{"id": "11812", "revid": "751903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11812", "title": "Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II", "text": "American stealth multirole fighter aircraft\nThe Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II is an American family of single-seat, single-engine, supersonic stealth strike fighters. A multirole combat aircraft designed for both air superiority and strike missions, it also has electronic warfare and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities. Lockheed Martin is the prime F-35 contractor with principal partners Northrop Grumman and BAE Systems. The aircraft has three main variants: the conventional takeoff and landing (CTOL) F-35A, the short take-off and vertical-landing (STOVL) F-35B, and the carrier variant (CV) catapult-assisted take-off but arrested recovery (CATOBAR) F-35C.\nThe aircraft descends from the Lockheed Martin X-35, which in 2001 beat the Boeing X-32 to win the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) program intended to replace the F-16 Fighting Falcon, F/A-18 Hornet, and the McDonnell Douglas AV-8B Harrier II \"jump jet\", among others. Its development is primarily funded by the United States, with additional funding from program partner countries from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and close U.S. allies, including Australia, Canada, Denmark, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, the United Kingdom, and formerly Turkey. Several other countries have also ordered, or are considering ordering, the aircraft.\nThe program has drawn criticism for its unprecedented size, complexity, ballooning costs, and delayed deliveries. The decision to start manufacturing the aircraft while it was still in development and testing led to expensive design changes and retrofits. As of July\u00a02024[ [update]], the average unit costs (excluding the engine) are: US$82.5 million for the F-35A, $109 million for the F-35B, and $102.1 million for the F-35C. The F135 engine costs $20.4 million as of August 2025.\nThe F-35 first flew in 2006; its variants entered U.S. service in July 2015 (Marine Corps F-35B), August 2016 (Air Force F-35A), and February 2019 (Navy F-35C). The aircraft first saw combat in 2018, during Israeli Air Force attacks on Syria. The F-35 has since been used in combat by the U.S. in Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, and Yemen; by Israel in Gaza, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, and Yemen; and by the UK in Iraq and Syria. F-35As contribute to US nuclear forward deployment in European NATO countries. The U.S. plans to buy 2,456 F-35s through 2044, which will represent the bulk of its crewed fixed-wing tactical aviation for several decades; the aircraft is to be a cornerstone of NATO and U.S.-allied air power and operate until 2070.\nDevelopment.\nProgram origins.\nThe F-35 was the product of the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) program, which was the merger of various combat aircraft programs from the 1980s and 1990s. One progenitor program was the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Advanced Short Take-Off/Vertical Landing (ASTOVL) which ran from 1983 to 1994; ASTOVL aimed to develop a Harrier jump jet replacement for the U.S. Marine Corps (USMC) and the UK Royal Navy. Under one of ASTOVL's classified programs, the Supersonic STOVL Fighter (SSF), Lockheed's Skunk Works conducted research for a stealthy supersonic STOVL fighter intended for both U.S. Air Force (USAF) and USMC; among key STOVL technologies explored was the shaft-driven lift fan (SDLF) system. Lockheed's concept was a single-engine canard delta aircraft weighing about empty. ASTOVL was rechristened as the Common Affordable Lightweight Fighter (CALF) in 1993 and involved Lockheed, McDonnell Douglas, and Boeing.\nThe end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 caused considerable reductions in Department of Defense (DoD) spending and subsequent restructuring. In 1993, the Joint Advanced Strike Technology (JAST) program emerged following the cancellation of the USAF's Multi-Role Fighter (MRF) and U.S. Navy's (USN) Advanced Attack/Fighter (A/F-X) programs. MRF, a program for a relatively affordable F-16 Fighting Falcon replacement, was scaled back and delayed due to post\u2013Cold War defense posture easing F-16 fleet usage and thus extending its service life as well as increasing budget pressure from the Lockheed Martin F-22 Advanced Tactical Fighter (ATF) program. The A/F-X, initially known as the Advanced-Attack (A-X), began in 1991 as the USN's follow-on to the Advanced Tactical Aircraft (ATA) program for an Grumman A-6 Intruder replacement; the ATA's resulting McDonnell Douglas A-12 Avenger II had been canceled due to technical problems and cost overruns in 1991. In the same year, the termination of the Naval Advanced Tactical Fighter (NATF), a naval development of USAF's ATF program to replace the Grumman F-14 Tomcat, resulted in additional fighter capability being added to A-X, which was then renamed A/F-X. Amid increased budget pressure, the DoD's Bottom-Up Review (BUR) in September 1993 announced MRF's and A/F-X's cancellations, with applicable experience brought to the emerging JAST program. JAST was not meant to develop a new aircraft, but rather to develop requirements, mature technologies, and demonstrate concepts for advanced strike warfare.\nAs JAST progressed, the need for concept demonstrator aircraft by 1996 emerged, which would coincide with the full-scale flight demonstrator phase of ASTOVL/CALF. Because the ASTOVL/CALF concept appeared to align with the JAST charter, the two programs were eventually merged in 1994 under the JAST name, with the program now serving the USAF, USMC, and USN. JAST was subsequently renamed to Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) in 1995, with STOVL submissions by McDonnell Douglas, Northrop Grumman, Lockheed Martin, and Boeing. The JSF was expected to eventually replace large numbers of multi-role and strike fighters in the inventories of the US and its allies, including the Harrier, F-16, F/A-18, Fairchild A-10 Thunderbolt II, and Lockheed F-117 Nighthawk.\nInternational participation is a key aspect of the JSF program, starting with United Kingdom participation in the ASTOVL program. Many international partners requiring modernization of their air forces were interested in the JSF. The United Kingdom joined JAST/JSF as a founding member in 1995 and thus became the only Tier 1 partner of the JSF program; Italy, the Netherlands, Denmark, Norway, Canada, Australia, and Turkey joined the program during the Concept Demonstration Phase (CDP), with Italy and the Netherlands being Tier 2 partners and the rest Tier 3. Consequently, the aircraft was developed in cooperation with international partners and available for export.\nJSF competition.\nBoeing and Lockheed Martin were selected in early 1997 for CDP, with their concept demonstrator aircraft designated X-32 and X-35 respectively; the McDonnell Douglas team was eliminated and Northrop Grumman and British Aerospace joined the Lockheed Martin team. Each firm would produce two prototype air vehicles to demonstrate conventional takeoff and landing (CTOL), carrier takeoff and landing (CV), and STOVL. Lockheed Martin's design would make use of the work on the SDLF system conducted under the ASTOVL/CALF program. The key aspect of the X-35 that enabled STOVL operation, the SDLF system consists of the lift fan in the forward center fuselage that could be activated by engaging a clutch that connects the driveshaft to the turbines and thus augmenting the thrust from the engine's swivel nozzle. Research from prior aircraft incorporating similar systems, such as the Convair Model 200, Rockwell XFV-12, and Yakovlev Yak-141, were also taken into consideration. By contrast, Boeing's X-32 employed a direct lift system that the augmented turbofan would be reconfigured to when engaging in STOVL operation.\nLockheed Martin's commonality strategy was to replace the STOVL variant's SDLF with a fuel tank and the aft swivel nozzle with a two-dimensional thrust vectoring nozzle for the CTOL variant. STOVL operation is made possible through a patented shaft-driven LiftFan propulsion system. This would enable identical aerodynamic configuration for the STOVL and CTOL variants, while the CV variant would have an enlarged wing to reduce landing speed for carrier recovery. Due to aerodynamic characteristics and carrier recovery requirements from the JAST merger, the design configuration settled on a conventional tail compared to the canard delta design from the ASTOVL/CALF; notably, the conventional tail configuration offers much lower risk for carrier recovery compared to the ASTOVL/CALF canard configuration, which was designed without carrier compatibility in mind. This enabled greater commonality between all three variants, as the commonality goal was important at this design stage. Lockheed Martin's prototypes would consist of the X-35A for demonstrating CTOL before converting it to the X-35B for STOVL demonstration and the larger-winged X-35C for CV compatibility demonstration.\nThe X-35A first flew on 24 October 2000 and conducted flight tests for subsonic and supersonic flying qualities, handling, range, and maneuver performance. After 28 flights, the aircraft was then converted into the X-35B for STOVL testing, with key changes including the addition of the SDLF, the three-bearing swivel module (3BSM), and roll-control ducts. The X-35B would successfully demonstrate the SDLF system by performing stable hover, vertical landing, and short takeoff in less than . The X-35C first flew on 16 December 2000 and conducted field landing carrier practice tests.\nOn 26 October 2001, Lockheed Martin was declared the winner and was awarded the System Development and Demonstration (SDD) contract; Pratt &amp; Whitney was separately awarded a development contract for the F135 engine for the JSF. The F-35 designation, which was out of sequence with standard DoD numbering, was allegedly determined on the spot by program manager Major General Mike Hough; this came as a surprise even to Lockheed Martin, which had expected the F-24 designation for the JSF.\nDesign and production.\nAs the JSF program moved into the System Development and Demonstration phase, the X-35 demonstrator design was modified to create the F-35 combat aircraft. The forward fuselage was lengthened by to make room for mission avionics, while the horizontal stabilizers were moved aft to retain balance and control. The diverterless supersonic inlet changed from a four-sided to a three-sided cowl shape and was moved aft. The fuselage section was fuller, the top surface raised by along the centerline and the lower surface bulged to accommodate weapons bays. Following the designation of the X-35 prototypes, the three variants were designated F-35A (CTOL), F-35B (STOVL), and F-35C (CV), all with a design service life of 8,000 hours. Prime contractor Lockheed Martin performs overall systems integration and final assembly and checkout (FACO) at Air Force Plant 4 in Fort Worth, Texas, while Northrop Grumman and BAE Systems supply components for mission systems and airframe.\nAdding the systems of a fighter aircraft added weight. The F-35B gained the most, largely due to a 2003 decision to enlarge the weapons bays for commonality between variants; the total weight growth was reportedly up to , over 8%, causing all STOVL key performance parameter (KPP) thresholds to be missed. In December 2003, the STOVL Weight Attack Team (SWAT) was formed to reduce the weight increase; changes included thinned airframe members, smaller weapons bays and vertical stabilizers, less thrust fed to the roll-post outlets, and redesigning the wing-mate joint, electrical elements, and the airframe immediately aft of the cockpit. The inlet was also revised to accommodate more powerful, greater mass flow engines. Many changes from the SWAT effort were applied to all three variants for commonality. By September 2004, these efforts had reduced the F-35B's weight by over , while the F-35A and F-35C were reduced in weight by and respectively. The weight reduction work cost $6.2\u00a0billion and caused an 18-month delay.\nThe first F-35A, designated AA-1, was rolled out at Fort Worth on 19 February 2006 and first flew on 15 December 2006 with chief test pilot Jon S. Beesley at the controls. In 2006, the F-35 was given the name \"Lightning II\" after the Lockheed P-38 Lightning of World War II. Some USAF pilots have nicknamed the aircraft \"Panther\" instead, and other nicknames include \"Fat Amy\" and \"Battle Penguin\".\nThe aircraft's software was developed as six releases, or Blocks, for SDD. The first two Blocks, 1A and 1B, readied the F-35 for initial pilot training and multi-level security. Block 2A improved the training capabilities, while 2B was the first combat-ready release planned for the USMC's Initial Operating Capability (IOC). Block 3i retains the capabilities of 2B while having new Technology Refresh 2 (TR-2) hardware and was planned for the USAF's IOC. The final release for SDD, Block 3F, would have full flight envelope and all baseline combat capabilities. Alongside software releases, each block also incorporates avionics hardware updates and air vehicle improvements from flight and structural testing. In what is known as \"concurrency\", some low rate initial production (LRIP) aircraft lots would be delivered in early Block configurations and eventually upgraded to Block 3F once development is complete. After 17,000\u00a0flight test hours, the final flight for the SDD phase was completed in April 2018. Like the F-22, the F-35 has been targeted by cyberattacks and technology theft efforts, as well as potential vulnerabilities in the integrity of the supply chain.\nTesting found several major problems: early F-35B airframes were vulnerable to premature cracking, the F-35C arrestor hook design was unreliable, fuel tanks were too vulnerable to lightning strikes, the helmet display had problems, and more. Software was repeatedly delayed due to its unprecedented scope and complexity. In 2009, the DoD Joint Estimate Team (JET) estimated that the program was 30 months behind the public schedule. In 2011, the program was \"re-baselined\"; that is, its cost and schedule goals were changed, pushing the IOC from the planned 2010 to July 2015. The decision to simultaneously test, fix defects, and begin production was criticized as inefficient; in 2014, Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition Frank Kendall called it \"acquisition malpractice\". The three variants shared just 25% of their parts, far below the anticipated commonality of 70%.\nThe program received considerable criticism for cost overruns and for the total projected lifetime cost, as well as quality management shortcomings by contractors. As of August\u00a02023[ [update]], the program was 80% over budget and 10 years late.\nThe JSF program was expected to cost about $200 billion for acquisition in base-year 2002 dollars when SDD was awarded in 2001. As early as 2005, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) had identified major program risks in cost and schedule. The costly delays strained the relationship between the Pentagon and contractors. By 2017, delays and cost overruns had pushed the F-35 program's expected acquisition costs to $406.5\u00a0billion, with total lifetime cost (i.e., to 2070) to $1.5\u00a0trillion in then-year dollars which also includes operations and maintenance. The F-35A's unit cost (not including engine) for LRIP Lot 13 was $79.2\u00a0million in base-year 2012 dollars. Delays in development and operational test and evaluation, including integration into the Joint Simulation Environment, pushed full-rate production decision from the end of 2019 to March 2024, although actual production rate had already approached the full rate by 2020; the combined full rate at the Fort Worth, Italy, and Japan FACO plants is 156 aircraft annually.\nUpgrades and further development.\nThe F-35 is expected to be continually upgraded over its lifetime. The first combat-capable Block 2B configuration, which had basic air-to-air and strike capabilities, was declared ready by the USMC in July 2015. The Block 3F configuration began operational test and evaluation (OT&amp;E) in December 2018 and its completion in late 2023 concluded SDD in March 2024. The F-35 program is also conducting sustainment and upgrade development, with early aircraft from LRIP lot 2 onwards gradually upgraded to the baseline Block 3F standard by 2021.\nWith Block 3F as the final build for SDD, the first major upgrade program is Block 4 which began development in 2019 and was initially captured under the Continuous Capability Development and Delivery (C2D2) program. Block 4 is expected to enter service in incremental steps from the late 2020s to early 2030s and integrates additional weapons, including those unique to international customers, improved sensor capabilities including the new AN/APG-85 AESA radar and additional ESM bandwidth, and adds Remotely Operated Video Enhanced Receiver (ROVER) support. C2D2 also places greater emphasis on agile software development to enable quicker releases.\nThe key enabler of Block 4 is Technology Refresh 3 (TR-3) avionics hardware, which consists of new display, core processor, and memory modules to support increased processing requirements, as well as engine upgrade that increases the amount of cooling available to support the additional mission systems. The engine upgrade effort explored both improvements to the F135 as well as significantly more power and efficient adaptive cycle engines. In 2018, General Electric and Pratt &amp; Whitney were awarded contracts to develop adaptive cycle engines for potential application in the F-35, and in 2022, the F-35 Adaptive Engine Replacement program was launched to integrate them. However, in 2023 the USAF chose an improved F135 under the Engine Core Upgrade (ECU) program over an adaptive cycle engine due to cost as well as concerns over risk of integrating the new engine, initially designed for the F-35A, on the B and C. Difficulties with the new TR-3 hardware, including regression testing, have caused delays to Block 4 as well as a halt in aircraft deliveries from July 2023 to July 2024.\nIn 2023, the GAO raised concerns in two reports that the estimated cost of the Block 4 upgrade has increased from $10.6 billion to $16.5 billion and completion of the upgrade is delayed from 2026 to 2029 the earliest. In September 2025, it was announced that the Block 4 upgrade would be truncated and delayed due to technological uncertainties and engine upgrade delays, among other reasons. Critical changes that do not require an upgraded engine will remain in Block 4 and be ready by 2031 at the earliest. Upgrades that where originally planned for Block 4, but require the upgraded engine, or lack technological maturity, will be deffered to currently undefined efforts expected in the mid 2030s. Block 4 was originally intended to be completed in 2026. \nDefense contractors have offered upgrades to the F-35 outside of official program contracts. In 2013, Northrop Grumman disclosed its development of a directional infrared countermeasures suite, named Threat Nullification Defensive Resource (ThNDR). The countermeasure system would share the same space as the Distributed Aperture System (DAS) sensors and acts as a laser missile jammer to protect against infrared-homing missiles.\nIsrael operates a unique subvariant of the F-35A, designated the F-35I, that is designed to better interface with and incorporate Israeli equipment and weapons. The Israeli Air Force also has their own F-35I test aircraft that provides more access to the core avionics to include their own equipment.\nProcurement and international participation.\nThe United States is the primary customer and financial backer, with planned procurement of 1,763 F-35As for the USAF, 353 F-35Bs and 67 F-35Cs for the USMC, and 273 F-35Cs for the USN. Additionally, the United Kingdom, Italy, the Netherlands, Turkey, Australia, Norway, Denmark and Canada have agreed to contribute US$4.375\u00a0billion towards development costs, with the United Kingdom contributing about 10% of the planned development costs as the sole Tier 1 partner. Britain supplies ejector seats, rear fuselage, active interceptor systems, targeting lasers and weapon release cables, mainly through British Aerospace, amounting to 15% of the value of the F-35, and is the largest supplier of spare parts for the jet after the US. The initial plan was that the U.S. and eight major partner countries would acquire over 3,100 F-35s through 2035. The three tiers of international participation generally reflect financial stake in the program, the amount of technology transfer and subcontracts open for bid by national companies, and the order in which countries can obtain production aircraft. Alongside program partner countries, Israel and Singapore have joined as Security Cooperative Participants (SCP). Sales to SCP and non-partner states, including Belgium, Japan, and South Korea, are made through the Pentagon's Foreign Military Sales program. Turkey was removed from the F-35 program in July 2019 over security concerns following its purchase of a Russian S-400 surface-to-air missile system. As of July\u00a02024[ [update]], the average flyaway costs per plane are: $82.5 million for the F-35A, $109 million for the F-35B, and $102.1 million for the F-35C. The cost of the F-35 does not include the cost of the engine as this is negotiated in a separate contract, and engines are delivered free of charge to Lockheed Martin. The cost of the engine is $20.4 million in lot 18.\nDesign.\nOverview.\nThe F-35 is a family of single-engine, supersonic, stealth multirole strike fighters. The second fifth-generation fighter to enter US service and the first operational supersonic STOVL stealth fighter, the F-35 emphasizes low observables, advanced avionics and sensor fusion that enable a high level of situational awareness and long range lethality; the USAF considers the aircraft its primary strike fighter for conducting suppression of enemy air defense (SEAD) and air interdiction missions, owing to the advanced sensors and mission systems.\nThe F-35 has a wing-tail configuration with two vertical stabilizers canted for stealth. Flight control surfaces include leading-edge flaps, flaperons, rudders, and all-moving horizontal tails (stabilators); leading edge root extensions or chines also run forwards to the inlets. The relatively short 35-foot wingspan of the F-35A and F-35B is set by the requirement to fit inside USN amphibious assault ship parking areas and elevators; the F-35C's larger wing is more fuel efficient. The fixed diverterless supersonic inlets (DSI) use a bumped compression surface and forward-swept cowl to shed the boundary layer of the forebody away from the inlets, which form a Y-duct for the engine. Structurally, the F-35 drew upon lessons from the F-22; composites comprise 35% of airframe weight, with the majority being bismaleimide and composite epoxy materials as well as some carbon nanotube-reinforced epoxy in later production lots. The F-35 is considerably heavier than the lightweight fighters it replaces, with the lightest variant having an empty weight of ; much of the weight can be attributed to the internal weapons bays and the extensive avionics carried. Each F-35 contains about of samarium magnets.\nWhile lacking the kinematic performance of the larger twin-engine F-22, the F-35 is competitive with fourth-generation fighters such as the F-16 and F/A-18, especially when they carry weapons because the F-35's internal weapons bay eliminates drag from external stores. All variants have a top speed of , attainable with full internal payload. The Pratt &amp; Whitney F135 engine gives good subsonic acceleration and energy, with supersonic dash in afterburner. The F-35, while not a \"supercruising\" aircraft, can fly at for a dash of with afterburners. This ability can be useful in battlefield situations. The large stabilitors, leading edge extensions and flaps, and canted rudders provide excellent high alpha (angle-of-attack) characteristics, with a trimmed alpha of 50\u00b0. Relaxed stability and triplex-redundant fly-by-wire controls provide excellent handling qualities and departure resistance. Having over double the F-16's internal fuel, the F-35 has a considerably greater combat radius, while stealth also enables a more efficient mission flight profile.\nSensors and avionics.\nThe F-35's mission systems are among the most complex aspects of the aircraft. The avionics and sensor fusion are designed to improve the pilot's situational awareness and command-and-control capabilities and facilitate network-centric warfare. Key sensors include the Northrop Grumman AN/APG-81 active electronically scanned array (AESA) radar, BAE Systems AN/ASQ-239 Barracuda electronic warfare system, Northrop Grumman/Raytheon AN/AAQ-37 Electro-optical Distributed Aperture System (DAS), Lockheed Martin AN/AAQ-40 Electro-Optical Targeting System (EOTS) and Northrop Grumman AN/ASQ-242 Communications, Navigation, and Identification (CNI) suite. The F-35 was designed for its sensors to work together to provide a cohesive image of the local battlespace; for example, the APG-81 radar also acts as a part of the electronic warfare system.\nMuch of the F-35's software was developed in C and C++ programming languages, while Ada83 code from the F-22 was also used; the Block 3F software has 8.6\u00a0million lines of code. The Green Hills Software Integrity DO-178B real-time operating system (RTOS) runs on integrated core processors (ICPs); data networking includes the IEEE 1394b and Fibre Channel buses. The avionics use commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) components when practical to make upgrades cheaper and more flexible; for example, to enable fleet software upgrades for the software-defined radio (SDR) systems. The mission systems software, particularly for sensor fusion, was one of the program's most difficult parts and responsible for substantial program delays.\nThe APG-81 radar uses electronic scanning for rapid beam agility and incorporates passive and active air-to-air modes, strike modes, and synthetic aperture radar (SAR) capability, with multiple target track-while-scan at ranges in excess of . The antenna is tilted backwards for stealth. Complementing the radar is the AAQ-37 DAS: six infrared sensors that can track targets and warn of approaching missiles all around the aircraft; it acts as a situational-awareness infrared search and track (SAIRST) and feeds spherical infrared and night-vision imagery to the helmet visor. The ASQ-239 Barracuda electronic warfare system has ten radio frequency antennas embedded into the edges of the wing and tail for all-aspect radar warning receiver (RWR). It also provides sensor fusion of radio frequency and infrared tracking functions, geolocation threat targeting, and multispectral image countermeasures for self-defense against missiles. The electronic warfare system can detect and jam hostile radars. The AAQ-40 EOTS is mounted behind a faceted low-observable window under the nose and performs laser targeting, forward-looking infrared (FLIR), and long range IRST functions. The ASQ-242 CNI suite uses a half dozen physical links, including the directional Multifunction Advanced Data Link (MADL), for covert CNI functions. Information from radio frequency receivers and infrared sensors are combined to form a single tactical picture for the pilot. The all-aspect target direction and identification can be shared via MADL to other platforms without compromising low observability, while Link 16 enables communication with older systems.\nThe F-35 was designed to accept upgrades to its processors, sensors, and software. Technology Refresh 3, which includes a new core processor and a new cockpit display, is planned for Lot 15 aircraft. Lockheed Martin has offered the Advanced EOTS for the Block 4 configuration; the improved sensor fits into the same area as the baseline EOTS with minimal changes. In June 2018, Lockheed Martin picked Raytheon for improved DAS. The USAF has studied the potential for the F-35 to orchestrate attacks by unmanned combat aerial vehicles (UCAVs) via its sensors and communications equipment.\nA new radar called the AN/APG-85 is planned for Block 4 F-35s. According to the JPO, the new radar will be compatible with all three major F-35 variants. However, it is unclear if older aircraft will be retrofitted with the new radar.\nStealth and signatures.\nStealth is a key aspect of the F-35's design, and radar cross-section (RCS) is minimized through careful shaping of the airframe and the use of radar-absorbent materials (RAM); visible measures to reduce RCS include alignment of edges and continuous curvature of surfaces, serration of skin panels, and the masking of the engine face and turbine. Additionally, the F-35's diverterless supersonic inlet (DSI) uses a compression bump and forward-swept cowl rather than a splitter gap or bleed system to divert the boundary layer away from the inlet duct, eliminating the diverter cavity and further reducing radar signature. The RCS of the F-35 has been characterized as lower than a metal golf ball at certain frequencies and angles; in some conditions, the F-35 compares favorably to the F-22 in stealth. For maintainability, the F-35's stealth design took lessons from earlier stealth aircraft such as the F-22; the F-35's radar-absorbent fibermat skin is more durable and requires less maintenance than older topcoats. The aircraft also has reduced infrared and visual signatures as well as strict controls of radio frequency emitters to prevent their detection. The F-35's stealth design is primarily focused on high-frequency X-band wavelengths; low-frequency radars can spot stealthy aircraft due to Rayleigh scattering, but such radars are also conspicuous, susceptible to clutter, and lack precision. To disguise its RCS, the aircraft can mount four Luneburg lens reflectors. Overseas deployments of the F-35, including the Estonia, Bulgaria, and South Korea, use these radar reflectors to prevent Russian and Chinese intelligence gathering on the true RCS signature. There were concerns that Russian involvement in the Syrian civil war allowed the country to gather true RCS data on Israeli F-35Is flying without reflectors over Lebanon, as well as US F-22s.\nNoise from the F-35 caused concerns in residential areas near potential bases for the aircraft, and residents near two such bases\u2014Luke Air Force Base, Arizona, and Eglin Air Force Base (AFB), Florida\u2014requested environmental impact studies in 2008 and 2009 respectively. Although the noise levels, in decibels, were comparable to those of prior fighters such as the F-16, the F-35's sound power is stronger\u2014particularly at lower frequencies. Subsequent surveys and studies have indicated that the noise of the F-35 was not perceptibly different from the F-16 and F/A-18E/F, though the greater low-frequency noise was noticeable for some observers.\nCockpit.\nThe glass cockpit was designed to give the pilot good situational awareness. The main display is a 20-by-8-inch (50 by 20\u00a0cm) panoramic touchscreen, which shows flight instruments, stores management, CNI information, and integrated caution and warnings; the pilot can customize the arrangement of the information. Below the main display is a smaller stand-by display. The cockpit has a speech-recognition system developed by Adacel. The F-35 does not have a head-up display; instead, flight and combat information is displayed on the visor of the pilot's helmet in a helmet-mounted display system (HMDS). The one-piece tinted canopy is hinged at the front and has an internal frame for structural strength. The Martin-Baker US16E ejection seat is launched by a twin-catapult system housed on side rails. There is a right-hand side stick and throttle hands-on throttle-and-stick system. For life support, an onboard oxygen-generation system (OBOGS) is fitted and powered by the Integrated Power Package (IPP), with an auxiliary oxygen bottle and backup oxygen system for emergencies.\nThe Vision Systems International helmet display is a key piece of the F-35's human-machine interface. Instead of the head-up display mounted atop the dashboard of earlier fighters, the HMDS puts flight and combat information on the helmet visor, allowing the pilot to see it no matter which way they are facing. Infrared and night vision imagery from the Distributed Aperture System can be displayed directly on the HMDS and enables the pilot to \"see through\" the aircraft. The HMDS allows an F-35 pilot to fire missiles at targets even when the nose of the aircraft is pointing elsewhere by cuing missile seekers at high angles off-boresight. Each helmet costs $400,000. The HMDS weighs more than traditional helmets, and there is concern that it can endanger lightweight pilots during ejection.\nDue to the HMDS's vibration, jitter, night-vision and sensor display problems during development, Lockheed Martin and Elbit issued a draft specification in 2011 for an alternative HMDS based on the AN/AVS-9 night vision goggles as backup, with BAE Systems chosen later that year. A cockpit redesign would be needed to adopt an alternative HMDS. Following progress on the baseline helmet, development on the alternative HMDS was halted in October 2013. In 2016, the Gen 3 helmet with improved night vision camera, new liquid crystal displays, automated alignment and software enhancements was introduced with LRIP lot 7.\nArmament.\nTo preserve its stealth shaping, the F-35 has two internal weapons bays each with two weapons stations. The two outboard weapon stations each can carry ordnance up to , or for the F-35B, while the two inboard stations carry air-to-air missiles. Air-to-surface weapons for the outboard station include the Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM), Paveway series of bombs, Joint Standoff Weapon (JSOW), and cluster munitions (Wind Corrected Munitions Dispenser). The station can also carry multiple smaller munitions such as the GBU-39 Small Diameter Bombs (SDB), GBU-53/B StormBreaker and SPEAR 3; up to four SDBs can be carried per station for the F-35A and F-35C, and three for the F-35B. The F-35A achieved certification to carry the B61 Mod 12 nuclear bomb in October 2023. The inboard station can carry the AIM-120 AMRAAM and eventually the AIM-260 JATM. Two compartments behind the weapons bays contain flares, chaff, and towed decoys.\nThe aircraft can use six external weapons stations for missions that do not require stealth. The wingtip pylons each can carry an AIM-9X or AIM-132 ASRAAM and are canted outwards to reduce their radar cross-section. Additionally, each wing has a inboard station and a middle station, or for F-35B. The external wing stations can carry large air-to-surface weapons that would not fit inside the weapons bays such as the AGM-158 Joint Air to Surface Standoff Missile (JASSM) or AGM-158C LRASM cruise missile. An air-to-air missile load of eight AIM-120s and two AIM-9s is possible using internal and external weapons stations; a configuration of six bombs, two AIM-120s and two AIM-9s can also be arranged. The F-35 is armed with a 25\u00a0mm GAU-22/A rotary cannon, a lighter four-barrel variant of the GAU-12/U Equalizer. On the F-35A this is mounted internally near the left wing root with 182 rounds carried; the gun is more effective against ground targets than the 20 mm gun carried by other USAF fighters. In 2020, a USAF report noted \"unacceptable\" accuracy problems with the GAU-22/A on the F-35A. These were due to \"misalignments\" in the gun's mount, which was also susceptible to cracking. These problems were resolved by 2024. The F-35B and F-35C have no internal gun and instead can use a Terma A/S multi-mission pod (MMP) carrying the GAU-22/A and 220 rounds; the pod is mounted on the centerline of the aircraft and shaped to reduce its radar cross-section. In lieu of the gun, the pod can also be used for different equipment and purposes, such as electronic warfare, aerial reconnaissance, or rear-facing tactical radar. The pod was not susceptible to the accuracy issues that once plagued the gun on the F-35A variant, though was apparently not problem-free.&lt;ref name=\"GAU-22/A resolved\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nLockheed Martin is developing a weapon rack called Sidekick that would enable the internal outboard station to carry two AIM-120s, thus increasing the internal air-to-air payload to six missiles, currently offered for Block 4. Block 4 will also have a rearranged hydraulic line and bracket to allow the F-35B to carry four SDBs per internal outboard station; integration of the MBDA Meteor is also planned. The USAF and USN are planning to integrate the AGM-88G AARGM-ER internally in the F-35A and F-35C. Norway and Australia are funding an adaptation of the Naval Strike Missile (NSM) for the F-35; designated Joint Strike Missile (JSM), two missiles can be carried internally with an additional four externally. Both hypersonic missiles and direct energy weapons such as solid-state laser are currently being considered as future upgrades; in 2024, Lockheed Martin disclosed its proposed Mako hypersonic missile, which can be carried internally in the F-35A and C and externally on the B. Additionally, Lockheed Martin is studying integrating a fiber laser that uses spectral beam combining multiple individual laser modules into a single high-power beam, which can be scaled to various levels.\nThe USAF plans for the F-35A to take up the close air support (CAS) mission in contested environments; amid criticism that it is not as well suited as a dedicated attack platform, USAF chief of staff Mark Welsh placed a focus on weapons for CAS sorties, including guided rockets, fragmentation rockets that shatter into individual projectiles before impact, and more compact ammunition for higher capacity gun pods. Fragmentary rocket warheads create greater effects than cannon shells as each rocket creates a \"thousand-round burst\", delivering more projectiles than a strafing run.\nEngine.\nThe aircraft is powered by a single Pratt &amp; Whitney F135 low-bypass augmented turbofan with rated thrust of at military power and with afterburner. Derived from the Pratt &amp; Whitney F119 used by the F-22, the F135 has a larger fan and higher bypass ratio to increase subsonic thrust and fuel efficiency, and unlike the F119, is not optimized for supercruise. The engine contributes to the F-35's stealth by having a low-observable augmenter, or afterburner, that incorporates fuel injectors into thick curved vanes; these vanes are covered by ceramic radar-absorbent materials and mask the turbine. The stealthy augmenter had problems with pressure pulsations, or \"screech\", at low altitude and high speed early in its development. The low-observable axisymmetric nozzle consists of 15 partially overlapping flaps that create a sawtooth pattern at the trailing edge, which reduces radar signature and creates shed vortices that reduce the infrared signature of the exhaust plume. Due to the engine's large dimensions, the U.S. Navy had to modify its underway replenishment system to facilitate at-sea logistics support. The F-35's Integrated Power Package (IPP) performs power and thermal management and integrates environment control, auxiliary power unit, engine starting, and other functions into a single system.\nThe F135-PW-600 variant for the F-35B incorporates the Shaft-Driven Lift Fan (SDLF) to allow STOVL operations. Designed by Lockheed Martin and developed by Rolls-Royce, the SDLF, also known as the Rolls-Royce LiftSystem, consists of the lift fan, drive shaft, two roll posts, and a \"three-bearing swivel module\" (3BSM). The nozzle features three bearings resembling a short cylinder with nonparallel bases. As the toothed edges are rotated by motors, the nozzle swivels from being linear with the engine to being perpendicular. The thrust vectoring 3BSM nozzle allows the main engine exhaust to be deflected downward at the tail of the aircraft and is moved by a \"fueldraulic\" actuator that uses pressurized fuel as the working fluid. Unlike the Harrier's Pegasus engine that entirely uses direct engine thrust for lift, the F-35B's system augments the swivel nozzle's thrust with the lift fan; the fan is powered by the low-pressure turbine through a drive shaft when engaged with a clutch and placed near the front of the aircraft to provide a torque countering that of the 3BSM nozzle. Roll control during slow flight is achieved by diverting unheated engine bypass air through wing-mounted thrust nozzles called roll posts.\nAn alternative engine, the General Electric/Allison/Rolls-Royce F136, was being developed in the 1990s and 2000s; originally, F-35 engines from Lot 6 onward were competitively tendered. Using technology from the General Electric YF120, the F136 was claimed to have a greater temperature margin than the F135 due to the higher mass flow design making full use of the inlet. The F136 was canceled in December 2011 due to lack of funding.\nThe F-35 is expected to receive propulsion upgrades over its lifecycle to adapt to emerging threats and enable additional capabilities. In 2016, the Adaptive Engine Transition Program (AETP) was launched to develop and test adaptive cycle engines, with one major potential application being the re-engining of the F-35; in 2018, both GE and P&amp;W were awarded contracts to develop thrust class demonstrators, with the designations XA100 and XA101 respectively. In addition to potential re-engining, P&amp;W is also developing improvements to the baseline F135; the Engine Core Upgrade (ECU) is an update to the power module, originally called Growth Option 1.0 and then Engine Enhancement Package, that improves engine thrust and fuel burn by 5% and bleed air cooling capacity by 50% to support Block 4. The F135 ECU was selected over AETP engines in 2023 to provide additional power and cooling for the F-35. Although GE had expected that the more revolutionary XA100 could enter service with the F-35A and C by 2027 and could be adapted for the F-35B, the increased cost and risk caused the USAF to choose the F135 ECU instead.\nMaintenance and logistics.\nThe F-35 is designed to require less maintenance than prior stealth aircraft. Some 95% of all field-replaceable parts are \"one deep\"\u2014that is, nothing else needs to be removed to reach the desired part; for instance, the ejection seat can be replaced without removing the canopy. The F-35 has a fibermat radar-absorbent material (RAM) baked into the skin, which is more durable, easier to work with, and faster to cure than older RAM coatings; similar coatings are being considered for application on older stealth aircraft such as the F-22. Skin corrosion on the F-22 led to the F-35 using a less galvanic corrosion-inducing skin gap filler, fewer gaps in the airframe skin needing filler, and better drainage. The flight control system uses electro-hydrostatic actuators rather than traditional hydraulic systems; these controls can be powered by lithium-ion batteries in case of emergency. Commonality between variants led to the USMC's first aircraft maintenance Field Training Detachment, which applied USAF lessons to their F-35 operations.\nThe F-35 was initially supported by a computerized maintenance management system named Autonomic Logistics Information System (ALIS). In concept, any F-35 can be serviced at any maintenance facility and all parts can be globally tracked and shared as needed. Due to numerous problems, such as unreliable diagnoses, excessive connectivity requirements, and security vulnerabilities, ALIS is being replaced by the cloud-based Operational Data Integrated Network (ODIN). From September 2020, ODIN base kits (OBKs) were running ALIS software, as well as ODIN software, first at Marine Corps Air Station (MCAS) Yuma, Arizona, then at Naval Air Station Lemoore, California, in support of Strike Fighter Squadron (VFA) 125 on 16 July 2021, and then Nellis Air Force Base, Nevada, in support of the 422nd Test and Evaluation Squadron (TES) on 6 August 2021. In 2022, over a dozen more OBK sites will replace the ALIS's Standard Operating Unit unclassified (SOU-U) servers. OBK performance is double that of ALIS.\nOperational history.\nTesting.\nThe first F-35A, AA-1, conducted its engine run in September 2006 and first flew on 15 December 2006. Unlike all subsequent aircraft, AA-1 did not have the weight optimization from SWAT; consequently, it mainly tested subsystems common to subsequent aircraft, such as the propulsion, electrical system, and cockpit displays. This aircraft was retired from flight testing in December 2009 and was used for live-fire testing at NAS China Lake.\nThe first F-35B, BF-1, flew on 11 June 2008, while the first weight-optimized F-35A and F-35C, AF-1 and CF-1, flew on 14 November 2009 and 6 June 2010 respectively. The F-35B's first hover was on 17 March 2010, followed by its first vertical landing the next day. The F-35 Integrated Test Force (ITF) consisted of 18 aircraft at Edwards Air Force Base and Naval Air Station Patuxent River. Nine aircraft at Edwards, five F-35As, three F-35Bs, and one F-35C, performed flight sciences testing such as F-35A envelope expansion, flight loads, stores separation, as well as mission systems testing. The other nine aircraft at Patuxent River, five F-35Bs and four F-35Cs, were responsible for F-35B and C envelope expansion and STOVL and CV suitability testing. Additional carrier suitability testing was conducted at Naval Air Warfare Center Aircraft Division at Lakehurst, New Jersey. Two non-flying aircraft of each variant were used to test static loads and fatigue. For testing avionics and mission systems, a modified Boeing 737-300 with a duplication of the cockpit, the Lockheed Martin CATBird has been used. Field testing of the F-35's sensors were conducted during Exercise Northern Edge 2009 and 2011, serving as significant risk-reduction steps.\nFlight tests revealed several serious deficiencies that required costly redesigns, caused delays, and resulted in several fleet-wide groundings. In 2011, the F-35C failed to catch the arresting wire in all eight landing tests; a redesigned tail hook was delivered two years later. By June 2009, many of the initial flight test targets had been accomplished but the program was behind schedule. Software and mission systems were among the biggest sources of delays for the program, with sensor fusion proving especially challenging. In fatigue testing, the F-35B suffered several premature cracks, requiring a redesign of the structure. A third non-flying F-35B is currently planned to test the redesigned structure. The F-35B and C also had problems with the horizontal tails suffering heat damage from prolonged afterburner use. Early flight control laws had problems with \"wing drop\" and also made the airplane sluggish, with high angles-of-attack tests in 2015 against an F-16 showing a lack of energy.\nAt-sea testing of the F-35B was first conducted aboard . In October 2011, two F-35Bs conducted three weeks of initial sea trials, called Development Test I. The second F-35B sea trials, Development Test II, began in August 2013, with tests including nighttime operations; two aircraft completed 19 nighttime vertical landings using DAS imagery. The first operational testing involving six F-35Bs was done on the \"Wasp\" in May 2015. The final Development Test III on involving operations in high sea states was completed in late 2016. A Royal Navy F-35 conducted the first \"rolling\" landing on board in October 2018.\nAfter the redesigned tail hook arrived, the F-35C's carrier-based Development Test I began in November 2014 aboard and focused on basic day carrier operations and establishing launch and recovery handling procedures. Development Test II, which focused on night operations, weapons loading, and full power launches, took place in October 2015. The final Development Test III was completed in August 2016, and included tests of asymmetric loads and certifying systems for landing qualifications and interoperability. Operational test of the F-35C was conducted in 2018 and the first operational squadron achieved safe-for-flight milestone that December, paving the way for its introduction in 2019.\nThe F-35's reliability and availability have fallen short of requirements, especially in the early years of testing. The ALIS maintenance and logistics system was plagued by excessive connectivity requirements and faulty diagnoses. In late 2017, the GAO reported the time needed to repair an F-35 part averaged 172 days, which was \"twice the program's objective\", and that shortage of spare parts was degrading readiness. In 2019, while individual F-35 units have achieved mission-capable rates of over the target of 80% for short periods during deployed operations, fleet-wide rates remained below target. The fleet availability goal of 65% was also not met, although the trend shows improvement. Internal gun accuracy of the F-35A was unacceptable until misalignment issues were addressed by 2024. As of 2020, the number of the program's most serious issues have been decreased by half.\nOperational test and evaluation (OT&amp;E) with Block 3F, the final configuration for SDD, began in December 2018, but its completion was delayed particularly by technical problems in integration with the DOD's Joint Simulation Environment (JSE); the F-35 finally completed all JSE trials in September 2023.\nUnited States.\nTraining.\nThe F-35A and F-35B were cleared for basic flight training in early 2012, although there were concerns over safety and performance due to lack of system maturity at the time. During the Low Rate Initial Production (LRIP) phase, the three U.S. military services jointly developed tactics and procedures using flight simulators, testing effectiveness, discovering problems and refining design. On 10 September 2012, the USAF began an operational utility evaluation (OUE) of the F-35A, including logistical support, maintenance, personnel training, and pilot execution.\nThe USMC F-35B Fleet Replacement Squadron (FRS) was initially based at Eglin AFB in 2012 alongside USAF F-35A training units, before moving to MCAS Beaufort in 2014 while another FRS was stood up at MCAS Miramar in 2020. The USAF F-35A basic course is held at Eglin AFB and Luke AFB; in January 2013, training began at Eglin with capacity for 100 pilots and 2,100 maintainers at once. Additionally, the 6th Weapons Squadron of the USAF Weapons School was activated at Nellis AFB in June 2017 for F-35A weapons instructor curriculum while the 65th Aggressor Squadron was reactivated with the F-35A in June 2022 to expand training against adversary stealth aircraft tactics. The USN stood up its F-35C FRS in 2012 with VFA-101 at Eglin AFB, but operations would later be transferred and consolidated under VFA-125 at NAS Lemoore in 2019. The F-35C was introduced to the Strike Fighter Tactics Instructor course, or TOPGUN, in 2020 and the additional capabilities of the aircraft greatly revamped the course syllabus.\nU.S. Marine Corps.\nOn 16 November 2012, the USMC received the first F-35B of VMFA-121 at MCAS Yuma. The USMC declared Initial Operational Capability (IOC) for the F-35B in the Block 2B configuration on 31 July 2015 after operational trials, with some limitations in night operations, mission systems, and weapons carriage. USMC F-35Bs participated in their first Red Flag exercise in July 2016 with 67 sorties conducted. The first F-35B deployment occurred in 2017 at MCAS Iwakuni, Japan; combat employment began in July 2018 from the amphibious assault ship , with the first combat strike on 27 September 2018 against a Taliban target in Afghanistan.\nIn addition to deploying F-35Bs on amphibious assault ships, the USMC plans to disperse the aircraft among austere forward-deployed bases with shelter and concealment to enhance survivability while remaining close to a battlespace. Known as distributed STOVL operations (DSO), F-35Bs would operate from temporary bases in allied territory within hostile missile engagement zones and displace inside the enemy's 24- to 48-hour targeting cycle; this strategy allows F-35Bs to rapidly respond to operational needs, with mobile forward arming and refueling points (M-FARPs) accommodating KC-130 and MV-22 Osprey aircraft to rearm and refuel the jets, as well as littoral areas for sea links of mobile distribution sites. For higher echelons of maintenance, F-35Bs would return from M-FARPs to rear-area friendly bases or ships. Helicopter-portable metal planking is needed to protect unprepared roads from the F-35B's exhaust; the USMC are studying lighter heat-resistant options. These operations have become part of the larger USMC Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations (EABO) concept.\nThe first USMC F-35C squadron, VMFA-314, achieved Full Operational Capability in July 2021 and was first deployed on board USS \"Abraham Lincoln\" as a part of Carrier Air Wing 9 in January 2022.\nIn 2024, Lt. Gen. Sami Sadat of Afghanistan described an operation using F-35Bs from which bombed a Taliban position through cloud cover. \"The impact [the F-35] left on my soldiers was amazing. Like, whoa, you know, we have this technology\", Sadat said. \"But also the impact on the Taliban was quite crippling, because they have never seen Afghan forces move in the winter, and they have never seen planes that could bomb through the clouds.\"\nOn 9 November 2024, Marine F-35Cs carried out strikes on the Houthi movement in Yemen in the context of the Red Sea crisis, making it the first time the F-35C has been used in combat.\nU.S. Air Force.\nUSAF F-35A in the Block 3i configuration achieved IOC with the USAF's 34th Fighter Squadron at Hill Air Force Base, Utah on 2 August 2016. F-35As conducted their first Red Flag exercise in 2017; system maturity had improved and the aircraft scored a kill ratio of 15:1 against an F-16 aggressor squadron in a high-threat environment. The first USAF F-35A deployment occurred on 15 April 2019 to Al Dhafra Air Base, UAE. On 27 April 2019, USAF F-35As were first used in combat in an airstrike on an Islamic State tunnel network in northern Iraq.\nFor European basing, RAF Lakenheath in the UK was chosen as the first installation to station two F-35A squadrons, with 48 aircraft adding to the 48th Fighter Wing's existing F-15C and F-15E squadrons. The first aircraft of the 495th Fighter Squadron arrived on 15 December 2021.\nThe F-35's operating cost is higher than some older USAF tactical aircraft. In fiscal year 2018, the F-35A's cost per flight hour (CPFH) was $44,000, a number that was reduced to $35,000 in 2019. For comparison, in 2015 the CPFH of the A-10 was $17,716; the F-15C, $41,921; and the F-16C, $22,514. Lockheed Martin hopes to reduce it to $25,000 by 2025 through performance-based logistics and other measures.\nAccording to US officials, F-35As and F-22s launched from land bases in the region, were used to attempt to draw surface-to-air missile fire ahead of B-2 bombing runs during the United States strikes on Iranian nuclear sites on 22 June 2025.\nU.S. Navy.\nThe USN achieved operational status with the F-35C in Block 3F on 28 February 2019. On 2 August 2021, the F-35C of VFA-147, as well as the CMV-22 Osprey, embarked on their maiden deployments as part of Carrier Air Wing 2 on board .\nUSN F-35Cs operating from the USS \"Carl Vinson\" took part the training exercise Pacific Stellar 2025 in February, along with the French and Japanese navies.\nIn April 2025, F-35C's from VFA-97 shot down multiple Houthi drones in the Red Sea, making it the first time the Navy has used the jet in combat.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe United Kingdom's Royal Air Force and Royal Navy operate the F-35B. Called Lightning in British service, it has replaced the Harrier GR9, retired in 2010, and Tornado GR4, retired in 2019. The F-35 is to be Britain's primary strike aircraft for the next three decades. One of the Royal Navy's requirements was a Shipborne Rolling and Vertical Landing (SRVL) mode to increase maximum landing weight by using wing lift during landing. Like the Italian Navy, British F-35Bs use ski-jumps to fly from their aircraft carriers, and . British F-35Bs are not intended to use the Brimstone 2 missile. In July 2013, Chief of the Air Staff Air Chief Marshal Sir Stephen Dalton announced that No. 617 Squadron would be the RAF's first operational F-35 squadron.\nThe first British F-35 squadron was No. 17 (Reserve) Test and Evaluation Squadron (TES), which stood up on 12 April 2013 as the aircraft's Operational Evaluation Unit. By June 2013, the RAF had received three F-35s of the 48 on order, initially based at Eglin Air Force Base. In June 2015, the F-35B undertook its first launch from a ski-jump at NAS Patuxent River. On 5 July 2017, it was announced the second UK-based RAF squadron would be No. 207 Squadron, which reformed on 1 August 2019 as the Lightning Operational Conversion Unit (OCU). No. 617 Squadron reformed on 18 April 2018 during a ceremony in Washington, D.C., becoming the first RAF front-line squadron to operate the type; receiving its first four F-35Bs on 6 June, flying from MCAS Beaufort to RAF Marham. On 10 January 2019, No. 617 Squadron and its F-35s were declared combat-ready.\nApril 2019 saw the first overseas deployment of a UK F-35 squadron when No. 617 Squadron went to RAF Akrotiri, Cyprus. This reportedly led on 25 June 2019 to the first combat use of an RAF F-35B: an armed reconnaissance flight searching for Islamic State targets in Iraq and Syria. In October 2019, F-35s of 617 Squadron and No. 17 TES were embarked on HMS \"Queen Elizabeth\" for the first time. No. 617 Squadron departed RAF Marham on 22 January 2020 for their first Exercise Red Flag with the Lightning. As of November 2022, 26 F-35Bs were based in the United Kingdom (with 617 and 207 Squadrons) and a further three were permanently based in the United States (with 17 Squadron) for testing and evaluation purposes.\nThe UK's second operational squadron is the Fleet Air Arm's 809 Naval Air Squadron, which stood up in December 2023.\nIn June 2025, as part of its second phase of procurement, the UK announced plans to procure 12 F-35As, capable of delivering both conventional and nuclear weapons, including the B61-12 thermonuclear gravity bomb. The aircraft will form part of NATO's dual capable aircraft programme. The F35-As will be based in RAF Marham, to be used in a training role on routine operation, as part of the OCU. 15 F-35Bs are also planned in this phase.\nIn July 2025, United States B61 nuclear weapons were redeployed to the US-operated RAF Lakenheath for the first time since 2008. The base operates F-35As and F-15Es, both capable of delivering the B61.\nAustralia.\nAustralia's first F-35, designated A35-001, was manufactured in 2014, with flight training provided through international Pilot Training Centre (PTC) at Luke Air Force Base in Arizona. The first two F-35s were unveiled to the Australian public on 3 March 2017 at the Avalon Airshow. By 2021, the Royal Australian Air Force had accepted 26 F-35As, with nine in the US and 17 operating at No 3 Squadron and No 2 Operational Conversion Unit at RAAF Base Williamtown. With 41 trained RAAF pilots and 225 trained technicians for maintenance, the fleet was declared ready to deploy on operations. It was originally expected that Australia would receive all 72 F-35s by 2023. Its final nine aircraft, which were the TR-3 version, arrived in Australia in December 2024.\nIsrael.\nThe Israeli Air Force (IAF) declared the F-35 operationally capable on 6 December 2017. According to Kuwaiti newspaper \"Al Jarida\", in July 2018, a test mission of at least three IAF F-35s flew to Iran's capital Tehran and back to Tel Aviv. While publicly unconfirmed, regional leaders acted on the report; Iran's supreme leader Ali Khamenei reportedly fired the air force chief and commander of Iran's Revolutionary Guard Corps over the mission.\nOn 22 May 2018, IAF chief Amikam Norkin said that the service had employed their F-35Is in two attacks on two battle fronts. This was part of the May 2018 Israel-Iran clashes, where airstrikes were claimed to target Iranian positions surrounding Syria's capital of Damascus and the buffer UNDOF Zone of the occupied Golan Heights. This marks the first combat operation of an F-35 by any country. Norkin said it had been flown \"all over the Middle East\", and showed photos of an F-35I flying over Beirut in daylight. In July 2019, Israel expanded its strikes against Iranian missile shipments; IAF F-35Is allegedly struck Iranian targets in Iraq twice.\nIn November 2020, the IAF announced the delivery of a unique F-35I testbed aircraft among a delivery of four aircraft received in August, to be used to test and integrate Israeli-produced weapons and electronic systems on F-35s received later. This is the only example of a testbed F-35 delivered to a non-US air force.\nOn 11 May 2021, eight IAF F-35Is took part in an attack on 150 targets in Hamas' rocket array, including 50\u201370 launch pits in the northern Gaza Strip, as part of Operation Guardian of the Walls. On 6 March 2022, the IDF stated that on 15 March 2021, F-35Is shot down two Iranian drones carrying weapons to the Gaza Strip. This was the first operational shoot down and interception carried out by the F-35. They were also used in the Gaza war. On 2 November 2023, the IDF posted on social media that they used an F-35I to shoot down a Houthi cruise missile over the Red Sea that was fired from Yemen during the Gaza war.\nF-35Is were used in airstrikes against Lebanon, including aerial refuelling in the country's airspace, in August and September 2024, as part of the Israel\u2013Hezbollah conflict (2023\u2013present). F-35Is were used in the 29 September 2024 Israeli attacks on Yemen. F-35Is were also reportedly involved in the October 2024 Israeli strikes on Iran. The F-35 was also used during the June 2025 Israeli strikes on Iran, equipped with low-observable conformal fuel tanks to extend their range and allow operations over Iranian soil without mid-air refueling. Iranian state-run media claimed that Iran shot down several Israeli F-35 jets, though the IDF denied the claims.\nBritain supplies Israel with parts for the F-35 through the global spares pool. Patrick Wintour wrote in \"The Guardian\" that, following criticism of Israel's role in the Gaza war, the legality of continuing this supply was questioned. The government in 2025 argued in a court case testing whether the law was broken by supplying Israel with F-35 parts usable to attack Palestinians in Gaza that preserving the British role in the F-35 jet fighter programme overrode UK laws on arms export controls and any UK obligation to prevent genocide in Israel.\nItaly.\nItaly's F-35As were declared to have reached initial operational capability (IOC) on 30 November 2018. At the time Italy had taken delivery of 10 F-35As and one F-35B, with 2 F-35As and the one F-35B being stationed in the U.S. for training, the remaining 8 F-35As were stationed in Amendola. Italian Navy F-35Bs have been operating from the Italian aircraft carrier ITS \"Cavour\", where they have also conducted drills in the Philippine Sea with the US in 2024. Construction in 2023 showed that Ghedi Air Base is planning to host F-35As for Italian delivery of US B61 nuclear weapons under NATO nuclear sharing.\nJapan.\nJapan's F-35As were declared to have reached initial operational capability (IOC) on 29 March 2019. At the time Japan had taken delivery of 10 F-35As stationed in Misawa Air Base. Japan plans to eventually acquire a total of 147 F-35s, which will include 42 F-35Bs. It plans to use the latter variant to equip Japan's s. On August 7, 2025, the first three Japanese F-35B's landed at Nyutabaru Air Base. Four more are to arrive by March 2026.\nNorway.\nOn 6 November 2019 Norway declared initial operational capability (IOC) for its fleet of 15 F-35As out of a planned 52 F-35As. On 6 January 2022 Norway's F-35As replaced its older F-16A and B models for the NATO quick reaction alert mission in the high north. In April 2025, the total number of F-35s delivered totaled 49 out of 52.\nOn 22 September 2023, two F-35As from the Royal Norwegian Air Force landed on a motorway near Tervo, Finland, showing, for the first time, that F-35As can operate from paved roads. Unlike the F-35B they cannot land vertically. The fighters were also refueled with their engines running. Major General Rolf Folland, Commander of the RNAF, said: \"Fighter jets are vulnerable on the ground, so by being able to use small airfields \u2013 and now motorways \u2013 (this) increases our survivability in war\",\nNetherlands.\nOn 27 December 2021, the Netherlands declared initial operational capability (IOC) for its fleet of 24 F-35As it has received to date from its order for 46 F-35As. In 2022, the Netherlands announced they will order an additional six F-35s, totaling 52 aircraft ordered. As of September\u00a02024[ [update]], 40 out of the 52 ordered have been delivered, and the Netherlands seeks to order another six jets to help completely phase out their F-16 fleet.\nVariants.\nThe F-35 was designed with three initial variants \u2013 the F-35A, a CTOL land-based version; the F-35B, a STOVL version capable of use either on land or on aircraft carriers; and the F-35C, a CATOBAR carrier-based version. Since then, there has been work on the design of nationally specific versions for Israel and Canada.\nF-35A.\nThe F-35A is the conventional take-off and landing (CTOL) variant intended for the USAF and other air forces. It is the smallest, lightest version and capable of 9 g, the highest of all variants.\nAlthough the F-35A currently conducts aerial refueling via boom and receptacle method, the aircraft can be modified for probe-and-drogue refueling if needed by the customer. A drag chute pod can be installed on the F-35A, with the Royal Norwegian Air Force being the first operator to adopt it. The F-35A has a tailhook designed to stop the aircraft during emergency situations. Unlike the more robust unit of the carrier-based F-35C, the F-35A's tailhook is a single-use device.\nF-35B.\nThe F-35B is the short take-off and vertical landing (STOVL) variant of the aircraft. Similar in size to the A variant, the B sacrifices about a third of the A variant's fuel volume to accommodate the shaft-driven lift fan (SDLF). This variant is limited to 7\u00a0g. Unlike other variants, the F-35B has no landing hook. The \"STOVL/HOOK\" control instead engages conversion between normal and vertical flight. The F-35B is capable of and can perform vertical and/or short take-off and landing (V/STOL).\nF-35C.\nThe F-35C is the carrier-based variant of the aircraft, designed for catapult-assisted take-off and barrier-arrested recovery (CATOBAR) operations from aircraft carriers. Compared to the F-35A, the F-35C incorporates several modifications to meet the specific demands of carrier operations. These include larger wings with foldable wingtips to reduce the aircraft's footprint for storage, enlarged control surfaces for improved handling at low speeds, a more robust tailhook for repeated use with carrier arrestor cables, a twin-wheel nose gear, and reinforced landing gear to withstand the stresses of arrested landings. The increased wing area also allows for lower landing speeds and improves both range and payload capacity. The F-35C is limited to a maximum load factor of 7.5\u00a0g.\nF-35I \"Adir\".\nThe F-35I \"Adir\" (, meaning \"Awesome\", or \"Mighty One\") is an F-35A with unique Israeli modifications. The US initially refused to allow such changes before permitting Israel to integrate its own electronic warfare systems, including sensors and countermeasures. The main computer has a plug-and-play function for add-on systems; proposals include an external jamming pod, and new Israeli air-to-air missiles and guided bombs in the internal weapon bays. A senior IAF official said that the F-35's stealth may be partly overcome within 10 years despite a 30 to 40-year service life, thus Israel's insistence on using their own electronic warfare systems. In 2010, Israel Aerospace Industries (IAI) considered a two-seat F-35 concept; an IAI executive noted that there was a \"known demand for two seats not only from Israel but from other air forces.\" In 2008, IAI planned to produce conformal fuel tanks, as well as stealthy external fuel tanks; these were reportedly used during the June 2025 Israeli airstrikes against Iran.\nIsrael had ordered a total of 75 F-35Is by 2023, with 36 already delivered as of November 2022.\nProposed variants.\nCF-35.\nThe Canadian CF-35 was a proposed variant that would differ from the F-35A through the addition of a drogue parachute and the potential inclusion of an F-35B/C-style refueling probe. In 2012, it was revealed that the CF-35 would employ the same boom refueling system as the F-35A. One alternative proposal would have been the adoption of the F-35C for its probe refueling and lower landing speed; however, the Parliamentary Budget Officer's report cited the F-35C's limited performance and payload as being too high a price to pay. Following the 2015 Federal Election the Liberal Party, whose campaign had included a pledge to cancel the F-35 procurement, formed a new government and commenced an open competition to replace the existing CF-18 Hornet. The CF-35 variant was deemed too expensive to develop, and was never considered. The Canadian government decided to not pursue any other modifications in the Future Fighter Capability Project, and instead focused on the potential procurement of the existing F-35A variant.\nOn 28 March 2022, the Canadian Government began negotiations with Lockheed Martin for 88 F-35As to replace the aging fleet of CF-18 fighters starting in 2025. The aircraft are reported to cost up to CA$19bn total with a life-cycle cost estimated at CA$77bn over the course of the F-35 program. On 9 January 2023, Canada formally confirmed the purchase of 88 aircraft. The initial delivery to the Royal Canadian Air Force in 2026 will be 4 aircraft, followed by 6 aircraft each in 2027\u20132028, and the rest to be delivered by 2032. The additional characteristics confirmed for the CF-35[] included the drag chute pod for landings at short/icy arctic runways, as well as the 'sidekick' system, which allows the CF-35 to carry up to 6 x AIM-120D missiles internally (instead of the typical internal capacity of 4 x AIM-120 missiles on other variants).\nNew export variant.\nIn December 2021, it was reported that Lockheed Martin was developing a new variant for an unspecified foreign customer. The Department of Defense released US$49\u00a0million in funding for this work.\nAccidents and notable incidents.\nThe F-35 has been described as a relatively safe military aircraft. Still, since 2014, more than a dozen have crashed or otherwise been involved in incidents that have killed or severely injured people or destroyed the aircraft. Some were caused by operator error; others by mechanical problems, some of which set the entire program back.\nSpecifications (F-35A).\n\"Data from\" Lockheed Martin: F-35 specifications, Lockheed Martin: F-35 weaponry, Lockheed Martin: F-35 Program Status, F-35 Program brief, FY2019 Select Acquisition Report (SAR), Director of Operational Test &amp; EvaluationGeneral characteristics* Crew: 1* Aspect ratio: 2.66* Fuel capacity: internal\nPerformance* Maximum speed: Mach 1.6 at high altitude (1,228 mph / 1,976 km/h)\nArmament\nAvionics\n *AN/APG-81 \"or\" AN/APG-85 (Lot 17 onwards) AESA radar\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11814", "revid": "809560779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11814", "title": "Food additives", "text": ""}
{"id": "11815", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11815", "title": "Food additive", "text": "Substances added to food\nFood additives are substances added to food to preserve flavor or enhance taste, appearance, or other sensory qualities. Some additives, such as vinegar (pickling), salt (salting), smoke (smoking) and sugar (crystallization), have been used for centuries to preserve food. This allows for longer-lasting foods, such as bacon, sweets, and wines. \nWith the advent of ultra-processed foods in the late 20th century, many additives having both natural and artificial origin were introduced. Food additives also include substances that may be introduced to food indirectly (called \"indirect additives\") in the manufacturing process through packaging, storage or transport.\nIn Europe and internationally, many additives are designated with E numbers, while in the United States, additives in amounts deemed safe for human consumption are designated as GRAS.\nIdentification.\nTo regulate these additives and inform consumers each additive is assigned a unique number called an \"E number\", which is used in Europe for all approved additives. This numbering scheme has been adopted and extended by the \"Codex Alimentarius\" Commission as the International Numbering System for Food Additives (INS) to internationally identify all additives (INS number.,\nE numbers are all prefixed by \"E\", but countries outside Europe use only the number, whether the additive is approved in Europe or not.\nFor example, acetic acid is written as E260 on products sold in Europe, but is simply known as additive 260 in some countries. Additive 103, alkannin, is not approved for use in Europe, so does not have an E number, although it is approved for use in Australia and New Zealand. Since 1987, Australia has had an approved system of labelling for additives in packaged foods. Each food additive has to be named or numbered. The numbers are the same as in Europe, but without the prefix \"E\".\nThe United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) lists these items as GRAS; they are listed under both their Chemical Abstracts Service number and FDA regulation under the United States Code of Federal Regulations.\nThe FDA publishes a list of food additives for all approved ingredients.\nCategories.\nFood additives can be divided into several groups, although there is some overlap because some additives exert more than one effect. For example, salt is both a preservative as well as a flavor.\nIn Europe, flavorings do not have an E-code and they are not considered as food additives.\nSafety and regulation.\nWith the increasing use of processed foods since the 19th century, food additives are more widely used. Many countries regulate their use. For example, boric acid was widely used as a food preservative from the 1870s to the 1920s, but was banned after World War I due to its toxicity, as demonstrated in animal and human studies. During World War II, the urgent need for cheap, available food preservatives led to boric acid being used again, but it was finally banned in the 1950s. Such cases led to a general mistrust of food additives, and an application of the precautionary principle led to the conclusion that only additives that are known to be safe should be used in foods. In the United States, this induced adoption of the Delaney clause, an amendment to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of 1938, stating that no carcinogenic substances may be used as food additives. However, after the banning of cyclamates in the United States and Britain in 1969, saccharin, the only remaining legal artificial sweetener at the time, was found to cause cancer in rats. Widespread public outcry in the United States, partly communicated to Congress by postage-paid postcards supplied in the packaging of sweetened soft drinks, led to the retention of saccharin, despite its violation of the Delaney clause. However, in 2000, saccharin was found to be carcinogenic in rats due only to their unique urine chemistry.\nIn 2007, Food Standards Australia New Zealand published an official shoppers' guidance with which the concerns of food additives and their labeling are mediated. In the EU, it can take 10 years or more to obtain approval for a new food additive. This includes five years of safety testing, followed by two years for evaluation by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) and another three years before the additive receives an EU-wide approval for use in every country in the European Union. Apart from testing and analyzing food products during the whole production process to ensure safety and compliance with regulatory standards, Trading Standards officers (in the UK) protect the public from any illegal use or potentially dangerous mis-use of food additives by performing random testing of food products.\nThere has been controversy associated with the risks and benefits of food additives. Natural additives may be similarly harmful or be the cause of allergic reactions in certain individuals. For example, safrole was used to flavor root beer until it was shown to be carcinogenic. Due to the application of the Delaney clause, it may not be added to foods, even though it occurs naturally in sassafras and sweet basil.\nHyperactivity.\nAlthough concerns have been expressed about a linkage between additives and hyperactivity, there is no clear evidence of a cause-and-effect relationship.\nToxicity assessment.\nIn 2012, the EFSA proposed the tier approach to evaluate the potential toxicity of food additives. It is based on four dimensions: toxicokinetics (absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion); genotoxicity; subchronic (at least 90 data) and chronic toxicity and carcinogenity; reproductive and developmental toxicity.\nMicronutrients.\nA subset of food additives, micronutrients added in food fortification processes preserve nutrient value by providing vitamins and minerals to foods such as flour, cereal, margarine and milk which normally would not retain such high levels. Added ingredients, such as air, bacteria, fungi, and yeast, also contribute manufacturing and flavor qualities, and reduce spoilage.\nRegulation in the United States.\nThe United States Food and Drug Administration defines a food additive as \"any substance the intended use of which results or may reasonably be expected to result directly or indirectly in its becoming a component or otherwise affecting the characteristics of any food\". For a novel food additive to be approved, a food additive approval petition must be submitted to the FDA. The identity of the ingredient, the proposed use in the food system, the technical effect of the ingredient, a method of analysis for the ingredient in foods, information on the manufacturing process, and full safety reports must be defined in a food additive petition. The FDA evaluates the chemical composition of the ingredient, the quantities that would be typically consumed, acute and chronic health impacts, and other safety factors. The FDA reviews the petition prior to market approval of the additive.\nStandardization.\nISO has published a series of standards regarding the topic and these standards are covered by ICS 67.220.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11820", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11820", "title": "Fridtjof Nansen", "text": "Norwegian polar explorer (1861\u20131930)\nFridtjof Wedel-Jarlsberg Nansen (; 10 October 1861 \u2013 13 May 1930) was a Norwegian polymath and Nobel Peace Prize laureate. He gained prominence at various points in his life as an explorer, a scientist, a diplomat, a humanitarian, and the co-founder of the Fatherland League.\nHe led the team that made the first crossing of the Greenland interior in 1888, traversing the island on cross-country skis. He won international fame after reaching a record northern latitude of 86\u00b014\u2032 during his \"Fram\" expedition of 1893\u20131896. Although he retired from exploration after his return to Norway, his techniques of polar travel and his innovations in equipment and clothing influenced a generation of subsequent Arctic and Antarctic expeditions. He was elected an International Member of the American Philosophical Society in 1897.\nNansen studied zoology at the Royal Frederick University in Christiania and later worked as a curator at the University Museum of Bergen where his research on the central nervous system of lower marine creatures earned him a doctorate and helped establish neuron doctrine. Later, neuroscientist Santiago Ram\u00f3n y Cajal won the 1906 Nobel Prize in Medicine for his research on the same subject. After 1896 his main scientific interest switched to oceanography; in the course of his research he made many scientific cruises, mainly in the North Atlantic, and contributed to the development of modern oceanographic equipment.\nAs one of his country's leading citizens, in 1905 Nansen spoke out for ending Norway's union with Sweden, and was instrumental in persuading Prince Carl of Denmark to accept the throne of the newly independent Norway. Between 1906 and 1908, he served as the Norwegian representative in London, where he helped negotiate the Integrity Treaty that guaranteed Norway's independent status.\nIn the final decade of his life, Nansen devoted himself primarily to the League of Nations, following his appointment in 1921 as the League's High Commissioner for Refugees. In 1922 he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his work on behalf of the displaced victims of World War I and related conflicts. Among the initiatives he introduced was the \"Nansen passport\" for stateless persons, a certificate that used to be recognized by more than 50 countries. He worked on behalf of refugees alongside Vidkun Quisling until his sudden death in 1930, after which the League established the Nansen International Office for Refugees to ensure that his work continued. This office received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1938. His name is commemorated in numerous geographical features, particularly in the polar regions.\nFamily background and childhood.\nThe Nansen family originated from Denmark. Hans Nansen (1598\u20131667), a trader, was an early explorer of the White Sea region of the Arctic Ocean. In later life he settled in Copenhagen, becoming the city's \"borgmester\" in 1654. Later generations of the family lived in Copenhagen until the mid-18th century, when Ancher Antoni Nansen moved to Norway (then in a union with Denmark). His son, Hans Leierdahl Nansen (1764\u20131821), was a magistrate first in the Trondheim district, later in J\u00e6ren. After Norway's separation from Denmark in 1814, he entered national political life as the representative for Stavanger in the first Storting, and became a strong advocate of union with Sweden. After suffering a paralytic stroke in 1821 Hans Leierdahl Nansen died, leaving a four-year-old son, Baldur Fridtjof Nansen, the explorer's father. \nBaldur was a lawyer without ambitions for public life, who became Reporter to the Supreme Court of Norway. He married twice, the second time to Adelaide Johanne Thekla Isidore B\u00f8lling Wedel-Jarlsberg from B\u00e6rum, a niece of Herman Wedel-Jarlsberg who had helped frame the Norwegian constitution of 1814 and was later the Swedish king's Norwegian Viceroy. Baldur and Adelaide settled at Store Fr\u00f8en, an estate at Aker, a few kilometres north of Norway's capital city, Christiania (since renamed Oslo). The couple had three children; the first died in infancy, the second, born 10 October 1861, was Fridtjof Wedel-Jarlsberg Nansen.\nStore Fr\u00f8en's rural surroundings shaped the nature of Nansen's childhood. In the short summers the main activities were swimming and fishing, while in the autumn the chief pastime was hunting for game in the forests. The long winter months were devoted mainly to skiing, which Nansen began to practice at the age of two, on improvised skis. At the age of 10 he defied his parents and attempted the ski jump at the nearby Huseby installation. This exploit had near-disastrous consequences, as on landing the skis dug deep into the snow, pitching the boy forward: \"I, head first, described a fine arc in the air ... [W]hen I came down again I bored into the snow up to my waist. The boys thought I had broken my neck, but as soon as they saw there was life in me ... a shout of mocking laughter went up.\" Nansen's enthusiasm for skiing was undiminished, though as he records, his efforts were overshadowed by those of the skiers from the mountainous region of Telemark, where a new style of skiing was being developed. \"I saw this was the only way\", wrote Nansen later.\nAt school, Nansen worked adequately without showing any particular aptitude. Studies took second place to sports, or to expeditions into the forests where he would live \"like Robinson Crusoe\" for weeks at a time. Through such experiences Nansen developed a marked degree of self-reliance. He became an accomplished skier and a highly proficient skater. Life was disrupted when, in the summer of 1877, Adelaide Nansen died suddenly. Distressed, Baldur Nansen sold the Store Fr\u00f8en property and moved with his two sons to Christiania. Nansen's sporting prowess continued to develop; at 18 he broke the world one-mile (1.6\u00a0km) skating record, and in the following year won the national cross-country skiing championship, a feat he would repeat on 11 subsequent occasions.\nStudent and adventurer.\nIn 1880 Nansen passed his university entrance examination, the \"examen artium\". He decided to study zoology, claiming later that he chose the subject because he thought it offered the chance of a life in the open air. He began his studies at the Royal Frederick University in Christiania early in 1881.\nEarly in 1882 Nansen took \"...the first fatal step that led me astray from the quiet life of science.\" Professor Robert Collett of the university's zoology department proposed that Nansen take a sea voyage, to study Arctic zoology at first hand. Nansen was enthusiastic, and made arrangements through a recent acquaintance, Captain Axel Krefting, commander of the sealer \"Viking\". The voyage began on 11 March 1882 and extended over the following five months. In the weeks before sealing started, Nansen was able to concentrate on scientific studies. From water samples he showed that, contrary to previous assumption, sea ice forms on the surface of the water rather than below. His readings also demonstrated that the Gulf Stream flows beneath a cold layer of surface water. Through the spring and early summer \"Viking\" roamed between Greenland and Spitsbergen in search of seal herds. Nansen became an expert marksman, and on one day proudly recorded that his team had shot 200 seals. In July, \"Viking\" became trapped in the ice close to an unexplored section of the Greenland coast; Nansen longed to go ashore, but this was impossible. However, he began to develop the idea that the Greenland icecap might be explored, or even crossed. On 17 July the ship broke free from the ice, and early in August was back in Norwegian waters.\nNansen did not resume formal studies at the university. Instead, on Collett's recommendation, he accepted a post as curator in the zoological department of the Bergen Museum. He was to spend the next six years of his life there\u2014apart from a six-month sabbatical tour of Europe\u2014working and studying with leading figures such as Gerhard Armauer Hansen, the discoverer of the leprosy bacillus, and Daniel Cornelius Danielssen, the museum's director who had turned it from a backwater collection into a centre of scientific research and education. Nansen's chosen area of study was the then relatively unexplored field of neuroanatomy, specifically the central nervous system of lower marine creatures. Before leaving for his sabbatical in February 1886 he published a paper summarising his research to date, in which he stated that \"anastomoses or unions between the different ganglion cells\" could not be demonstrated with certainty. This unorthodox view was confirmed by the simultaneous research of the embryologist Wilhelm His and the psychiatrist August Forel. Nansen is considered the first Norwegian defender of the neuron theory, originally proposed by Santiago Ram\u00f3n y Cajal. His subsequent paper, \"The Structure and Combination of Histological Elements of the Central Nervous System\", published in 1887, became his doctoral thesis.\nCrossing of Greenland.\nPlanning.\nThe idea of an expedition across the Greenland icecap grew in Nansen's mind throughout his Bergen years. In 1887, after the submission of his doctoral thesis, he finally began organising this project. Before then, the two most significant penetrations of the Greenland interior had been those of Adolf Erik Nordenski\u00f6ld in 1883, and Robert Peary in 1886. Both had set out from Disko Bay on the western coast, and had travelled about eastward before turning back. By contrast, Nansen proposed to travel from east to west, ending rather than beginning his trek at Disko Bay. A party setting out from the inhabited west coast would, he reasoned, have to make a return trip, as no ship could be certain of reaching the dangerous east coast and picking them up. By starting from the east\u2014assuming that a landing could be made there\u2014Nansen's would be a one-way journey towards a populated area. The party would have no line of retreat to a safe base; the only way to go would be forward, a situation that fitted Nansen's philosophy completely.\nNansen rejected the complex organisation and heavy manpower of other Arctic ventures, and instead planned his expedition for a small party of six. Supplies would be manhauled on specially designed lightweight sledges. Much of the equipment, including sleeping bags, clothing and cooking stoves, also needed to be designed from scratch. These plans received a generally poor reception in the press; one critic had no doubt that \"if [the] scheme be attempted in its present form ... the chances are ten to one that he will ... uselessly throw his own and perhaps others' lives away\". The Norwegian parliament refused to provide financial support, believing that such a potentially risky undertaking should not be encouraged. The project was eventually launched with a donation from a Danish businessman, Augustin Gam\u00e9l; the rest came mainly from small contributions from Nansen's countrymen, through a fundraising effort organised by students at the university.\nDespite the adverse publicity, Nansen received numerous applications from would-be adventurers. He wanted expert skiers, and attempted to recruit from the skiers of the Telemark region, but his approaches were rebuffed. Nordenski\u00f6ld had advised Nansen that Sami people, from Finnmark in the far north of Norway, were expert snow travellers, so Nansen recruited a pair, Samuel Balto and Ole Nielsen Ravna. The remaining places went to Otto Sverdrup, a former sea-captain who had more recently worked as a forester; Oluf Christian Dietrichson, an army officer, and Kristian Kristiansen, an acquaintance of Sverdrup's. All had experience of outdoor life in extreme conditions, and were experienced skiers. Just before the party's departure, Nansen attended a formal examination at the university, which had agreed to receive his doctoral thesis. In accordance with custom, he was required to defend his work before appointed examiners acting as \"devil's advocates\". He left before knowing the outcome of this process.\nExpedition.\nThe sealer \"Jason\" picked up Nansen's party on 3 June 1888 from the Icelandic port of \u00cdsafj\u00f6r\u00f0ur. They sighted the Greenland coast a week later, but thick pack ice hindered progress. With the coast still away, Nansen decided to launch the small boats. They were within sight of Sermilik Fjord on 17 July; Nansen believed it would offer a route up the icecap.\nThe expedition left \"Jason\" \"in good spirits and with the highest hopes of a fortunate result.\" Days of extreme frustration followed as they drifted south. Weather and sea conditions prevented them from reaching the shore. They spent most time camping on the ice itself\u2014it was too dangerous to launch the boats.\nBy 29 July, they found themselves south of the point where they left the ship. That day they finally reached land but were too far south to begin the crossing. Nansen ordered the team back into the boats after a brief rest and to begin rowing north. The party battled northward along the coast through the ice floes for the next 12\u00a0days. They encountered a large Inuit encampment on the first day, near Cape Steen Bille. Occasional contacts with the nomadic native population continued as the journey progressed.\nThe party reached Umivik Bay on 11 August, after covering . Nansen decided they needed to begin the crossing. Although they were still far south of his intended starting place, the season was becoming too advanced. After they landed at Umivik, they spent the next four days preparing for their journey. They set out on the evening of 15 August, heading north-west towards Christianhaab on the western shore of Disko Bay\u2014 away.\nOver the next few days, the party struggled to ascend. The inland ice had a treacherous surface with many hidden crevasses and the weather was bad. Progress stopped for three days because of violent storms and continuous rain one time. The last ship was due to leave Christianhaab by mid-September. They would not be able to reach it in time, Nansen concluded on 26 August. He ordered a change of course due west, towards Godthaab, a shorter journey by at least . The rest of the party, according to Nansen, \"hailed the change of plan with acclamation.\"\nThey continued climbing until 11 September and reached a height of above sea level. Temperatures on the summit of the icecap dropped to at night. From then on, the downward slope made travelling easier. Yet, the terrain was rugged and the weather remained hostile. Progress was slow: fresh snowfalls made dragging the sledges like pulling them through sand.\nOn 26 September, they battled their way down the edge of a fjord westward towards Godthaab. Sverdrup constructed a makeshift boat out of parts of the sledges, willows, and their tent. Three days later, Nansen and Sverdrup began the last stage of the journey, rowing down the fjord.\nOn 3 October, they reached Godthaab, where the Danish town representative greeted them. He first informed Nansen that he had secured his doctorate, a matter that \"could not have been more remote from [Nansen's] thoughts at that moment.\" The team accomplished their crossing in 49\u00a0days. Throughout the journey, they maintained meteorological and geographical and other records relating to the previously unexplored interior.\nThe rest of the team arrived in Godthaab on 12 October. Nansen soon learned no ship was likely to call at Godthaab until the following spring. Still, they were able to send letters back to Norway via a boat leaving Ivigtut at the end of October. He and his party spent the next seven months in Greenland. On 15 April 1889, the Danish ship \"Hvidbj\u00f8rnen\" finally entered the harbour. Nansen recorded: \"It was not without sorrow that we left this place and these people, among whom we had enjoyed ourselves so well.\"\nInterlude and marriage.\n\"Hvidbj\u00f8rnen\" reached Copenhagen on 21 May 1889. News of the crossing had preceded its arrival, and Nansen and his companions were feted as heroes. This welcome, however, was dwarfed by the reception in Christiania a week later, when crowds of between thirty and forty thousand\u2014a third of the city's population\u2014thronged the streets as the party made its way to the first of a series of receptions. The interest and enthusiasm generated by the expedition's achievement led directly to the formation that year of the Norwegian Geographical Society.\nNansen accepted the position of curator of the Royal Frederick University's zoology collection, a post which carried a salary but involved no duties; the university was satisfied by the association with the explorer's name. Nansen's main task in the following weeks was writing his account of the expedition, but he found time late in June to visit London, where he met the Prince of Wales (the future Edward VII), and addressed a meeting of the Royal Geographical Society (RGS).\nThe RGS president, Sir Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant Duff, said that Nansen had claimed \"the foremost place amongst northern travellers\", and later awarded him the Society's prestigious Patron's Medal. This was one of many honours Nansen received from institutions all over Europe. He was invited by a group of Australians to lead an expedition to Antarctica, but declined, believing that Norway's interests would be better served by a North Pole conquest.\nOn 11 August 1889 Nansen announced his engagement to Eva Sars, celebrated mezzo-soprano singer, a pioneer of women's skiing and the daughter of Michael Sars, a theologian and zoology professor who had died when Eva was 11 years old. The couple had met some years previously, at the skiing resort of Frognerseteren, where Nansen recalled seeing \"two feet sticking out of the snow\". Eva was three years older than Nansen, and despite the evidence of this first meeting, was an accomplished skier. She was also a celebrated classical singer who had been coached in Berlin by D\u00e9sir\u00e9e Art\u00f4t, one-time paramour of Tchaikovsky. The engagement surprised many; since Nansen had previously expressed himself forcefully against the institution of marriage, Otto Sverdrup assumed he had read the message wrongly. The wedding took place on 6 September 1889, less than a month after the engagement.\n\"Fram\" expedition.\nPlanning.\nNansen first began to consider the possibility of reaching the North Pole after reading meteorologist Henrik Mohn's theory on transpolar drift in 1884. Artefacts found on the coast of Greenland were identified to have come from the \"Jeannette\" expedition. In June 1881, was crushed and sunk off the Siberian coast\u2014the opposite side of the Arctic Ocean. Mohn surmised the location of the artefacts indicated the existence of an ocean current from east to west, all the way across the polar sea and possibly over the pole itself.\nThe idea remained fixated in Nansen's mind for the next couple of years. He developed a detailed plan for a polar venture after his triumphant return from Greenland. He made his idea public in February 1890, at a meeting of the newly formed Norwegian Geographical Society. Previous expeditions, he argued, approached the North Pole from the west and failed because they were working against the prevailing east\u2013west current; the secret was to work with the current.\nA workable plan would require a sturdy and manoeuvrable small ship, capable of carrying fuel and provisions for twelve men for five years. This ship would enter the ice pack close to the approximate location of \"Jeannette's\" sinking, drifting west with the current towards the pole and beyond it\u2014eventually reaching the sea between Greenland and Spitsbergen.\nExperienced polar explorers were dismissive: Adolphus Greely called the idea \"an illogical scheme of self-destruction\". Equally dismissive were Sir Allen Young, a veteran of the searches for Franklin's lost expedition, and Sir Joseph Dalton Hooker, who had sailed to the Antarctic on the Ross expedition. Nansen still managed to secure a grant from the Norwegian parliament after an impassioned speech. Additional funding was secured through a national appeal for private donations.\nPreparations.\nNansen chose the Norwegian naval engineer Colin Archer to design and build a ship. Archer designed an extraordinarily sturdy vessel with an intricate system of crossbeams and braces of the toughest oak timbers. Its rounded hull was designed to push the ship upwards when beset by pack ice. Speed and manoeuvrability were to be secondary to its ability as a safe and warm shelter during their predicted confinement.\nThe length-to-beam ratio\u2014 and \u2014gave it a stubby appearance, justified by Archer: \"A ship that is built with exclusive regard to its suitability for [Nansen's] object must differ essentially from any known vessel.\" It was christened \"Fram\" and launched on 6 October 1892.\nNansen selected a party of twelve from thousands of applicants. Otto Sverdrup, who took part in Nansen's earlier Greenland expedition was appointed as the expedition's second-in-command. Competition was so fierce that army lieutenant and dog-driving expert Hjalmar Johansen signed on as ship's stoker, the only position still available.\nInto the ice.\n\"Fram\" left Christiania on 24 June 1893, cheered on by thousands of well-wishers. After a slow journey around the coast, the final port of call was Vard\u00f8, in the far north-east of Norway. \"Fram\" left Vard\u00f8 on 21\u00a0July, following the North-East Passage route pioneered by Nordenski\u00f6ld in 1878\u20131879, along the northern coast of Siberia. Progress was impeded by fog and ice conditions in the mainly uncharted seas.\nThe crew also experienced the dead water phenomenon, where a ship's forward progress is impeded by friction caused by a layer of fresh water lying on top of heavier salt water. Nevertheless, Cape Chelyuskin, the most northerly point of the Eurasian continental mass, was passed on 10\u00a0September.\nHeavy pack ice was sighted ten days later at around latitude 78\u00b0N, as \"Fram\" approached the area in which was crushed. Nansen followed the line of the pack northwards to a position recorded as , before ordering engines stopped and the rudder raised. From this point \"Fram's\" drift began. The first weeks in the ice were frustrating, as the drift moved unpredictably; sometimes north, sometimes south.\nBy 19 November, \"Fram's\" latitude was south of that at which she had entered the ice. Only after the turn of the year, in January 1894, did the northerly direction become generally settled; the 80\u00b0N mark was finally passed on 22\u00a0March. Nansen calculated that, at this rate, it might take the ship five years to reach the pole. As the ship's northerly progress continued at a rate rarely above a kilometre and a half per day, Nansen began privately to consider a new plan\u2014a dog sledge journey towards the pole. With this in mind, he began to practice dog-driving, making many experimental journeys over the ice.\nIn November, Nansen announced his plan: when the ship passed latitude 83\u00b0N, he and Hjalmar Johansen would leave the ship with the dogs and make for the pole while \"Fram\", under Sverdrup, continued its drift until it emerged from the ice in the North Atlantic. After reaching the pole, Nansen and Johansen would make for the nearest known land, the recently discovered and sketchily mapped Franz Josef Land. They would then cross to Spitzbergen where they would find a ship to take them home.\nThe crew spent the rest of the winter of 1894 preparing clothing and equipment for the forthcoming sledge journey. Kayaks were built, to be carried on the sledges until needed for the crossing of open water. Preparations were interrupted early in January when violent tremors shook the ship. The crew disembarked, fearing the vessel would be crushed, but \"Fram\" proved herself equal to the danger. On 8 January 1895, the ship's position was 83\u00b034\u2032N, above Greely's previous record of 83\u00b024\u2032N.\nDash for the pole.\nWith the ship's latitude at 84\u00b04\u2032N and after two false starts, Nansen and Johansen began their journey on 14 March 1895. Nansen allowed 50\u00a0days to cover the to the pole, an average daily journey of . After a week of travel, a sextant observation indicated they averaged per day, which put them ahead of schedule. However, uneven surfaces made skiing more difficult, and their speeds slowed. They also realised they were marching against a southerly drift, and that distances travelled did not necessarily equate to distance progressed.\nOn 3 April, Nansen began to doubt whether the pole was attainable. Unless their speed improved, their food would not last them to the pole and back to Franz Josef Land. He confided in his diary: \"I have become more and more convinced we ought to turn before time.\" Four days later, after making camp, he observed the way ahead was \"...\u00a0a veritable chaos of iceblocks stretching as far as the horizon.\" Nansen recorded their latitude as 86\u00b013\u20326\u2033N\u2014almost three degrees beyond the previous record\u2014and decided to turn around and head back south.\nRetreat.\nAt first Nansen and Johansen made good progress south, but suffered a serious setback on 13 April, when in his eagerness to break camp, they had forgotten to wind their chronometers, which made it impossible to calculate their longitude and accurately navigate to Franz Josef Land. They restarted the watches based on Nansen's guess they were at 86\u00b0E. From then on they were uncertain of their true position. The tracks of an Arctic fox were observed towards the end of April. It was the first trace of a living creature other than their dogs since they left \"Fram\". They soon saw bear tracks and by the end of May saw evidence of nearby seals, gulls and whales.\nOn 31 May, Nansen calculated they were only from Cape Fligely, Franz Josef Land's northernmost point. Travel conditions worsened as increasingly warmer weather caused the ice to break up. On 22 June, the pair decided to rest on a stable ice floe while they repaired their equipment and gathered strength for the next stage of their journey. They remained on the floe for a month.\nThe day after leaving this camp, Nansen recorded: \"At last the marvel has come to pass\u2014land, land, and after we had almost given up our belief in it!\" Whether this still-distant land was Franz Josef Land or a new discovery they did not know\u2014they had only a rough sketch map to guide them. The edge of the pack ice was reached on 6 August and they shot the last of their dogs\u2014the weakest of which they killed regularly to feed the others since 24\u00a0April. The two kayaks were lashed together, a sail was raised, and they made for the land.\nIt soon became clear this land was part of an archipelago. As they moved southwards, Nansen tentatively identified a headland as Cape Felder on the western edge of Franz Josef Land. Towards the end of August, as the weather grew colder and travel became increasingly difficult, Nansen decided to camp for the winter. In a sheltered cove, with stones and moss for building materials, the pair erected a hut which was to be their home for the next eight months. With ready supplies of bear, walrus and seal to keep their larder stocked, their principal enemy was not hunger but inactivity. After muted Christmas and New Year celebrations, in slowly improving weather, they began to prepare to leave their refuge, but it was 19 May 1896 before they were able to resume their journey.\nRescue and return.\nOn 17 June, during a stop for repairs after the kayaks had been attacked by a walrus, Nansen thought he heard a dog barking as well as human voices. He went to investigate, and a few minutes later saw the figure of a man approaching. It was the British explorer Frederick Jackson, who was leading an expedition to Franz Josef Land and was camped at Cape Flora on nearby Northbrook Island. The two were equally astonished by their encounter; after some awkward hesitation Jackson asked: \"You are Nansen, aren't you?\", and received the reply \"Yes, I am Nansen.\"\nJohansen was picked up and the pair were taken to Cape Flora where, during the following weeks, they recuperated from their ordeal. Nansen later wrote that he could \"still scarcely grasp\" their sudden change of fortune; had it not been for the walrus attack that caused the delay, the two parties might have been unaware of each other's existence.\nOn 7 August, Nansen and Johansen boarded Jackson's supply ship \"Windward\", and sailed for Vard\u00f8 where they arrived on the 13th. They were greeted by Hans Mohn, the originator of the polar drift theory, who was in the town by chance. The world was quickly informed by telegram of Nansen's safe return, but as yet there was no news of \"Fram\".\nTaking the weekly mail steamer south, Nansen and Johansen reached Hammerfest on 18 August, where they learned that \"Fram\" had been sighted. She had emerged from the ice north and west of Spitsbergen, as Nansen had predicted, and was now on her way to Troms\u00f8. She had not passed over the pole, nor exceeded Nansen's northern mark. Without delay Nansen and Johansen sailed for Troms\u00f8, where they were reunited with their comrades.\nThe homeward voyage to Christiania was a series of triumphant receptions at every port. On 9 September, \"Fram\" was escorted into Christiania's harbour and welcomed by the largest crowds the city had ever seen. The crew were received by King Oscar, and Nansen, reunited with family, remained at the palace for several days as special guests. Tributes arrived from all over the world; typical was that from the British mountaineer Edward Whymper, who wrote that Nansen had made \"almost as great an advance as has been accomplished by all other voyages in the nineteenth century put together\".\nNational figure.\nScientist and polar oracle.\nNansen's first task on his return was to write his account of the voyage. This he did remarkably quickly, producing 300,000 words of Norwegian text by November 1896; the English translation, titled \"Farthest North\", was ready in January 1897. The book was an instant success, and secured Nansen's long-term financial future. Nansen included without comment the one significant adverse criticism of his conduct, that of Greely, who had written in \"Harper's Weekly\" on Nansen's decision to leave \"Fram\" and strike for the pole: \"It passes comprehension how Nansen could have thus deviated from the most sacred duty devolving on the commander of a naval expedition.\"\nDuring the 20 years following his return from the Arctic, Nansen devoted most of his energies to scientific work. In 1897 he accepted a professorship in zoology at the Royal Frederick University, which gave him a base from which he could tackle the major task of editing the reports of the scientific results of the \"Fram\" expedition. This was a much more arduous task than writing the expedition narrative. The results were eventually published in six volumes, and according to a later polar scientist, Robert Rudmose-Brown, \"were to Arctic oceanography what the \"Challenger\" expedition results had been to the oceanography of other oceans.\"\nIn 1900, Nansen became director of the Christiania-based International Laboratory for North Sea Research, and helped found the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea. Through his connection with the latter body, in the summer of 1900 Nansen embarked on his first visit to Arctic waters since the \"Fram\" expedition, a cruise to Iceland and Jan Mayen Land on the oceanographic research vessel \"Michael Sars\", named after Eva's father. Shortly after his return he learned that his Farthest North record had been passed, by members of the Duke of the Abruzzi's Italian expedition. They had reached 86\u00b034\u2032N on 24 April 1900, in an attempt to reach the North Pole from Franz Josef Land. Nansen received the news philosophically: \"What is the value of having goals for their own sake? They all vanish\u00a0... it is merely a question of time.\"\nNansen was now considered an oracle by all would-be explorers of the north and south polar regions. Abruzzi had consulted him, as had the Belgian Adrien de Gerlache, each of whom took expeditions to the Antarctic. Although Nansen refused to meet his own countryman and fellow-explorer Carsten Borchgrevink (whom he considered a fraud), he gave advice to Robert Falcon Scott on polar equipment and transport, prior to the 1901\u201304 \"Discovery\" expedition. At one point Nansen seriously considered leading a South Pole expedition himself, and asked Colin Archer to design two ships. However, these plans remained on the drawing board.\nBy 1901 Nansen's family had expanded considerably. A daughter, Liv, had been born just before \"Fram\" set out; a son, K\u00e5re was born in 1897 followed by a daughter, Irmelin, in 1900 and a second son Odd in 1901. The family home, which Nansen had built in 1891 from the profits of his Greenland expedition book, was now too small. Nansen acquired a plot of land in the Lysaker district and built, substantially to his own design, a large and imposing house which combined some of the characteristics of an English manor house with features from the Italian renaissance.\nThe house was ready for occupation by April 1902; Nansen called it \"Polh\u00f8gda\" (in English \"polar heights\"), and it remained his home for the rest of his life. A fifth and final child, son Asmund, was born at Polh\u00f8gda in 1903.\nPolitician and diplomat.\nThe union between Norway and Sweden, imposed by the Great Powers in 1814, had been under considerable strain through the 1890s, the chief issue in question being Norway's rights to its own consular service. Nansen, although not by inclination a politician, had spoken out on the issue on several occasions in defence of Norway's interests. As of 1898 Nansen was among the contributors of \"Ringeren\", an anti-Union magazine established by Sigurd Ibsen. It seemed, early in the 20th century that agreement between the two countries might be possible, but hopes were dashed when negotiations broke down in February 1905. The Norwegian government fell, and was replaced by one led by Christian Michelsen, whose programme was one of separation from Sweden.\nIn February and March Nansen published a series of newspaper articles which placed him firmly in the separatist camp. The new prime minister wanted Nansen in the cabinet, but Nansen had no political ambitions. However, at Michelsen's request he went to Berlin and then to London where, in a letter to \"The Times\", he presented Norway's legal case for a separate consular service to the English-speaking world. On 17 May 1905, Norway's Constitution Day, Nansen addressed a large crowd in Christiania, saying: \"Now have all ways of retreat been closed. Now remains only one path, the way forward, perhaps through difficulties and hardships, but forward for our country, to a free Norway\". He also wrote a book, \"Norway and the Union with Sweden\", to promote Norway's case abroad.\nOn 23 May the Storting passed the Consulate Act establishing a separate consular service. King Oscar refused his assent; on 27 May the Norwegian cabinet resigned, but the king would not recognise this step. On 7 June the Storting unilaterally announced that the union with Sweden was dissolved. In a tense situation the Swedish government agreed to Norway's request that the dissolution should be put to a referendum of the Norwegian people. This was held on 13 August 1905 and resulted in an overwhelming vote for independence, at which point King Oscar relinquished the crown of Norway while retaining the Swedish throne. A second referendum, held in November, determined that the new independent state should be a monarchy rather than a republic. In anticipation of this, Michelsen's government had been considering the suitability of various princes as candidates for the Norwegian throne. Faced with King Oscar's refusal to allow anyone from his own House of Bernadotte to accept the crown, the favoured choice was Prince Charles of Denmark. In July 1905 Michelsen sent Nansen to Copenhagen on a secret mission to persuade Charles to accept the Norwegian throne. Nansen was successful; shortly after the second referendum Charles was proclaimed king, taking the name Haakon VII. He and his wife, the British princess Maud, were crowned in the Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim on 22 June 1906.\nIn April 1906 Nansen was appointed Norway's first Minister in London. His main task was to work with representatives of the major European powers on an Integrity Treaty which would guarantee Norway's position. Nansen was popular in England, and got on well with King Edward, though he found court functions and diplomatic duties disagreeable; \"frivolous and boring\" was his description. However, he was able to pursue his geographical and scientific interests through contacts with the Royal Geographical Society and other learned bodies. The Treaty was signed on 2 November 1907, and Nansen considered his task complete. Resisting the pleas of, among others, King Edward that he should remain in London, on 15 November Nansen resigned his post. A few weeks later, still in England as the king's guest at Sandringham, Nansen received word that Eva was seriously ill with pneumonia. On 8 December he set out for home, but before he reached Polh\u00f8gda he learned, from a telegram, that Eva had died.\nOceanographer and traveller.\nAfter a period of mourning, Nansen returned to London. He had been persuaded by his government to rescind his resignation until after King Edward's state visit to Norway in April 1908. His formal retirement from the diplomatic service was dated 1 May 1908, the same day on which his university professorship was changed from zoology to oceanography. This new designation reflected the general character of Nansen's more recent scientific interests.\nIn 1905, he had supplied the Swedish physicist Walfrid Ekman with the data which established the principle in oceanography known as the Ekman spiral. Based on Nansen's observations of ocean currents recorded during the \"Fram\" expedition, Ekman concluded that the effect of wind on the sea's surface produced currents which \"formed something like a spiral staircase, down towards the depths\".\nIn 1909 Nansen combined with Bj\u00f8rn Helland-Hansen to publish an academic paper, \"The Norwegian Sea: its Physical Oceanography\", based on the \"Michael Sars\" voyage of 1900. Nansen had by now retired from polar exploration, the decisive step being his release of \"Fram\" to fellow Norwegian Roald Amundsen, who was planning a North Pole expedition. When Amundsen made his controversial change of plan and set out for the South Pole, Nansen stood by him.\nBetween 1910 and 1914, Nansen participated in several oceanographic voyages. In 1910, aboard the Norwegian naval vessel \"Fridtjof\", he carried out researches in the northern Atlantic, and in 1912 he took his own yacht, \"Veslem\u00f8y\", to Bear Island and Spitsbergen. The main objective of the \"Veslem\u00f8y\" cruise was the investigation of salinity in the North Polar Basin. One of Nansen's lasting contributions to oceanography was his work designing instruments and equipment; the \"Nansen bottle\" for taking deep water samples remained in use into the 21st century, in a version updated by Shale Niskin.\nAt the request of the Royal Geographical Society, Nansen began work on a study of Arctic discoveries, which developed into a two-volume history of the exploration of the northern regions up to the beginning of the 16th century. This was published in 1911 as \"Nord i T\u00e5keheimen\" (\"In Northern Mists\"). That year he renewed an acquaintance with Kathleen Scott, wife of Robert Falcon Scott, whose \"Terra Nova\" Expedition had sailed for Antarctica in 1910.\nBiographer Roland Huntford has claimed that Nansen and Kathleen Scott had a brief affair. Louisa Young, in her biography of Lady Scott, rejects the claim. Many women were attracted to Nansen, and he had a reputation as a womaniser. His personal life was troubled around this time; in January 1913 he received news of the suicide of Hjalmar Johansen, who had returned in disgrace from Amundsen's successful South Pole expedition. In March 1913, Nansen's youngest son Asmund died after a long illness.\nIn the summer of 1913, Nansen travelled to the Kara Sea, by the invitation of Jonas Lied, as part of a delegation investigating a possible trade route between Western Europe and the Siberian interior. The party then took a steamer up the Yenisei River to Krasnoyarsk, and travelled on the Trans-Siberian Railway to Vladivostok before turning for home. Nansen published a report from the trip in \"Through Siberia\". The life and culture of the Russian peoples aroused in Nansen an interest and sympathy he would carry through to his later life. Immediately before the First World War, Nansen joined Helland-Hansen in an oceanographical cruise in eastern Atlantic waters.\nStatesman and humanitarian.\nLeague of Nations.\nOn the outbreak of war in 1914, Norway declared its neutrality, alongside Sweden and Denmark. Nansen was appointed as the president of the Norwegian Union of Defence, but had few official duties, and continued with his professional work as far as circumstances permitted. As the war progressed, the loss of Norway's overseas trade led to acute shortages of food in the country, which became critical in April 1917, when the United States entered the war and placed extra restrictions on international trade. Nansen was dispatched to Washington by the Norwegian government; after months of discussion, he secured food and other supplies in return for the introduction of a rationing system. When his government hesitated over the deal, he signed the agreement on his own initiative.\nWithin a few months of the war's end in November 1918, a draft agreement had been accepted by the Paris Peace Conference to create a League of Nations, as a means of resolving disputes between nations by peaceful means. The foundation of the League at this time was providential as far as Nansen was concerned, giving him a new outlet for his restless energy. He became president of the Norwegian League of Nations Society, and although the Scandinavian nations with their traditions of neutrality initially held themselves aloof, his advocacy helped to ensure that Norway became a full member of the League in 1920, and he became one of its three delegates to the League's General Assembly.\nIn April 1920, at the League's request, Nansen began organising the repatriation of around half a million prisoners of war, stranded in various parts of the world. Of these, 300,000 were in Russia which, gripped by revolution and civil war, had little interest in their fate. Nansen was able to report to the Assembly in November 1920 that around 200,000\u00a0men had been returned to their homes. \"Never in my life\", he said, \"have I been brought into touch with so formidable an amount of suffering.\"\nNansen continued this work for a further two years until, in his final report to the Assembly in 1922, he was able to state that 427,886 prisoners had been repatriated to around 30\u00a0different countries. In paying tribute to his work, the responsible committee recorded that the story of his efforts \"would contain tales of heroic endeavour worthy of those in the accounts of the crossing of Greenland and the great Arctic voyage.\"\nNansen Mission.\nThe Nansen Mission is the colloquial term used by inhabitants of former Soviet Socialist Republics to describe the series of humanitarian initiatives undertaken by the International Committee of the Red Cross and headed by Fridtjof Nansen. This international effort included the involvement of the Swiss, Swedish, Dutch, Danish, Norwegian and German branches of the Red Cross, the Swiss and Italian Children's Aids, the Seventh-day Adventist Society, as well as many other organisations. The mobilisation effort began in August 1921 and the first programmes in Russia began soon after, with the signing of an agreement of assistance between Nansen and Georgy Chicherin, which provided aid to mitigate starvation in Russia and Ukraine.\nRussian famine.\nEven before this work was complete, Nansen was involved in a further humanitarian effort. On 1 September 1921, prompted by the British delegate Philip Noel-Baker, he accepted the post of the League's High Commissioner for Refugees. His main brief was the resettlement of around two million Russian refugees displaced by the upheavals of the Russian Revolution.\nAt the same time he tried to tackle the urgent problem of famine in Russia; following a widespread failure of crops around 30\u00a0million people were threatened with starvation and death. Despite Nansen's pleas on behalf of the starving, Russia's revolutionary government was feared and distrusted internationally, and the League was reluctant to come to its peoples' aid. Nansen had to rely largely on fundraising from private organisations, and his efforts met with limited success. Later he was to express himself bitterly on the matter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"There was in various transatlantic countries such an abundance of maize, that the farmers had to burn it as fuel in their railway engines. At the same time, the ships in Europe were idle, for there were no cargoes. Simultaneously there were thousands, nay millions of unemployed. All this, while thirty million people in the Volga region\u2014not far away and easily reached by our ships\u2014were allowed to starve and die. The politicians of the world at large, except in the United States, were trying to find an excuse for doing nothing on the pretext that it was the Russians' own fault \u2013 a result of the Bolshevik system.\"\nA major problem impeding Nansen's work on behalf of refugees was that most of them lacked documentary proof of identity or nationality. Without legal status in their country of refuge, their lack of papers meant they were unable to go anywhere else. To overcome this, Nansen devised a document that became known as the \"Nansen passport\", a form of identity for stateless persons that was in time recognised by more than 50\u00a0governments, and which allowed refugees to cross borders legally. Although the passport was created initially for refugees from Russia, it was extended to cover other groups.\nWhile attending the Conference of Lausanne in November 1922, Nansen learned that he had been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for 1922. The citation referred to \"his work for the repatriation of the prisoners of war, his work for the Russian refugees, his work to bring succour to the millions of Russians afflicted by famine, and finally his present work for the refugees in Asia Minor and Thrace\". Nansen donated the prize money to international relief efforts.\nGreco-Turkish resettlement.\nAfter the Greco-Turkish War of 1919\u20131922, Nansen travelled to Constantinople to negotiate the resettlement of hundreds of thousands of refugees, mainly ethnic Greeks who had fled from Turkey after the defeat of the Greek Army. The impoverished Greek state was unable to take them in, and so Nansen devised a scheme for a population exchange whereby half a million Turks in Greece were returned to Turkey, with full financial compensation, while further loans facilitated the absorption of the refugee Greeks into their homeland. Despite some controversy over the principle of a population exchange, the plan was implemented successfully over a period of several years.\nArmenian genocide.\nFrom 1925 onwards, Nansen devoted much time trying to help Armenian refugees, victims of Armenian genocide at the hands of the Ottoman Empire during the First World War and further ill-treatment thereafter. His goal was the establishment of a national home for these refugees, within the borders of Soviet Armenia. His main assistant in this endeavour was Vidkun Quisling, the future Nazi collaborator and head of a Norwegian puppet government during the Second World War.\nAfter visiting the region, Nansen presented the Assembly with a modest plan for the irrigation of on which 15,000\u00a0refugees could be settled. The plan ultimately failed, because even with Nansen's unremitting advocacy the money to finance the scheme was not forthcoming. Despite this failure, his reputation among the Armenian people remains high.\nNansen wrote \"Armenia and the Near East\" (1923) wherein he describes the plight of the Armenians in the wake of losing its independence to the Soviet Union. The book was translated into many languages. After his visit to Armenia, Nansen wrote two additional books: \"Across Armenia\" (1927) and \"Through the Caucasus to the Volga\" (1930).\nWithin the League's Assembly, Nansen spoke out on many issues besides those related to refugees. He believed that the Assembly gave the smaller countries such as Norway a \"unique opportunity for speaking in the councils of the world.\" He believed that the extent of the League's success in reducing armaments would be the greatest test of its credibility. He was a signatory to the Slavery Convention of 25 September 1926, which sought to outlaw the use of forced labour. He supported a settlement of the post-war reparations issue and championed Germany's membership of the League, which was granted in September 1926 after intensive preparatory work by Nansen.\nLater life.\nOn 17 January 1919 Nansen married Sigrun Munthe, a long-time friend with whom he had had a love affair in 1905, while Eva was still alive. The marriage was resented by the Nansen children, and proved unhappy; an acquaintance writing of them in the 1920s said Nansen appeared unbearably miserable and Sigrun steeped in hate.\nNansen's League of Nations commitments through the 1920s meant that he was mostly absent from Norway, and was able to devote little time to scientific work. Nevertheless, he continued to publish occasional papers. He entertained the hope that he might travel to the North Pole by airship, but could not raise sufficient funding. In any event he was forestalled in this ambition by Amundsen, who flew over the pole in Umberto Nobile's airship \"Norge\" in May 1926. Two years later Nansen broadcast a memorial oration to Amundsen, who had disappeared in the Arctic while organising a rescue party for Nobile whose airship had crashed during a second polar voyage. Nansen said of Amundsen: \"He found an unknown grave under the clear sky of the icy world, with the whirring of the wings of eternity through space.\"\nIn 1926 Nansen was elected Rector of the University of St Andrews in Scotland, the first foreigner to hold this largely honorary position. He used the occasion of his inaugural address to review his life and philosophy, and to deliver a call to the youth of the next generation. He ended:\nWe all have a Land of Beyond to seek in our life\u2014what more can we ask? Our part is to find the trail that leads to it. A long trail, a hard trail, maybe; but the call comes to us, and we have to go. Rooted deep in the nature of every one of us is the spirit of adventure, the call of the wild\u2014vibrating under all our actions, making life deeper and higher and nobler.\nNansen largely avoided involvement in domestic Norwegian politics, but in 1924 he was persuaded by the long-retired former Prime Minister Christian Michelsen to take part in a new anti-communist political grouping, the Fatherland League. There were fears in Norway that should the Marxist-oriented Labour Party gain power it would introduce a revolutionary programme. At the inaugural rally of the League in Oslo (as Christiania had now been renamed), Nansen declared: \"To talk of the right of revolution in a society with full civil liberty, universal suffrage, equal treatment for everyone ... [is] idiotic nonsense.\"\nFollowing continued turmoil between the centre-right parties, there was even an independent petition in 1926 gaining some momentum that proposed for Nansen to head a centre-right national unity government on a balanced budget program, an idea he did not reject. He was the headline speaker at the single largest Fatherland League rally with 15,000 attendees in T\u00f8nsberg in 1928. In 1929 he went on his final tour for the League on the ship \"Stella Polaris\", holding speeches from Bergen to Hammerfest.\nIn between his various duties and responsibilities, Nansen had continued to take skiing holidays when he could. In February 1930, aged 68, he took a short break in the mountains with two old friends, who noted that Nansen was slower than usual and appeared to tire easily. On his return to Oslo he was laid up for several months, with influenza and later phlebitis, and was visited on his sickbed by King Haakon VII.\nNansen was a close friend of a clergyman named Wilhelm. Nansen was an atheist.\nDeath and legacy.\nNansen died of a heart attack on 13 May 1930. He was given a non-religious state funeral before cremation, after which his ashes were laid under a tree at Polh\u00f8gda. Nansen's daughter Liv recorded that there were no speeches, just music: Schubert's \"Death and the Maiden\", which Eva used to sing.\nIn his lifetime and thereafter, Nansen received honours and recognition from many countries. Among the many tributes paid to him subsequently was that of Lord Robert Cecil, a fellow League of Nations delegate, who spoke of the range of Nansen's work, done with no regard for his own interests or health: \"Every good cause had his support. He was a fearless peacemaker, a friend of justice, an advocate always for the weak and suffering.\"\nNansen was a pioneer and innovator in many fields. As a young man he embraced the revolution in skiing methods that transformed it from a means of winter travel to a universal sport, and quickly became one of Norway's leading skiers. He was later able to apply this expertise to the problems of polar travel, in both his Greenland and his \"Fram\" expeditions.\nHe invented the \"Nansen sledge\" with broad, ski-like runners, the \"Nansen cooker\" to improve the heat efficiency of the standard spirit stoves then in use, and the layer principle in polar clothing, whereby the traditionally heavy, awkward garments were replaced by layers of lightweight material. In science, Nansen is recognised both as one of the founders of modern neurology, and as a significant contributor to early oceanographical science, in particular for his work in establishing the Central Oceanographic Laboratory in Christiania.\nThrough his work on behalf of the League of Nations, Nansen helped to establish the principle of international responsibility for refugees. Immediately after his death the League set up the Nansen International Office for Refugees, a semi-autonomous body under the League's authority, to continue his work. The Nansen Office faced great difficulties, in part arising from the large numbers of refugees from the European dictatorships during the 1930s. Nevertheless, it secured the agreement of 14\u00a0countries (including a reluctant Great Britain) to the Refugee Convention of 1933.\nIt also helped to repatriate 10,000\u00a0Armenians to Yerevan in Soviet Armenia, and to find homes for a further 40,000 in Syria and Lebanon. In 1938, the year in which it was superseded by a wider-ranging body, the Nansen Office was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. In 1954, the League's successor body, the United Nations, established the Nansen Medal, later named the Nansen Refugee Award, given annually by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to an individual, group or organisation \"for outstanding work on behalf of the forcibly displaced\".\nNumerous geographical features bear his name: the Nansen Basin and the Nansen-Gakkel Ridge in the Arctic Ocean; Mount Nansen in the Yukon region of Canada; Mount Nansen, Mount Fridtjof Nansen and Nansen Island, all in Antarctica; as well as Nansen Island in the Kara Sea, Nansen Land in Greenland and Nansen Island in Franz Josef Land; 853 Nansenia, an asteroid; Nansen crater at the Moon's north pole and Nansen crater on Mars. His Polh\u00f8gda mansion is now home to the Fridtjof Nansen Institute, an independent foundation which engages in research on environmental, energy and resource management politics.\nA 1968 Norwegian/Soviet biographical film \"Just a Life: the Story of Fridtjof Nansen\" was released with Knut Wigert as Nansen. \nIn the 1948 film \"Scott of the Antarctic\", Nansen was played by Stig Egede-Nissen. In the 1985 television serial \"The Last Place on Earth\", he was portrayed by Max von Sydow. In the 2019 film \"Amundsen\", Trond Espen Seim appeared as Nansen.\nThe Royal Norwegian Navy launched the first of a series of five s in 2004, with as its lead ship. Cruise ship was launched in 2020.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nInline citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11824", "revid": "17753739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11824", "title": "Frederick Augustus II of Saxony", "text": "King of Saxony from 1836 to 1854\nFrederick Augustus II (; 18 May 1797 \u2013 9 August 1854) was King of Saxony and a member of the House of Wettin.\nHe was the eldest son of Maximilian, Prince of Saxony \u2013 younger son of the Elector Frederick Christian of Saxony \u2013 by his first wife, Caroline of Bourbon, Princess of Parma.\nLife.\nEarly years.\nFrom his birth, it was clear that one day Frederick Augustus would become the ruler of Saxony. His father was the only son of the Elector Frederick Christian of Saxony who left surviving male issue. When King Frederick Augustus I died (1827) and Anton succeeded him as King, Frederick Augustus became second in line to the throne, preceded only by his father Maximilian. However, he took no part in the administration of the country.\nHe was an officer in the War of the Sixth Coalition. However, he had little interest in military affairs.\nCo-Regent to the Kingdom.\nThe July Revolution of 1830 in France marked the beginning of disturbances in Saxony that autumn. The people claimed a change in the constitution and demanded a young regent of the kingdom to share the government with the King Anton. On 1 September the Prince Maximilian renounced his rights of succession in favor of his son Frederick Augustus, who was proclaimed Prince Co-Regent (de: \"Prinz-Mitregenten\") of Saxony. On 2 February 1832 Frederick Augustus brought Free Autonomy to the cities. Also, by an edict of 17 March of that year, the farmers were freed from the corv\u00e9e and hereditary submission. His popularity and liberal reforms quickly ended the discontent.\nKing of Saxony.\nOn 6 June 1836, King Anton died and Frederick Augustus succeeded him. As an intelligent man, he was quickly popular with the people as he had been since the time of his regency. The new king solved political questions only from a pure sense of duty. Mostly he preferred to leave these things on the hands of his ministers.\nA standardized jurisdiction for Saxony created the Criminal Code of 1836. During the Revolutionary disturbances of 1848 (March Revolution), he appointed liberal ministers in the government, lifted censorship, and remitted a liberal electoral law. Later his attitude changed. On 28 April Frederick August II dissolved the Parliament, and in 1849 he was forced to flee to the K\u00f6nigstein Fortress. The May Uprising was crushed by Saxon and Prussian troops and Frederick was able to return after only a few days.\nFrom that time onward his reign was tranquil and prosperous. Later Count Beust, leader of the Austrian and feudal party in Saxony, became his principal minister and guided his policy on most occasions.\nJourney through England and Scotland.\nIn 1844 Frederick Augustus, accompanied by his personal physician Carl Gustav Carus, made an informal (\"incognito\") visit to England and Scotland. Among places they visited were Lyme Regis where he purchased from the local fossil collector and dealer, Mary Anning, an ichthyosaur skeleton for his own extensive natural history collection. It was not a state visit, but the King was the guest of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert at Windsor Castle, visited many of the sights in London and in the university cities of Oxford and Cambridge, and toured widely in England, Wales and Scotland.\nIn addition to his interest in fossils, Frederick Augustus devoted his leisure hours chiefly to the study of botany. He made botanical excursions into different countries, and his \"Flora Marienbadensis, oder Pflanzen und Gebirgsarten, gesammelt und beschrieben\" was published in Prague in 1837.\nDeath.\nDuring a journey in Tyrol, he had an accident in Brennb\u00fcchel in which he fell in front of a horse that stepped on his head. On 9 August 1854, he died in the Gasthof Neuner. He was buried on 16 August in the Katholische Hofkirche of Dresden. In his memory, the Dowager Queen Maria arranged to establish the K\u00f6nigskapelle (King's Chapel) at the accident place, which was consecrated one year later, some of the last members of the Saxon royal family, including Maria Emanuel, Margrave of Meissen, are buried beside the chapel.\nMarriages.\nIn Vienna on 26 September 1819 (by proxy) and again in Dresden on 7 October 1819 (in person), Frederick Augustus married firstly with the Archduchess Maria Caroline of Austria (Maria Karoline Ferdinande Theresia Josephine Demetria), daughter of Emperor Francis I of Austria. They had no children.\nIn Dresden on 24 April 1833 Frederick Augustus married secondly with the Princess Maria Anna of Bavaria (Maria Anna Leopoldine Elisabeth Wilhelmine), daughter of the King Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria. Like his first marriage, this was childless.\nThe musician Theodor Uhlig (1822\u20131853) was an illegitimate son of Frederick Augustus.\nWithout legitimate issue, after his death Frederick Augustus was succeeded by his younger brother, Johann.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11825", "revid": "10512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11825", "title": "Frederick Augustus I King of Saxony", "text": ""}
{"id": "11826", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11826", "title": "Free market", "text": "Form of market-based economy\nIn economics, a free market is an economic system in which the prices of goods and services are determined by supply and demand expressed by sellers and buyers. Such markets, as modeled, operate without the intervention of government or any other external authority. Proponents of the free market as a normative ideal contrast it with a regulated market, in which a government intervenes in supply and demand by means of various methods such as taxes or regulations. In an idealized free market economy, prices for goods and services are set solely by the bids and offers of the participants.\nScholars contrast the concept of a free market with the concept of a coordinated market in fields of study such as political economy, new institutional economics, economic sociology, and political science. All of these fields emphasize the importance in currently existing market systems of rule-making institutions external to the simple forces of supply and demand which create space for those forces to operate to control productive output and distribution. Although free markets are commonly associated with capitalism in contemporary usage and popular culture, free markets have also been components in some forms of market socialism.\nHistorically, free market has also been used synonymously with other economic policies. For instance proponents of \"laissez-faire\" capitalism may refer to it as free market capitalism because they claim it achieves the most economic freedom. In practice, governments usually intervene to reduce externalities such as greenhouse gas emissions; although they may use markets to do so, such as carbon emission trading.\nEconomic systems.\nCapitalism.\nCapitalism is an economic system based on the private ownership of the means of production and their operation for profit. Central characteristics of capitalism include capital accumulation, competitive markets, a price system, private property and the recognition of property rights, voluntary exchange, and wage labor. In a capitalist market economy, decision-making and investments are determined by every owner of wealth, property or production ability in capital and financial markets whereas prices and the distribution of goods and services are mainly determined by competition in goods and services markets.\nEconomists, historians, political economists and sociologists have adopted different perspectives in their analyses of capitalism and have recognized various forms of it in practice. These include \"laissez-faire\" or free-market capitalism, state capitalism and welfare capitalism. Different forms of capitalism feature varying degrees of free markets, public ownership, obstacles to free competition and state-sanctioned social policies. The degree of competition in markets and the role of intervention and regulation as well as the scope of state ownership vary across different models of capitalism. The extent to which different markets are free and the rules defining private property are matters of politics and policy. Most of the existing capitalist economies are mixed economies that combine elements of free markets with state intervention and in some cases economic planning.\nMarket economies have existed under many forms of government and in many different times, places and cultures. Modern capitalist societies\u2014marked by a universalization of money-based social relations, a consistently large and system-wide class of workers who must work for wages (the proletariat) and a capitalist class which owns the means of production\u2014developed in Western Europe in a process that led to the Industrial Revolution. Capitalist systems with varying degrees of direct government intervention have since become dominant in the Western world and continue to spread. Capitalism has been shown to be strongly correlated with economic growth.\nGeorgism.\nFor classical economists such as Adam Smith, the term free market refers to a market free from all forms of economic privilege, monopolies and artificial scarcities. They say this implies that economic rents, which they describe as profits generated from a lack of perfect competition, must be reduced or eliminated as much as possible through free competition.\nEconomic theory suggests the returns to land and other natural resources are economic rents that cannot be reduced in such a way because of their perfect inelastic supply. Some economic thinkers emphasize the need to share those rents as an essential requirement for a well functioning market. It is suggested this would both eliminate the need for regular taxes that have a negative effect on trade (see deadweight loss) as well as release land and resources that are speculated upon or monopolised, two features that improve the competition and free market mechanisms. Winston Churchill supported this view by the following statement: \"Land is the mother of all monopoly\". The American economist and social philosopher Henry George, the most famous proponent of this thesis, wanted to accomplish this through a high land value tax that replaces all other taxes. Followers of his ideas are often called Georgists or geoists and geolibertarians.\nL\u00e9on Walras, one of the founders of the neoclassical economics who helped formulate the general equilibrium theory, had a very similar view. He argued that free competition could only be realized under conditions of state ownership of natural resources and land. Additionally, income taxes could be eliminated because the state would receive income to finance public services through owning such resources and enterprises.\n\"Laissez-faire\".\nThe \"laissez-faire\" principle expresses a preference for an absence of non-market pressures on prices and wages such as those from discriminatory government taxes, subsidies, tariffs, regulations, or government-granted monopolies. In \"The Pure Theory of Capital\", Friedrich Hayek argued that the goal is the preservation of the unique information contained in the price itself.\nAccording to Karl Popper, the idea of the free market is paradoxical, as it requires interventions towards the goal of preventing interventions.\nAlthough \"laissez-faire\" has been commonly associated with capitalism, there is a similar economic theory associated with socialism called left-wing or socialist \"laissez-faire\", also known as free-market anarchism, free-market anti-capitalism and free-market socialism to distinguish it from \"laissez-faire\" capitalism. Critics of \"laissez-faire\" as commonly understood argue that a truly \"laissez-faire\" system would be anti-capitalist and socialist. American individualist anarchists such as Benjamin Tucker saw themselves as economic free-market socialists and political individualists while arguing that their \"anarchistic socialism\" or \"individual anarchism\" was \"consistent Manchesterism\".\nSocialism.\nVarious forms of socialism based on free markets have existed since the 19th century. Early notable socialist proponents of free markets include Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, Benjamin Tucker and the Ricardian socialists. These economists believed that genuinely free markets and voluntary exchange could not exist within the exploitative conditions of capitalism. These proposals ranged from various forms of worker cooperatives operating in a free-market economy such as the mutualist system proposed by Proudhon, to state-owned enterprises operating in unregulated and open markets. These models of socialism are not to be confused with other forms of market socialism (e.g. the Lange model) where publicly owned enterprises are coordinated by various degrees of economic planning, or where capital good prices are determined through marginal cost pricing.\nAdvocates of free-market socialism such as Jaroslav Vanek argue that genuinely free markets are not possible under conditions of private ownership of productive property. Instead, he contends that the class differences and inequalities in income and power that result from private ownership enable the interests of the dominant class to skew the market to their favor, either in the form of monopoly and market power, or by utilizing their wealth and resources to legislate government policies that benefit their specific business interests. Additionally, Vanek states that workers in a socialist economy based on cooperative and self-managed enterprises have stronger incentives to maximize productivity because they would receive a share of the profits (based on the overall performance of their enterprise) in addition to receiving their fixed wage or salary. The stronger incentives to maximize productivity that he conceives as possible in a socialist economy based on cooperative and self-managed enterprises might be accomplished in a free-market economy if employee-owned companies were the norm as envisioned by various thinkers including Louis O. Kelso and James S. Albus.\nSocialists also assert that free-market capitalism leads to an excessively skewed distributions of income and economic instabilities which in turn leads to social instability. Corrective measures in the form of social welfare, re-distributive taxation and regulatory measures and their associated administrative costs which are required create agency costs for society. These costs would not be required in a self-managed socialist economy.\nCriticism of market socialism comes from two major directions. Economists Friedrich Hayek and George Stigler argued that socialism as a theory is not conducive to democratic systems and even the most benevolent state would face serious implementation problems.\nMore modern criticism of socialism and market socialism implies that even in a democratic system, socialism cannot reach the desired efficient outcome. This argument holds that democratic majority rule becomes detrimental to enterprises and industries, and that the formation of interest groups distorts the optimal market outcome.\nConcepts.\nEconomic equilibrium.\nThe general equilibrium theory has demonstrated that, under certain theoretical conditions of perfect competition, the law of supply and demand influences prices toward an equilibrium that balances the demands for the products against the supplies. At these equilibrium prices, the market distributes the products to the purchasers according to each purchaser's preference or utility for each product and within the relative limits of each buyer's purchasing power. This result is described as market efficiency, or more specifically a Pareto optimum.\nLow barriers to entry.\nA free market does not directly require the existence of competition; however, it does require a framework that freely allows new market entrants. Hence, competition in a free market is a consequence of the conditions of a free market, including that market participants not be obstructed from following their profit motive.\nPerfect competition and market failure.\nAn absence of any of the conditions of perfect competition is considered a market failure. Regulatory intervention may provide a substitute force to counter a market failure, which leads some economists to believe that some forms of market regulation may be better than an unregulated market at providing a free market.\nSpontaneous order.\nFriedrich Hayek popularized the view that market economies promote spontaneous order which results in a better \"allocation of societal resources than any design could achieve\". According to this view, market economies are characterized by the formation of complex transactional networks that produce and distribute goods and services throughout the economy. These networks are not designed, but they nevertheless emerge as a result of decentralized individual economic decisions. The idea of spontaneous order is an elaboration on the invisible hand proposed by Adam Smith in \"The Wealth of Nations\". About the individual, Smith wrote:\nBy preferring the support of domestic to that of foreign industry, he intends only his own security; and by directing that industry in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention. Nor is it always the worse for society that it was no part of it. By pursuing his own interest, he frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than when he really intends to promote it. I have never known much good done by those who affected to trade for the public good.\nSmith pointed out that one does not get one's dinner by appealing to the brother-love of the butcher, the farmer or the baker. Rather, one appeals to their self-interest and pays them for their labor, arguing:\nIt is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer or the baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own self-interest. We address ourselves, not to their humanity but to their self-love, and never talk to them of our own necessities but of their advantages.\nSupporters of this view claim that spontaneous order is superior to any order that does not allow individuals to make their own choices of what to produce, what to buy, what to sell and at what prices due to the number and complexity of the factors involved. They further believe that any attempt to implement central planning will result in more disorder, or a less efficient production and distribution of goods and services.\nCritics such as political economist Karl Polanyi question whether a spontaneously ordered market can exist, completely free of distortions of political policy, claiming that even the ostensibly freest markets require a state to exercise coercive power in some areas, namely to enforce contracts, govern the formation of labor unions, spell out the rights and obligations of corporations, shape who has standing to bring legal actions and define what constitutes an unacceptable conflict of interest.\nSupply and demand.\nDemand for an item (such as a good or service) refers to the economic market pressure from people trying to buy it. Buyers have a maximum price they are willing to pay for an item, and sellers have a minimum price at which they are willing to offer their product. The point at which the supply and demand curves meet is the equilibrium price of the good and quantity demanded. Sellers willing to offer their goods at a lower price than the equilibrium price receive the difference as producer surplus. Buyers willing to pay for goods at a higher price than the equilibrium price receive the difference as consumer surplus.\nThe model is commonly applied to wages in the market for labor. The typical roles of supplier and consumer are reversed. The suppliers are individuals, who try to sell (supply) their labor for the highest price. The consumers are businesses, which try to buy (demand) the type of labor they need at the lowest price. As more people offer their labor in that market, the equilibrium wage decreases and the equilibrium level of employment increases as the supply curve shifts to the right. The opposite happens if fewer people offer their wages in the market as the supply curve shifts to the left.\nIn a free market, individuals and firms taking part in these transactions have the liberty to enter, leave and participate in the market as they so choose. Prices and quantities are allowed to adjust according to economic conditions in order to reach equilibrium and allocate resources. However, in many countries around the world governments seek to intervene in the free market in order to achieve certain social or political agendas. Governments may attempt to create social equality or equality of outcome by intervening in the market through actions such as imposing a minimum wage (price floor) or erecting price controls (price ceiling). \nOther lesser-known goals are also pursued, such as in the United States, where the federal government subsidizes owners of fertile land to not grow crops in order to prevent the supply curve from further shifting to the right and decreasing the equilibrium price. This is done under the justification of maintaining farmers' profits; due to the relative inelasticity of demand for crops, increased supply would lower the price but not significantly increase quantity demanded, thus placing pressure on farmers to exit the market. Those interventions are often done in the name of maintaining basic assumptions of free markets such as the idea that the costs of production must be included in the price of goods. Pollution and depletion costs are sometimes not included in the cost of production (a manufacturer that withdraws water at one location then discharges it polluted downstream, avoiding the cost of treating the water), therefore governments may opt to impose regulations in an attempt to try to internalize all of the cost of production and ultimately include them in the price of the goods.\nAdvocates of the free market contend that government intervention hampers economic growth by disrupting the efficient allocation of resources according to supply and demand while critics of the free market contend that government intervention is sometimes necessary to protect a country's economy from better-developed and more influential economies, while providing the stability necessary for wise long-term investment. Milton Friedman argued against central planning, price controls and state-owned corporations, particularly as practiced in the Soviet Union and China while Ha-Joon Chang cites the examples of post-war Japan and the growth of South Korea's steel industry as positive examples of government intervention.\nReception.\nCriticism.\nCritics of a \"laissez-faire\" free market have argued that in real world situations it has proven to be susceptible to the development of price fixing monopolies. Such reasoning has led to government intervention, e.g. the United States antitrust law. Critics of the free market also argue that it results in significant market dominance, inequality of bargaining power, or information asymmetry, in order to allow markets to function more freely.\nCritics of a free market often argue that some market failures require government intervention. Economists Ronald Coase, Milton Friedman, Ludwig von Mises, and Friedrich Hayek have responded by arguing that markets can internalize or adjust to supposed market failures.\nTwo prominent Canadian authors argue that government at times has to intervene to ensure competition in large and important industries. Naomi Klein illustrates this roughly in her work \"The Shock Doctrine\" and John Ralston Saul more humorously illustrates this through various examples in \"The Collapse of Globalism and the Reinvention of the World\". While its supporters argue that only a free market can create healthy competition and therefore more business and reasonable prices, opponents say that a free market in its purest form may result in the opposite. According to Klein and Ralston, the merging of companies into giant corporations or the privatization of government-run industry and national assets often result in monopolies or oligopolies requiring government intervention to force competition and reasonable prices. \nAnother form of market failure is speculation, where transactions are made to profit from short term fluctuation, rather from the intrinsic value of the companies or products. This criticism has been challenged by historians such as Lawrence Reed, who argued that monopolies have historically failed to form even in the absence of antitrust law. This is because monopolies are inherently difficult to maintain as a company that tries to maintain its monopoly by buying out new competitors, for instance, is incentivizing newcomers to enter the market in hope of a buy-out. Furthermore, according to writer Walter Lippman and economist Milton Friedman, historical analysis of the formation of monopolies reveals that, contrary to popular belief, these were the result not of unfettered market forces, but of legal privileges granted by government.\nAmerican philosopher and author Cornel West has derisively termed what he perceives as dogmatic arguments for \"laissez-faire\" economic policies as free-market fundamentalism. West has contended that such mentality \"trivializes the concern for public interest\" and \"makes money-driven, poll-obsessed elected officials deferential to corporate goals of profit \u2013 often at the cost of the common good\". American political philosopher Michael J. Sandel contends that in the last thirty years the United States has moved beyond just having a market economy and has become a market society where literally everything is for sale, including aspects of social and civic life such as education, access to justice and political influence. The economic historian Karl Polanyi was highly critical of the idea of the market-based society in his book \"The Great Transformation\", stating that any attempt at its creation would undermine human society and the common good: \"Ultimately...the control of the economic system by the market is of overwhelming consequence to the whole organization of society; it means no less than the running of society as an adjunct to the market. Instead of economy being embedded in social relations, social relations are embedded in the economic system.\"\nDavid McNally of the University of Houston argues in the Marxist tradition that the logic of the market inherently produces inequitable outcomes and leads to unequal exchanges, arguing that Adam Smith's moral intent and moral philosophy espousing equal exchange was undermined by the practice of the free market he championed. According to McNally, the development of the market economy involved coercion, exploitation and violence that Smith's moral philosophy could not countenance. McNally also criticizes market socialists for believing in the possibility of fair markets based on equal exchanges to be achieved by purging parasitical elements from the market economy such as private ownership of the means of production, arguing that market socialism is an oxymoron when socialism is defined as an end to wage labour.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11830", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11830", "title": "Ford GT40", "text": "High-performance endurance racing car\nThe Ford GT40 is a high-performance mid-engined racing car originally designed and built for and by the Ford Motor Company to compete in 1960s European endurance racing and the World Sportscar Championship. Its specific impetus was to beat Scuderia Ferrari, which had won the prestigious 24 Hours of Le Mans race for six years running from 1960 to 1965. As rules of the time required that GT cars were built in dozens and sold, around 100 cars in total have been made, mostly as V8-powered Mk Is, of which at least 50 were made in 1965, which allowed FIA-homologation as Group-4-Sportscar for 1966 until 1971. This gave the old MK.I car of Gulf-Wyer the chance to enter and win Le Mans in 1968 and 1969 after prototypes had been limited to 3 litre, with the performance of the Ford 7-litre-V8 in the factory 1966 Mk.II and 1967 Mk.IV prototypes causing this rule change, which also banned the 4-litre V12 Ferrari 330P4 and others after 1967. The Mk.III designation was used for some road-legal cars.\nThe Ford GT40 debuted in 1964, and improvements in 1965 led to Ford winning World Championships categories from 1966 to 1968. The first Le Mans win came in 1966 with three powered Mk.II prototypes crossing the finish line together, the second in 1967 with the same engine now in quite different US-built Mk.IV prototype chassis similar to the \"J-car\" mule. In order to lower ever-higher race top speeds, a rule change from 1968 onwards limited prototypes to 3.0 litre Formula 1 engines; the sportscar \"loophole\", however, allowed the private JW \"Gulf Oil\" team to win at Le Mans in 1968 and 1969 running a Mk.I with a 5.0 litre engine.\nThe GT40 effort began in Britain in the early 1960s when Ford Advanced Vehicles began to build the Mk I, based upon the British Lola Mk6, in Slough, UK. After disappointing race results, the engineering team was moved in 1964 to Dearborn, Michigan, US, to design and build cars by its advanced developer, Kar Kraft. All chassis versions were powered by a series of American-built Ford V8 OHV engines modified for racing.\nIn the 1966 Le Mans, the GT40 Mk II car broke Ferrari's winning streak, making Ford the first American manufacturer to win a major European race since Jimmy Murphy's Duesenberg in the 1921 French Grand Prix. In the 1967 Le Mans, the GT40 Mk IV car became the only car developed and assembled entirely (both chassis and engine) in the United States to achieve the overall win at Le Mans.\nName.\nThe \"GT\" in the car's name stands for grand touring, and the \"40\" its height in inches (1.02 m) measured at the top of the windscreen, the minimum allowed. The first 12 \"prototype\" vehicles carried serial numbers GT-101 to GT-112. Production GT40s (Mk I, Mk II, Mk III, and Mk IV) began with GT40P/1000.\nHistory.\nHenry Ford II had wanted a Ford at Le Mans since the early 1960s. In early 1963, Ford reportedly received word through a European intermediary that Enzo Ferrari was interested in selling to Ford Motor Company. Ford reportedly spent several million dollars in an audit of Ferrari factory assets and in legal negotiations, only to have Ferrari unilaterally cut off talks at a late stage due to disputes about the ability to direct open-wheel racing. Ferrari, who wanted to remain the sole operator of his company's motorsports division, was angered when he was told that he would not be allowed to race at the Indianapolis 500 again (Ferrari had raced at the '52 Indy) if the deal went through, since Ford fielded Lotus 29 cars with the new Ford Indy V8 engine and didn't want competition from Ferrari. Enzo cut the deal off out of spite and Henry Ford II, enraged, directed his racing division to find a company that could build a Ferrari-beater on the world endurance-racing Gran Turismo circuit.\nTo this end, Ford began negotiation with Lotus, Lola, and Cooper. Cooper had no experience in GT or prototype and its performances in Formula One were declining as others also used the rear-mid engine layout.\nThe Lola proposal was chosen since Lola had used a Ford V8 engine in its mid-engined Lola Mk6 (also known as Lola GT). It was one of the most advanced racing cars of the time and made a noted performance in Le Mans 1963, even though the car did not finish, due to low gearing and slow revving out on the Mulsanne Straight. However, Eric Broadley, Lola Cars' owner and chief designer, agreed on a short-term personal contribution to the project without involving Lola Cars.\nThe agreement with Broadley included a one-year collaboration between Ford and Broadley, and the sale of the two Lola Mk 6 chassis builds to Ford. To form the development team, Ford also hired the ex-Aston Martin team manager John Wyer. Ford Motor Co. engineer Roy Lunn was sent to England; he had designed the mid-engined Mustang I concept car , making him the only Dearborn engineer to have some experience with that configuration.\nOverseen by Harley Copp, the team of Broadley, Lunn, and Wyer began working on the new car at the Lola Factory in Bromley. At the end of 1963, the team moved to Slough, near Heathrow Airport. Ford then established Ford Advanced Vehicles (FAV) Ltd, a new subsidiary under the direction of Wyer, to manage the project.\nThe first chassis built by Abbey Panels of Coventry was delivered on 16 March 1964, with fibreglass mouldings produced by Fibre Glass Engineering Ltd of Farnham. The first \"Ford GT\" the GT/101 was unveiled in England on 1 April and soon after exhibited in New York. Purchase price of the completed car for competition use was \u00a35,200.\nIt was powered by the 4.7\u00a0L HiPo (K-code) 289 cu in Fairlane engine with a Colotti transaxle. An aluminium block DOHC version, known as the Ford Indy V8 engine, won the 1965 Indianapolis 500 and in later years.\nRacing history '64-'65.\nThe Ford GT40 was first raced in May 1964 at the N\u00fcrburgring 1000 km where it retired with suspension failure after holding second place early in the event. Three weeks later at the 1964 24 Hours of Le Mans, all three entries retired, although the Ginther/Gregory car led the field from the second lap until its first pitstop. After a season-long series of dismal results under John Wyer in 1964, the program was handed over to Carroll Shelby after the 1964 Nassau race. The cars were sent directly to Shelby, still bearing the dirt and damage from the Nassau race. Carroll Shelby was noted for complaining that the cars were poorly maintained when he received them, but later information revealed the cars were packed up as soon as the race was over, and FAV never had a chance to clean and organize the cars to be transported to Shelby.\nShelby's first victory came on their maiden race with the Ford program, with Ken Miles and Lloyd Ruby taking a Shelby American-entered Ford GT40 to victory in the Daytona 2000km in February 1965. One month later, Ken Miles and Bruce McLaren came in second overall (to the winning Chaparral in the sports class) and first in prototype class at the Sebring 12-hour race. The rest of the season, however, was a disappointment.\nRacing history '66-'67.\nThe experience gained in 1964 and 1965 allowed the 7-liter Mk II prototypes to dominate the following years. In addition, as more than 50 had been built, the 4.7 litre Mk.I was homologated as Group 4 Sportscar, and privateers could challenge for wins in the S 5.0 class, earning championship points for Ford in the 1966 World Sportscar Championship International Sports Car Championship Division III (Over 2000cc).\nIn February, the GT40 again won at Daytona. This was the first year Daytona was run in the 24 hour format and Mk II's finished 1st, 2nd, and 3rd. In March, at the 1966 12 Hours of Sebring, GT40s again took all three top finishes, with the X-1 Roadster first, a Mk II taking second, and a Mk I in third. Then in June, at the 24 Hours of Le Mans, the GT40 achieved the desired Le Mans victory, with yet another 1\u20132\u20133 result.\nThe \"orchestrated\" Le Mans finish, however, was clouded in controversy: The No1 car of Ken Miles and Denny Hulme held a four lap lead over the No2 car of Bruce McLaren and Chris Amon. This disintegrated when the No1 car was forced to make a pit-stop for replacement brake rotors, following an incorrect set being fitted a lap prior in a scheduled rotor change. It was found to be a result of the correct brake rotors being taken by the No2 crew.\nThis meant that in the final few hours, the Ford GT40 of New Zealanders Bruce McLaren and Chris Amon closely trailed the leading Ford GT40 driven by Englishman Ken Miles and New Zealander Denny Hulme. With a multimillion-dollar program finally on the very brink of success, Ford team officials faced a difficult choice. They could allow the drivers to settle the outcome by racing each other\u2014and risk one or both cars breaking down or crashing; they could dictate a finishing order to the drivers\u2014guaranteeing that one set of drivers would be extremely unhappy; or they could arrange a tie, with the McLaren/Amon and Miles/Hulme cars crossing the line side by side.\nThe team chose the latter and informed Shelby. He told McLaren and Miles of the decision just before the two got into their cars for the final stint. Then, not long before the finish, the Automobile Club de l'Ouest (ACO), organizers of the Le Mans event, informed Ford that the geographical difference in starting positions would be taken into account at a close finish. This meant that the McLaren/Amon vehicle, which had started perhaps behind the Hulme-Miles car, would have covered slightly more ground over the 24 hours and would, in the event of a tie for first place, be the winner. Secondly, Ford officials admitted later, the company's contentious relationship with Miles, its top contract driver, placed executives in a difficult position. They could reward an outstanding driver who had been at times extremely difficult to work with, or they could decide in favor of drivers (McLaren/Amon) who had committed less to the Ford program but who had been easier to deal with. Ford stuck with the orchestrated photo finish. What happened on the last lap remains the subject of speculation. Either Miles, deeply bitter over this decision after his dedication to the program, issued his own protest by suddenly slowing just yards from the finish and letting McLaren across the line first, or Bruce McLaren accelerated just before the finish line robbing Miles of his victory. Either way, McLaren's car was declared the victor.\nNeither driver had many opportunities to elaborate on the event, as both died testing new race cars, McLaren in 1970. Already two months later in 1966 Ken Miles died at the wheel of the Ford \"J-car\" at Riverside Raceway. The J-car was a GT40 prototype that included several unique features, most notably an aluminium-honeycomb chassis construction and a \"bread-van\" body-design that experimented with \"Kammback\" aerodynamic theories. Miles' fatal accident was attributed at least partly to the unproven aerodynamics of the J-car design, and to the experimental chassis' strength that had no roll cage yet.\nThe team embarked on a complete redesign of the car, which became known as the Mk\u00a0IV. The Mk\u00a0IV newer design, with a Mk\u00a0II engine but a different chassis and a different body, won the 1967 24 Hours of Le Mans (when four Mark\u00a0IVs, three Mark\u00a0IIs, and three Mark\u00a0Is raced), but only two of them finished, 1st and 4th. The high speeds achieved in that race caused a rule change, which already came into effect in 1968: the prototypes were limited to the capacity of 3.0 litres, the same as in Formula One since 1966. This took out not only the Ford Mk\u00a0II and Mk\u00a0IV, but also the Chaparral V8 Chevy, and the V12-powered Ferrari 330P and Jaguar XJ13 (in development).\nRacing history '68-'69.\nThe rule change of late 1967 meant that there would be few 3-litre prototype entries in early 1968, most of them of (too) small capacity, like 2.0 litre Alfa Romeo Tipo 33/2 and 2.2 litre Porsche 907, later 3.0 litre Porsche 908. Ferrari remained absent in protest, but Matra and others entered. Most of the few F1 engines were too unreliable for endurance, let alone 24 hours. Ford's own Cosworth V8 had been introduced to F1 in 1967, where it was a success into the early 1980s, but vibrations prevented it from succeeding in endurance racing (Ford P68 and others), even though the 1975 and 1980s Le Mans races were won with later Ford Cosworth engine versions, after Matra had won 1972 to 1974 with their V12.\nTo attract more entrants, who also could compete for overall wins and points towards the 1968 World Sportscar Championship simplified \"International Championship for Makes\", existing sportscars like the GT40 and the Lola T70 were allowed, with a maximum of 5.0\u00a0l if at least 50 cars had been built. For the many GT40 Mk.Is which had been built mainly in 1965, were homologated in February 1966, and won the Sportcars championship in 1966 and 1967, some modifications were allowed in early 1968, regarding the Cylinder head, an Engine with 4942cc, and Gearbox with Limited slip differential.\nJohn Wyer's team revised the 4.7-liter, bored to 4.9 litre, and O-rings cut and installed between the block and head to prevent head gasket failure, a common problem found with the 4.7 engine. The JWA Mk I won the 24 hours of Le Mans race in 1968 against the fragile smaller 3.0 litre prototypes from Porsche, Alfa and others. This result, added to four other WC round wins for the GT40, gave Ford unexpected victory in the 1968 International Championship for Makes. The GT40's intended 3.0\u00a0l replacements, the Cosworth DFV powered Ford P68, and John Wyer JWA Gulf Mirage M2/M3 cars proved a dismal failure.\nFor 1969, the minimum number for Gr.4 sportscar status was lowered to 25, and Porsche made the daring investment to built 25 4.5\u00a0l flat-12-powered Porsche 917 up front in secrecy to get homologated from May 1969 onwards until the end of 1971. While facing more experienced prototypes and the new yet still unreliable Porsche 917s, Wyer's 1969 24 Hours of Le Mans winners Jacky Ickx/Jackie Oliver managed to beat the remaining 3.0-liter Porsche 908 by just a few seconds with the already outdated GT40 Mk\u00a0I, in the very car that had won in 1968 \u2013 the legendary chassis GT40P/1075. Apart from brake-wear in the Porsche and the decision not to change brake-pads so close to the end of the race, the winning combination was relaxed driving by both GT40 drivers and heroic efforts at the right time by Ickx (at that time Le Mans' rookie). Ickx, protesting the by now unsafe traditional Le Mans start, had walked to his car and properly strapped his seat belts before taking off well behind the others. He would go on to win Le Mans five more times in later years, mainly with Porsche Turbos.\nInternational titles.\nIn addition to four consecutive overall Le Mans victories, Ford also won the following four FIA international titles (at what was then unofficially known as the World Sportscar Championship) with the GT40 car:\nOriginal versions.\nMk I.\nThe Mk I was both the first and the last type of Ford GT40 to be raced, from 1964 to 1969. Early prototypes were powered by 255 cu in (4.2 L) alloy V8 engines and production models were powered by engines as used in the Ford Mustang. Five prototype models were built with roadster bodywork, including the Ford X-1. Two lightweight cars (of a planned five), AMGT40/1 and AMGT40/2, were built by Alan Mann Racing in 1966, with light alloy bodies and other weight-saving modifications.\nThe Mk I met with little success in its initial tune during the 1964 season as it had to enter in the prototype class, against others prototypes, like Ferrari P and Chaparral. After the Nassau in December, Ford handed over the project to Carroll Shelby's Shelby American team. The car won the 1965 Continental 2000 km of Daytona and the 12 Hours of Sebring, but otherwise the GT40 program was a disappointment overall, once again failing to finish at Le Mans. But dozens of Mk.I cars were made and sold in 1965, and as the minimum number of 50 was met, the FIA homologated it as a Group 4 sports car in the 5 litre class, valid from 1966 to 1971. With competition mainly from Ferrari 250 LM homologated with a significantly smaller 3,3 litre, or the Lola T70, the Mk.I owned and run by customers could score nearly all 5 litre sportscar class wins in the 1966 and 1967 World Sportscar Championship while factory entered 7 litre Mk.II challenged for overall wins in the big prototype class.\nFollowing the fast 1967 24 Hours of Le Mans, the FIA changed the rules to ban unlimited capacity engines, imposing a 3 litre capacity limit as in Formula 1 on the prototypes, ruling out the 427 cu in (7 L) Ford V8, the 4 litre Ferrari 330P4 and others. However, homologated Gr.4 sportscars with up to 5 litre could still race and score points for their manufacturers in a simplified 1968 World Sportscar Championship format, extending their life and bolstering the otherwise low number of entrants.\nIt soon turned out that putting F1 engines into prototype endurance race chassis did not work due to lack of reliability, as Ford soon found out with the Ford P68 that suffered from vibrations of the Ford Cosworth DFV engine. The J.W. Automotive Gulf-Wyer team tried to built its Mirage M2 with a BRM V12 F1 engine, later a M3 with a Cosworth DFV, and refurbished the old Mk.I with some upgrades that were permitted by FIA, like Cylinder head, Engine size enlarged to 4942cc, Gearbox, and Limited slip differential. Ferrari even skipped the whole 1968 sportscar season in protest, and due to lack of a suitable engine.\nThe season began slowly for JWA, losing at Sebring and Daytona to 2.2 litre Porsche 907 before taking their first win at the BOAC International 500 at Brands Hatch. Later victories included the 1000\u00a0km of Monza, of Spa, and the 6 Hours of Watkins Glen Only 5 results would count, and both Porsche and Ford had 4 wins each before the main event that was postponed due to political unrest from June to September: the 1968 24 Hours of Le Mans.\nEven with additional time, the Porsche 908 as the first prototype built for the new 3-liter Group 6 rules, had teething problems. With Porsche still connected with Volkswagen and using an aircooled two-valve engine, the design had only 350\u00a0hp but low weight and low drag. The new Porsche team managers did not read the French rules properly, and attempted to replace failing generators instead of repairing them. Alfa Romeo, Matra and Alpine has works entries with small or unproven engines. The five GT40s were anything but bullet proof, with four DNFs, but the lone surviving Mk I won the 1968 24 Hours of Le Mans and the World Championship of Makes, as Pedro Rodr\u00edguez and Lucien Bianchi had a clear lead over the best 2.2 litre 270\u00a0hp Porsche 907, driving the 'almighty' #9 car with the 'Gulf Oil' colors. The engine installed on this car was a naturally aspirated Windsor V8 with a compression ratio of 10.6:1; fuel fed by four 2-barrel 48 IDA Weber carburettors, rated at at 6,000 rpm and a maximum torque of at 4,750 rpm. The same chassis would win again in 1969 in a close finish over a Porsche 908.\nA total of 31 Mk I cars were built at the Slough factory in \"road\" trim, which differed little from the race versions. Wire wheels, carpet, ruched fabric map pockets in the doors and a cigarette lighter made up most of the changes. Some cars deleted the ventilated seats, and at least one (chassis 1049) was built with the opening metal-framed windows from the Mk III.\nThe X-1 was a roadster built to contest the Fall 1965 North American Pro Series, a forerunner of Can-Am, entered by the Bruce McLaren racing team and driven by Chris Amon. The car had an aluminium chassis built at Abbey Panels and was originally powered by a 289 cu in (4.7L) engine. The real purpose of this car was to test several improvements originating from Kar Kraft, Shelby, and McLaren. Several gearboxes were used: a Hewland LG500 and at least one automatic gearbox. It was later upgraded to Mk II specifications with a 427 cu in (7 L) engine and a standard four ratio Kar Kraft (subsidiary of Ford) gearbox, however, the car kept specific features such as its open roof and lightweight aluminium chassis. The car went on to win the 12 Hours of Sebring in 1966. The X-1 was a one-off and, having been built in the United Kingdom and being liable for United States tariffs, was later ordered to be destroyed by United States customs officials.\nMk II.\nThe Mk I design was altered separately by both Holman Moody and Shelby American to handle the much larger highly modified \"big block\" Ford FE engine side oiler from the Ford's large family car called Ford Galaxie, used in NASCAR at the time and modified for road course use. Referred to retroactively as the \"Ford Mk II\", the car had a new Kar Kraft-built four-speed gearbox (KKL-108 also called a Ford box) in place of the overpowered ZF five-speed (which had already belatedly replaced the over-stressed Colleti in the Mk I) used in the Mk I.\nIn 1966, the three teams racing the Mk II (Chris Amon and Bruce McLaren, Denny Hulme and Ken Miles, and Dick Hutcherson and Ronnie Bucknum) dominated Le Mans, taking European audiences by surprise and beating Ferrari to finish 1-2-3 in the standings. Ford GT40 went on to win the Le Mans race for the next three years, but in very different form, as Mk.IV in 1967, and then twice an old Mk.I.\nFor the 1967 Daytona 24 Hours, two Mk II models (chassis 1016 and 1047) had their bodies and engines re-badged as Mercury vehicles and engines to promote that division of the Ford Motor Company.\nIn 2018, a Mk II that was 3rd overall at the 1966 Le Mans 24 Hours was sold by RM Sotheby's for $9,795,000 (\u00a37,624,344) - the highest price paid at that time for a GT40 at auction.\nMk II B.\nFor 1967, the Mk IIs were upgraded to \"B\" spec, with re-designed bodywork and twin Holley carburettors (giving an additional ). The new bodywork removed two top vents, which were for cooling rear brakes and added a spare wheel at the rear end. A batch of improperly heat-treated input shafts in the transaxles side-lined virtually every Ford in the race at the 24 Hours of Daytona, however, and Ferrari won 1\u20132\u20133. The Mk IIBs were also used for Sebring and Le Mans that year and won the Reims 12 Hours in France.\nMk III.\nThe Mk III was a street-legal version of the GT40 Mk I, with its engine detuned to . A total of seven were built, four with right-hand drive, with four headlamps (raised to meet US lighting standards), an expanded rear (for luggage room), softer shock absorbers, a center-mounted shift lever, and an ashtray. many customers interested in buying a GT40 for road use chose to buy a Mk I that was available from Wyer Ltd.\nMk IV.\nIn an effort to develop a car with better aerodynamics (potentially resulting in superior control and speed compared to competitors), the decision was made to re-conceptualize and redesign everything about the vehicle other than its 7-liter engine. This became the Mk IV.\n more restrictive partnerships were implemented with English firms. This resulted in the sale of Ford Advanced Vehicles to John Wyer, ultimately leading to a new vehicle which would be slated for design by Ford's studios and produced by Ford's subsidiary Kar-Kraft under Ed Hull. Furthermore, there was also a partnership with the Brunswick Aircraft Corporation for expertise on the novel use of aluminium honeycomb panels bonded together to form a lightweight, rigid \"tub\".\nThe nickname \"J-car\" came from its construction to meet the new Appendix J regulations introduced by the FIA in 1966; the redesign resulted in the abandonment of the original Mk I/Mk II chassis.\nThe first J-car was completed in March 1966 and set the fastest time at the Le Mans trials that year. The tub weighed only , and the entire car weighed only , less than the Mk II. In spite of this, it was decided to run the Mk IIs due to their proven reliability, and little or no development was done on the J-car for the rest of the season. Following Le Mans, the development program for the J-car was resumed, and a second car was built. During a test session at Riverside International Raceway in August 1966 with Ken Miles driving, the car suddenly went out of control at the end of its high-speed, back straight. The honeycomb chassis shattered upon impact, and the car burst into flames, killing Miles. It was determined that the unique, flat-topped \"bread van\" aerodynamics of the car, lacking any sort of spoiler, led to excess lift. Therefore, a conventional but significantly more aerodynamic body was designed. A total of nine cars were constructed with J-car specification chassis, with six designated as Mk IVs and one as the G7A.\nRacing.\nThe Mk IV was built around a reinforced J chassis powered by the same 7.0 L engine as the Mk II. Excluding the engine, gearbox, some suspension parts and the brakes from the Mk II, the Mk IV was totally different from other GT40s, using a specific, all-new chassis and bodywork. It was undoubtedly the most radical and American variant of all the GT40s over the years. As a direct result of the Miles accident, the team installed a NASCAR-style steel-tube roll cage in the Mk IV, which made it much safer, but the roll cage was so heavy that it negated most of the weight saving of the then-highly advanced, radically innovative honeycomb-panel construction. The Mk IV had a long, streamlined shape, which gave it exceptional top speed, crucial to do well at Le Mans (a circuit made up predominantly of straight roads connecting tight corners)\u2014the race it was ultimately built for. A 2-speed automatic gearbox was tried, but during the extensive testing of the J-car chassis in 1966 and 1967, it was decided that the 4-speed from the Mk II would be retained.\nIn 1966 and early 1967, Ford's R&amp;D department in Detroit developed a test rig to simulate circuit laps; the rig was programmed to accurately mimic the characteristics of the target circuit. The Mk IV design was revised based on weeks of simulated Le Mans laps. This was an early example of the now-common practice of using test rigs for Formula One and Le Mans vehicle protoyping.\nThanks to its streamlined aerodynamics, the car proved to be fastest in the field at Le Mans in 1967, achieving 213\u00a0mph on the 3.6-mile Mulsanne Straight.\nDan Gurney, who was 6 feet 4 inches tall, requested a bubble-shaped bodywork extension over the driver's seat to accommodate him. Gurney also complained about the weight of the Mk IV, which was more than the Ferrari 330 P4, and, combined with its higher speed, put more stress on its brakes. During practice at Le Mans in 1967, in an effort to preserve the brakes, Gurney developed a strategy (also adopted by co-driver A.J. Foyt who had just won the 1967 Indianapolis 500) of backing completely off the throttle several hundred yards before the approach to the Mulsanne hairpin and virtually coasting into the braking area. This technique saved the brakes, but the resulting increase in the car's recorded lap times during practice led to mistaken speculation within the Ford team that Gurney and Foyt, in an effort to compromise on chassis settings, had hopelessly \"dialed out\" their car - despite Gurney having been the fastest GT40 pilot in the 1966 practice and race. Also, Gurney was developing his own Eagle V12 F1 car with which he would win the 1967 Belgian Grand Prix the very next weekend.\nThe Mk IV ran in only two races, the April 1967 12 Hours of Sebring and the June 1967 24 Hours of Le Mans, and won both events. Only one Mk IV was completed for Sebring; the pressure from Ford had been increased considerably after Ford's humiliation at the 1967 Daytona 24h in early February, when Ferrari staged a 1-2-3 finish, honored later by naming a road car the Ferrari Daytona. Mario Andretti and Bruce McLaren won Sebring, Dan Gurney and A. J. Foyt won Le Mans (their car was the Mk IV that was apparently least likely to win), where the Ford-representing Shelby-American and Holman &amp; Moody teams showed up to Le Mans with 2 Mk IVs each. The installation of the roll cage was ultimately credited by many with saving the life of Andretti, who crashed violently at the Esses during the 1967 Le Mans yet escaped with minor injuries. Gurney later described the Mk IV as \"half-way between a road-legal passenger car and a race car; it was reliable and comfortable, but heavy\".\nUnlike the earlier Mk I - III cars, the chassis of which were built in Britain, the Mk IV car was built entirely in the United States by Kar Kraft, Ford's performance division in Detroit. Thus, Le Mans 1967 still remains both the only all-American victory in Le Mans history \u2014 American drivers (Dan Gurney and A. J. Foyt), team (Shelby-American Inc.), chassis constructor (Ford), engine manufacturer (Ford), and tires (Goodyear) \u2014 as well as the only victory of a car designed and built entirely (both chassis and engine) in the United States. A total of six Mk IVs were constructed.\nOne of the Mk IVs was rebuilt to Group 7 (motorsport) rules as the Ford G7 in 1968, and used in the Can-Am series for 1969 and 1970, but with no success.\nLater versions.\nThe Ford GT40 became obsolete twice in international racing, the large engine Mk.II and Mk.IV after 1967, when sports car prototypes had been limited to the 3.0 litre engine size used in Formula 1 since 1966. The Ford P68 (also Ford 3L GT or F3L) was a Ford-sponsored attempt to compete in that category with the Ford Cosworth DFV V8 F1 engine. As homologated 5 litre FIA Group 4 sportscars could still race from 1968 to 1971, an old Gulf-Wyer GT40 Mk.I chassis won Le Mans twice in 1968 and 1969, but when no less than 25 each of Porsche 917 and Ferrari 512S were tailor made for that set of rules, the older sportscars became obsolete for good despite being eligible in the World Championship until the end of 1971.\nSince the 1970s, there was growing interest from enthusiasts rather than racers in Ford GT40s that could not be satisfied with the remaining GT40s, even though around 100 had originally been made. This led to the production of \"continuation models\" and replicas.\nContinuation models.\nMk V.\nFor years Peter Thorp, owner of Safir Engineering, had searched for a GT40 in good condition. Most of the cars had problems, including significant rusting. His company was building and fielding Formula 3 race cars; in addition, it had a Formula One car purchased from the Ron Dennis Company, Rondell Racing. Formula One events in which Safir Engineering competed included Brands Hatch and Silverstone. Safir was also redesigning and exporting Range Rovers, modifying them to six-wheel drive. Safir had the technical capabilities to rebuild GT40s. Desiring to build new GT40s from scratch, Thorp approached John Willment, partner of John Wyer, for his thoughts. It was soon decided that there would be a limited, further run of the GT40. JW Engineering would oversee the build, with Safir doing the work. The continued JW Engineering/Safir Engineering would utilize sequential serial numbers starting at the last used serial number. Maintaining the vehicle's Mark nomenclature, the new cars would be referred to as GT40 Mk Vs.\nJW Engineering wished to complete the existing GT40 chassis numbers GT40P-1087, 1088 and 1089 prior to the beginning of Safir production; this, however, was very much delayed.\nFord's Len Bailey was hired to inspect the proposed build and engineer any changes to minimize known problems with the car, and upgrade safety to modern standards he thought prudent. While the GT40 chassis was upgraded without making any major changes, Bailey upgraded the front suspension to Alan Mann Racing specifications, which minimized nose-dive under braking. Zinc coated steel replaced the previous uncoated rust-prone sheet metal. The vulnerable drive donuts were replaced with CV joints and the leak-prone rubber gas tanks were replaced with aluminum.\nMetal fabricator Tennant Panels supplied the roof structure, and the balance of the chassis was completed by Safir with parts from Adams McCall Engineering. Bill Pink, noted for his electrical experience and the wiring installation of previous GT40s, was brought in. Also, Jim Rose was hired for his experience with working at both Alan Mann and Shelby. After the manufacture of chassis 1120, John Etheridge was hired to manage the MkV GT40 build.\nFor the most part, the Mk V resembled very closely the Mk I car; as with the '60s production, very few cars were identical.\nThe first new build, GT40P-1090, had an open-top in place of roof-hinged doors. Most motors were Ford \"small block\" V8s, fitted with twin-Weber or 4-barrel carburettors. Safir produced five \"big block\" Mk V GT40s, serial numbers GT40P-1128 to GT40P-1132. These aluminium bodied cars all had easily removable door roof sections. Although most Mk V GT40s were high-performance street cars, some were built solely to race specs. Two road cars, a roadster (GT40P-1133), and a standard configuration (GT40P-1142), were built with lightweights aluminium honeycomb chasses and carbon fiber bodywork.\nReplicas and modernizations.\nSeveral kit cars and replicas inspired by the Ford GT40 have been built. They are generally intended for assembly in a home workshop or garage. There are two alternatives to the kit car approach, either continuation models (exact and licensed replicas true to the original GT40) or modernizations (replicas with upgraded components, ergonomics &amp; trim for improved usability, drivability, and performance).\nFord GT.\nThe Ford GT is a modern reinterpretation of the GT40 manufactured by Ford Motor Company.\nAt the 1995 North American International Auto Show, the Ford GT90 concept was shown and at the 2002 show, a new GT40 Concept was unveiled by Ford. While similar in appearance to the original cars, it was bigger, wider, and 3 inches (76\u00a0mm) taller than the original 40\u00a0inches (1020\u00a0mm). Three production prototype cars were shown in 2003 as part of Ford's centenary, and delivery of the production Ford GT began in the fall of 2004. The Ford GT was assembled in the Ford Wixom, Michigan, plant and painted by Saleen, Incorporated at their Saleen Special Vehicles plant in Troy, Michigan.\nA British company, Safir Engineering, which continued to produce a limited number of GT40s (the Mk V) in the 1980s under an agreement with Walter Hayes of Ford and John Wilmont of J.W. Automotive Engineering, owned the GT40 trademark at that time, and when they completed production, they sold the excess parts, tooling, design, and trademark to a small American company called Safir GT40 Spares, Limited based in Ohio. Safir GT40 Spares licensed the use of the GT40 trademark to Ford for the initial 2002 show car, but when Ford decided to make the production vehicle, negotiations between the two failed, and as a result, the new Ford GT lost the \"40\" of GT40. Bob Wood, one of three partners who own Safir GT40 Spares, said: \"When we talked with Ford, they asked what we wanted. We said that Ford owns Beanstalk in New York, the company that licenses the Blue Oval for Ford on such things as T-shirts. Since Beanstalk gets 7.5 percent of the retail cost of the item for licensing the name, we suggested 7.5 percent on each GT40 sold.\"\nFord, however, wished to purchase rather than license the GT40 trademark. At the then-estimated $125,000 per copy, 7.5% of 4,500 vehicles would have totalled approximately $42,187,500. This figure was widely reported following an \"Automotive News Weekly\" story that Safir \"demanded\" $40 million for the sale of the trademark. Fruitless discussions between Safir and Ford ensued. Later Ford GT models or prototypes have borne such previously unprotected designations as \"Ford GT90\" or the \"Ford GT70\". The GT40 name and trademark is currently licensed to Superformance in the USA.\nA second-generation Ford GT was unveiled at the 2015 North American International Auto Show. It features a 3.5L twin-turbocharged V6 engine, carbonfibre monocoque and body panels, pushrod suspension and active aerodynamics. It entered the 2016 season of the FIA World Endurance Championship and the United SportsCar Championship, and a street-legal second-generation production version started being sold at Ford dealerships in 2017.\nIn media.\nThe British television series \"The Avengers\" of the 1960s featured a Mk.1 painted silver in the 1965 episode \"From Venus with Love\", used by the villains as a mobile, high-powered laser platform.\nThe 2019 movie \"Ford v Ferrari\" is about the GT40's development and victory at the 1966 24 Hours of Le Mans.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "11833", "revid": "1317160858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11833", "title": "GerMany", "text": ""}
{"id": "11834", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11834", "title": "GNUFreeDocumentationLicense", "text": ""}
{"id": "11835", "revid": "36087022", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11835", "title": "Glycine", "text": "Amino acid\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nGlycine (symbol Gly or G; ) is an organic compound with the formula C2H5NO2, and is the simplest stable amino acid, distinguished by having a single hydrogen atom as its side chain. As one of the 20 proteinogenic amino acids, glycine is a fundamental building block of proteins in all life and is encoded by all codons starting with GG (GGU, GGC, GGA, and GGG). Because of its minimal side chain, it is the only common amino acid that is not chiral, meaning it is superimposable on its mirror image.\nIn the body, glycine plays several crucial roles. Its small and flexible structure is vital for the formation of certain protein structures, most notably in collagen, where glycine makes up about 35% of the amino acid content and enables the tight coiling of the collagen triple helix. Glycine disrupts the formation of alpha-helices in secondary protein structure, in favor instead of random coils. Beyond its structural role, glycine functions as an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system, particularly in the spinal cord and brainstem, where it helps regulate motor and sensory signals. Disruption of glycine signaling can lead to severe neurological disorders and motor dysfunction; for example, the tetanus toxin causes spastic paralysis by blocking glycine release. It also serves as a key precursor for the synthesis of other important biomolecules, including the porphyrins that form heme in blood and the purines used to build DNA and RNA.\nGlycine is a white, sweet-tasting crystalline solid, leading to its name from Greek word glykys () or \"sweet\". While the body can synthesize it, it is also obtained from the diet and produced industrially by chemical synthesis for use as a food additive, a nutritional supplement, and an intermediate in the manufacture of products such as the herbicide glyphosate. In aqueous solutions, glycine exists predominantly as a zwitterion (H3N+CH2COO-), a polar molecule with both a positive and negative charge, making it highly soluble in water. It can also fit into hydrophobic environments due to its minimal side chain.\nHistory and etymology.\nGlycine was discovered in 1820 by French chemist Henri Braconnot when he hydrolyzed gelatin by boiling it with sulfuric acid. He originally called it \"sugar of gelatin\", but French chemist Jean-Baptiste Boussingault showed in 1838 that it contained nitrogen. In 1847 American scientist Eben Norton Horsford, then a student of the German chemist Justus von Liebig, proposed the name \"glycocoll\"; however, the Swedish chemist Berzelius suggested the simpler current name a year later. The name comes from the Greek word \u03b3\u03bb\u03c5\u03ba\u03cd\u03c2 \"sweet tasting\" (which is also related to the prefixes \"glyco-\" and \"gluco-\", as in \"glycoprotein\" and \"glucose\"). In 1858, the French chemist Auguste Cahours determined that glycine was an amine of acetic acid.\nProduction.\nAlthough glycine can be isolated from hydrolyzed proteins, this route is not used for industrial production, as it can be manufactured more conveniently by chemical synthesis. The two main processes are amination of chloroacetic acid with ammonia, giving glycine and hydrochloric acid, and the Strecker amino acid synthesis, which is the main synthetic method in the United States and Japan. About 15 thousand tonnes are produced annually in this way.\nGlycine is also co-generated as an impurity in the synthesis of EDTA, arising from reactions of the ammonia co-product.&lt;ref name=\"Ullmann/Roger\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nChemical reactions.\nIts acid\u2013base properties are most important. In aqueous solution, glycine is amphoteric: below pH = 2.4, it converts to the ammonium cation called glycinium. Above about pH 9.6, it converts to glycinate.\nGlycine functions as a bidentate ligand for many metal ions, forming amino acid complexes. A typical complex is Cu(glycinate)2, i.e. Cu(H2NCH2CO2)2, which exists both in cis and trans isomers.\nAs a bifunctional molecule, glycine reacts with many reagents. These can be classified into N-centered and carboxylate-center reactions.\nWith acid chlorides, glycine converts to the amidocarboxylic acid, such as hippuric acid and acetylglycine. With nitrous acid, one obtains glycolic acid (van Slyke determination). With methyl iodide, the amine becomes quaternized to give trimethylglycine, a natural product:\nH3N+CH2COO- + 3 CH3I \u2192 (CH3)3N+CH2COO- + 3 HI\nGlycine condenses with itself to give peptides, beginning with the formation of glycylglycine:\n2 H3N+CH2COO- \u2192 H3N+CH2CONHCH2COO- + H2O\nPyrolysis of glycine or glycylglycine gives 2,5-diketopiperazine, the cyclic diamide.\nGlycine forms esters with alcohols. They are often isolated as their hydrochloride, such as glycine methyl ester hydrochloride. Otherwise, the free ester tends to convert to diketopiperazine.\nMetabolism.\nBiosynthesis.\nGlycine is not strictly essential to the human diet, as it is biosynthesized in the body. However, it is considered semi-essential in that the amount that can be biosynthesized is insufficient for all metabolic uses.\nIt can be synthesized from the amino acid serine, which is in turn derived from 3-phosphoglycerate. In most organisms, the enzyme serine hydroxymethyltransferase catalyses this transformation via the cofactor pyridoxal phosphate:\n serine + tetrahydrofolate \u2192 glycine + \"N5\",\"N10\"-methylene tetrahydrofolate + H2O\nIn \"E. coli\", antibiotics that target folate depletes the supply of active tetrahydrofolates, halting glycine biosynthesis as a consequence.\nIn the liver of vertebrates, glycine synthesis is catalyzed by glycine synthase (also called glycine cleavage enzyme). This conversion is readily reversible:\n CO2 + NH + \"N5\",\"N10\"-methylene tetrahydrofolate + NADH + H+ \u21cc Glycine + tetrahydrofolate + NAD+\nIn addition to being synthesized from serine, glycine can also be derived from threonine, choline or hydroxyproline via inter-organ metabolism of the liver and kidneys.\nDegradation.\nGlycine is degraded via three pathways. The predominant pathway in animals and plants is the reverse of the glycine synthase pathway mentioned above. In this context, the enzyme system involved is usually called the glycine cleavage system:\n Glycine + tetrahydrofolate + NAD+ \u21cc CO2 + NH + \"N5\",\"N10\"-methylene tetrahydrofolate + NADH + H+\nIn the second pathway, glycine is degraded in two steps. The first step is the reverse of glycine biosynthesis from serine with serine hydroxymethyl transferase. Serine is then converted to pyruvate by serine dehydratase.\nIn the third pathway of its degradation, glycine is converted to glyoxylate by D-amino acid oxidase. Glyoxylate is then oxidized by hepatic lactate dehydrogenase to oxalate in an NAD+-dependent reaction.\nThe half-life of glycine and its elimination from the body varies significantly based on dose. In one study, the half-life varied between 0.5 and 4.0 hours.\nPhysiological function.\nThe principal function of glycine is it acts as a precursor to proteins. Most proteins incorporate only small quantities of glycine, a notable exception being collagen, which contains about 35% glycine due to its periodically repeated role in the formation of collagen's helix structure in conjunction with hydroxyproline. In the genetic code, glycine is coded by all codons starting with GG, namely GGU, GGC, GGA and GGG.\nAs a biosynthetic intermediate.\nIn higher eukaryotes, \u03b4-aminolevulinic acid, the key precursor to porphyrins, is biosynthesized from glycine and succinyl-CoA by the enzyme ALA synthase. Glycine provides the central C2N subunit of all purines.\nAs a neurotransmitter.\nGlycine is an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system, especially in the spinal cord, brainstem, and retina. When glycine receptors are activated, chloride enters the neuron via ionotropic receptors, causing an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP). Strychnine is a strong antagonist at ionotropic glycine receptors, whereas bicuculline is a weak one. Glycine is a required co-agonist along with glutamate for NMDA receptors. In contrast to the inhibitory role of glycine in the spinal cord, this behaviour is facilitated at the (NMDA) glutamatergic receptors which are excitatory. The LD50 of glycine is 7930\u00a0mg/kg in rats (oral), and it usually causes death by hyperexcitability.\nAs a toxin conjugation agent.\nGlycine conjugation pathway has not been fully investigated. Glycine is thought to be a hepatic detoxifier of a number endogenous and xenobiotic organic acids. Bile acids are normally conjugated to glycine in order to increase their solubility in water.\nThe human body rapidly clears sodium benzoate by combining it with glycine to form hippuric acid which is then excreted. The metabolic pathway for this begins with the conversion of benzoate by butyrate-CoA ligase into an intermediate product, benzoyl-CoA, which is then metabolized by glycine \"N\"-acyltransferase into hippuric acid.\nUses.\nIn the US, glycine is typically sold in two grades: United States Pharmacopeia (\"USP\"), and technical grade. USP grade sales account for approximately 80 to 85 percent of the U.S. market for glycine. If purity greater than the USP standard is needed, for example for intravenous injections, a more expensive pharmaceutical grade glycine can be used. Technical grade glycine, which may or may not meet USP grade standards, is sold at a lower price for use in industrial applications, e.g., as an agent in metal complexing and finishing.\nAnimal and human foods.\nGlycine is not widely used in foods for its nutritional value, except in infusions. Instead, glycine's role in food chemistry is as a flavorant. It is mildly sweet, and it counters the aftertaste of saccharine. It also has preservative properties, perhaps owing to its complexation to metal ions. Metal glycinate complexes, e.g. copper(II) glycinate are used as supplements for animal feeds.\nAs of 1971[ [update]], the U.S. Food and Drug Administration \"no longer regards glycine and its salts as generally recognized as safe for use in human food\", and only permits food uses of glycine under certain conditions.\nGlycine has been researched for its potential to extend life. The proposed mechanisms of this effect are its ability to clear methionine from the body, and activating autophagy.\nChemical feedstock.\nGlycine is an intermediate in the synthesis of a variety of chemical products. It is used in the manufacture of the herbicides glyphosate, iprodione, glyphosine, imiprothrin, and eglinazine. It is used as an intermediate of antibiotics such as thiamphenicol.\nLaboratory research.\nGlycine is a significant component of some solutions used in the SDS-PAGE method of protein analysis. It serves as a buffering agent, maintaining pH and preventing sample damage during electrophoresis. Glycine is also used to remove protein-labeling antibodies from Western blot membranes to enable the probing of numerous proteins of interest from SDS-PAGE gel. This allows more data to be drawn from the same specimen, increasing the reliability of the data, reducing the amount of sample processing, and number of samples required. This process is known as stripping.\nPresence in space.\nThe presence of glycine outside the Earth was confirmed in 2009, based on the analysis of samples that had been taken in 2004 by the NASA spacecraft \"Stardust\" from comet Wild 2 and subsequently returned to Earth. Glycine had previously been identified in the Murchison meteorite in 1970. The discovery of glycine in outer space bolstered the hypothesis of so-called soft-panspermia, which claims that the \"building blocks\" of life are widespread throughout the universe. In 2016, detection of glycine within Comet 67P/Churyumov\u2013Gerasimenko by the \"Rosetta\" spacecraft was announced.\nThe detection of glycine outside the Solar System in the interstellar medium has been debated.\nEvolution.\nGlycine is proposed to be defined by early genetic codes. For example, low complexity regions (in proteins), that may resemble the proto-peptides of the early genetic code are highly enriched in glycine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11836", "revid": "29291527", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11836", "title": "GermanicLanguages", "text": ""}
{"id": "11840", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11840", "title": "GermanY", "text": ""}
{"id": "11842", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11842", "title": "GeorgeWBush", "text": ""}
{"id": "11845", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11845", "title": "GottfriedLeibniz", "text": ""}
{"id": "11846", "revid": "48781923", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11846", "title": "Guitar", "text": "Fretted string instrument\nThe guitar is a stringed musical instrument that is usually fretted (with some exceptions) and typically has six or twelve strings. It is usually held flat against the player's body and played by strumming or plucking the strings with the dominant hand, while simultaneously pressing selected strings against frets with the fingers of the opposite hand. A guitar pick may also be used to strike the strings. The sound of the guitar is projected either acoustically, by means of a resonant hollow chamber on the guitar, or amplified by an electronic pickup and an amplifier.\nThe guitar is classified as a chordophone, meaning the sound is produced by a vibrating string stretched between two fixed points. Historically, a guitar was constructed from wood, with its strings made of catgut. Steel guitar strings were introduced near the end of the nineteenth century in the United States, but nylon and steel strings became mainstream only following World War II. The guitar's ancestors include the gittern, the vihuela, the four-course Renaissance guitar, and the five-course baroque guitar, all of which contributed to the development of the modern six-string instrument.\nThere are three main types of modern guitar: the classical guitar (Spanish guitar); the steel-string acoustic guitar or electric guitar; and the Hawaiian guitar (played across the player's lap). Traditional acoustic guitars include the flat top guitar (typically with a large sound hole) or the archtop guitar, which is sometimes called a \"jazz guitar\". The tone of an acoustic guitar is produced by the strings' vibration, amplified by the hollow body of the guitar, which acts as a resonating chamber. The classical Spanish guitar is often played as a solo instrument using a comprehensive fingerstyle technique where each string is plucked individually by the player's fingers, as opposed to being strummed. The term \"finger-picking\" can also refer to a specific tradition of folk, blues, bluegrass, and country guitar playing in the United States.\nElectric guitars, first patented in 1937, use a pickup and amplifier that made the instrument loud enough to be heard, but also enabled manufacturing guitars with a solid block of wood, without needing a resonant chamber. A wide array of electronic effects units became possible including reverb and distortion (or \"overdrive\"). Solid-body guitars began to dominate the guitar market during the 1960s and 1970s; they are less prone to unwanted acoustic feedback. As with acoustic guitars, there are a number of types of electric guitars, including hollowbody guitars, archtop guitars (used in jazz guitar, blues and rockabilly) and solid-body guitars, which are widely used in rock music.\nThe loud, amplified sound and sonic power of the electric guitar played through a guitar amp have played a key role in the development of blues and rock music, both as an accompaniment instrument (playing riffs and chords) and performing guitar solos, and in many rock subgenres, notably heavy metal music and punk rock. The electric guitar has had a major influence on popular culture. The guitar is used in a wide variety of musical genres worldwide. It is recognized as a primary instrument in genres such as blues, bluegrass, country, flamenco, folk, jazz, jota, ska, mariachi, metal, punk, funk, reggae, rock, grunge, soul, acoustic music, disco, new wave, new age, adult contemporary music, and pop, occasionally used as a sample in hip-hop, dubstep, or trap music.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe modern word \"guitar\" and its antecedents have been applied to a wide variety of chordophones since classical times, sometimes causing confusion. The English word \"guitar\", the German ', and the French ' were all adopted from the Spanish ', which comes from the Andalusian Arabic (') and the Latin \"\", which in turn came from the Ancient Greek which is of uncertain ultimate origin. \"Kithara\" appears in the Bible four times (1 Cor. 14:7, Rev. 5:8, 14:2, and 15:2), and is usually translated into English as \"harp\".\nThe origins of the modern guitar are not known. Before the development of the electric guitar and the use of synthetic materials, a guitar was defined as being an instrument having \"a long, fretted neck, flat wooden soundboard, ribs, and a flat back, most often with incurved sides.\" The term is used to refer to a number of chordophones that were developed and used across Europe, beginning in the 12th century and, later, in the Americas. A 3,300-year-old stone carving of a Hittite bard playing a stringed instrument is the oldest iconographic representation of a chordophone, and clay plaques from Babylonia show people playing a lute-like instrument which is similar to the guitar.\nSeveral scholars cite varying influences as antecedents to the modern guitar. Although the development of the earliest \"guitar\" is lost to the history of medieval Spain, two instruments are commonly claimed as influential predecessors: the four-string oud and its precursor, the European lute; the former was brought to Iberia by the Moors in the 8th century. It has often been assumed that the guitar is a development of the lute, or of the ancient Greek kithara. However, many scholars consider the lute an offshoot or separate line of development which did not influence the evolution of the guitar in any significant way.\nAt least two instruments called \"guitars\" were in use in Spain by 1200: the ' (Latin guitar) and the so-called ' (Moorish guitar). The guitarra morisca had a rounded back, a wide fingerboard, and several sound holes. The guitarra Latina had a single sound hole and a narrower neck. By the 14th century the qualifiers \"moresca\" or \"morisca\" and \"latina\" had been dropped, and these two chordophones were simply referred to as guitars.\nThe Spanish vihuela, called in Italian the , a guitar-like instrument of the 15th and 16th centuries, is widely considered to have been the single most important influence in the development of the baroque guitar. It had six courses (usually), lute-like tuning in fourths and a guitar-like body, although early representations reveal an instrument with a sharply cut waist. It was also larger than the contemporary four-course guitars. By the 16th century, the vihuela's construction had more in common with the modern guitar, with its curved one-piece ribs, than with the viols, and more like a larger version of the contemporary four-course guitars. The vihuela enjoyed only a relatively short period of popularity in Spain and Italy during an era dominated elsewhere in Europe by the lute; the last surviving published music for the instrument appeared in 1576.\nMeanwhile, the five-course baroque guitar, which was documented in Spain from the middle of the 16th century, enjoyed popularity, especially in Spain, Italy and France from the late 16th century to the mid-18th century. In Portugal, the word \"viola\" referred to the guitar, as \"guitarra\" meant the \"Portuguese guitar\", a variety of cittern.\nThere were many different plucked instruments that were being invented and used in Europe during the Middle Ages. By the 16th century, most of the forms of guitar had fallen off, to never be seen again. However, midway through the 16th century, the five-course guitar was established. It was not a straightforward process. There were two types of five-course guitars, differing in the location of the major third and in the interval pattern. The fifth course can be inferred because the instrument was known to play more than the sixteen notes possible with four. The guitar's strings were tuned in unison, so, in other words, it was tuned by placing a finger on the second fret of the thinnest string and tuning the guitar bottom to top. The strings were a whole octave apart from one another, which is the reason for the different method of tuning. Because it was so different, there was major controversy as to who created the five course guitar. A literary source, Lope de Vega's Dorotea, gives the credit to the poet and musician Vicente Espinel. This claim was also repeated by Nicolas Doizi de Velasco in 1640, however this claim has been contested by others who state that Espinel's birth year (1550) make it impossible for him to be responsible for the tradition. He believed that the tuning was the reason the instrument became known as the Spanish guitar in Italy. Even later, in the same century, Gaspar Sanz wrote that other nations such as Italy or France added to the Spanish guitar. All of these nations even imitated the five-course guitar by \"recreating\" their own.\nFinally, c.\u20091850, the form and structure of the modern guitar were developed by different Spanish makers such as Manuel de Soto y Solares and, perhaps the most important of all guitar makers, Antonio Torres Jurado, who increased the size of the guitar body, altered its proportions, and invented the breakthrough fan-braced pattern. Bracing, the internal pattern of wood reinforcements used to secure the guitar's top and back and prevent the instrument from collapsing under tension, is an important factor in how the guitar sounds. Torres' design greatly improved the volume, tone, and projection of the instrument, and it has remained essentially unchanged since.\nTypes.\nGuitars are often divided into two broad categories: acoustic and electric guitars. Within each category, there are further sub-categories that are nearly endless in quantity and are always evolving. For example, an electric guitar can be purchased in a six-string model (the most common model) or in seven- or twelve-string formats. An instrument's overall design, internal construction and components, wood type or species, hardware and electronic appointments all add to the abundant nature of sub-categories and its unique tonal &amp; functional property.\nAcoustic.\nAcoustic guitars form several notable subcategories within the acoustic guitar group: classical and flamenco guitars; steel-string guitars, which include the flat-topped, or \"folk\", guitar; twelve-string guitars; and the arched-top guitar. The acoustic guitar group also includes unamplified guitars designed to play in different registers, such as the acoustic bass guitar, which has a similar tuning to that of the electric bass guitar.\nRenaissance and Baroque.\nRenaissance and Baroque guitars are the ancestors of the modern classical and flamenco guitar. They are substantially smaller, more delicate in construction, and generate less volume. The strings are paired in courses as in a modern 12-string guitar, but they only have four or five courses of strings rather than six single strings normally used now. They were more often used as rhythm instruments in ensembles than as solo instruments, and can often be seen in that role in early music performances. (Gaspar Sanz's \"Instrucci\u00f3n de M\u00fasica sobre la Guitarra Espa\u00f1ola\" of 1674 contains his whole output for the solo guitar.) Renaissance and Baroque guitars are easily distinguished, because the Renaissance guitar is very plain and the Baroque guitar is very ornate, with ivory or wood inlays all over the neck and body, and a paper-cutout inverted \"wedding cake\" inside the hole.\nClassical.\nClassical guitars, also known as \"Spanish\" guitars, are typically strung with nylon strings, plucked with the fingers, played in a seated position and are used to play a diversity of musical styles including classical music. The classical guitar's wide, flat neck allows the musician to play scales, arpeggios, and certain chord forms more easily and with less adjacent string interference than on other styles of guitar. Flamenco guitars are very similar in construction, but they are associated with a more percussive tone. In Portugal, the same instrument is often used with steel strings particularly in its role within fado music. The guitar is called viola, or viol\u00e3o in Brazil, where it is often used with an extra seventh string by choro musicians to provide extra bass support.\nIn Mexico, the popular mariachi band includes a range of guitars, from the small \"requinto\" to the \"guitarr\u00f3n\", a guitar larger than a cello, which is tuned in the bass register. In Colombia, the traditional quartet includes a range of instruments too, from the small \"bandola\" (sometimes known as the Deleuze-Guattari, for use when traveling or in confined rooms or spaces), to the slightly larger tiple, to the full-sized classical guitar. The requinto also appears in other Latin-American countries as a complementary member of the guitar family, with its smaller size and scale, permitting more projection for the playing of single-lined melodies. Modern dimensions of the classical instrument were established by the Spaniard Antonio de Torres Jurado (1817\u20131892).\nFlat-top.\nFlat-top guitars with steel strings are similar to the classical guitar, however, the flat-top body size is usually significantly larger than a classical guitar, and has a narrower, reinforced neck and stronger structural design. The robust X-bracing typical of flat-top guitars was developed in the 1840s by German-American luthiers, of whom Christian Friedrich \"C. F.\" Martin is the best known. Originally used on gut-strung instruments, the strength of the system allowed the later guitars to withstand the additional tension of steel strings. Steel strings produce a brighter tone and a louder sound. The acoustic guitar is used in many kinds of music including folk, country, bluegrass, pop, jazz, and blues. Many variations are possible from the roughly classical-sized OO and Parlour to the large Dreadnought (the most commonly available type) and Jumbo. Ovation makes a modern variation, with a rounded back/side assembly molded from artificial materials.\nArchtop.\nArchtop guitars are steel-string instruments in which the top (and often the back) of the instrument are carved from a solid billet, into a curved, rather than flat, shape. This violin-like construction is usually credited to the American Orville Gibson. Lloyd Loar of the Gibson Mandolin-Guitar Mfg. Co introduced the violin-inspired F-shaped hole design now usually associated with archtop guitars, after designing a style of mandolin of the same type. The typical archtop guitar has a large, deep, hollow body whose form is much like that of a mandolin or a violin-family instrument. Nowadays, most archtops are equipped with magnetic pickups, and they are therefore both acoustic and electric. F-hole archtop guitars were immediately adopted, upon their release, by both jazz and country musicians, and have remained particularly popular in jazz music, usually with flatwound strings.\nResonator, resophonic or Dobros.\nAll three principal types of resonator guitars were invented by the Slovak-American John Dopyera (1893\u20131988) for the National and Dobro (Dopyera Brothers) companies. Similar to the flat top guitar in appearance, but with a body that may be made of brass, nickel-silver, or steel as well as wood, the sound of the resonator guitar is produced by one or more aluminum resonator cones mounted in the middle of the top. The physical principle of the guitar is therefore similar to the loudspeaker.\nThe original purpose of the resonator was to produce a very loud sound; this purpose has been largely superseded by electrical amplification, but the resonator guitar is still played because of its distinctive tone. Resonator guitars may have either one or three resonator cones. The method of transmitting sound resonance to the cone is either a \"biscuit\" bridge, made of a small piece of hardwood at the vertex of the cone (Nationals), or a \"spider\" bridge, made of metal and mounted around the rim of the (inverted) cone (Dobros). Three-cone resonators always use a specialized metal bridge. The type of resonator guitar with a neck with a square cross-section\u2014called \"square neck\" or \"Hawaiian\"\u2014is usually played face up, on the lap of the seated player, and often with a metal or glass slide. The round neck resonator guitars are normally played in the same fashion as other guitars, although slides are also often used, especially in blues.\nSteel.\nA steel guitar is any guitar played while moving a polished steel bar or similar hard object against plucked strings. The bar itself is called a \"steel\" and is the source of the name \"steel guitar\". The instrument differs from a conventional guitar in that it does not use frets; conceptually, it is somewhat akin to playing a guitar with one finger (the bar). Known for its portamento capabilities, gliding smoothly over every pitch between notes, the instrument can produce a sinuous crying sound and deep vibrato emulating the human singing voice. Typically, the strings are plucked (not strummed) by the fingers of the dominant hand, while the steel tone bar is pressed lightly against the strings and moved by the opposite hand. The instrument is played while sitting, placed horizontally across the player's knees or otherwise supported. The horizontal playing style is called \"Hawaiian style\".\nTwelve-string.\nThe twelve-string guitar usually has steel strings, and it is widely used in folk music, blues, and rock and roll. Rather than having only six strings, the 12-string guitar has six courses made up of two strings each, like a mandolin or lute. The highest two courses are tuned in unison, while the others are tuned in octaves. The 12-string guitar is also made in electric forms. The chime-like sound of the 12-string electric guitar was the basis of jangle pop.\nAcoustic bass.\nThe acoustic bass guitar is a bass instrument with a hollow wooden body similar to, though usually somewhat larger than, that of a six-string acoustic guitar. Like the traditional electric bass guitar and the double bass, the acoustic bass guitar commonly has four strings, which are normally tuned E-A-D-G, an octave below the lowest four strings of the six-string guitar, which is the same tuning pitch as an electric bass guitar. It can, more rarely, be found with five or six strings, which provides a wider range of notes to be played with less movement up and down the neck.\nElectric.\nElectric guitars can have solid, semi-hollow, or hollow bodies; solid bodies produce little sound without amplification. In contrast to a standard acoustic guitar, electric guitars instead rely on electromagnetic pickups, and sometimes piezoelectric pickups, that convert the vibration of the steel strings into signals, which are fed to an amplifier through a patch cable or radio transmitter. The sound is frequently modified by other electronic devices (effects units) or the natural distortion of valves (vacuum tubes) or the pre-amp in the amplifier. There are two main types of magnetic pickups, single- and double-coil (or humbucker), each of which can be passive or active. The electric guitar is used extensively in jazz, blues, R &amp; B, and rock and roll. The first successful magnetic pickup for a guitar was invented by George Beauchamp, and incorporated into the 1931 Ro-Pat-In (later Rickenbacker) \"Frying Pan\" lap steel; other manufacturers, notably Gibson, soon began to install pickups in archtop models. After World War II the completely solid-body electric was popularized by Gibson in collaboration with Les Paul, and independently by Leo Fender of Fender Music. The lower fretboard action (the height of the strings from the fingerboard), lighter (thinner) strings, and its electrical amplification lend the electric guitar to techniques less frequently used on acoustic guitars. These include tapping, extensive use of legato through pull-offs and hammer-ons (also known as slurs), pinch harmonics, volume swells, and use of a tremolo arm or effects pedals.\nSome electric guitar models feature piezoelectric pickups, which function as transducers to provide a sound closer to that of an acoustic guitar with the flip of a switch or knob, rather than switching guitars. Those that combine piezoelectric pickups and magnetic pickups are sometimes known as hybrid guitars.\nHybrids of acoustic and electric guitars are also common. There are also more exotic varieties, such as guitars with two, three, or rarely four necks, all manner of alternate string arrangements, fretless fingerboards (used almost exclusively on bass guitars, meant to emulate the sound of a stand-up bass), 5.1 surround guitar, and such.\nSeven-string and eight-string.\nSolid-body seven-string guitars were popularized in the 1980s and 1990s. Other artists go a step further, by using an eight-string guitar with two extra low strings. Although the most common seven-string has a low B string, Roger McGuinn (of The Byrds and Rickenbacker) uses an octave G string paired with the regular G string as on a 12-string guitar, allowing him to incorporate chiming 12-string elements in standard six-string playing. In 1982 Uli Jon Roth developed the \"Sky Guitar\", with a vastly extended number of frets, which was the first guitar to venture into the upper registers of the violin. Roth's seven-string and \"Mighty Wing\" guitar features a wider octave range.\nElectric bass.\nThe bass guitar (also called an \"electric bass\", or simply a \"bass\") is similar in appearance and construction to an electric guitar, but with a longer neck and scale length, and four to six strings. The four-string bass, by far the most common, is usually tuned the same as the double bass, which corresponds to pitches one octave lower than the four lowest pitched strings of a guitar (E, A, D, and G). The bass guitar is a transposing instrument, as it is notated in bass clef an octave higher than it sounds (as is the double bass) to avoid excessive ledger lines being required below the staff. Like the electric guitar, the bass guitar has pickups and it is plugged into an amplifier and speaker for live performances.\nConstruction.\nHandedness.\nModern guitars can be constructed to suit both left- and right-handed players. Typically the dominant hand is used to pluck or strum the strings. This is similar to the violin family of instruments where the dominant hand controls the bow. Left-handed players usually play a mirror image instrument manufactured especially for left-handed players. There are other options, some unorthodox, including learn to play a right-handed guitar as if the player is right-handed or playing an unmodified right-handed guitar reversed. Guitarist Jimi Hendrix played a right-handed guitar strung in reverse (the treble strings and bass strings reversed). The problem with doing this is that it reverses the guitar's saddle angle. The saddle is the strip of material on top of the bridge where the strings rest. It is normally slanted slightly, making the bass strings longer than the treble strings. In part, the reason for this is the difference in the thickness of the strings. Physical properties of the thicker bass strings require them to be slightly longer than the treble strings to correct intonation. Reversing the strings, therefore, reverses the orientation of the saddle, adversely affecting intonation.\nComponents.\nHead.\nThe headstock is located at the end of the guitar neck farthest from the body. It is fitted with machine heads that adjust the tension of the strings, which in turn affects the pitch. The traditional tuner layout is \"3+3\", in which each side of the headstock has three tuners (such as on Gibson Les Pauls). In this layout, the headstocks are commonly symmetrical. Many guitars feature other layouts, including six-in-line tuners (featured on Fender Stratocasters) or even \"4+2\" (e.g. Ernie Ball Music Man). Some guitars (such as Steinbergers) do not have headstocks at all, in which case the tuning machines are located elsewhere, either on the body or the bridge.\nThe nut is a small strip of bone, plastic, brass, corian, graphite, stainless steel, or other medium-hard material, at the joint where the headstock meets the fretboard. Its grooves guide the strings onto the fretboard, giving consistent lateral string placement. It is one of the endpoints of the strings' vibrating length. It must be accurately cut, or it can contribute to tuning problems due to string slippage or string buzz. To reduce string friction in the nut, which can adversely affect tuning stability, some guitarists fit a roller nut. Some instruments use a zero fret just in front of the nut. In this case the nut is used only for lateral alignment of the strings, the string height and length being dictated by the zero fret.\nNeck.\nA guitar's frets, fretboard, tuners, headstock, and truss rod, all attached to a long wooden extension, collectively constitute its neck. The wood used to make the fretboard usually differs from the wood in the rest of the neck. The bending stress on the neck is considerable, particularly when heavier gauge strings are used (see Tuning), and the ability of the neck to resist bending (see Truss rod) is important to the guitar's ability to hold a constant pitch during tuning or when strings are fretted. The rigidity of the neck with respect to the body of the guitar is one determinant of a good instrument versus a poor-quality one.\nThe cross-section of the neck can also vary, from a gentle \"C\" curve to a more pronounced \"V\" curve. There are many different types of neck profiles available, giving the guitarist many options. Some aspects to consider in a guitar neck may be the overall width of the fretboard, scale (distance between the frets), the neck wood, the type of neck construction (for example, the neck may be glued in or bolted on), and the shape (profile) of the back of the neck. Other types of material used to make guitar necks are graphite (Steinberger guitars), aluminum (Kramer Guitars, Travis Bean and Veleno guitars), or carbon fiber (Modulus Guitars and ThreeGuitars). Double neck electric guitars have two necks, allowing the musician to quickly switch between guitar sounds.\nThe neck joint or heel is the point at which the neck is either bolted or glued to the body of the guitar. Almost all acoustic steel-string guitars, with the primary exception of Taylors, have glued (otherwise known as set) necks, while electric guitars are constructed using both types.Most classical guitars have a neck and headblock carved from one piece of wood, known as a \"Spanish heel\".\nCommonly used set neck joints include mortise and tenon joints (such as those used by C. F. Martin &amp; Co.), dovetail joints (also used by C. F. Martin on the D-28 and similar models) and Spanish heel neck joints, which are named after the shoe they resemble and commonly found in classical guitars. All three types offer stability.\nBolt-on necks, though they are historically associated with cheaper instruments, do offer greater flexibility in the guitar's set-up, and allow easier access for neck joint maintenance and repairs. Another type of neck, only available for solid-body electric guitars, is the neck-through-body construction. These are designed so that everything from the machine heads down to the bridge is located on the same piece of wood. The sides (also known as wings) of the guitar are then glued to this central piece. Some luthiers prefer this method of construction as they claim it allows better sustain of each note. Some instruments may not have a neck joint at all, having the neck and sides built as one piece and the body built around it.\nThe fingerboard, also called the fretboard, is a piece of wood embedded with metal frets that comprises the top of the neck. It is flat on classical guitars and slightly curved crosswise on acoustic and electric guitars. The curvature of the fretboard is measured by the fretboard radius, which is the radius of a hypothetical circle of which the fretboard's surface constitutes a segment. The smaller the fretboard radius, the more noticeably curved the fretboard is. Most modern guitars feature a 12\" neck radius, while older guitars from the 1960s and 1970s usually feature a 6\u20138\" neck radius. Pinching a string against a fret on the fretboard effectively shortens the vibrating length of the string, producing a higher pitch.\nFretboards are most commonly made of rosewood, ebony, maple, and sometimes manufactured using composite materials such as HPL or resin. See the section \"Neck\" below for the importance of the length of the fretboard in connection to other dimensions of the guitar. The fingerboard plays an essential role in the treble tone for acoustic guitars. The quality of vibration of the fingerboard is the principal characteristic for generating the best treble tone. For that reason, ebony wood is better, but because of high use, ebony has become rare and extremely expensive. Most guitar manufacturers have adopted rosewood instead of ebony.\nFrets.\nAlmost all guitars have frets, which are metal strips (usually nickel alloy or stainless steel) embedded along the fretboard and located at exact points that divide the scale length in accordance with a specific mathematical formula. The exceptions include fretless bass guitars and very rare fretless guitars. Pressing a string against a fret determines the strings' vibrating length and therefore its resultant pitch. The pitch of each consecutive fret is defined at a half-step interval on the chromatic scale. Standard classical guitars have 19 frets and electric guitars between 21 and 24 frets, although guitars have been made with as many as 27 frets. Frets are laid out to accomplish an equal tempered division of the octave. Each set of twelve frets represents an octave. The twelfth fret divides the scale length exactly into two halves, and the 24th fret position divides one of those halves in half again.\nThe ratio of the spacing of two consecutive frets is formula_1 (twelfth root of two). In practice, luthiers determine fret positions using the constant 17.817\u2014an approximation to 1/(1-1/formula_1). If the nth fret is a distance x from the bridge, then the distance from the (n+1)th fret to the bridge is x-(x/17.817). Frets are available in several different gauges and can be fitted according to player preference. Among these are \"jumbo\" frets, which have a much thicker gauge, allowing for use of a slight vibrato technique from pushing the string down harder and softer. \"Scalloped\" fretboards, where the wood of the fretboard itself is \"scooped out\" between the frets, allow a dramatic vibrato effect. Fine frets, much flatter, allow a very low string-action, but require that other conditions, such as curvature of the neck, be well-maintained to prevent buzz.\nTruss rod.\nThe truss rod is a thin, strong metal rod that runs along the inside of the neck. It is used to correct changes to the neck's curvature caused by aging of the neck timbers, changes in humidity, or to compensate for changes in the tension of strings. The tension of the rod and neck assembly is adjusted by a hex nut or an allen-key bolt on the rod, usually located either at the headstock, sometimes under a cover, or just inside the body of the guitar underneath the fretboard and accessible through the sound hole. Some truss rods can only be accessed by removing the neck. The truss rod counteracts the immense amount of tension the strings place on the neck, bringing the neck back to a straighter position. Turning the truss rod clockwise tightens it, counteracting the tension of the strings and straightening the neck or creating a backward bow. Turning the truss rod counter-clockwise loosens it, allowing string tension to act on the neck and creating a forward bow.\nAdjusting the truss rod affects the intonation of a guitar as well as the height of the strings from the fingerboard, called the action. Some truss rod systems, called \"double action\" truss systems, tighten both ways, pushing the neck both forward and backward (standard truss rods can only release to a point beyond which the neck is no longer compressed and pulled backward). The artist and luthier Irving Sloane pointed out, in his book \"Steel-String Guitar Construction\", that truss rods are intended primarily to remedy concave bowing of the neck, but cannot correct a neck with \"back bow\" or one that has become twisted. Classical guitars do not require truss rods, as their nylon strings exert a lower tensile force with lesser potential to cause structural problems. However, their necks are often reinforced with a strip of harder wood, such as an ebony strip that runs down the back of a cedar neck. There is no tension adjustment on this form of reinforcement.\nInlays.\nInlays are visual elements set into the exterior surface of a guitar, both for decoration and artistic purposes and, in the case of the markings on the 3rd, 5th, 7th and 12th fret (and in higher octaves), to provide guidance to the performer about the location of frets on the instrument. The typical locations for inlay are on the fretboard, headstock, and on acoustic guitars around the soundhole, known as the rosette. Inlays range from simple plastic dots on the fretboard to intricate works of art covering the entire exterior surface of a guitar (front and back). Some guitar players have used LEDs in the fretboard to produce unique lighting effects onstage. Fretboard inlays are most commonly shaped like dots, diamond shapes, parallelograms, or large blocks in between the frets.\nDots are usually inlaid into the upper edge of the fretboard in the same positions, small enough to be visible only to the player. These usually appear on the odd-numbered frets, but also on the 12th fret (the one-octave mark) instead of the 11th and 13th frets. Some older or high-end instruments have inlays made of mother of pearl, abalone, ivory, colored wood or other exotic materials and designs. Simpler inlays are often made of plastic or painted. High-end classical guitars seldom have fretboard inlays as a well-trained player is expected to know their way around the instrument. In addition to fretboard inlay, the headstock and soundhole surround are also frequently inlaid. The manufacturer's logo or a small design is often inlaid into the headstock. Rosette designs vary from simple concentric circles to delicate fretwork mimicking the historic rosette of lutes. Bindings that edge the finger and soundboards are sometimes inlaid. Some instruments have a filler strip running down the length and behind the neck, used for strength or to fill the cavity through which the truss rod was installed in the neck.\nBody.\nIn acoustic guitars, string vibration is transmitted through the bridge and saddle to the body via sound board. The sound board is typically made of tonewoods such as spruce or cedar. Timbers for tonewoods are chosen for both strength and ability to transfer mechanical energy from the strings to the air within the guitar body. Sound is further shaped by the characteristics of the guitar body's resonant cavity. In expensive instruments, the entire body is made of wood. In inexpensive instruments, the back may be made of plastic.\nIn an acoustic instrument, the body of the guitar is a major determinant of the overall sound quality. The guitar top, or soundboard, is a finely crafted and engineered element made of tonewoods such as spruce and red cedar. This thin piece of wood, often only 2 or 3\u00a0mm thick, is strengthened by differing types of internal bracing. Many luthiers consider the top the dominant factor in determining the sound quality. The majority of the instrument's sound is heard through the vibration of the guitar top as the energy of the vibrating strings is transferred to it. The body of an acoustic guitar has a sound hole through which sound projects. The sound hole is usually a round hole in the top of the guitar under the strings. The air inside the body vibrates as the guitar top and body is vibrated by the strings, and the response of the air cavity at different frequencies is characterized, like the rest of the guitar body, by a number of resonance modes at which it responds more strongly.\nThe top, back and ribs of an acoustic guitar body are very thin (1\u20132\u00a0mm), so a flexible piece of wood called lining is glued into the corners where the rib meets the top and back. This interior reinforcement provides 5 to 20\u00a0mm of solid gluing area for these corner joints. Solid linings are often used in classical guitars, while kerfed lining is most often found in steel-string acoustics. Kerfed lining is also called kerfing because it is scored, or \"kerfed\"(incompletely sawn through), to allow it to bend with the shape of the rib). During final construction, a small section of the outside corners is carved or routed out and filled with binding material on the outside corners and decorative strips of material next to the binding, which is called purfling. This binding serves to seal off the end grain of the top and back. Purfling can also appear on the back of an acoustic guitar, marking the edge joints of the two or three sections of the back. Binding and purfling materials are generally made of either wood or plastic.\nBody size, shape and style have changed over time. 19th-century guitars, now known as salon guitars, were smaller than modern instruments. Differing patterns of internal bracing have been used over time by luthiers. Torres, Hauser, Ramirez, Fleta, and C.\u00a0F. Martin were among the most influential designers of their time. Bracing not only strengthens the top against potential collapse due to the stress exerted by the tensioned strings but also affects the resonance characteristics of the top. The back and sides are made out of a variety of timbers such as mahogany, Indian rosewood and highly regarded Brazilian rosewood (\"Dalbergia nigra\"). Each one is primarily chosen for their aesthetic effect and can be decorated with inlays and purfling.\nInstruments with larger areas for the guitar top were introduced by Martin in an attempt to create greater volume levels. The popularity of the larger \"dreadnought\" body size amongst acoustic performers is related to the greater sound volume produced.\nMost electric guitar bodies are made of wood and include a plastic pickguard. Boards wide enough to use as a solid body are very expensive due to the worldwide depletion of hardwood stock since the 1970s, so the wood is rarely one solid piece. Most bodies are made from two pieces of wood with some of them including a seam running down the center line of the body. The most common woods used for electric guitar body construction include maple, basswood, ash, poplar, alder, and mahogany. Many bodies consist of good-sounding, but inexpensive woods, like ash, with a \"top\", or thin layer of another, more attractive wood (such as maple with a natural \"flame\" pattern) glued to the top of the basic wood. Guitars constructed like this are often called \"flame tops\". The body is usually carved or routed to accept the other elements, such as the bridge, pickup, neck, and other electronic components. Most electrics have a polyurethane or nitrocellulose lacquer finish. Other alternative materials to wood are used in guitar body construction. Some of these include carbon composites, plastic material, such as polycarbonate, and aluminum alloys.\nBridge.\nThe main purpose of the bridge on an acoustic guitar is to transfer the vibration from the strings to the soundboard, which vibrates the air inside of the guitar, thereby amplifying the sound produced by the strings. On all electric, acoustic and original guitars, the bridge holds the strings in place on the body. There are many varied bridge designs. There may be some mechanism for raising or lowering the bridge saddles to adjust the distance between the strings and the fretboard (action), or fine-tuning the intonation of the instrument. Some are spring-loaded and feature a \"whammy bar\", a removable arm that lets the player modulate the pitch by changing the tension on the strings. The whammy bar is sometimes also called a \"tremolo bar\". (The effect of rapidly changing pitch is properly called \"vibrato\". See Tremolo for further discussion of this term.) Some bridges also allow for alternate tunings at the touch of a button.\nOn almost all modern electric guitars, the bridge has saddles that are adjustable for each string so that intonation stays correct up and down the neck. If the open string is in tune, but sharp or flat when frets are pressed, the bridge saddle position can be adjusted with a screwdriver or hex key to remedy the problem. In general, flat notes are corrected by moving the saddle forward and sharp notes by moving it backward. On an instrument correctly adjusted for intonation, the actual length of each string from the nut to the bridge saddle is slightly, but measurably longer than the scale length of the instrument. This additional length is called compensation, which flattens all notes a bit to compensate for the sharping of all fretted notes caused by stretching the string during fretting.\nSaddle.\nThe saddle of a guitar is the part of the bridge that physically supports the strings. It may be one piece (typically on acoustic guitars) or separate pieces, one for each string (electric guitars and basses). The saddle's basic purpose is to provide the endpoint for the string's vibration at the correct location for proper intonation, and on acoustic guitars to transfer the vibrations through the bridge into the top wood of the guitar. Saddles are typically made of plastic or bone for acoustic guitars, though synthetics and some exotic animal tooth variations (e.g. fossilized tooth, ivory, etc. ) have become popular with some players. Electric guitar saddles are typically metal, though some synthetic saddles are available.\nPickguard.\nThe pickguard, also known as the scratch plate, is usually a piece of laminated plastic or other material that protects the finish of the top of the guitar from damage due to the use of a plectrum (\"pick\") or fingernails. Electric guitars sometimes mount pickups and electronics on the pickguard. It is a common feature on steel-string acoustic guitars. Some performance styles that use the guitar as a percussion instrument (tapping the top or sides between notes, etc.), such as flamenco, require that a scratchplate or pickguard be fitted to nylon-string instruments.\nStrings.\nThe standard guitar has six strings, but four-, seven-, eight-, nine-, ten-, eleven-, twelve-, thirteen- and eighteen-string guitars are also available. Classical and flamenco guitars historically used gut strings, but these have been superseded by polymer materials, such as nylon and fluorocarbon. Modern guitar strings are constructed from metal, polymers, or animal or plant product materials. \"Steel\" strings may be made from alloys incorporating steel, nickel or phosphor bronze. Bass strings for both instruments are wound rather than monofilament.\nPickups and electronics.\nPickups are transducers attached to a guitar that detect (or \"pick up\") string vibrations and convert the mechanical energy of the string into electrical energy. The resultant electrical signal can then be electronically amplified. The most common type of pickup is electromagnetic in design. These contain magnets that are within a coil, or coils, of copper wire. Such pickups are usually placed directly underneath the guitar strings. Electromagnetic pickups work on the same principles and in a similar manner to an electric generator. The vibration of the strings creates a small electric current in the coils surrounding the magnets. This signal current is carried to a guitar amplifier that drives a loudspeaker.\nTraditional electromagnetic pickups are either single-coil or double-coil. Single-coil pickups are susceptible to noise induced by stray electromagnetic fields, usually mains-frequency (60 or 50\u00a0hertz) hum. The introduction of the double-coil humbucker in the mid-1950s solved this problem through the use of two coils, one of which is wired in opposite polarity to cancel or \"buck\" stray fields.\nThe types and models of pickups used can greatly affect the tone of the guitar. Typically, humbuckers, which are two magnet-coil assemblies attached to each other, are traditionally associated with a heavier sound. Single-coil pickups, one magnet wrapped in copper wire, are used by guitarists seeking a brighter, twangier sound with greater dynamic range.\nModern pickups are tailored to the sound desired. A commonly applied approximation used in the selection of a pickup is that less wire (lower electrical impedance) gives a brighter sound, more wire gives a \"fat\" tone. Other options include specialized switching that produces coil-splitting, in/out of phase and other effects. Guitar circuits are either active, needing a battery to power their circuit, or, as in most cases, equipped with a passive circuit.\nFender Stratocaster-type guitars generally have three single-coil pickups, while most Gibson Les Paul types have humbucker pickups.\nPiezoelectric, or piezo, pickups represent another class of pickup. These employ piezoelectricity to generate the musical signal and are popular in hybrid electro-acoustic guitars. A crystal is located under each string, usually in the saddle. When the string vibrates, the shape of the crystal is distorted, and the stresses associated with this change produce tiny voltages across the crystal that can be amplified and manipulated. Piezo pickups usually require a powered pre-amplifier to lift their output to match that of electromagnetic pickups. Power is typically delivered by an on-board battery.\nMost pickup-equipped guitars feature onboard controls, such as volume or tone, or pickup selection. At their simplest, these consist of passive components, such as potentiometers and capacitors, but may also include specialized integrated circuits or other active components requiring batteries for power, for preamplification and signal processing, or even for electronic tuning. In many cases, the electronics have some sort of shielding to prevent pickup of external interference and noise.\nGuitars may be shipped or retrofitted with a hexaphonic pickup, which produces a separate output for each string, usually from a discrete piezoelectric or magnetic pickup. This arrangement lets on-board or external electronics process the strings individually for modeling or Musical Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI) conversion. Roland makes \"GK\" hexaphonic pickups for guitar and bass, and a line of guitar modeling and synthesis products. Line 6's hexaphonic-equipped Variax guitars use on-board electronics to model the sound after various vintage instruments, and vary pitch on individual strings.\nMIDI converters use a hexaphonic guitar signal to determine pitch, duration, attack, and decay characteristics. The MIDI sends the note information to an internal or external sound bank device. The resulting sound closely mimics numerous instruments. The MIDI setup can also let the guitar be used as a game controller (i.e., Rock Band Squier) or as an instructional tool, as with the Fretlight Guitar.\nTuning.\nStandard.\nBy the 16th century, the guitar tuning of ADGBE had already been adopted in Western culture; a lower E was later added on the bottom as a sixth string.\nThe result, known as \"standard tuning\", has the strings tuned from a low E to a high E, traversing a two-octave range: EADGBE.\nThis tuning is a series of ascending fourths (and a single major third) from low to high.\nThe reason for ascending fourths is to accommodate four fingers on four frets up a scale before moving to the next string.\nThis is musically convenient and physically comfortable, and it eased the transition between fingering chords and playing scales.\nIf the tuning contained all perfect fourths, the range would be two octaves plus one semitone; the high string would be an F, a dissonant half-step from the low E and much out of place.\nThe pitches are as follows:\nThe table below shows a pitch's name found over the six strings of a guitar in standard tuning, from the nut (zero), to the twelfth fret.\nFor four strings, the 5th fret on one string is the same open-note as the next string; for example, a 5th-fret note on the sixth string is the same note as the open fifth string. However, between the second and third strings, an irregularity occurs: The \"4th\"-fret note on the third string is equivalent to the open second string.\nAlternative.\nStandard tuning has evolved to provide a good compromise between simple fingering for many chords and the ability to play common scales with reasonable left-hand movement. There are also a variety of commonly used alternative tunings, for example, the classes of \"open\", \"regular\", and \"dropped\" tunings.\n\"Open tuning\" refers to a guitar tuned so that strumming the open strings produces a chord, typically a major chord. The base chord consists of at least 3 notes and may include all the strings or a subset. The tuning is named for the open chord, Open D, open G, and open A are popular tunings. All similar chords in the chromatic scale can then be played by barring a single fret. Open tunings are common in blues music and folk music, and they are used in the playing of slide and bottleneck guitars. Many musicians use open tunings when playing slide guitar. Ry Cooder plays slide-guitar with open tunings.\nFor the standard tuning, there is exactly one interval of a major third between the second and third strings, and all the other intervals are fourths. The irregularity has a price \u2013 chords cannot be shifted around the fretboard in the standard tuning E-A-D-G-B-E, which requires four chord-shapes for the major chords. There are separate chord-forms for chords having their root note on the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth strings.\nIn contrast, \"regular\" tunings have equal intervals between the strings, and so they have symmetrical scales all along the fretboard. This makes it simpler to translate chords. For the regular tunings, chords may be moved diagonally around the fretboard. The diagonal movement of chords is especially simple for the regular tunings that are repetitive, in which case chords can be moved vertically: Chords can be moved three strings up (or down) in major-thirds tuning and chords can be moved two strings up (or down) in augmented-fourths tuning. Regular tunings thus appeal to new guitarists and also to jazz-guitarists, whose improvisation is simplified by regular intervals.\nOn the other hand, some chords are more difficult to play in a regular tuning than in standard tuning. It can be difficult to play conventional chords, especially in augmented-fourths tuning and all-fifths tuning, in which the large spacings require hand stretching. Some chords, which are conventional in folk music, are difficult to play even in all-fourths and major-thirds tunings, which do not require more hand-stretching than standard tuning.\nAnother class of alternative tunings is called drop tunings, because the tuning \"drops down\" the lowest string. Dropping down the lowest string a whole tone results in the \"drop-D\" (or \"dropped D\") tuning. Its open-string notes DADGBE (from low to high) allow for a deep bass D note, which can be used in keys such as D major, d minor and G major. It simplifies the playing of simple fifths (powerchords). Many contemporary rock bands re-tune all strings down, making, for example, Drop-C or Drop-B tunings.\nScordatura.\nMany scordatura (alternate tunings) modify the standard tuning of the lute, especially when playing Renaissance music repertoire originally written for that instrument. Some scordatura drop the pitch of one or more strings, giving access to new lower notes. Some scordatura makes it easier to play in unusual keys.\nAccessories.\nThough a guitar may be played on its own, there are a variety of common accessories used for holding and playing the guitar.\nCapotasto.\nA capo (short for \"capotasto\") is used to change the pitch of open strings. Capos are clipped onto the fretboard with the aid of spring tension or, in some models, elastic tension. To raise the guitar's pitch by one semitone, the player would clip the capo onto the fretboard just below the first fret. Its use allows players to play in different keys without having to change the chord formations they use. For example, if a folk guitar player wanted to play a song in the key of B Major, they could put a capo on the second fret of the instrument, and then play the song as if it were in the key of A Major, but with the capo the instrument would make the sounds of B Major. This is because, with the capo barring the entire second fret, open chords would all sound two semitones (in other words, one tone) higher in pitch. For example, if a guitarist played an open A Major chord (a very common open chord), it would sound like a B Major chord. All of the other open chords would be similarly modified in pitch. Because of the ease with which they allow guitar players to change keys, they are sometimes referred to with pejorative names, such as \"cheaters\" or the \"hillbilly crutch\". Despite this negative viewpoint, another benefit of the capo is that it enables guitarists to obtain the ringing, resonant sound of the common keys (C, G, A, etc.) in \"harder\" and less-commonly used keys. Classical performers are known to use them to enable modern instruments to match the pitch of historical instruments such as the Renaissance music lute.\nSlides.\nA slide or a steel is a hard smooth object (a steel bar, round metal or glass bar or cylinder, neck of a bottle) commonly used in country music or blues music, to create a glissando effect made popular in Hawaiian music at the beginning of the 20th century. The slide is pressed against the strings by the non-dominant hand, instead of using player's fingers on frets; the strings are then plucked by the dominant hand. The characteristic use of the slide is to move up to the intended pitch by, as the name implies, sliding up the neck to the desired note. Historically, necks of bottles were often used in blues and country music as improvised slides, giving the name \"bottleneck guitar\" to a style of blues music. Modern slides are constructed of glass, plastic, ceramic, chrome, brass or steel bars or cylinders, depending on the weight and tone desired. An instrument that is played exclusively in this manner (using a metal bar) is called a steel guitar or pedal steel. In such case, the hard object is called a \"steel\" instead of a slide, and is the reason for the name \"steel guitar\". A resonator guitar is a steel guitar built with a metal cone under the strings to make the instrument louder.\nPlectrum.\nA \"guitar pick\" or \"plectrum\" is a small piece of hard material generally held between the thumb and first finger of the picking hand and is used to \"pick\" the strings. Though most classical players pick with a combination of fingernails and fleshy fingertips, the pick is most often used for electric and steel-string acoustic guitars. Though today they are mainly plastic, variations do exist, such as bone, wood, steel or tortoise shell. Tortoise shell was the most commonly used material in the early days of pick-making, but as tortoises and turtles became endangered, the practice of using their shells for picks or anything else was banned. Tortoise-shell picks made before the ban are often coveted for a supposedly superior tone and ease of use, and their scarcity has made them valuable.\nPicks come in many shapes and sizes. Picks vary from the small jazz pick to the large bass pick. The thickness of the pick often determines its use. A thinner pick (between 0.2 and 0.5\u00a0mm) is usually used for strumming or rhythm playing, whereas thicker picks (between 0.7 and 1.5+ mm) are usually used for single-note lines or lead playing. The distinctive guitar sound of Billy Gibbons is attributed to using a quarter or peso as a pick. Similarly, Brian May is known to use a sixpence coin as a pick, while noted 1970s and early 1980s session musician David Persons is known for using old credit cards, cut to the correct size, as plectrums.\nThumb picks and finger picks that attach to the fingertips are sometimes employed in finger-picking styles on steel strings. These allow the fingers and thumb to operate independently, whereas a flat pick requires the thumb and one or two fingers to manipulate.\nStraps.\nA guitar strap is a strip of material with an attachment mechanism on each end, made to hold a guitar via the shoulders at an adjustable length. Guitars have varying accommodations for attaching a strap. The most common are strap buttons, also called strap pins, which are flanged steel posts anchored to the guitar with screws. Two strap buttons come pre-attached to virtually all electric guitars, and many steel-string acoustic guitars. Strap buttons are sometimes replaced with \"strap locks\", which connect the guitar to the strap more securely.\nThe lower strap button is usually located at the bottom (bridge end) of the body. The upper strap button is usually located near or at the top (neck end) of the body: on the upper body curve, at the tip of the upper \"horn\" (on a double cutaway), or at the neck joint (heel). Some electrics, especially those with odd-shaped bodies, have one or both strap buttons on the back of the body. Some Steinberger electric guitars, owing to their minimalist and lightweight design, have both strap buttons at the bottom of the body. Rarely, on some acoustics, the upper strap button is located on the headstock. Some acoustic and classical guitars only have a single strap button at the bottom of the body\u2014the other end must be tied onto the headstock, above the nut and below the machine heads.\nAmplifiers, effects and speakers.\nElectric guitars and bass guitars have to be used with a guitar amplifier and loudspeaker or a bass amplifier and speaker, respectively, in order to make enough sound to be heard by the performer and audience. Electric guitars and bass guitars almost always use magnetic pickups, which generate an electric signal when the musician plucks, strums or otherwise plays the instrument. The amplifier and speaker strengthen this signal using a power amplifier and a loudspeaker. Acoustic guitars that are equipped with a piezoelectric pickup or microphone can also be plugged into an instrument amplifier, acoustic guitar amp or PA system to make them louder. With electric guitar and bass, the amplifier and speaker are not just used to make the instrument louder; by adjusting the equalizer controls, the preamplifier, and any onboard effects units (reverb, distortion/overdrive, etc.) the player can also modify the tone (also called the timbre or \"colour\") and sound of the instrument. Acoustic guitar players can also use the amp to change the sound of their instrument, but in general, acoustic guitar amps are used to make the natural acoustic sound of the instrument louder without significantly changing its sound.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBooks, journals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "11847", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11847", "title": "GreekMythology", "text": ""}
{"id": "11848", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11848", "title": "GrouP", "text": ""}
{"id": "11850", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11850", "title": "GeorgeHamiltonGordonAberdeen", "text": ""}
{"id": "11853", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11853", "title": "GeologicTimescale", "text": ""}
{"id": "11856", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11856", "title": "Gnutella", "text": "Large peer-to-peer network by Nullsoft\nGnutella is a peer-to-peer network protocol. Founded in 2000, it was the first decentralized peer-to-peer network of its kind, leading to other, later networks adopting the model.\nIn June 2005, Gnutella's population was 1.81 million computers increasing to over three million nodes by January 2006. In late 2007, it was the most popular file-sharing network on the Internet with an estimated market share of more than 40%.\nHistory.\nThe first client (also called Gnutella) from which the network got its name was developed by Justin Frankel and Tom Pepper of Nullsoft in early 2000, soon after the company's acquisition by AOL. On March 14, the program was made available for download on Nullsoft's servers. The event was prematurely announced on Slashdot, and thousands downloaded the program that day. The source code was to be released later, under the GNU General Public License (GPL); however, the original developers never got the chance to accomplish this purpose.\nThe next day, AOL stopped the availability of the program over legal concerns and restrained Nullsoft from doing any further work on the project. This did not stop Gnutella; after a few days, the protocol had been reverse engineered, and compatible free and open source clones began to appear. This parallel development of different clients by different groups remains the \"modus operandi\" of Gnutella development today.\nAmong the first independent Gnutella pioneers were Gene Kan and Spencer Kimball, who launched the first portal aimed to assemble the open-source community to work on Gnutella and also developed \"GNUbile\", one of the first open-source (GNU-GPL) programs to implement the Gnutella protocol.\nThe Gnutella network is a fully distributed alternative to such semi-centralized systems as FastTrack (KaZaA) and the original Napster. The initial popularity of the network was spurred on by Napster's threatened legal demise in early 2001. This growing surge in popularity revealed the limits of the initial protocol's scalability. In early 2001, variations on the protocol (first implemented in proprietary and closed source clients) allowed an improvement in scalability. Instead of treating every user as client and server, some users were now treated as \"ultrapeers\", routing search requests and responses for users connected to them.\nThis allowed the network to grow in popularity. In late 2001, the Gnutella client LimeWire Basic became free and open source. In February 2002, Morpheus, a commercial file sharing group, abandoned its FastTrack-based peer-to-peer software and released a new client based on the free and open source Gnutella client Gnucleus.\nThe word \"Gnutella\" today refers not to any one project or piece of software, but to the open protocol used by the various clients.\nThe name is a portmanteau of \"GNU\" and \"Nutella\", the brand name of an Italian hazelnut flavored spread: supposedly, Frankel and Pepper ate a lot of Nutella working on the original project, and intended to license their finished program under the GNU General Public License. Gnutella is not associated with the GNU project or GNU's own peer-to-peer network, GNUnet.\nOn October 26, 2010, the popular Gnutella client LimeWire was ordered shut down by Judge Kimba Wood of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York when she signed a Consent Decree to which recording industry plaintiffs and LimeWire had agreed. This event was the likely cause of a notable drop in the size of the network, because, while negotiating the injunction, LimeWire staff had inserted remote-disabling code into the software. As the injunction came into force, users who had installed affected versions (newer than 5.5.10) were cut off from the P2P network. Since LimeWire was free software, nothing had prevented the creation of forks that omitted the disabling code, as long as LimeWire trademarks were not used. The shutdown did not affect, for example, FrostWire, a fork of LimeWire created in 2004 that carries neither the remote-disabling code nor adware.\nOn November 9, 2010, LimeWire was resurrected by a secret team of developers and named LimeWire Pirate Edition. It was based on LimeWire 5.6 BETA. This version had its server dependencies removed and all the PRO features enabled for free.\nDesign.\nTo envision how Gnutella originally worked, imagine a large circle of users \"(called nodes),\" each of whom has Gnutella client software. On initial startup, the client software must bootstrap and find at least one other node. Various methods have been used for this, including a pre-existing address list of possibly working nodes shipped with the software, using updated web caches of known nodes (called \"Gnutella Web Caches\"), UDP host caches and, rarely, even IRC. Once connected, the client requests a list of working addresses. The client tries to connect to the nodes it was shipped with, as well as nodes it receives from other clients until it reaches a certain quota. It connects to only that many nodes, locally caching the addresses which it has not yet tried and discarding the addresses which it tried and found to be invalid.\nWhen the user wants to do a search, the client sends the request to each actively connected node. In version 0.4 of the protocol, the number of actively connected nodes for a client was quite small (around 5). In that version of the protocol, each node forwards the request to all its actively connected nodes, who, in turn, forward the request. This continues until the packet has reached a predetermined number of \"hops\" from the sender (maximum 7).\nSince version 0.6 (2002), Gnutella is a composite network made of leaf nodes and ultra nodes (also called ultrapeers). The leaf nodes are connected to a small number of ultrapeers (typically 3) while each ultrapeer is connected to more than 32 other ultrapeers. With this higher outdegree, the maximum number of \"hops\" a query can travel was lowered to 4.\nLeaves and ultrapeers use the Query Routing Protocol to exchange a Query Routing Table (QRT), a table of 64 Ki-slots and up to 2 Mi-slots consisting of hashed keywords. A leaf node sends its QRT to each of the ultrapeers to which it is connected, and ultrapeers merge the QRT of all their leaves (downsized to 128 Ki-slots) plus their own QRT (if they share files) and exchange that with their own neighbors. Query routing is then done by hashing the words of the query and seeing whether all of them match in the QRT. Ultrapeers do that check before forwarding a query to a leaf node, and also before forwarding the query to a peer ultra node provided this is the last hop the query can travel.\nIf a search request turns up a result, the node that has the result contacts the searcher. In the classic Gnutella protocol, response messages were sent back along the route taken by the query, as the query itself did not contain identifying information for the node. This scheme was later revised, to deliver search results over UDP, directly to the node that initiated the search, usually an ultrapeer of the node. Thus, in the current protocol, the queries carry the IP address and port number of either node. This lowers the amount of traffic routed through the Gnutella network, making it significantly more scalable.\nIf the user decides to download the file, they negotiate the file transfer. If the node which has the requested file is not firewalled, the querying node can connect to it directly. However, if the node is firewalled, stopping the source node from receiving incoming connections, the client wanting to download a file sends it a so-called \"push request\" to the server for the remote client to initiate the connection instead (to \"push\" the file). At first, these push requests were routed along the original chain it used to send the query. This was rather unreliable because routes would often break and routed packets are always subject to flow control. \"push proxies\" were introduced to address this problem. These are usually the ultrapeers of a leaf node and they are announced in search results. The client connects to one of these \"push proxies\" using an HTTP request and the proxy sends a \"push request\" to a leaf on behalf of the client. Normally, it is also possible to send a push request over UDP to the push proxy, which is more efficient than using TCP. Push proxies have two advantages: First, ultrapeer-leaf connections are more stable than routes. This makes push requests much more reliable. Second, it reduces the amount of traffic routed through the Gnutella network.\nFinally, when a user disconnects, the client software saves a list of known nodes.\nThis contains the nodes to which the client was connected and the nodes learned from pong packets.\nThe client uses that as its seed list, when it next starts, thus becoming independent of bootstrap services.\nIn practice, this method of searching on the Gnutella network was often unreliable. Each node is a regular computer user; as such, they are constantly connecting and disconnecting, so the network is never completely stable. Also, the bandwidth cost of searching on Gnutella grew exponentially to the number of connected users, often saturating connections and rendering slower nodes useless. Therefore, search requests would often be dropped, and most queries reached only a very small part of the network. This observation identified the Gnutella network as an unscalable distributed system, and inspired the development of distributed hash tables, which are much more scalable but support only exact-match, rather than keyword, search.\nTo address the problems of bottlenecks, Gnutella developers implemented a tiered system of \"ultrapeers\" and \"leaves\". Instead of all nodes being considered equal, nodes entering the network were kept at the 'edge' of the network, as a leaf. Leaves don't provide routing. Nodes which are capable of routing messages are promoted to ultrapeers. Ultrapeers accept leaf connections and route searches and network maintenance messages. This allows searches to propagate further through the network and allows for numerous alterations in topology. This greatly improved efficiency and scalability.\nAdditionally, gnutella adopted a number of other techniques to reduce traffic overhead and make searches more efficient. Most notable are Query Routing Protocol (QRP) and Dynamic Querying (DQ). With QRP, a search reaches only those clients which are likely to have the files, so searches for rare files become far more efficient. With DQ, the search stops as soon as the program has acquired enough search results. This vastly reduces the amount of traffic caused by popular searches.\nOne of the benefits of having Gnutella so decentralized is to make it very difficult to shut the network down and to make it a network in which the users are the only ones who can decide which content will be available. Unlike Napster, where the entire network relied on the central server, Gnutella cannot be shut down by shutting down any one node. A decentralized network prevents bad actors from taking control of the contents of the network and/or manipulating data by controlling the central server.\nProtocol features and extensions.\nGnutella once operated on a purely query flooding-based protocol. The outdated Gnutella version 0.4 network protocol employs five different packet types, namely:\nThese packets facilitate searches. File transfers are instead handled by HTTP.\nThe development of the Gnutella protocol is currently led by the Gnutella Developers Forum (The GDF). Many protocol extensions have been and are being developed by the software vendors and by the free Gnutella developers of the GDF. These extensions include intelligent query routing, SHA-1 checksums, query hit transmission via UDP, querying via UDP, dynamic queries via TCP, file transfers via UDP, XML metadata, source exchange (also termed \"the download mesh\") and parallel downloading in slices (swarming).\nThere are efforts to finalize these protocol extensions in the Gnutella 0.6 specification, at the Gnutella protocol development website. The Gnutella 0.4 standard is outdated but it remains the latest protocol specification because all extensions, so far, exist as proposals. In fact, it is hard or impossible to connect today with 0.4 handshakes. According to developers in the GDF, version 0.6 is what new developers should pursue using the https://.\nThe Gnutella protocol remains under development. Despite attempts to make a clean break with the complexity inherited from the old Gnutella 0.4 and to design a clean new message architecture, it remains one of the most successful file-sharing protocols to date.\nSoftware.\nThe following tables compare general and technical information for a number of applications supporting the Gnutella network. The tables do not attempt to give a complete list of Gnutella clients. The tables are limited to clients that can participate in the current Gnutella network.\nGeneral specifications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Discontinued project\nGnutella features.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGnutella2.\nThe Gnutella2 protocol (often referred to as G2), despite its name, is not a successor protocol of Gnutella nor related to the original Gnutella project, but rather is a completely different protocol that forked from the original project and piggybacked on the Gnutella name. A sore point with many Gnutella developers is that the \"Gnutella2\" name conveys an upgrade or superiority, which led to a flame war. Other criticism included the use of the Gnutella network to bootstrap G2 peers and poor documentation of the G2 protocol. Additionally, the more frequent search retries of the Shareaza client, one of the initial G2 clients, could unnecessarily burden the Gnutella network.\nBoth protocols have undergone significant changes since the fork in 2002. G2 has advantages and disadvantages compared to Gnutella. An advantage often cited is that Gnutella2's hybrid search is more efficient than the original Gnutella's query flooding. However, Gnutella replaced query flooding with more efficient search methods, starting with Query Routing in 2002. This was proposed in 2001 by Limewire developers. An advantage of Gnutella is its large user base, which numbers in the millions. The G2 network is approximately an order of magnitude smaller. It is difficult to compare the protocols in their current form. The choice of client, on either network, probably affects the end user just as much.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11857", "revid": "45753170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11857", "title": "George Lucas", "text": "American filmmaker and philanthropist (born 1944)\nGeorge Walton Lucas Jr. (born May 14, 1944) is an American filmmaker and philanthropist. He created the \"Star Wars\" and \"Indiana Jones\" franchises and founded Lucasfilm, LucasArts, Industrial Light &amp; Magic and THX. He served as chairman of Lucasfilm before selling it to the Walt Disney Company in 2012. Nominated for four Academy Awards, he is considered to be one of the most significant figures of the 20th-century New Hollywood movement, and a pioneer of the modern blockbuster. Despite this, he has remained an independent filmmaker for most of his career.\nAfter graduating from the University of Southern California in 1967, Lucas moved to San Francisco and co-founded American Zoetrope with filmmaker Francis Ford Coppola. He wrote and directed \"THX 1138\" (1971), based on his student short \"\", which was a critical success but a financial failure. His next work as a writer-director was \"American Graffiti\" (1973), inspired by his youth in early 1960s Modesto, California, and produced through the newly founded Lucasfilm. The film was critically and commercially successful and received five Academy Award nominations, including Best Director and Best Picture. Lucas's next film, the epic space opera \"Star Wars\" (1977), later retitled \"A New Hope\", had a troubled production but was a surprise hit, becoming the highest-grossing film at the time, winning six Academy Awards and sparking a cultural phenomenon. Lucas produced and co-wrote the sequels \"The Empire Strikes Back\" (1980) and \"Return of the Jedi\" (1983). With director Steven Spielberg, he created, produced, and co-wrote \"Indiana Jones\" films \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\" (1981), \"The Temple of Doom\" (1984), \"The Last Crusade\" (1989) and \"The Kingdom of the Crystal Skull\" (2008), and served as an executive producer, with a cursory involvement in pre and post-production, on \"The Dial of Destiny\" (2023).\nIn 1997, Lucas re-released the original \"Star Wars\" trilogy as part of a Special Edition featuring several modifications; home media versions with further changes were released in 2004 and 2011. He returned to directing with a \"Star Wars\" prequel trilogy comprising ' (1999), \"Attack of the Clones\" (2002) and \"Revenge of the Sith\" (2005). He last collaborated on the CGI-animated and television series of the same name, ' (2008\u20132014, 2020), the war film \"Red Tails\" (2012) and the jukebox musical fantasy CGI-animated film \"Strange Magic\" (2015). Lucas is also known for his collaboration with composer John Williams, who was recommended to him by Spielberg, and with whom he has worked for all the films in both of these franchises. He also produced and wrote a variety of films and television series through Lucasfilm between the 1970s and the 2010s.\nLucas is one of history's most financially successful filmmakers. He directed or wrote the story for ten of the 100 highest-grossing movies at the North American box office, adjusted for ticket-price inflation. Through his companies Industrial Light and Magic and Skywalker Sound, Lucas was involved in the production of, and financially benefited from, almost every big-budget film released in the U.S. from the late 1980s until selling to Disney in 2012. In addition to his career as a filmmaker, Lucas has founded and supported multiple philanthropic organizations and campaigns dedicated to education and the arts, including the George Lucas Educational Foundation, which has been noted as a key supporter in the creation of the federal E-Rate program to provide broadband funding to schools and libraries, and the Lucas Museum of Narrative Art, a forthcoming art museum in Los Angeles developed with his wife, Mellody Hobson.\nEarly life and education.\nLucas was born and raised in Modesto, California, the son of Dorothy Ellinore Lucas (n\u00e9e Bomberger) and George Walton Lucas Sr., and is of German, Swiss German, English, Scottish, and distant Dutch and French descent. His family attended Disneyland during its opening week in July 1955, and Lucas would remain enthusiastic about the park. He was interested in comics and science fiction, including television programs such as the \"Flash Gordon\" serials. Long before Lucas began making films, he yearned to be a racecar driver, and he spent most of his high school years racing on the underground circuit at fairgrounds and hanging out at garages. On June 12, 1962, a few days before his high school graduation, Lucas was driving his souped-up Autobianchi Bianchina when another driver broadsided him, flipping his car several times before it crashed into a tree; Lucas's seatbelt had snapped, ejecting him and thereby saving his life. However, his lungs were bruised from severe hemorrhaging and he required emergency medical treatment. This incident caused him to lose interest in racing as a career, but also inspired him to pursue his other interests.\nLucas's father owned a stationery store, and had wanted George to work for him when he turned 18. Lucas had been planning to go to art school, but his father said he wouldn't pay for it. Lucas declared upon leaving home that he would be a millionaire by the age of 30. He attended Modesto Junior College, where he studied anthropology, sociology, and literature, amongst other subjects. He also began shooting with an 8-m.m. camera, including filming car races. At this time, Lucas became interested in Canyon Cinema: screenings of underground, avant-garde 16-m.m. film-makers like Jordan Belson, Stan Brakhage and Bruce Conner. Lucas and childhood friend John Plummer also saw classic European films of the time, including Jean-Luc Godard's \"Breathless\", Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut's \"Jules et Jim\" and Federico Fellini's \"8\u00bd\". \"That's when George really started exploring,\" Plummer said. Through his interest in autocross racing, Lucas met renowned cinematographer Haskell Wexler, another race enthusiast. Wexler, later to work with Lucas on several occasions, was impressed by Lucas's talent. \"George had a very good eye, and he thought visually,\" he recalled.\nAt Plummer's recommendation, Lucas then transferred to the University of Southern California (U.S.C.) School of Cinematic Arts. U.S.C. was one of the earliest universities to have a school devoted to motion picture film. During the years at U.S.C., Lucas shared a dorm room with Randal Kleiser. Along with classmates such as Walter Murch, Caleb Deschanel, Hal Barwood, John Milius and Matthew Robbins, they became a clique of film students known as The Dirty Dozen. He also became good friends with fellow acclaimed student film-maker and future \"Indiana Jones\" collaborator, Steven Spielberg and Martin Scorsese.\nA group of friends, which included Chris Lewis and Don Glut, started the Clean Cut Cinema Club. Lucas, Kleiser and Lewis then formed a short-lived production company called Sunrise Productions with offices on Sunset Boulevard. There they would make up stage names for themselves, Lucas calling himself Lucas Beaumont. Their only project would be the never completed short \"Five, Four, Three\", a self-referential and self-deprecating mockumentary about the making of a satirical teen beach movie called \"Orgy Beach Party\".\nLucas was deeply influenced by the Filmic Expression course taught at the school by film-maker Lester Novros which concentrated on the non-narrative elements of Film Form like color, light, movement, space and time. Another inspiration was the Serbian montagist (and dean of the U.S.C. Film Department) Slavko Vorkapich, a film theoretician who made stunning montage sequences for Hollywood studio features at MGM, RKO, and Paramount. Vorkapich taught the autonomous nature of the cinematic art form, emphasizing the kinetic energy inherent in motion pictures.\nAfter graduating with a bachelor of fine arts in film in 1967, he tried joining the United States Air Force as an officer, but he was immediately turned down because of his numerous speeding tickets. He was later drafted by the United States Army for military service in Vietnam, but he was exempted from service after medical tests showed he had diabetes, the disease that killed his paternal grandfather.\nCareer.\n1965\u20131969: Early career.\nLucas saw many inspiring films in class, particularly the visual films coming out of the National Film Board of Canada like Arthur Lipsett's \"21-87\", cameraman Jean-Claude Labrecque's cin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9 \"60 Cycles\", the work of Norman McLaren and the documentaries of Claude Jutra. Lucas fell madly in love with pure cinema and quickly became prolific at making 16-m.m. nonstory noncharacter visual tone poems and cin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9 with such titles as \"Look at Life\", \"Herbie\", \"\", \"The Emperor\", \"Anyone Lived in a Pretty (how) Town\", \"Filmmaker\" and \"6-18-67\". He was passionate and interested in cinematography and editing, defining himself as a film-maker as opposed to being a director, and he loved making abstract visual films that created emotions purely through nonnarrative structures.\nIn 1967, Lucas reenrolled as a U.S.C. graduate student in film production. He began working under movie and logo designer Saul Bass and film editor Verna Fields for the United States Information Agency, where he met his future wife Marcia Griffin. Working as a teaching instructor for a class of U.S. Navy students who were being taught documentary cinematography, Lucas directed the short film \"\", which won first prize at the 1967\u201368 National Student film festival. Lucas was awarded a student scholarship by Warner Bros. to observe and work on the making of a film of his choosing. The film he chose after finding the animation department closed down was \"Finian's Rainbow\" (1968) which was being directed by Francis Ford Coppola, who was revered among film school students of the time as a cinema graduate who had \"made it\" in Hollywood. In 1969, Lucas was one of the camera operators on the classic Rolling Stones concert film \"Gimme Shelter\".\n1969\u20131977: \"THX 1138\", \"American Graffiti\", and \"Star Wars\".\nIn 1969, Lucas moved back to the San Francisco Bay Area and co-founded the studio American Zoetrope with Coppola, hoping to create a liberating environment for film-makers to direct outside the perceived oppressive control of the Hollywood studio system. Coppola thought Lucas's \"Electronic Labyrinth\" could be adapted into his first full-length feature film, which was produced by American Zoetrope as \"THX 1138\", but was not a success. Lucas then created his own company, Lucasfilm, Ltd., and directed the successful \"American Graffiti\" (1973).\nLucas then set his sights on adapting Flash Gordon, an adventure serial from his childhood that he fondly remembered. When he was unable to obtain the rights, he set out to write an original space adventure that would eventually become \"Star Wars\". Despite his success with his previous film, all but one studio turned \"Star Wars\" down. It was only because Alan Ladd Jr. at 20th Century Fox liked \"American Graffiti\" that he forced through a production and distribution deal for the film, which ended up restoring Fox to financial stability after a number of flops. \"Star Wars\" was significantly influenced by samurai films of Akira Kurosawa, Spaghetti Westerns, as well as classic sword and sorcery fantasy stories.\n\"Star Wars\" quickly became the highest-grossing film of all time, displaced five years later by Spielberg's \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\". After the success of \"American Graffiti\" and prior to the beginning of filming on \"Star Wars\", Lucas was encouraged to renegotiate for a higher fee for writing and directing \"Star Wars\" than the US$150,000 agreed. He declined to do so, instead negotiating for advantage in some of the as-yet-unspecified parts of his contract with Fox, in particular, ownership of licensing and merchandising rights (for novelizations, clothing, toys, etc.) and contractual arrangements for sequels. Lucasfilm has earned hundreds of millions of dollars from licensed games, toys, and collectibles created for the franchise.\nThe original \"Star Wars\" film went through a tumultuous production, and during editing, Lucas suffered chest pains initially feared to be a heart attack, but actually a fit of hypertension and exhaustion. The effort that Lucas exerted during post-production for the film, and its subsequent sequels, caused strains on his relationship with his wife Marcia Lucas, and was a contributing factor to their divorce at the end of the trilogy. The success of the first \"Star Wars\" film also resulted in more attention focused on Lucas, both positive and negative, attracting wealth and fame, but also many people who wanted Lucas's financial backing or just to threaten him.\n1977\u20131993: Hiatus from directing and \"Indiana Jones\".\nFollowing the release of the first \"Star Wars\" film, Lucas worked extensively as a writer and producer, including on the many \"Star Wars\" spinoffs made for film, television and other media. Lucas acted as executive producer for the next two \"Star Wars\" films, commissioning Irvin Kershner to direct \"The Empire Strikes Back\" and Richard Marquand to direct \"Return of the Jedi\", while receiving a story credit on the former and sharing a screenwriting credit with Lawrence Kasdan on the latter. Lucas also gave away his screenwriting credit out of great respect for Leigh Brackett for \"The Empire Strikes Back\" after her death from cancer. He also acted as story writer and executive producer on the first four \"Indiana Jones\" films, which his colleague and good friend Steven Spielberg directed.\nCraig Barron, who worked at ILM as part of the matte painting department, told \"Star Wars Insider\" that Lucas liked to spend time with the department's painters and often spoke of what movies he wanted to make. According to Barron, Lucas had wanted to make a film about Alexander the Great, but this film was ultimately never produced. Projects where Lucas was credited as executive producer and sometimes story writer in this period include Kurosawa's \"Kagemusha\" (1980), John Korty's \"Twice Upon a Time\" (1983), ' (1984), ' (1985), ' (1985), Jim Henson's \"Labyrinth\" (1986), Ron Howard's \"Willow\" (1988), Don Bluth's \"The Land Before Time\" (1988), and the \"Indiana Jones\" television prequel spinoff \"The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles\" (1992\u201393). There were unsuccessful projects, however, including \"More American Graffiti\" (1979), Willard Huyck's \"Howard the Duck\" (1986), which was the biggest flop of Lucas's career, Coppola's ' (1988) and \"Radioland Murders\" (1994) directed by Mel Smith.\nIn some cases, George Lucas served as an actual executive producer without being credited, such as in the films \"Body Heat\" (1981), \"Latino\" (1985)\", Return to Oz\" (1985), documentary \"Powaqqatsi\" (1988, credited only as \"Presentation\"), also \"Star War\"s television projects: \"Holiday Special\" (1978), ' (1985\u20131986), \"Ewoks\" (1985\u20131986) and ' (2003\u20132005).\nThe animation studio Pixar was founded in 1979 as the Graphics Group, one third of the Computer Division of Lucasfilm. Pixar's early computer graphics research resulted in a digital film The Adventures of Andr\u00e9 &amp; Wally B. and groundbreaking effects in films such as \"\" and \"Young Sherlock Holmes\", and the group was purchased in 1986 by Steve Jobs shortly after he left Apple Computer. Jobs paid Lucas $5\u00a0million and put $5\u00a0million as capital into the company. The sale reflected Lucas's desire to stop the cash flow losses from his seven-year research projects associated with new entertainment technology tools, as well as his company's new focus on creating entertainment rather than tools. As of June 1983, Lucas was worth $60\u00a0million, but he met cash-flow difficulties following his divorce that year, concurrent with the sudden dropoff in revenues from \"Star Wars\" licenses following the theatrical run of \"Return of the Jedi\". At this point, Lucas had no desire to return to \"Star Wars\", and had unofficially canceled the sequel trilogy.\nLucas, formerly a member of Writers Guild of America West, left and maintained financial core status in 1981.\nAlso in 1983, Lucas and Tomlinson Holman founded the audio company THX. The company was formerly owned by Lucasfilm and contains equipment for stereo, digital, and theatrical sound for films, and music. Skywalker Sound and Industrial Light &amp; Magic, are the sound and visual effects subdivisions of Lucasfilm, while Lucasfilm Games, later renamed LucasArts, produces products for the gaming industry.\n1993\u20132012: Return to directing, \"Star Wars\", and \"Indiana Jones\".\nHaving lost much of his fortune in a divorce settlement in 1987, Lucas was hesitant on making additional \"Star Wars\" features. However, the prequels, which were still only a series of ideas partially pulled from his original drafts of \"The Star Wars\", continued to tantalize him with technical possibilities that would make it worthwhile to revisit his older material. When \"Star Wars\" became popular once again, in the wake of Dark Horse's comic book line and Timothy Zahn's trilogy of spin-off novels, Lucas realized that there was still a large audience. His children were older, and with the explosion of CGI technology he began to consider directing once again.\nBy 1993, it was announced, in \"Variety\" among other sources, that Lucas would be making the prequels. He began penning more to the story, indicating that the series would be a tragic one, examining Anakin Skywalker's fall to the dark side. Lucas also began to change the status of the prequels relative to the originals; at first, they were supposed to be a \"filling-in\" of history tangential to the originals, but now he saw that they could form the beginning of one long story that started with Anakin's childhood and ended with his death. This was the final step towards turning the film series into a \"Saga\". In 1994, Lucas began work on the screenplay of the first prequel, tentatively titled \"Episode I: The Beginning\".\nIn 1997, to celebrate the 20th anniversary of \"Star Wars\", Lucas restored the original trilogy and made numerous modifications using newly available digital technology to bring them closer to his original vision. The films were re-released in theaters as the \"Special Editions\". The trilogy received further modifications and restorations for DVD releases in 2004, Blu-ray releases in 2011 and 4K releases released in 2019. Additionally, Lucas released a director's cut of \"THX 1138\" in 2004, with the film re-cut and containing a number of CGI additions.\nThe first \"Star Wars\" prequel was finished and released in 1999 as \"Episode I \u2013 The Phantom Menace\", which would be the first film Lucas had directed in over two decades. Following the release of the first prequel, Lucas announced that he would also be directing the next two, and began working on \"Episode II\". The first draft of \"Episode II\" was completed just weeks before principal photography, and Lucas hired Jonathan Hales, a writer from \"The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles\", to polish it. It was completed and released in 2002 as \"Attack of the Clones\". The final prequel, \"Episode III \u2013 Revenge of the Sith\", began production in 2002 and was released in 2005. Numerous older fans and critics at the time considered the prequels more mixed compared to the original trilogy, though they were box office successes and popular with younger fans. In 2004, Lucas reflected that his transition from independent to corporate film-maker mirrored the story of \"Star Wars\" character Darth Vader in some ways, but concluded he was glad to be able to make his films the way he wanted to.\nLucas collaborated with Jeff Nathanson as a writer of the 2008 film \"Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull\", directed by Steven Spielberg. Similar to the \"Star Wars\" prequels, the reception was mixed with fans and critics alike. From 2008 to 2014, Lucas also served as the creator and executive producer for a second \"Star Wars\" animated series on Cartoon Network, \"\" which premiered with a before airing its first episode. The supervising director for this animated series was Dave Filoni, who was chosen by Lucas and closely collaborated with him on its development. This series bridged the events between \"Attack of the Clones\" and \"Revenge of the Sith\", and featured the last \"Star Wars\" stories in which Lucas was involved in a major way.\nIn 2012, Lucas self-funded and served as executive producer for \"Red Tails\", a war film based on the exploits of the Tuskegee Airmen during World War II. He also took over directing of reshoots while director Anthony Hemingway worked on other projects.\n2012\u2013present: Semi-retirement.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI'm moving away from the business ... From the company, from all this kind of stuff.\n\u2014George Lucas on his future career plans\nIn January 2012, Lucas announced his retirement from producing large blockbuster films, and instead re-focusing his career on smaller, independently budgeted features.\nIn June 2012, it was announced that producer Kathleen Kennedy, a long-term collaborator with Steven Spielberg and a producer of the \"Indiana Jones\" films, had been appointed as co-chair of Lucasfilm Ltd. It was reported that Kennedy would work alongside Lucas, who would remain chief executive and serve as co-chairman for at least one year, after which she would succeed him as the company's sole leader. With the sale of Lucasfilm to Disney, Lucas is currently Disney's second-largest single shareholder, after the estate of Steve Jobs.\nLucas worked as a creative consultant on the \"Star Wars\" sequel trilogy's first film, \"The Force Awakens\". Lucas's involvement included attending early story meetings; according to Lucas, \"I mostly say, 'You can't do this. You can do that.' You know, 'The cars don't have wheels. They fly with antigravity.' There's a million little pieces ... I know all that stuff.\" Lucas's son Jett told \"The Guardian \" that his father was \"very torn\" about having sold the rights to the franchise, despite having hand-picked Abrams to direct, and that his father was \"there to guide\" but that \"he wants to let it go and become its new generation.\" Among the materials turned over to the production team were story treatments Lucas developed when he considered creating Episodes \"VII\"\u2013\"IX\" himself; in January 2015, Lucas stated that Disney had discarded his story ideas.\n\"The Force Awakens\", directed by J. J. Abrams, was released on December 18, 2015. Kathleen Kennedy produced the film and its sequels. The new sequel trilogy was jointly produced by Lucasfilm and the Walt Disney Company, which had acquired Lucasfilm in 2012. During an interview with talk show host and journalist Charlie Rose that aired on December 24, 2015, Lucas likened his decision to sell Lucasfilm to Disney to a divorce and outlined the creative differences between him and the producers of \"The Force Awakens\". Lucas went on to say that he needed to support the company and its employees who were going to suffer financially. Lucas described the previous six \"Star Wars\" films as his \"children\" and defended his vision for them, while criticizing \"The Force Awakens\" for having a \"retro feel\", saying: \"I worked very hard to make them completely different, with different planets, with different spaceships \u2013 you know, to make it new.\" Lucas also drew some criticism and subsequently apologized for his remark likening Disney to \"white slavers\".\nIn 2015, Lucas wrote the CGI film \"Strange Magic\", his first musical. The film was produced at Skywalker Ranch. Gary Rydstrom directed the movie. At the same time the sequel trilogy was announced, a fifth installment of the \"Indiana Jones\" series also entered pre-development phase with Harrison Ford and Steven Spielberg set to return. Lucas originally did not specify whether the selling of Lucasfilm would affect his involvement with the film. In October 2016, Lucas announced his decision to not be involved in the story of the film but was nevertheless credited as an executive producer. In 2016, \"\", the first film of a \"Star Wars\" anthology series was released. It told the story of the rebels who stole the plans for the Death Star featured in the original \"Star Wars\" film, and it was reported that Lucas liked it more than \"The Force Awakens\". \"The Last Jedi\", the second film in the sequel trilogy, was released in 2017; Lucas described the film as \"beautifully made\".\nLucas has had cursory involvement with \"\" (2018), the \"Star Wars\" streaming series \"The Mandalorian\", and the premiere of the eighth season of \"Game of Thrones\". Lucas met with J. J. Abrams before the latter began writing the script to the sequel trilogy's final film, \"The Rise of Skywalker\", which was released in 2019.\nOther ventures.\nLucasfilm.\nLucas founded a film production company Lucasfilm in 1971, and incorporated as Lucasfilm Ltd. on September 12, 1977. In the mid-1970s, the company's offices were located on the Universal Studios Lot. Lucas founded the Star Wars Corporation, Inc. as a subsidiary to control various legal and financial aspects of \"Star Wars\" (1977), including copyright, and sequel and merchandising rights. It also produced the 1978 \"Star Wars Holiday Special\" for 20th Century Fox Television. That year, Lucas hired Los Angeles-based real-estate specialist Charles Weber to manage the company, telling him that he could keep the job as long as he made money. Lucas wanted the focus of the company to be making independent films, but the company gradually became enlarged from five employees to almost 100, increasing in middle management and running up costs. In 1980, after Weber asked Lucas for fifty million dollars to invest in other companies and suggested that they sell Skywalker Ranch to do so, Lucas fired Weber and had to let half of the Los Angeles staff go. By the same year, the corporate subsidiary had been discontinued and its business was absorbed into the various divisions of Lucasfilm.\nILM.\nLucas founded Industrial Light &amp; Magic in 1975, he wanted his 1977 film \"Star Wars\" to include visual effects that had never been seen on film before. After discovering that the in-house effects department at 20th Century Fox was no longer operational, Lucas approached Douglas Trumbull, best known for the effects on \"\" (1968) and \"Silent Running\" (1972). Trumbull declined as he was already committed to working on Steven Spielberg's film \"Close Encounters of the Third Kind\" (1977), but suggested his assistant John Dykstra to Lucas. Dykstra brought together a small team of college students, artists, and engineers and set them up in a warehouse in Van Nuys, California. After seeing the map for the location was zoned as light industrial, Lucas named the group Industrial Light and Magic, which became the Special Visual Effects department on \"Star Wars\". Alongside Dykstra, other leading members of the original ILM team were Ken Ralston, Richard Edlund, Dennis Muren, Robert Blalack, Joe Johnston, Phil Tippett, Steve Gawley, Lorne Peterson and Paul Huston.\nLucas Museum of Narrative Art.\nBy June 2013, Lucas was considering establishing a museum, the Lucas Cultural Arts Museum, to be built on Crissy Field near the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco, which would display his collection of illustrations and pop art, with an estimated value of more than $1\u00a0billion. Lucas offered to pay the estimated $300\u00a0million cost of constructing the museum, and would endow it with $400\u00a0million when it opened, eventually adding an additional $400\u00a0million to its endowment. After being unable to reach an agreement with The Presidio Trust, Lucas turned to Chicago. A potential lakefront site on Museum Campus in Chicago was proposed in May 2014. By June 2014, Chicago had been selected, pending approval of the Chicago Plan Commission, which was granted. The museum project was renamed the Lucas Museum of Narrative Art. On June 24, 2016, Lucas announced that he was abandoning his plans to locate the museum in Chicago, due to a lawsuit by a local preservation group, Friends of the Parks, and would instead build the museum in California. On January 17, 2017, Lucas announced that an eleven-acre campus with green space and the museum's five-story 300,000 square foot building will be constructed over what was a parking lot in Exposition Park, Los Angeles, California. It is due to be completed in 2026. \nIn July 2025, Lucas made his first ever appearance at San Diego Comic-Con, where he previewed the museum. At a panel, he showcased multiple pieces, including drawings from the original Iron Man comic, Indiana Jones concept art, Frida Kahlo paintings, and \"Peanuts\" sketches, that will be part of the museum's opening exhibits.\nCollaboration.\nLucas was also heavily involved and invested in the scoring process for the original \"Star Wars\" soundtrack, which was composed by John Williams, on the recommendation of his friend and colleague Steven Spielberg. Whilst initially wanting to use tracks and film music in a similar manner to \"\", which served as the inspiration for the film, Williams advised against this and instead proposed a system of recurring themes (or leitmotifs) to enhance the story in the style of classical composers Gustav Holst, William Walton, and Igor Stravinsky; works that Lucas had used as \"temp tracks\" for Williams to gain inspiration from. The film, and subsequent sequels and prequels, make use of the Main Title Theme, the Force Theme (less commonly referred to as Obi Wan Kenobi's Theme), the Rebel Alliance Theme and Princess Leia's Theme (all introduced in this film) repeatedly. Subsequent films also added to the catalog of themes for different characters, factions, and locations.\nThe score was released to critical acclaim and won Williams his third Academy Award for Best Original Score. The score was listed by the American Film Institute in 2005 as the greatest film score of all time. The professional relationship formed by Lucas and Williams extended through to Williams working on all of Lucas's blockbuster franchise movies: the remaining two films of the Star Wars original trilogy; all three films of prequel trilogy developed over fifteen years later; and the five films of the Indiana Jones franchise, in which Williams reunited with his long-time collaborator Spielberg. In his collaborations with Lucas, Williams received six of his fifty-two Academy Award nominations (\"Star Wars, The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, Raiders of the Lost Ark, Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom,\" and \"Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade\"). After Lucas sold Lucasfilm to Disney, Williams stayed on board with the franchise, and continued to score the remaining three films of the \"Skywalker Saga\" (\", \", and \",\" for which he received a further three Oscar nominations), after which he announced his \"retirement\" from the series.\nLucas was in attendance for a ceremony honoring Williams as the 44th recipient of the AFI Life Achievement Award, the first composer to receive the honor, and gave a speech in praise of their relationship and his work. In interviews, and most famously at the 40th Anniversary Star Wars Celebration convention, Lucas has repeatedly reaffirmed the importance of Williams to the Star Wars saga, affectionately referring to him as the \"secret sauce\" of his movies.\nPhilanthropy.\nLucas is the wealthiest film celebrity in the world. His personal net worth is estimated to be between $7.5\u20139.4\u00a0billion, making him one of the richest people in the entertainment industry. Lucas has pledged to give half of his fortune to charity as part of an effort called The Giving Pledge led by Bill Gates and Warren Buffett to persuade America's richest individuals to donate their financial wealth to charities.\nGeorge Lucas Educational Foundation.\nIn 1991, The George Lucas Educational Foundation was founded as a nonprofit operating foundation to celebrate and encourage innovation in schools. The foundation's content is available under the brand Edutopia, in an award-winning web site, social media and via documentary films. Lucas, through his foundation, was one of the leading proponents of the E-Rate program in the universal service fund, which was enacted as part of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. On June 24, 2008, Lucas testified before the United States House of Representatives subcommittee on Telecommunications and the Internet as the head of his Foundation to advocate for a free wireless broadband educational network.\nProceeds from the sale of Lucasfilm to Disney.\nIn 2012, Lucas sold Lucasfilm to the Walt Disney Company for a reported sum of $4.05\u00a0billion. It was widely reported at the time that Lucas intended to give the majority of the proceeds from the sale to charity. A spokesperson for Lucasfilm said: \"George Lucas has expressed his intention, in the event the deal closes, to donate the majority of the proceeds to his philanthropic endeavors.\" Lucas also spoke on the matter: \"For 41 years, the majority of my time and money has been put into the company. As I start a new chapter in my life, it is gratifying that I have the opportunity to devote more time and resources to philanthropy.\"\nOther initiatives.\nIn 2005, Lucas gave $1 million to help build the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial on the National Mall in Washington, D.C., to commemorate American civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr.\nOn September 19, 2006, the University of Southern California announced that Lucas had donated $175\u2013180\u00a0million to his alma mater to expand the film school. It is the largest single donation to U.S.C. and the largest gift to a film school anywhere. Previous donations led to the already-existing George Lucas Instructional Building and Marcia Lucas Post-Production building.\nIn 2013, Lucas and his wife Mellody Hobson donated $25\u00a0million to the Chicago-based not-for-profit After School Matters, of which Hobson is the chair.\nOn April 15, 2016, it was reported that Lucas had donated between $501,000 and $1\u00a0million through the Lucas Family Foundation (now the Hobson/Lucas Family Foundation) to the Obama Foundation, which is charged with overseeing the construction of the Barack Obama Presidential Center on Chicago's South Side.\nIn 2021, Lucas and his wife Mellody Hobson made a donation to NYU through the Hobson/Lucas Family Foundation to establish the Martin Scorsese Institute of Global Cinematic Arts.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1969, Lucas married film editor Marcia Lou Griffin, who went on to win an Academy Award for her editing work on the original \"Star Wars\" film. They adopted a daughter, Amanda Lucas, in 1981, and divorced in 1983. Lucas subsequently adopted two more children as a single parent: daughter Katie Lucas, born in 1988, and son Jett Lucas, born in 1993. His three eldest children all appeared in the three \"Star Wars\" prequels, as did Lucas himself. Following his divorce, Lucas was in a relationship with singer Linda Ronstadt in the 1980s.\nLucas began dating Mellody Hobson, president of Ariel Investments and chairwoman of Starbucks, in 2006, after meeting in 2005 at a business conference. She formerly served as chairwoman at DreamWorks Animation. Lucas and Hobson announced their engagement in January 2013, and married on June 22, 2013, at Lucas's Skywalker Ranch in Marin County, California. They have one daughter together, born via surrogate in August 2013.\nLucas was born and raised in a Methodist family. The religious and mythical themes in \"Star Wars\" were inspired by Lucas's interest in the writings of mythologist Joseph Campbell, and he would eventually come to identify strongly with the Eastern religious philosophies he studied and incorporated into his films, which were a major inspiration for \"the Force\". Lucas has come to state that his religion is \"Buddhist Methodist\". He resides in Marin County.\nLucas is a major collector of the American illustrator and painter Norman Rockwell. A collection of 57 Rockwell paintings and drawings owned by Lucas and fellow Rockwell collector and film director Steven Spielberg were displayed at the Smithsonian American Art Museum from July 2, 2010, to January 2, 2011, in an exhibition titled \"Telling Stories\".\nLucas has said that he is a fan of Seth MacFarlane's hit TV show \"Family Guy\". MacFarlane has said that Lucasfilm was extremely helpful when the \"Family Guy\" crew wanted to .\nLucas supported Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton in the run-up for the 2016 U.S. presidential election.\nAwards and honors.\nIn 1977, Lucas was awarded the Inkpot Award.\nThe American Film Institute awarded Lucas its Life Achievement Award on June 9, 2005. This was shortly after the release of \"Star Wars: Episode III \u2013 Revenge of the Sith\", about which he joked stating that, since he views the entire \"Star Wars\" series as one film, he could actually receive the award now that he had finally \"gone back and finished the movie\".\nLucas was nominated for four Academy Awards: Best Directing and Writing for \"American Graffiti\" and \"Star Wars\". He received the academy's Irving G. Thalberg Award in 1991. He appeared at the 79th Academy Awards ceremony in 2007 with Steven Spielberg and Francis Ford Coppola to present the Best Director award to their friend Martin Scorsese. During the speech, Spielberg and Coppola talked about the joy of winning an Oscar, making fun of Lucas, who has not won a competitive Oscar.\nThe Science Fiction Hall of Fame inducted Lucas in 2006, its second \"Film, Television, and Media\" contributor, after Spielberg. The Discovery Channel named him one of the 100 \"Greatest Americans\" in September 2008. Lucas served as Grand Marshal for the Tournament of Roses Parade and made the ceremonial coin toss at the Rose Bowl, New Year's Day 2007. In 2009, he was one of 13 California Hall of Fame inductees in The California Museum's yearlong exhibit.\nIn July 2013, Lucas was awarded the National Medal of Arts by President Barack Obama for his contributions to American cinema. In October 2014, Lucas received Honorary Membership of the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers.\nIn August 2015, Lucas was inducted as a Disney Legend, and on December 6, 2015, he was an honoree at the Kennedy Center Honors. In 2021, coinciding with Lucasfilm's 50th anniversary, an action figure of Lucas in stormtrooper disguise was released as part of Hasbro's .\nIn May 2024, Lucas was given the Honorary Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival. It is considered one of the highest recognitions in the film industry.\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11858", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11858", "title": "Games", "text": ""}
{"id": "11861", "revid": "46591300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11861", "title": "Gothenburg", "text": "City in V\u00e4sterg\u00f6tland, Sweden\nGothenburg or G\u00f6teborg ( ) is the second-largest city in Sweden, after the capital Stockholm, and the fifth-largest in the Nordic countries. Situated by the Kattegat on the west coast of Sweden, it is the gubernatorial seat of V\u00e4stra G\u00f6taland County, with a population of approximately 600,000 in the city proper and about 1.1\u00a0million inhabitants in the metropolitan area.\nKing Gustavus Adolphus founded Gothenburg by royal charter in 1621 as a heavily fortified, primarily Dutch, trading colony. In addition to the generous privileges given to his Dutch allies during the ongoing Thirty Years' War, e.g. tax relaxation, he also attracted significant numbers of his German and Scottish allies to populate his only town on the western coast; this trading status was furthered by the founding of the Swedish East India Company. At a key strategic location at the mouth of the , where Scandinavia's largest drainage basin enters the sea, the Port of Gothenburg is now the largest port in the Nordic countries. The presence of the University of Gothenburg and Chalmers University of Technology has led Gothenburg to become home to many students. Volvo was founded in Gothenburg in 1927, with both Volvo Cars, and its original parent Volvo Group (today makers of trucks, buses and marine engines) still headquartered on the island of Hisingen in the city. Other key companies in the area are AstraZeneca, Ericsson, and SKF.\nGothenburg is served by G\u00f6teborg Landvetter Airport southeast of the city centre. The smaller G\u00f6teborg City Airport, from the city centre, was closed to regular airline traffic in 2015. The city hosts the Gothia Cup, the world's largest youth football tournament, and the G\u00f6teborg Basketball Festival, Europe's largest youth basketball tournament, alongside some of the largest annual events in Scandinavia. The Gothenburg Film Festival, held in January since 1979, is the leading Scandinavian film festival and attracts over 155,000 visitors each year. In summer, a wide variety of music festivals are held in the city, including the popular Way Out West Festival.\nName.\nThe city was named G\u00f6teborg in the city's charter in 1621 and simultaneously given the German and English name Gothenburg. The Swedish name was given after the \"G\u00f6ta \u00e4lv\", called G\u00f6ta River in English, and other cities ending in \"-borg\". The city's name is often abbreviated to Gbg.\nBoth the Swedish and German/English names were in use before 1621 and had already been used for the previous city founded in 1604 that burned down in 1611. Gothenburg is one of few Swedish cities to still have an official and widely used exonym.\nThe city council of 1641 consisted of four Swedish, three Dutch, three German, and two Scottish members. In Dutch, Scots, English, and German, all languages with a long history in this trade and maritime-oriented city, the name Gothenburg is or was (in the case of German) used for the city. \nVariations of the official German/English name Gothenburg in the city's 1621 charter existed or exist in many languages. The French form of the city name is \"Gothembourg\", but in French texts, the Swedish name \"G\u00f6teborg\" is more frequent.\nIn 2003, the city decided to promote the name \"G\u00f6teborg\" in international contexts, a decision which was reversed six years later. However, the traditional forms (\"Gothenburg\" in English, or \"Gotemburgo\" in Spanish and Portuguese) are sometimes replaced with the use of the Swedish \"G\u00f6teborg\", for example by The G\u00f6teborg Opera and the G\u00f6teborg Ballet. However, \"G\u00f6teborgs universitet\", previously designated as the G\u00f6teborg University in English, changed its name to the University of Gothenburg in 2008. The Gothenburg municipality has also reverted to the use of the English name in international contexts.\nIn 2009, \"G\u00f6teborg &amp; Co\", the municipal destination management organisation of Gothenburg launched a new promotional logo for Gothenburg spelled \"Go:teborg\". Since the name \"G\u00f6teborg\" contains the Swedish letter \"\u00f6\", they planned to make the name more \"international\" and \"up to date\" by turning the \"\u00f6\" sideways. As of 2015[ [update]], the name was spelled \"Go:teborg\" on logos on various signs around the city. In March 2021, the city removed the \"Go:teborg\" branding from its English communications and switched back to using the logo with \"Gothenburg\".\nHistory.\nIn the early modern period, the configuration of Sweden's borders made Gothenburg strategically critical as the only Swedish gateway to Skagerrak, the North Sea and Atlantic, situated on the west coast in a very narrow strip of Swedish territory between Danish Halland in the south and Norwegian Bohusl\u00e4n in the north. After several failed attempts, Gothenburg was successfully founded in 1621 by King Gustavus Adolphus (Gustaf\u00a0II Adolf).\nThe site of the first church built in Gothenburg, subsequently destroyed by Danish invaders, is marked by a stone near the north end of the \u00c4lvsborg Bridge in the F\u00e4rjen\u00e4s Park. The church was built in 1603 and destroyed in 1611. The city was heavily influenced by the Dutch, Germans, and Scots, and Dutch planners and engineers were contracted to construct the city as they had the skills needed to drain and build in the marshy areas chosen for the city. The town was designed like Dutch cities such as Amsterdam, Batavia (Jakarta) and New Amsterdam (Manhattan). The planning of the streets and canals of Gothenburg closely resembled that of Jakarta, which was built by the Dutch around the same time. The Dutchmen initially won political power, and it was not until 1652, when the last Dutch politician in the city's council died, that Swedes acquired political power over Gothenburg. During the Dutch period, the town followed Dutch town laws and Dutch was proposed as the official language in the town. Robust city walls were built during the 17th century. In 1807, a decision was made to tear down most of the city's wall. The work started in 1810 and was carried out by 150 soldiers from the Bohus regiment.\nAlongside the Dutch, the town was also heavily influenced by Scots who settled down in Gothenburg. Many became people of high-profile. William Chalmers, the son of a Scottish immigrant, donated his fortunes to set up what later became the Chalmers University of Technology. In 1841, the Scotsman Alexander Keiller founded the G\u00f6taverken shipbuilding company that was in business until 1989. His son James Keiller donated Keiller Park to the city in 1906.\nThe Gothenburg coat of arms was based on the lion of the coat of arms of Sweden, symbolically holding a shield with the national emblem, the Three Crowns, to defend the city against its enemies.\nIn the Treaty of Roskilde (1658), Denmark\u2013Norway ceded the Danish province of Halland, in the south, and the Norwegian province of Bohus County or \"Bohusl\u00e4n\" in the north, which left Gothenburg less exposed. Gothenburg grew into a significant port and trade centre on the west coast, because it was the only city on the west coast that, along with Marstrand, was granted the rights to trade with merchants from other countries.\nIn the 18th century, fishing was the most important industry. However, in 1731, the Swedish East India Company was founded, and the city flourished due to its foreign trade with highly profitable commercial expeditions to China.\nThe harbour developed into Sweden's main harbour for trade towards the west, and when Swedish emigration to the United States increased, Gothenburg became Sweden's main point of departure for these travellers. The impact of Gothenburg as a main port of embarkation for Swedish emigrants is reflected by Gothenburg, Nebraska, a small Swedish settlement in the United States.\nWith the 19th century, Gothenburg evolved into a modern industrial city that continued on into the 20th century. The population increased tenfold in the century, from 13,000 (1800) to 130,000 (1900). In the 20th century, major companies that developed included SKF (1907) and Volvo (1927).\nGeography.\nGothenburg is located on the west coast, in southwestern Sweden, about halfway between the capital cities of Copenhagen (Denmark) and Oslo (Norway). The location at the mouth of the G\u00f6ta \u00e4lv, which feeds into the Kattegat, an arm of the North Sea, has helped the city grow in significance as a trading city. The archipelago of Gothenburg consists of rough, barren rocks and cliffs, which also is typical for the coast of Bohusl\u00e4n. Due to the Gulf Stream, the city has a mild climate and moderately heavy precipitation. It is the second-largest city in Sweden after its capital Stockholm.\nThe Gothenburg Metropolitan Area (\"Stor-G\u00f6teborg\") has 1,080,980 inhabitants (2023) and extends to the municipalities of Ale, Alings\u00e5s, G\u00f6teborg, H\u00e4rryda, Kung\u00e4lv, Lerum, Lilla Edet, M\u00f6lndal, Partille, Stenungsund, Tj\u00f6rn, \u00d6cker\u00f6 within V\u00e4stra G\u00f6taland County, and Kungsbacka within Halland County.\nAngered, a suburb outside Gothenburg, consists of Hj\u00e4llbo, Eriksbo, Rannebergen, Hammarkullen, G\u00e5rdsten, and L\u00f6vg\u00e4rdet. It is a Million Programme part of Gothenburg, like Roseng\u00e5rd in Malm\u00f6 and Botkyrka in Stockholm. Angered had about 50,000 inhabitants in 2015.[?] It lies north of Gothenburg and is isolated from the rest of the city. Bergsj\u00f6n is another Million Programme suburb north of Gothenburg, it has 14,000 inhabitants. Biskopsg\u00e5rden is the biggest multicultural suburb on the island of Hisingen, which is a part of Gothenburg but separated from the city by the river.\nClimate.\nGothenburg has an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\" according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification). Despite its northerly latitude, temperatures are quite mild throughout the year and warmer than places at a similar latitude such as Stockholm; this is mainly because of the moderating influence of the Gulf Stream. During the summer, daylight extends 18 hours and 5 minutes, but lasts 6 hours and 32 minutes in late December. The climate has become significantly milder in later decades, particularly in summer and winter; July temperatures used to be below Stockholm's 1961\u20131990 averages, but have since been warmer than that benchmark.\nSummers are warm and pleasant with average high temperatures of and lows of , but temperatures of occur on many days during the summer. Winters are cold and windy with temperatures of around , though it rarely drops below . Precipitation is regular but generally moderate throughout the year. Snow mainly occurs from December to March, but is not unusual in November and April and can sometimes occur even in October and May.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nParks and nature.\nGothenburg has several parks and nature reserves ranging in size from tens of square meters to hundreds of hectares. It also has many green areas that are not designated as parks or reserves.\nSelection of parks:\nArchitecture.\nVery few buildings are left from the 17th century when the city was founded, since all but the military and royal houses were built of wood. Some structures which do survive from this early phase in the city's history are Kronhuset and the Torstenson Palace, and the fortresses Skansen Kronan and Skansen Lejonet.\nThe first major architecturally interesting period is the 18th century when the East India Company made Gothenburg an important trade city. Imposing stone houses in Neo-Classical style were erected around the canals. One example from this period is the East India House, which today houses the G\u00f6teborg City Museum.\nIn the 19th century, the wealthy bourgeoisie began to move outside the city walls which had protected the city. The style now was an eclectic, academic, somewhat overdecorated style which the middle-class favoured. The working class lived in the overcrowded city district Haga in wooden houses.\nIn the 19th century, the first comprehensive town plan after the founding of city was created, which led to the construction of the main street, Kungsportsavenyen. Perhaps the most significant type of houses of the city, Landsh\u00f6vdingehusen, were built in the end of the 19th century \u2013 three-storey houses with the first floor in stone and the other two in wood.\nThe early 20th century, characterized by the National Romantic style, was rich in architectural achievements. Masthugg Church is a noted example of the style of this period. In the early 1920s, on the city's 300th anniversary, the G\u00f6taplatsen square with its Neoclassical look was built.\nAfter this, the predominant style in Gothenburg and rest of Sweden was Functionalism which especially dominated the suburbs such as V\u00e4stra Fr\u00f6lunda and Bergsj\u00f6n. The Swedish functionalist architect Uno \u00c5hr\u00e9n served as city planner from 1932 through 1943. In the 1950s, the big stadium Ullevi was built when Sweden hosted the 1958 FIFA World Cup.\nThe modern architecture of the city has been formed by such architects as Gert Wing\u00e5rdh, who started as a Post-modernist in the 1980s.\nGustaf Adolf Square is a town square located in central Gothenburg. Noted buildings on the square include Gothenburg City Hall (formerly the stock exchange, opened in 1849) and the Nordic Classicism law court. The main canal of Gothenburg also flanks the square.\nCharacteristic buildings.\nThe Gothenburg Central Station is in the centre of the city, next to Nordstan and Drottningtorget. The building has been renovated and expanded numerous times since the grand opening in October 1858. In 2003, a major reconstruction was finished which brought the 19th-century building into the 21st century expanding the capacity for trains, travellers, and shopping. Not far from the central station is the Skanskaskrapan, or more commonly known as \"The Lipstick\". It is high with 22\u00a0floors and coloured in red-white stripes. The skyscraper was designed by Ralph Erskine and built by Skanska in the late 1980s as the headquarters for the company.\nBy the shore of the G\u00f6ta \u00c4lv at Lilla Bommen is The G\u00f6teborg Opera. It was completed in 1994. The architect Jan Izikowitz was inspired by the landscape and described his vision as \"Something that makes your mind float over the squiggling landscape like the wings of a seagull.\"\nFeskek\u00f6rka, or \"Fiskhallen\", is an indoor fishmarket by the Rosenlundskanalen in central Gothenburg. Feskek\u00f6rkan was opened on 1November 1874 and its name from the building's resemblance to a Gothic church. The Gothenburg city hall is in the Beaux-Arts architectural style. The Gothenburg Synagogue at Stora Nygatan, near Drottningtorget, was built in 1855 according to the designs of the German architect August Kr\u00fcger.\nThe Gunnebo House is a country house located to the south of Gothenburg, in M\u00f6lndal. It was built in a neoclassical architecture towards the end of the 18th century. Created in the early 1900s was the Vasa Church. It is located in Vasastan and is built of granite in a neo-Romanesque style.\nKarlatornet, a skyscraper set to be fully completed in 2025, stands as the tallest building in the Nordics, reaching a height of 246 meters.\nAnother noted construction is Brudaremossen TV Tower, one of the few partially guyed towers in the world.\nCulture.\nThe sea, trade, and industrial history of the city are evident in the cultural life of Gothenburg. It is also a popular destination for tourists on the Swedish west coast.\nMuseums.\nMany of the cultural institutions, as well as hospitals and the university, were created by donations from rich merchants and industrialists, for example the R\u00f6hsska Museum. On 29December 2004, the Museum of World Culture opened near Korsv\u00e4gen. Museums include the G\u00f6teborgs Konsthall, Gothenburg Museum of Art, and several museums of sea and navigation history, natural history, the sciences, and East India. Aeroseum, close to the G\u00f6teborg City Airport, is an aircraft museum in a former military underground air force base. World of Volvo has exhibits of the history of Volvo and the development from 1927 until today. Products shown include cars, trucks, marine engines, and buses.\nUniverseum is a public science centre that opened in 2001, the largest of its kind in Scandinavia. It is divided into six sections, each containing experimental workshops and a collection of reptiles, fish, and insects. Universeum occasionally host debates between Swedish secondary-school students and Nobel Prize laureates or other scholars.\nLeisure and entertainment.\nThe most noted attraction is the amusement park Liseberg, located in the central part of the city. It is the largest amusement park in Scandinavia by number of rides, and was chosen as one of the top ten amusement parks in the world (2005) by \"Forbes\". It is the most popular attraction in Sweden by number of visitors per year (more than 3\u00a0million).\nThere are a number of independent theatre ensembles in the city, besides institutions such as Gothenburg City Theatre, Backa Theatre (youth theatre), and Folkteatern.\nThe main boulevard is called Kungsportsavenyn (commonly known as \"Avenyn\", \"The Avenue\"). It is about long and starts at G\u00f6taplatsen\u00a0\u2013 which is the location of the Gothenburg Museum of Art, the city's theatre, and the city library, as well as the concert hall \u2013 and stretches all the way to Kungsportsplatsen in the old city centre of Gothenburg, crossing a canal and a small park. The \"Avenyn\" was created in the 1860s and 1870s as a result of an international architecture contest, and is the product of a period of extensive town planning and remodelling. \"Avenyn\" has Gothenburg's highest concentration of pubs and clubs. Gothenburg's largest shopping centre (8th largest in Sweden), Nordstan, is located in central Gothenburg.\nGothenburg's Haga district is known for its picturesque wooden houses and its caf\u00e9s serving the well-known \"Haga bulle\" \u2013 a large cinnamon roll similar to the \"kanelbulle\".\nFive Gothenburg restaurants have a star in the 2008 \"Michelin Guide\": 28+ Basement, Fond, Kock &amp; Vin, Fiskekrogen, and Sj\u00f6magasinet. The city has a number of star chefs. In 2007, seven Swedish Chef of the Year awards of the previous twelve years had been won by people from Gothenburg.\nThe Gustavus Adolphus pastry, eaten every 6November in Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus Day, is especially connected to, and appreciated in, Gothenburg because the city was founded by King Gustavus Adolphus.\nOne of Gothenburg's most popular natural tourist attractions is the southern Gothenburg archipelago, which is a set of several islands that can be reached by ferry boats mainly operating from Saltholmen. Within the archipelago are the \u00c4lvsborg fortress, Vinga and Styrs\u00f6 islands.\nFestivals and fairs.\nThe annual Gothenburg Film Festival, is the largest film festival in Scandinavia. The Gothenburg Book Fair, held each year in September. It is the largest literary festival in Scandinavia, and the second largest book fair in Europe. A radical bookfair is held at the same time at the Syndikalistiskt Forum.\nThe International Science Festival in Gothenburg is an annual festival since April 1997, in central Gothenburg with thought-provoking science activities for the public. The festival is visited by about 100,000 people each year. This makes it the largest popular-science event in Sweden and one of the leading popular-science events in Europe.\nCiting the Great Recession, the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions moved the 2010 World Library and Information Congress, previously to be held in Brisbane, Australia, to Gothenburg. The event took place on 10\u201315August 2010.\nMusic.\nGothenburg has a diverse music community\u2014the Gothenburg Symphony Orchestra is the best-known in classical music. Gothenburg also was the birthplace of the Swedish composer Kurt Atterberg. The first internationally successfully Swedish group, instrumental rock group The Spotnicks came from Gothenburg.\nBands such as The Soundtrack of Our Lives and Ace of Base are well-known pop representatives of the city. During the 1970s, Gothenburg had strong roots in the Swedish progressive movement (progg) with such groups as Nationalteatern, Nynningen, and Motvind. The record company Nacksving and the editorial office for the magazine Musikens Makt which also were part of the progg movement were located in Gothenburg during this time as well.\nThere is also an active indie scene in Gothenburg. For example, the musician Jens Lekman was born in the suburb of Angered and named his 2007 release \"Night Falls Over Kortedala\" after another suburb, Kortedala. Other internationally acclaimed indie artists include the electro pop duos Studio, The Knife, Air France, The Tough Alliance, indie rock band Love is All, songwriter Jos\u00e9 Gonz\u00e1lez, and pop singer El Perro del Mar, as well as genre-bending quartet Little Dragon fronted by vocalist Yukimi Nagano. Another son of the city is one of Sweden's most popular singers, H\u00e5kan Hellstr\u00f6m, who often includes many places from the city in his songs. The glam rock group Supergroupies derives from Gothenburg.\nGothenburg's own commercially successful At the Gates, In Flames, and Dark Tranquillity are credited with pioneering melodic death metal. Other well-known bands of the Gothenburg scene are thrash metal band The Haunted, progressive power metal band Evergrey, and power metal bands HammerFall and Dream Evil.\nMany music festivals take place in the city every year. The Metaltown Festival was a two-day festival featuring heavy metal music bands, held in Gothenburg. It used to be arranged annually since 2004, taking place at the Frihamnen venue. In June 2012, the festival included bands such as In Flames, Marilyn Manson, Slayer, Lamb of God, and Mastodon. Another popular festival, Way Out West, focuses more on rock, electronic, and hip-hop genres.\nSports.\nAs in all of Sweden, a variety of sports are followed, including football, ice hockey, basketball, handball, floorball, baseball, and figure skating. A varied amateur and professional sports clubs scene exists.\nGothenburg is the birthplace of football in Sweden as the first football match in Sweden was played there in 1892. The city's three major football clubs, IFK G\u00f6teborg, \u00d6rgryte IS, and GAIS share a total of 34 Swedish championships between them. IFK has also won the UEFA Cup twice. Other notable clubs include BK H\u00e4cken (football), G\u00f6teborg HC (women's ice hockey), Pixbo IBK (floorball), multiple national handball champion Redbergslids IK, and five-time national ice hockey champion Fr\u00f6lunda HC, Gothenburg had a professional basketball team, Gothia Basket, until 2010 when it ceased. The bandy department of GAIS, GAIS Bandy, played the first season in the highest division Elitserien last season. The group stage match between the main rivals Sweden and Russia in the 2013 Bandy World Championship was played at Arena Heden in central Gothenburg.\nThe city's most notable sports venues are Scandinavium, and Ullevi (multisport) and the newly built Gamla Ullevi (football).\nThe 2003 World Allround Speed Skating Championships were held in Rudhallen, Sweden's only indoor speed-skating arena. It is a part of Ruddalens\u00a0IP, which also has a bandy field and several football fields.\nThe only Swedish heavyweight champion of the world in boxing, Ingemar Johansson, who took the title from Floyd Paterson in 1959, was from Gothenburg.\nGothenburg has hosted a number of international sporting events including the 1958 FIFA World Cup, the 1983 European Cup Winners' Cup Final, an NFL preseason game on 14August 1988 between the Chicago Bears and the Minnesota Vikings, the 1992 European Football Championship, the 1993 and the 2002 World Men's Handball Championship, the 1995 World Championships in Athletics, the 1997 World Championships in Swimming (short track), the 2002 Ice Hockey World Championships, the 2004 UEFA Cup final, the 2006 European Championships in Athletics, and the 2008 World Figure Skating Championships. Annual events held in the city are the Gothia Cup and the G\u00f6teborgsvarvet. The annual Gothia Cup, is the world's largest football tournament with regards to the number of participants: in 2011, a total of 35,200 players from 1,567 teams and 72 nations participated.\nGothenburg hosted the XIII\u00a0FINA World Masters Championships in 2010. Diving, swimming, synchronized swimming and open-water competitions were held on 28July to 7August. The water polo events were played on the neighboring city of Bor\u00e5s.\nGothenburg is also home to the Gothenburg Sharks, a professional baseball team in the Elitserien division of baseball in Sweden.\nWith around 25,000 sailboats and yachts scattered about the city, sailing is a popular sports activity in the region, particularly because of the nearby Gothenburg archipelago. In June 2015, the Volvo Ocean Race, professional sailing's leading crewed offshore race, concluded in Gothenburg, as well as an event in the 2015\u20132016 America's Cup World Series in August 2015.\nThe Gothenburg Amateur Diving Club (G\u00f6teborgs amat\u00f6rdykarklubb) has been operating since October 1938.\nEconomy.\nDue to Gothenburg's advantageous location in the centre of Scandinavia, trade and shipping have always played a major role in the city's economic history, and they continue to do so. Gothenburg port has come to be the largest harbour in Scandinavia.\nApart from trade, the second pillar of Gothenburg has traditionally been manufacturing and industry, which significantly contributes to the city's wealth. Major companies operating plants in the area include SKF, Volvo (both cars and trucks), and Ericsson. Volvo Cars is the largest employer in Gothenburg, not including jobs in supply companies. The blue-collar industries which have dominated the city for long are still important factors in the city's economy, but they are being gradually replaced by high-tech industries.\nBanking and finance are also important, as well as the event and tourist industry.\nGothenburg is the terminus of the Valdemar-G\u00f6teborg gas pipeline, which brings natural gas from the North Sea fields to Sweden, through Denmark.\nHistorically, Gothenburg was home base from the 18th century of the Swedish East India Company. From its founding until the late 1970s, the city was a world leader in shipbuilding, with such shipyards as Eriksbergs Mekaniska Verkstad, G\u00f6taverken, Arendalsvarvet, and Lindholmens varv. In 1875, the Lindholmsdockan drydock opened in Gothenburg. Gothenburg is classified as a global city by GaWC, with a ranking of Gamma. The city has been ranked as the 12th-most inventive city in the world by \"Forbes\".\nGovernment.\nGothenburg became a city municipality with an elected city council when the first Swedish local government acts were implemented in 1863. The municipality has an assembly consisting of 81 members, elected every fourth year. Political decisions depend on citizens considering them legitimate. Political legitimacy can be based on various factors: legality, due process, and equality before the law, as well as the efficiency and effectiveness of public policy. One method used to achieve greater legitimacy for controversial policy reforms such as congestion charges is to allow citizens to decide or advise on the issue in public referendums.\nIn December 2010 a petition for a local referendum on the congestion tax, signed by 28,000 citizens, was submitted to the City Council. This right to submit so-called \"people's initiatives\" was inscribed in the Local Government Act, which obliged local governments to hold a local referendum if petitioned by 5% of the citizens unless the issue was deemed to be outside their area of jurisdiction or if a majority in the City Council voted against holding such a referendum. A second petition for a referendum, signed by 57,000 citizens, was submitted to the local government in February 2013. This petition followed a campaign organised by a local newspaper \u2013 \u2013 whose editor-in-chief argued that the paper's involvement was justified by the large public response to a series of articles on the congestion tax, as well as out of concern for the local democracy.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;In 2019, approximately 28% (159,342 residents) of the population of Gothenburg were foreign born and approximately 46% (265,019 residents) had at least one parent born abroad. In addition, approximately 12% (69,263 residents) were foreign citizens.\nIn 2016, 45% of Gothenburg's immigrant population was from other parts of Europe, and 10% of the total population was from another Nordic country.\nThe city's population increased by 9,292 during 2022.\nEducation.\nGothenburg has two universities, both of which started as colleges founded by private donations in the 19th century. The University of Gothenburg has about 38,000 students and is one of the largest universities in Scandinavia, and one of the most versatile in Sweden. Chalmers University of Technology is a well-known university located in Johanneberg south of the inner city, lately also established at Lindholmen in Norra \u00c4lvstranden, Hisingen.\nIn 2015, there were ten adult education centres in Gothenburg: \"Agnesbergs folkh\u00f6gskola\", \"Arbetarr\u00f6relsens folkh\u00f6gskola i G\u00f6teborg\", \"Finska folkh\u00f6gskolan\", \"Folkh\u00f6gskolan i Angered\", \"G\u00f6teborgs folkh\u00f6gskola\", \"Kvinnofolkh\u00f6gskolan\", \"Mo G\u00e5rd folkh\u00f6gskola\", \"S:ta Birgittas folkh\u00f6gskola\", \"V\u00e4stra G\u00f6talands folkh\u00f6gskolor\" and \"Wendelsbergs folkh\u00f6gskola\".\nIn 2015, there were 49 high schools in Gothenburg. Some of the more notable schools are Hvitfeldtska gymnasiet, G\u00f6teborgs H\u00f6gre Samskola, Sigrid Rudebecks gymnasium and Polhemsgymnasiet. Some high-schools are also connected to large Swedish corporations, such as SKF Technical high-school owned by SKF and Gothenburg's technical high-school jointly owned by Volvo, Volvo Cars and Gothenburg municipality.\nThere are two adult education centers that teach fine arts: Domen and G\u00f6teborg Folkh\u00f6gskola.\nTransport.\nPublic transport.\nWith over of double track, the Gothenburg tram network covers most of the city and is the largest tram/light rail network in Scandinavia. Gothenburg also has a bus network. Boat and ferry services connect the Gothenburg archipelago to the mainland. The lack of a subway is due to the soft ground on which Gothenburg is situated. Tunneling is very expensive in such conditions.\nThe Gothenburg commuter rail with three lines services some nearby cities and towns.\nPublic transport on the river is operated on the \u00c4lvsnabben ferry line, operated by Styrs\u00f6bolaget on a commission from V\u00e4sttrafik.\nRail and intercity bus.\nOther major transportation hubs are \"Centralstationen\" (Gothenburg Central Station) and the Nils Ericson Terminal. Trains depart from Gothenburg Central Station to various destinations in Sweden, as well as frequent connections to Oslo and Copenhagen (via Malm\u00f6).\nAir.\nGothenburg is served by G\u00f6teborg Landvetter Airport (), located about 20\u00a0km (12\u00a0mi) east of the city centre. It is named after nearby locality Landvetter. Flygbussarna offer frequent bus connections to and from Gothenburg with travel time 20\u201330 minutes. Swebus, Flixbus and Nettbuss also serve the airport with several daily departures to Gothenburg, Bor\u00e5s and other destinations along European route E4. V\u00e4sttrafik, the local public transport provider in the area, offers additional connections to Landvetter.\nThe airport is operated by Swedish national airport operator Swedavia, and with 6.8\u00a0million passengers served in 2017, it is Sweden's second-largest airport after Stockholm Arlanda. It serves as a base for several domestic and international airlines, e.g. Scandinavian Airlines, Norwegian Air Shuttle and Ryanair. G\u00f6teborg Landvetter, however, does not serve as a hub for any airline. In total, there are about 50 destinations with scheduled direct flights to and from Gothenburg, most of them European. An additional 40 destinations are served via charter.\nThe second airport in the area, G\u00f6teborg City Airport (), is closed. On 13January 2015, Swedish airport operator Swedavia announced that G\u00f6teborg City Airport will not reopen for commercial services following an extensive rebuild of the airport started in November 2014, citing that the cost of making the airport viable for commercial operations again was too high, at 250 million kronor ($31\u00a0million). Commercial operations will be gradually wound down. The airport was located northwest of the city centre. It was formerly known as \"S\u00e4ve Flygplats.\" It is located within the borders of Gothenburg Municipality. In addition to commercial airlines, the airport was also operated by a number of rescue services, including the Swedish Coast Guard, and was used for other general aviation. Most civil air traffic to G\u00f6teborg City Airport was via low-cost airlines such as Ryanair and Wizz Air. Those companies have now been relocated to Landvetter Airport.\nSea.\nThe Swedish company Stena Line operates between Gothenburg/Frederikshavn in Denmark and Gothenburg/Kiel in Germany.\nThe \"England ferry\" (\"Englandsf\u00e4rjan\") to Newcastle via Kristiansand (run by the Danish company DFDS Seaways) ceased at the end of October 2006, after being a Gothenburg institution since the 19th century. DFDS Seaways' sister company, DFDS Tor Line, continues to run scheduled cargo ships between Gothenburg and several English ports, and these used to have limited capacity for passengers and their private vehicles. Also freight ships to North America and East Asia leave from the port.\nFreight.\nGothenburg is an intermodal logistics hub and Gothenburg harbour has access to Sweden and Norway via rail and trucks. Gothenburg harbour is the largest port in Scandinavia with a cargo turnover of 36.9\u00a0million tonnes per year in 2004.\nNotable people.\nTwo of the noted people from Gothenburg are fictional, but have become synonymous with \"people from Gothenburg\". They are a working class couple called Kal and Ada, featured in \"Gothenburg jokes\" (), songs, plays and names of events. Each year two persons who have significantly contributed to culture in the city are given the honorary titles of \"Kal and Ada\". A bronze statue of the couple made by Svenrobert Lundquist, was placed outside the entrance to Liseberg in 1995.\nOther notable people from Gothenburg include:\nInternational rankings.\nGothenburg has performed well in international rankings, some of which are mentioned below:\nThe Global Destination Sustainability Index has named Gothenburg the world's most sustainable destination every year since 2016.\nIn 2019 Gothenburg was selected by the EU as one of the top 2020 European Capitals of Smart Tourism.\nIn 2020 Business Region G\u00f6teborg received the 'European Entrepreneurial Region Award 2020' (EER Award 2020) from the EU.\nInternational relations.\nThe Gothenburg Award is the city's international prize that recognises and supports work to achieve sustainable development \u2013 in the Gothenburg region and from a global perspective. The award, which is one million Swedish crowns, is administered and funded by a coalition of the City of Gothenburg and 12 companies. Past winners of the award have included Kofi Annan, Al Gore, and Michael Biddle.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nGothenburg is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWith Lyon (France) there is no formal partnership, but \"a joint willingness to cooperate\".\nGothenburg had signed an agreement with Shanghai in 1986 which was upgraded in 2003 to include exchanges in culture, economics, trade and sport. The agreement was allowed to lapse in 2020.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11862", "revid": "35107032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11862", "title": "G\u00f6teborg", "text": ""}
{"id": "11863", "revid": "51046716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11863", "title": "Gotland County", "text": "County (l\u00e4n) of Sweden\nGotland County () is a county or of Sweden. Gotland is located in the Baltic Sea to the east of \u00d6land, and is the largest of Sweden's islands. Counties are usually sub-divided into municipalities, but Gotland County consists of only one county council, which also serves as a municipality, Region Gotland. Gotland County is the only county in Sweden that is not governed by a municipal council. The municipality handles the tasks that are otherwise handled by the county council: mainly health care and public transport. Like other counties, Gotland has a County Administrative Board, which oversees implementation of the Swedish state government. Both the County Administrative Board and the municipality have their seat in the largest city, Visby, with over 22,000 inhabitants. Princess Leonore, the daughter of Princess Madeleine, is Duchess of Gotland.\nProvince.\nThe provinces of Sweden are no longer officially administrative units but are used in reporting population size, politics, etc. In that case, the province, the county and the municipality all have identical borders and cover an area of 3151\u00a0km2\nAdministration.\nGotland is the only Swedish county that is not administered by a county council. Instead, the municipality is tasked with the responsibilities of a county, including public health care and public transport.\nThe main aims of the County Administrative Board are to fulfil the goals set in national politics by the Riksdag and the Government, to coordinate the interests and promote the development of the county, to establish regional goals and safeguard the due process of law in the handling of each case. The County Administrative Board is a Government agency headed by a Governor.\nMats L\u00f6fving is the regional police chief for both Stockholm and Gotland Counties.\nPolitics.\nDuring a trial period the County Council provisions for Gotland has been evolved to provisions for a Regional Council, meaning that it has assumed certain tasks from the County Administrative Board. Similar provisions are applicable to the counties of V\u00e4stra G\u00f6taland and Sk\u00e5ne during the trial period.\nLocalities in order of size.\nThe five most populous localities of Gotland County in 2010:\nForeign background.\nStatistics Sweden have collected statistics on backgrounds of residents since 2002. These tables consist of all who have two foreign-born parents or are born abroad themselves. The chart lists election years and the last year on record alone.\nHeraldry.\nGotland County inherited its coat of arms from the province of Gotland. When it is shown with a royal crown it represents the County Administrative Board."}
{"id": "11864", "revid": "5016021", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11864", "title": "Games of Chance", "text": ""}
{"id": "11866", "revid": "8183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11866", "title": "Global Positioning System", "text": "American satellite-based radio navigation service\nThe Global Positioning System (GPS) is a satellite-based hyperbolic navigation system owned by the United States Space Force and operated by Mission Delta 31. It is one of the global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) that provide geolocation and time information to a GPS receiver anywhere on or near the Earth where signal quality permits. It does not require the user to transmit any data, and operates independently of any telephone or Internet reception, though these technologies can enhance the usefulness of the GPS positioning information. It provides critical positioning capabilities to military, civil, and commercial users around the world. Although the United States government created, controls, and maintains the GPS system, it is freely accessible to anyone with a GPS receiver.\nOverview.\nThe GPS project was started by the U.S. Department of Defense in 1973. The prototype spacecraft was launched in 1978 and the full constellation of 24 satellites became operational in 1993. After Korean Air Lines Flight 007 was shot down when it mistakenly entered Soviet airspace, President Ronald Reagan determined that the GPS system would be made available for civilian use as of 1988; however, initially this civilian use was limited to an average accuracy of by use of Selective Availability (SA), a deliberate error introduced into the GPS data that military receivers could correct for.\nAs civilian GPS usage grew, there was increasing pressure to remove this error. The SA system was temporarily disabled during the Gulf War, as a shortage of military GPS units meant that many US soldiers were using civilian GPS units sent from home. In the 1990s, Differential GPS systems from the US Coast Guard, Federal Aviation Administration, and similar agencies in other countries began to broadcast local GPS corrections, reducing the effect of both SA degradation and atmospheric effects (that military receivers also corrected for). The U.S. military had also developed methods to perform local GPS jamming, meaning that the ability to globally degrade the system was no longer necessary. As a result, United States President Bill Clinton signed a bill ordering that Selective Availability be disabled on May 1, 2000; and, in 2007, the US government announced that the next generation of GPS satellites would not include the feature.\nAdvances in technology and new demands on the existing system have led to efforts to modernize the GPS and implement the next generation of GPS Block III satellites and Next Generation Operational Control System (OCX) which was authorized by the U.S. Congress in 2000. When Selective Availability was discontinued, GPS was accurate to about . GPS receivers that use the L5 band have much higher accuracy of , while those for high-end applications such as engineering and land surveying are accurate to within and can even provide sub-millimeter accuracy with long-term measurements. Consumer devices such as smartphones can be accurate to or better when used with assistive services like Wi-Fi positioning.\nAs of July\u00a02023[ [update]], 18 GPS satellites broadcast L5 signals, which are considered pre-operational prior to being broadcast by a full complement of 24 satellites in 2027.\nHistory.\nThe GPS project was launched in the United States in 1973 to overcome the limitations of previous navigation systems, combining ideas from several predecessors, including classified engineering design studies from the 1960s. The U.S. Department of Defense developed the system, which originally used 24 satellites, for use by the United States military, and became fully operational in 1993. Civilian use was allowed from the 1980s. Roger L. Easton of the Naval Research Laboratory, Ivan A. Getting of The Aerospace Corporation, and Bradford Parkinson of the Applied Physics Laboratory are credited with inventing it. The work of Gladys West on the creation of the mathematical geodetic Earth model is credited as instrumental in the development of computational techniques for detecting satellite positions with the precision needed for GPS.\nThe design of GPS is based partly on similar ground-based radio-navigation systems, such as LORAN and the Decca Navigator System, developed in the early 1940s. In 1955, Friedwardt Winterberg proposed a test of general relativity\u2014detecting time slowing in a strong gravitational field using accurate atomic clocks placed in orbit inside artificial satellites. Special and general relativity predicted that the clocks on GPS satellites, as observed by those on Earth, run 38 microseconds faster per day than those on the Earth. The design of GPS corrects for this difference; because without doing so, GPS calculated positions would accumulate errors of up to .\nPredecessors.\nWhen the Soviet Union launched its first artificial satellite (Sputnik 1) in 1957, two American physicists, William Guier and George Weiffenbach, at Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) monitored its radio transmissions. Within hours they realized that, because of the Doppler effect, they could pinpoint where the satellite was along its orbit. The Director of the APL gave them access to their UNIVAC I computer to perform the heavy calculations required.\nEarly the next year, Frank McClure, the deputy director of the APL, asked Guier and Weiffenbach to investigate the inverse problem: pinpointing the user's location, given the satellite's. (At the time, the Navy was developing the submarine-launched Polaris missile, which required them to know the submarine's location.) This led them and APL to develop the TRANSIT system. In 1959, ARPA (renamed DARPA in 1972) also played a role in TRANSIT.\nTRANSIT was first successfully tested in 1960. It used a constellation of five satellites and could provide a navigational fix approximately once per hour. In 1967, the U.S. Navy developed the Timation satellite, which proved the feasibility of placing accurate clocks in space, a technology required for GPS.\nIn the 1970s, the ground-based OMEGA navigation system, based on phase comparison of signal transmission from pairs of stations, became the first worldwide radio navigation system. Limitations of these systems drove the need for a more universal navigation solution with greater accuracy.\nAlthough there were wide needs for accurate navigation in military and civilian sectors, almost none of those was seen as justification for the billions of dollars it would cost in research, development, deployment, and operation of a constellation of navigation satellites. During the Cold War arms race, the nuclear threat to the existence of the United States was the one need that did justify this cost in the view of the United States Congress. This deterrent effect is why GPS was funded. It is also the reason for the ultra-secrecy at that time. The nuclear triad consisted of the United States Navy's submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) along with United States Air Force (USAF) strategic bombers and intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs). Considered vital to the nuclear deterrence posture, accurate determination of the SLBM launch position was a force multiplier.\nPrecise navigation would enable United States ballistic missile submarines to get an accurate fix of their positions before they launched their SLBMs. The USAF, with two-thirds of the nuclear triad, also had requirements for a more accurate and reliable navigation system. The U.S. Navy and U.S. Air Force were developing their own technologies in parallel to solve what was essentially the same problem. To increase the survivability of ICBMs, there was a proposal to use mobile launch platforms (comparable to the Soviet SS-24 and SS-25) and so the need to fix the launch position had similarity to the SLBM situation.\nIn 1960, the Air Force proposed a radio-navigation system called MOSAIC (MObile System for Accurate ICBM Control) that was essentially a 3-D LORAN System. A follow-on study, Project 57, was performed in 1963 and it was \"in this study that the GPS concept was born\". That same year, the concept was pursued as Project 621B, which had \"many of the attributes that you now see in GPS\" and promised increased accuracy for U.S. Air Force bombers as well as ICBMs.\nUpdates from the Navy TRANSIT system were too slow for the high speeds of Air Force operation. The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) continued making advances with their Timation (Time Navigation) satellites, first launched in 1967, second launched in 1969, with the third in 1974 carrying the first atomic clock into orbit and the fourth launched in 1977.\nAnother important predecessor to GPS came from a different branch of the United States military. In 1964, the United States Army orbited its first Sequential Collation of Range (SECOR) satellite used for geodetic surveying. The SECOR system included three ground-based transmitters at known locations that would send signals to the satellite transponder in orbit. A fourth ground-based station, at an undetermined position, could then use those signals to fix its location precisely. The last SECOR satellite was launched in 1969.\nDevelopment.\nWith these parallel developments in the 1960s, it was realized that a superior system could be developed by synthesizing the best technologies from 621B, Transit, Timation, and SECOR in a multi-service program. Satellite orbital position errors, induced by variations in the gravity field and radar refraction among others, had to be resolved. A team led by Harold L. Jury of Pan Am Aerospace Division in Florida from 1970 to 1973, used real-time data assimilation and recursive estimation to do so, reducing systematic and residual errors to a manageable level to permit accurate navigation.\nDuring Labor Day weekend in 1973, a meeting of about twelve military officers at the Pentagon discussed the creation of a \"Defense Navigation Satellite System (DNSS)\". It was at this meeting that the real synthesis that became GPS was created. Later that year, the DNSS program was named \"Navstar.\" Navstar is often erroneously considered an acronym for \"NAVigation System using Timing And Ranging\" but was never considered as such by the GPS Joint Program Office (TRW may have once advocated for a different navigational system that used that acronym). With the individual satellites being associated with the name Navstar (as with the predecessors Transit and Timation), a more fully encompassing name was used to identify the constellation of Navstar satellites, \"Navstar-GPS\". Ten \"Block I\" prototype satellites were launched between 1978 and 1985 (an additional unit was destroyed in a launch failure).\nThe effect of the ionosphere on radio transmission was investigated in a geophysics laboratory of Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratory, renamed to Air Force Geophysical Research Lab (AFGRL) in 1974. AFGRL developed the Klobuchar model for computing ionospheric corrections to GPS location. Of note is work done by Australian space scientist Elizabeth Essex-Cohen at AFGRL in 1974. She was concerned with the curving of the paths of radio waves (atmospheric refraction) traversing the ionosphere from NavSTAR satellites.\nAfter Korean Air Lines Flight 007, a Boeing 747 carrying 269 people, was shot down by a Soviet interceptor aircraft after straying in prohibited airspace because of navigational errors, in the vicinity of Sakhalin and Moneron Islands, President Ronald Reagan issued a directive making GPS freely available for civilian use, once it was sufficiently developed, as a common good. The first Block II satellite was launched on February 14, 1989, and the 24th\u00a0satellite was launched in 1994. The GPS program cost at this point, not including the cost of the user equipment but including the costs of the satellite launches, has been estimated at US$5\u00a0billion (equivalent to $ billion in 2024).\nInitially, the highest-quality signal was reserved for military use, and the signal available for civilian use was intentionally degraded, in a policy known as Selective Availability. This changed on May 1, 2000, with U.S. President Bill Clinton signing a policy directive to turn off Selective Availability to provide the same accuracy to civilians that was afforded to the military. The directive was proposed by the U.S. Secretary of Defense, William Perry, in view of the widespread growth of differential GPS services by private industry to improve civilian accuracy. Moreover, the U.S. military was developing technologies to deny GPS service to potential adversaries on a regional basis. Selective Availability was removed from the GPS architecture beginning with GPS-III.\nSince its deployment, the U.S. has implemented several improvements to the GPS service, including new signals for civil use and increased accuracy and integrity for all users, all the while maintaining compatibility with existing GPS equipment. Modernization of the satellite system has been an ongoing initiative by the U.S. Department of Defense through a series of satellite acquisitions to meet the growing needs of the military, civilians, and the commercial market. As of early 2015, high-quality Standard Positioning Service (SPS) GPS receivers provided horizontal accuracy of better than , although many factors such as receiver and antenna quality and atmospheric issues can affect this accuracy.\nGPS is owned and operated by the United States government as a national resource. The Department of Defense is the steward of GPS. The \"Interagency GPS Executive Board (IGEB)\" oversaw GPS policy matters from 1996 to 2004. After that, the National Space-Based Positioning, Navigation and Timing Executive Committee was established by presidential directive in 2004 to advise and coordinate federal departments and agencies on matters concerning the GPS and related systems. The executive committee is chaired jointly by the Deputy Secretaries of Defense and Transportation. Its membership includes equivalent-level officials from the Departments of State, Commerce, and Homeland Security, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and NASA. Components of the executive office of the president participate as observers to the executive committee, and the FCC chairman participates as a liaison.\nThe U.S. Department of Defense is required by law to \"maintain a Standard Positioning Service (as defined in the federal radio navigation plan and the standard positioning service signal specification) that will be available on a continuous, worldwide basis\" and \"develop measures to prevent hostile use of GPS and its augmentations without unduly disrupting or degrading civilian uses\".\nAwards.\nOn February 10, 1993, the National Aeronautic Association selected the GPS Team as winners of the 1992 Robert J. Collier Trophy, the US's most prestigious aviation award. This team combines researchers from the Naval Research Laboratory, the U.S. Air Force, the Aerospace Corporation, Rockwell International Corporation, and IBM Federal Systems Company. The citation honors them \"for the most significant development for safe and efficient navigation and surveillance of air and spacecraft since the introduction of radio navigation 50\u00a0years ago\".\nTwo GPS developers received the National Academy of Engineering Charles Stark Draper Prize for 2003:\nGPS developer Roger L. Easton received the National Medal of Technology on February 13, 2006. Francis X. Kane (Col. USAF, ret.) was inducted into the U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Pioneers Hall of Fame at Lackland A.F.B., San Antonio, Texas, March 2, 2010, for his role in space technology development and the engineering design concept of GPS conducted as part of Project 621B. In 1998, GPS technology was inducted into the Space Foundation Space Technology Hall of Fame.\nOn October 4, 2011, the International Astronautical Federation (IAF) awarded the Global Positioning System (GPS) its 60th Anniversary Award, nominated by IAF member, the American Institute for Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA). The IAF Honors and Awards Committee recognized the uniqueness of the GPS program and the exemplary role it has played in building international collaboration for the benefit of humanity. On December 6, 2018, Gladys West was inducted into the Air Force Space and Missile Pioneers Hall of Fame in recognition of her work on an extremely accurate geodetic Earth model, which was ultimately used to determine the orbit of the GPS constellation. On February 12, 2019, four founding members of the project were awarded the Queen Elizabeth Prize for Engineering with the chair of the awarding board stating: \"Engineering is the foundation of civilisation; ...They've re-written, in a major way, the infrastructure of our world.\"\nPrinciples.\nThe GPS satellites carry very stable atomic clocks that are synchronized with one another and with the reference atomic clocks at the ground control stations; any drift of the clocks aboard the satellites from the reference time maintained on the ground stations is corrected regularly. Since the speed of radio waves (speed of light) is constant and independent of the satellite speed, the time delay between when the satellite transmits a signal and the ground station receives it is proportional to the distance from the satellite to the ground station. With the distance information collected from multiple ground stations, the location coordinates of any satellite at any time can be calculated with great precision.\nEach GPS satellite carries an accurate record of its own position and time, and broadcasts that data continuously. Based on data received from multiple GPS satellites, an end user's GPS receiver can calculate its own four-dimensional position in spacetime; However, at a minimum, four satellites must be in view of the receiver for it to compute four unknown quantities (three position coordinates and the deviation of its own clock from satellite time).\nMore detailed description.\nEach GPS satellite continually broadcasts a signal (carrier wave with modulation) that includes:\nConceptually, the receiver measures the TOAs (according to its own clock) of four satellite signals. From the TOAs and the TOTs, the receiver forms four time of flight (TOF) values, which are (given the speed of light) approximately equivalent to receiver-satellite ranges plus time difference between the receiver and GPS satellites multiplied by speed of light, which are called pseudo-ranges. The receiver then computes its three-dimensional position and clock deviation from the four TOFs.\nIn practice the receiver position (in three dimensional Cartesian coordinates with origin at the Earth's center) and the offset of the receiver clock relative to the GPS time are computed simultaneously, using the navigation equations to process the TOFs.\nThe receiver's Earth-centered solution location is usually converted to latitude, longitude and height relative to an ellipsoidal Earth model. The height may then be further converted to height relative to the geoid, which is essentially mean sea level. These coordinates may be displayed, such as on a moving map display, or recorded or used by some other system, such as a vehicle guidance system.\nAs of 2025, these core principles are being enhanced by the ongoing modernization of the GPS constellation with the introduction of GPS III and GPS IIIF satellites. These next-generation satellites feature more advanced atomic clocks for even greater timekeeping accuracy and broadcast more powerful, secure, and interoperable signals (such as L1C, L2C, and L5). This improves the precision of the time-of-flight (TOF) measurements and provides better resistance to signal interference, enhancing the reliability of the position calculation for all users.\nUser-satellite geometry.\nAlthough usually not formed explicitly in the receiver processing, the conceptual time differences of arrival (TDOAs) define the measurement geometry. Each TDOA corresponds to a hyperboloid of revolution (see Multilateration). The line connecting the two satellites involved (and its extensions) forms the axis of the hyperboloid. The receiver is located at the point where three hyperboloids intersect.\nIt is sometimes incorrectly said that the user location is at the intersection of three spheres. While simpler to visualize, this is the case only if the receiver has a clock synchronized with the satellite clocks (i.e., the receiver measures true ranges to the satellites rather than range differences). There are marked performance benefits to the user carrying a clock synchronized with the satellites. Foremost is that only three satellites are needed to compute a position solution. If it were an essential part of the GPS concept that all users needed to carry a synchronized clock, a smaller number of satellites could be deployed, but the cost and complexity of the user equipment would increase.\nReceiver in continuous operation.\nThe description above is representative of a receiver start-up situation. Most receivers have a track algorithm, sometimes called a \"tracker\", that combines sets of satellite measurements collected at different times\u2014in effect, taking advantage of the fact that successive receiver positions are usually close to each other. After a set of measurements is processed, the tracker predicts the receiver location corresponding to the next set of satellite measurements. When the new measurements are collected, the receiver uses a weighting scheme to combine the new measurements with the tracker prediction. In general, a tracker can (a) improve receiver position and time accuracy, (b) reject bad measurements, and (c) estimate receiver speed and direction.\nThe disadvantage of a tracker is that changes in speed or direction can be computed only with a delay, and that derived direction becomes inaccurate when the distance traveled between two position measurements drops below or near the random error of position measurement. GPS units can use measurements of the Doppler shift of the signals received to compute velocity accurately. More advanced navigation systems use additional sensors like a compass or an inertial navigation system to complement GPS.\nNon-navigation applications.\nGPS requires four or more satellites to be visible for accurate navigation. The solution of the navigation equations gives the position of the receiver along with the difference between the time kept by the receiver's on-board clock and the true time-of-day, thereby eliminating the need for a more precise and possibly impractical receiver based clock. Applications for GPS such as time transfer, traffic signal timing, and synchronization of cell phone base stations, make use of this cheap and highly accurate timing. Some GPS applications use this time for display, or, other than for the basic position calculations, do not use it at all.\nAlthough four satellites are required for normal operation, fewer apply in special cases. If one variable is already known, a receiver can determine its position using only three satellites. For example, a ship on the open ocean usually has a known elevation close to 0m, and the elevation of an aircraft may be known. Some GPS receivers may use additional clues or assumptions such as reusing the last known altitude, dead reckoning, inertial navigation, or including information from the vehicle computer, to give a (possibly degraded) position when fewer than four satellites are visible.\nStructure.\nThe current GPS consists of three major segments. These are the space segment, a control segment, and a user segment. The U.S. Space Force develops, maintains, and operates the space and control segments. GPS satellites broadcast signals from space, and each GPS receiver uses these signals to calculate its three-dimensional location (latitude, longitude, and altitude) and the current time.\nSpace segment.\nThe space segment (SS) is composed of 24 to 32 satellites, or Space Vehicles (SV), in medium Earth orbit, and also includes the payload adapters to the boosters required to launch them into orbit. The GPS design originally called for 24\u00a0SVs, eight each in three approximately circular orbits, but this was modified to six orbital planes with four satellites each. The six orbit planes have approximately 55\u00b0 inclination (tilt relative to the Earth's equator) and are separated by 60\u00b0 right ascension of the ascending node (angle along the equator from a reference point to the orbit's intersection). The orbital period is one-half of a sidereal day, about 11 hours and 58 minutes, so that the satellites pass over the same locations or almost the same locations every day. The orbits are arranged so that at least six satellites are always within line of sight from everywhere on the Earth's surface (see animation at right). The result of this objective is that the four satellites are not evenly spaced (90\u00b0) apart within each orbit. In general terms, the angular difference between satellites in each orbit is 30\u00b0, 105\u00b0, 120\u00b0, and 105\u00b0 apart, which sum to 360\u00b0.\nOrbiting at an altitude of approximately ; orbital radius of approximately , each SV makes two complete orbits each sidereal day, repeating the same ground track each day. This was very helpful during development because even with only four satellites, correct alignment means all four are visible from one spot for a few hours each day. For military operations, the ground track repeat can be used to ensure good coverage in combat zones.\nAs of \u00a02019[ [update]], there are 31 satellites in the GPS constellation, 27 of which are in use at a given time with the rest allocated as stand-bys. A 32nd was launched in 2018, but as of July 2019 is still in evaluation. More decommissioned satellites are in orbit and available as spares. The additional satellites improve the precision of GPS receiver calculations by providing redundant measurements. With the increased number of satellites, the constellation was changed to a nonuniform arrangement. Such an arrangement was shown to improve accuracy but also improves reliability and availability of the system, relative to a uniform system, when multiple satellites fail. With the expanded constellation, nine satellites are usually visible at any time from any point on the Earth with a clear horizon, ensuring considerable redundancy over the minimum four satellites needed for a position.\nControl segment.\nThe control segment (CS) is composed of:\nThe MCS can also access Satellite Control Network (SCN) ground antennas (for additional command and control capability) and NGA (National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency) monitor stations. The flight paths of the satellites are tracked by dedicated U.S. Space Force monitoring stations in Hawaii, Kwajalein Atoll, Ascension Island, Diego Garcia, Colorado Springs, Colorado and Cape Canaveral, Florida, along with shared NGA monitor stations operated in England, Argentina, Ecuador, Bahrain, Australia and Washington, DC. The tracking information is sent to the MCS at Schriever Space Force Base ESE of Colorado Springs, which is operated by the 2nd Space Operations Squadron (2\u00a0SOPS) of the U.S. Space Force. Then 2\u00a0SOPS contacts each GPS satellite regularly with a navigational update using dedicated or shared (AFSCN) ground antennas (GPS dedicated ground antennas are located at Kwajalein, Ascension Island, Diego Garcia, and Cape Canaveral). These updates synchronize the atomic clocks on board the satellites to within a few nanoseconds of each other, and adjust the ephemeris of each satellite's internal orbital model. The updates are created by a Kalman filter that uses inputs from the ground monitoring stations, space weather information, and various other inputs.\nWhen a satellite's orbit is being adjusted, the satellite is marked \"unhealthy\", so receivers do not use it. After the maneuver, engineers track the new orbit from the ground, upload the new ephemeris, and mark the satellite healthy again. The operation control segment (OCS) currently serves as the control segment of record. It provides the operational capability that supports GPS users and keeps the GPS operational and performing within specification.\nOCS replaced the 1970s-era mainframe computer at Schriever Air Force Base in September 2007. After installation, the system helped enable upgrades and provide a foundation for a new security architecture that supported U.S. armed forces.\nOCS will continue to be the ground control system of record until the new segment, Next Generation GPS Operation Control System (OCX), is fully developed and functional. The U.S. Department of Defense has claimed that the new capabilities provided by OCX will be the cornerstone for enhancing GPS's mission capabilities, enabling U.S. Space Force to enhance GPS operational services to U.S. combat forces, civil partners and domestic and international users. The GPS OCX program also will reduce cost, schedule and technical risk. It is designed to provide 50% sustainment cost savings through efficient software architecture and Performance-Based Logistics. In addition, GPS OCX is expected to cost millions of dollars less than the cost to upgrade OCS while providing four times the capability.\nThe GPS OCX program represents a critical part of GPS modernization and provides information assurance improvements over the current GPS OCS program.\nOn September 14, 2011, the U.S. Air Force announced the completion of GPS OCX Preliminary Design Review and confirmed that the OCX program is ready for the next phase of development. The GPS OCX program missed major milestones and pushed its launch into 2021, 5 years past the original deadline. According to the Government Accounting Office in 2019, the 2021 deadline looked shaky.\nThe project remained delayed in 2023, and was (as of June 2023) 73% over its original estimated budget. In late 2023, Frank Calvelli, the assistant secretary of the Air Force for space acquisitions and integration, stated that the project was estimated to go live some time during the summer of 2024.\nThe US Space Force accepted delivery of OCX Blocks I and II from contractor RTX on July 1, 2025, over 8 years behind schedule and roughly $4 billion over budget due to its monolithic development and constant feature creep while in process. If current Government Accountability Office estimates hold, the new system will enter service in December 2025.\nOCX Block 3F is currently in development to enable command and control of GPS IIIF satellites, currently slated to begin launching in 2027.\nUser segment.\nThe user segment (US) is composed of hundreds of thousands of U.S. and allied military users of the secure GPS Precise Positioning Service, and tens of millions of civil, commercial and scientific users of the Standard Positioning Service. In general, GPS receivers are composed of an antenna, tuned to the frequencies transmitted by the satellites, receiver-processors, and a highly stable clock (often a crystal oscillator). They may also include a display for providing location and speed information to the user.\nGPS receivers may include an input for differential corrections, using the RTCM SC-104 format. This is typically in the form of an RS-232 port at 4,800\u00a0bit/s speed. Data is actually sent at a much lower rate, which limits the accuracy of the signal sent using RTCM. Receivers with internal DGPS receivers can outperform those using external RTCM data. As of 2006[ [update]], even low-cost units commonly include Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS) receivers.\nMany GPS receivers can relay position data to a PC or other device using the NMEA 0183 protocol. Although this protocol is officially defined by the National Marine Electronics Association (NMEA), references to this protocol have been compiled from public records, allowing open source tools like gpsd to read the protocol without violating intellectual property laws. Other proprietary protocols exist as well, such as the SiRF and MTK protocols. Receivers can interface with other devices using methods including a serial connection, USB, or Bluetooth.\nApplications.\nWhile originally a military project, GPS is considered a dual-use technology, meaning it has significant civilian applications as well.\nGPS has become a widely deployed and useful tool for commerce, scientific uses, tracking, and surveillance. GPS's accurate time facilitates everyday activities such as banking, mobile phone operations, and even the control of power grids by allowing well synchronized hand-off switching.\nCivilian.\nMany civilian applications use one or more of GPS's three basic components: absolute location, relative movement, and time transfer.\nRestrictions on civilian use.\nThe U.S. government controls the export of some civilian receivers. All GPS receivers capable of functioning above above sea level and , or designed or modified for use with unmanned missiles and aircraft, are classified as munitions (weapons)\u2014which means they require State Department export licenses. This rule applies even to otherwise purely civilian units that only receive the L1 frequency and the C/A (Coarse/Acquisition) code.\nDisabling operation above these limits exempts the receiver from classification as a munition. Vendor interpretations differ. The rule refers to operation at both the target altitude and speed, but some receivers stop operating even when stationary. This has caused problems with some amateur radio balloon launches that regularly reach . These limits only apply to units or components exported from the United States. A growing trade in various components exists, including GPS units from other countries. These are expressly sold as ITAR-free.\nMilitary.\nAs of 2009, military GPS applications include:\nGPS type navigation was first used in war in the 1991 Persian Gulf War, before GPS was fully developed in 1995, to assist Coalition Forces to navigate and perform maneuvers in the war. The war also demonstrated the vulnerability of GPS to being jammed, when Iraqi forces installed jamming devices on likely targets that emitted radio noise, disrupting reception of the weak GPS signal.\nGPS's vulnerability to jamming is a threat that continues to grow as jamming equipment and experience grows. GPS signals have been reported to have been jammed many times over the years for military purposes. Russia seems to have several objectives for this approach, such as intimidating neighbors while undermining confidence in their reliance on American systems, promoting their GLONASS alternative, disrupting Western military exercises, and protecting assets from drones. China uses jamming to discourage US surveillance aircraft near the contested Spratly Islands. North Korea has mounted several major jamming operations near its border with South Korea and offshore, disrupting flights, shipping and fishing operations. Iranian Armed Forces disrupted the civilian airliner plane Flight PS752's GPS when it shot down the aircraft.\nIn the Russo-Ukrainian War, GPS-guided munitions provided to Ukraine by NATO countries experienced significant failure rates as a result of Russian electronic warfare. Excalibur artillery shells efficiency rate hitting targets dropped from 70% to 6% as Russia adapted its electronic warfare activities.\nTimekeeping.\nLeap seconds.\nWhile most clocks derive their time from Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), the atomic clocks on the satellites are set to \"GPS time\". The difference is that GPS time is not corrected to match the rotation of the Earth, so it does not contain new leap seconds or other corrections that are periodically added to UTC. GPS time was set to match UTC in 1980, but has since diverged. The lack of corrections means that GPS time remains at a constant offset with International Atomic Time (TAI) (TAI \u2013 GPS = 19\u00a0seconds). Periodic corrections are performed to the on-board clocks to keep them synchronized with ground clocks.Section 1.2.2\nThe GPS navigation message includes the difference between GPS time and UTC. As of \u00a02017,[ [update]] GPS time is 18 seconds ahead of UTC because of the leap second added to UTC on December 31, 2016. Receivers subtract this offset from GPS time to calculate UTC and specific time zone values. New GPS units may not show the correct UTC time until after receiving the UTC offset message. The GPS-UTC offset field can accommodate 255 leap seconds (eight bits).\nAccuracy.\nGPS time is theoretically accurate to about 14 nanoseconds, due to the clock drift relative to International Atomic Time that the atomic clocks in GPS transmitters experience. Most receivers lose some accuracy in their interpretation of the signals and are only accurate to about 100 nanoseconds.\nRelativistic corrections.\nThe GPS implements two major corrections to its time signals for relativistic effects: one for relative velocity of satellite and receiver, using the special theory of relativity, and one for the difference in gravitational potential between satellite and receiver, using general relativity. The acceleration of the satellite could also be computed independently as a correction, depending on purpose, but normally the effect is already dealt with in the first two corrections.\nFormat.\nAs opposed to the year, month, and day format of the Gregorian calendar, the GPS date is expressed as a week number and a seconds-into-week number. The week number is transmitted as a ten-bit field in the C/A and P(Y) navigation messages, and so it becomes zero again every 1,024\u00a0weeks (19.6\u00a0years). GPS week zero started at 00:00:00\u00a0UTC (00:00:19\u00a0TAI) on January 6, 1980, and the week number became zero again for the first time at 23:59:47\u00a0UTC on August 21, 1999 (00:00:19\u00a0TAI on August 22, 1999). It happened the second time at 23:59:42\u00a0UTC on April 6, 2019. To determine the current Gregorian date, a GPS receiver must be provided with the approximate date (to within 3,584\u00a0days) to correctly translate the GPS date signal. To address this concern in the future the modernized GPS civil navigation (CNAV) message will use a 13-bit field that only repeats every 8,192\u00a0weeks (157\u00a0years), thus lasting until 2137 (157\u00a0years after GPS week zero).\nCommunication.\nThe navigational signals transmitted by GPS satellites encode a variety of information including satellite positions, the state of the internal clocks, and the health of the network. These signals are transmitted on two separate carrier frequencies that are common to all satellites in the network. Two different encodings are used: a public encoding that enables lower resolution navigation, and an encrypted encoding used by the U.S. military.\nMessage format.\nEach GPS satellite continuously broadcasts a \"navigation message\" on L1 (C/A and P/Y) and L2 (P/Y) frequencies at a rate of 50 bits per second (see bitrate). Each complete message takes 750 seconds (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;12+1\u20442 minutes) to complete. The message structure has a basic format of a 1500-bit-long frame made up of five subframes, each subframe being 300 bits (6 seconds) long. Subframes 4 and 5 are subcommutated 25 times each, so that a complete data message requires the transmission of 25 full frames. Each subframe consists of ten words, each 30 bits long. Thus, with 300 bits in a subframe times 5 subframes in a frame times 25 frames in a message, each message is 37,500 bits long. At a transmission rate of 50-bit/s, this gives 750 seconds to transmit an entire almanac message (GPS). Each 30-second frame begins precisely on the minute or half-minute as indicated by the atomic clock on each satellite.\nThe first subframe of each frame encodes the week number and the time within the week, as well as the data about the health of the satellite. The second and the third subframes contain the \"ephemeris\" \u2013 the precise orbital parameters for the satellite. The fourth and fifth subframes contain the \"almanac\", which contains coarse orbit and status information for up to 32 satellites in the constellation as well as data related to error correction. Thus, to obtain an accurate satellite location from this transmitted message, the receiver must demodulate the message from each satellite it includes in its solution for 18 to 30 seconds. To collect all transmitted almanacs, the receiver must demodulate the message for 732 to 750 seconds or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;12+1\u20442 minutes.\nAll satellites broadcast at the same frequencies, encoding signals using unique code-division multiple access (CDMA) so receivers can distinguish individual satellites from each other. The system uses two distinct CDMA encoding types: the coarse/acquisition (C/A) code, which is accessible by the general public, and the precise (P(Y)) code, which is encrypted so that only the U.S. military and other NATO nations who have been given access to the encryption code can access it.\nThe ephemeris is updated every 2 hours and is sufficiently stable for 4 hours, with provisions for updates every 6\u00a0hours or longer in non-nominal conditions. The almanac is updated typically every 24\u00a0hours. Additionally, data for a few weeks following is uploaded in case of transmission updates that delay data upload.\nSatellite frequencies.\nAll satellites broadcast at the same two frequencies, 1.57542\u00a0GHz (L1 signal) and 1.2276\u00a0GHz (L2\u00a0signal). The satellite network uses a CDMA spread-spectrum technique where the low-bitrate message data is encoded with a high-rate pseudo-random (PRN) sequence that is different for each satellite. The receiver must be aware of the PRN codes for each satellite to reconstruct the actual message data. The C/A\u00a0code, for civilian use, transmits data at 1.023\u00a0million chips per second, whereas the P\u00a0code, for U.S. military use, transmits at 10.23\u00a0million chips per second. The actual internal reference of the satellites is 10.22999999543\u00a0MHz to compensate for relativistic effects that make observers on the Earth perceive a different time reference with respect to the transmitters in orbit. The L1\u00a0carrier is modulated by both the C/A and P\u00a0codes, while the L2\u00a0carrier is only modulated by the P\u00a0code. The P\u00a0code can be encrypted as a so-called P(Y)\u00a0code that is only available to military equipment with a proper decryption key. Both the C/A and P(Y)\u00a0codes impart the precise time-of-day to the user.\nThe L3 signal at a frequency of 1.38105\u00a0GHz is used to transmit data from the satellites to ground stations. This data is used by the United States Nuclear Detonation (NUDET) Detection System (USNDS) to detect, locate, and report nuclear detonations (NUDETs) in the Earth's atmosphere and near space. One usage is the enforcement of nuclear test ban treaties.\nThe L4 band at 1.379913\u00a0GHz is being studied for additional ionospheric correction.\nThe L5 frequency band at 1.17645\u00a0GHz was added in the process of GPS modernization. This frequency falls into an internationally protected range for aeronautical navigation, promising little or no interference under all circumstances. The first Block IIF satellite that provides this signal was launched in May 2010. On February 5, 2016, the 12th and final Block IIF satellite was launched. The L5 consists of two carrier components that are in phase quadrature with each other. Each carrier component is bi-phase shift key (BPSK) modulated by a separate bit train. \"L5, the third civil GPS signal, will eventually support safety-of-life applications for aviation and provide improved availability and accuracy.\"\nIn 2011, a conditional waiver was granted to LightSquared to operate a terrestrial broadband service near the L1 band. Although LightSquared had applied for a license to operate in the 1525 to 1559 band as early as 2003 and it was put out for public comment, the FCC asked LightSquared to form a study group with the GPS community to test GPS receivers and identify issues that might arise due to the larger signal power from the LightSquared terrestrial network. The GPS community had not objected to the LightSquared (formerly MSV and SkyTerra) applications until November 2010, when LightSquared applied for a modification to its Ancillary Terrestrial Component (ATC) authorization. This filing (SAT-MOD-20101118-00239) amounted to a request to run several orders of magnitude more power in the same frequency band for terrestrial base stations, essentially repurposing what was supposed to be a \"quiet neighborhood\" for signals from space as the equivalent of a cellular network. Testing in the first half of 2011 has demonstrated that the effects from the lower 10\u00a0MHz of spectrum are minimal to GPS devices (less than 1% of the total GPS devices are affected). The upper 10\u00a0MHz intended for use by LightSquared may have some effect on GPS devices. There is some concern that this may seriously degrade the GPS signal for many consumer uses. \"Aviation Week\" magazine reports that the latest testing (June 2011) confirms \"significant jamming\" of GPS by LightSquared's system.\nDemodulation and decoding.\nBecause all of the satellite signals are modulated onto the same L1 carrier frequency, the signals must be separated after demodulation. This is done by assigning each satellite a unique binary sequence known as a Gold code. The signals are decoded after demodulation using addition of the Gold codes corresponding to the satellites monitored by the receiver.\nIf the almanac information has previously been acquired, the receiver picks the satellites to listen for by their PRNs, unique numbers in the range\u00a01 through 32. If the almanac information is not in memory, the receiver enters a search mode until a lock is obtained on one of the satellites. To obtain a lock, it is necessary that there be an unobstructed line of sight from the receiver to the satellite. The receiver can then acquire the almanac and determine the satellites it should listen for. As it detects each satellite's signal, it identifies it by its distinct C/A\u00a0code pattern. There can be a delay of up to 30\u00a0seconds before the first estimate of position because of the need to read the ephemeris data.\nProcessing of the navigation message enables the determination of the time of transmission and the satellite position at this time. For more information see Demodulation and Decoding, Advanced.\nNavigation equations.\nProblem statement.\nThe receiver uses messages received from satellites to determine the satellite positions and time sent. The \"x, y,\" and \"z\" components of satellite position and the time sent (\"s\") are designated as [\"xi, yi, zi, si\"] where the subscript \"i\" denotes the satellite and has the value 1, 2, ..., \"n\", where \"n\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a04. When the time of message reception indicated by the on-board receiver clock is formula_1, the true reception time is formula_2, where \"b\" is the receiver's clock bias from the much more accurate GPS clocks employed by the satellites. The receiver clock bias is the same for all received satellite signals (assuming the satellite clocks are all perfectly synchronized). The message's transit time is formula_3, where \"si\" is the satellite time. Assuming the message traveled at the speed of light, \"c\", the distance traveled is formula_4.\nFor n satellites, the equations to satisfy are:\nformula_5\nwhere \"di\" is the geometric distance or range between receiver and satellite \"i\" (the values without subscripts are the \"x, y,\" and \"z\" components of receiver position):\nformula_6\nDefining \"pseudoranges\" as formula_7, we see they are biased versions of the true range:\nformula_8 .\nSince the equations have four unknowns [\"x, y, z, b\"]\u2014the three components of GPS receiver position and the clock bias\u2014signals from at least four satellites are necessary to attempt solving these equations. They can be solved by algebraic or numerical methods. Existence and uniqueness of GPS solutions are discussed by Abell and Chaffee. When \"n\" is greater than four, this system is overdetermined and a fitting method must be used.\nThe amount of error in the results varies with the received satellites' locations in the sky, since certain configurations (when the received satellites are close together in the sky) cause larger errors. Receivers usually calculate a running estimate of the error in the calculated position. This is done by multiplying the basic resolution of the receiver by quantities called the geometric dilution of position (GDOP) factors, calculated from the relative sky directions of the satellites used. The receiver location is expressed in a specific coordinate system, such as latitude and longitude using the WGS 84 geodetic datum or a country-specific system.\nGeometric interpretation.\nThe GPS equations can be solved by numerical and analytical methods. Geometrical interpretations can enhance the understanding of these solution methods.\nSpheres.\nThe measured ranges, called pseudoranges, contain clock errors. In a simplified idealization in which the ranges are synchronized, these true ranges represent the radii of spheres, each centered on one of the transmitting satellites. The solution for the position of the receiver is then at the intersection of the surfaces of these spheres; see trilateration (more generally, true-range multilateration). Signals from at minimum three satellites are required, and their three spheres would typically intersect at two points. One of the points is the location of the receiver, and the other moves rapidly in successive measurements and would not usually be on Earth's surface.\nIn practice, there are many sources of inaccuracy besides clock bias, including random errors as well as the potential for precision loss from subtracting numbers close to each other if the centers of the spheres are relatively close together. This means that the position calculated from three satellites alone is unlikely to be accurate enough. Data from more satellites can help because of the tendency for random errors to cancel out and also by giving a larger spread between the sphere centers. But at the same time, more spheres will not generally intersect at one point. Therefore, a near intersection gets computed, typically via least squares. The more signals available, the better the approximation is likely to be.\nHyperboloids.\nIf the pseudorange between the receiver and satellite \"i\" and the pseudorange between the receiver and satellite \"j\" are subtracted, \"pi\" \u2212 \"pj\", the common receiver clock bias (\"b\") cancels out, resulting in a difference of distances \"di\" \u2212 \"dj\". The locus of points having a constant difference in distance to two points (here, two satellites) is a hyperbola on a plane and a hyperboloid of revolution (more specifically, a two-sheeted hyperboloid) in 3D space (see Multilateration). Thus, from four pseudorange measurements, the receiver can be placed at the intersection of the surfaces of three hyperboloids each with foci at a pair of satellites. With additional satellites, the multiple intersections are not necessarily unique, and a best-fitting solution is sought instead.\nInscribed sphere.\nThe receiver position can be interpreted as the center of an inscribed sphere (insphere) of radius \"bc\", given by the receiver clock bias \"b\" (scaled by the speed of light \"c\"). The insphere location is such that it touches other spheres. The circumscribing spheres are centered at the GPS satellites, whose radii equal the measured pseudoranges \"p\"i. This configuration is distinct from the one described above, in which the spheres' radii were the unbiased or geometric ranges \"d\"i.\nHypercones.\nThe clock in the receiver is usually not of the same quality as the ones in the satellites and will not be accurately synchronized to them. This produces pseudoranges with large differences compared to the true distances to the satellites. Therefore, in practice, the time difference between the receiver clock and the satellite time is defined as an unknown clock bias \"b\". The equations are then solved simultaneously for the receiver position and the clock bias. The solution space [\"x, y, z, b\"] can be seen as a four-dimensional spacetime, and signals from at minimum four satellites are needed. In that case each of the equations describes a hypercone (or spherical cone), with the cusp located at the satellite, and the base a sphere around the satellite. The receiver is at the intersection of four or more of such hypercones.\nSolution methods.\nLeast squares.\nWhen more than four satellites are available, the calculation can use the four best, or more than four simultaneously (up to all visible satellites), depending on the number of receiver channels, processing capability, and geometric dilution of precision (GDOP).\nUsing more than four involves an over-determined system of equations with no unique solution; such a system can be solved by a least-squares or weighted least squares method.\nformula_9\nIterative.\nBoth the equations for four satellites, or the least squares equations for more than four, are non-linear and need special solution methods. A common approach is by iteration on a linearized form of the equations, such as the Gauss\u2013Newton algorithm.\nThe GPS was initially developed assuming use of a numerical least-squares solution method\u2014i.e., before closed-form solutions were found.\nClosed-form.\nOne closed-form solution to the above set of equations was developed by S. Bancroft. Its properties are well known; in particular, proponents claim it is superior in low-GDOP situations, compared to iterative least squares methods.\nBancroft's method is algebraic, as opposed to numerical, and can be used for four or more satellites. When four satellites are used, the key steps are inversion of a 4x4 matrix and solution of a single-variable quadratic equation. Bancroft's method provides one or two solutions for the unknown quantities. When there are two (usually the case), only one is a near-Earth sensible solution.\nWhen a receiver uses more than four satellites for a solution, Bancroft uses the generalized inverse (i.e., the pseudoinverse) to find a solution. A case has been made that iterative methods, such as the Gauss\u2013Newton algorithm approach for solving over-determined non-linear least squares problems, generally provide more accurate solutions.\nLeick et al. (2015) states that \"Bancroft's (1985) solution is a very early, if not the first, closed-form solution.\"\nOther closed-form solutions were published afterwards, although their adoption in practice is unclear.\nError sources and analysis.\nGPS error analysis examines error sources in GPS results and the expected size of those errors. GPS makes corrections for receiver clock errors and other effects, but some residual errors remain uncorrected. Error sources include signal arrival time measurements, numerical calculations, atmospheric effects (ionospheric/tropospheric delays), ephemeris and clock data, multipath signals, and natural and artificial interference. Magnitude of residual errors from these sources depends on geometric dilution of precision. Artificial errors may result from jamming devices and threaten ships and aircraft or from intentional signal degradation through selective availability, which limited accuracy to \u2248 , but has been switched off since May 1, 2000.\nRegulatory spectrum issues concerning GPS receivers.\nIn the United States, GPS receivers are regulated under the Federal Communications Commission's (FCC) Part 15 rules. As indicated in the manuals of GPS-enabled devices sold in the United States, as a Part 15 device, it \"must accept any interference received, including interference that may cause undesired operation\". With respect to GPS devices in particular, the FCC states that GPS receiver manufacturers \"must use receivers that reasonably discriminate against reception of signals outside their allocated spectrum\". For the last 30 years, GPS receivers have operated next to the Mobile Satellite Service band, and have discriminated against reception of mobile satellite services, such as Inmarsat, without any issue.\nThe spectrum allocated for GPS L1 use by the FCC is 1559 to 1610\u00a0MHz, while the spectrum allocated for satellite-to-ground use owned by Lightsquared is the Mobile Satellite Service band. Since 1996, the FCC has authorized licensed use of the spectrum neighboring the GPS band of 1525 to 1559\u00a0MHz to the Virginia company LightSquared. On March 1, 2001, the FCC received an application from LightSquared's predecessor, Motient Services, to use their allocated frequencies for an integrated satellite-terrestrial service. In 2002, the U.S. GPS Industry Council came to an out-of-band-emissions (OOBE) agreement with LightSquared to prevent transmissions from LightSquared's ground-based stations from emitting transmissions into the neighboring GPS band of 1559 to 1610\u00a0MHz. In 2004, the FCC adopted the OOBE agreement in its authorization for LightSquared to deploy a ground-based network ancillary to their satellite system \u2013 known as the Ancillary Tower Components (ATCs) \u2013 \"We will authorize MSS ATC subject to conditions that ensure that the added terrestrial component remains ancillary to the principal MSS offering. We do not intend, nor will we permit, the terrestrial component to become a stand-alone service.\" This authorization was reviewed and approved by the U.S. Interdepartment Radio Advisory Committee, which includes the U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Space Force, U.S. Army, U.S. Coast Guard, Federal Aviation Administration, National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), U.S. Department of the Interior, and U.S. Department of Transportation.\nIn January 2011, the FCC conditionally authorized LightSquared's wholesale customers\u2014such as Best Buy, Sharp, and C Spire\u2014to only purchase an integrated satellite-ground-based service from LightSquared and re-sell that integrated service on devices that are equipped to only use the ground-based signal using LightSquared's allocated frequencies of 1525 to 1559\u00a0MHz. In December 2010, GPS receiver manufacturers expressed concerns to the FCC that LightSquared's signal would interfere with GPS receiver devices although the FCC's policy considerations leading up to the January 2011 order did not pertain to any proposed changes to the maximum number of ground-based LightSquared stations or the maximum power at which these stations could operate. The January 2011 order makes final authorization contingent upon studies of GPS interference issues carried out by a LightSquared led working group along with GPS industry and Federal agency participation. On February 14, 2012, the FCC initiated proceedings to vacate LightSquared's Conditional Waiver Order based on the NTIA's conclusion that there was currently no practical way to mitigate potential GPS interference.\nGPS receiver manufacturers design GPS receivers to use spectrum beyond the GPS-allocated band. In some cases, GPS receivers are designed to use up to 400\u00a0MHz of spectrum in either direction of the L1 frequency of 1575.42\u00a0MHz, because mobile satellite services in those regions are broadcasting from space to ground, and at power levels commensurate with mobile satellite services. As regulated under the FCC's Part 15 rules, GPS receivers are not warranted protection from signals outside GPS-allocated spectrum. This is why GPS operates next to the Mobile Satellite Service band, and also why the Mobile Satellite Service band operates next to GPS. The symbiotic relationship of spectrum allocation ensures that users of both bands are able to operate cooperatively and freely.\nThe FCC adopted rules in February 2003 that allowed Mobile Satellite Service (MSS) licensees such as LightSquared to construct a small number of ancillary ground-based towers in their licensed spectrum to \"promote more efficient use of terrestrial wireless spectrum\". In those 2003 rules, the FCC stated: \"As a preliminary matter, terrestrial [Commercial Mobile Radio Service ('CMRS')] and MSS ATC are expected to have different prices, coverage, product acceptance and distribution; therefore, the two services appear, at best, to be imperfect substitutes for one another that would be operating in predominantly different market segments\u00a0... MSS ATC is unlikely to compete directly with terrestrial CMRS for the same customer base...\". In 2004, the FCC clarified that the ground-based towers would be ancillary, noting: \"We will authorize MSS ATC subject to conditions that ensure that the added terrestrial component remains ancillary to the principal MSS offering. We do not intend, nor will we permit, the terrestrial component to become a stand-alone service.\" In July 2010, the FCC stated that it expected LightSquared to use its authority to offer an integrated satellite-terrestrial service to \"provide mobile broadband services similar to those provided by terrestrial mobile providers and enhance competition in the mobile broadband sector\". GPS receiver manufacturers have argued that LightSquared's licensed spectrum of 1525 to 1559\u00a0MHz was never envisioned as being used for high-speed wireless broadband based on the 2003 and 2004 FCC ATC rulings making clear that the Ancillary Tower Component (ATC) would be, in fact, ancillary to the primary satellite component. To build public support of efforts to continue the 2004 FCC authorization of LightSquared's ancillary terrestrial component vs. a simple ground-based LTE service in the Mobile Satellite Service band, GPS receiver manufacturer Trimble Navigation Ltd. formed the \"Coalition To Save Our GPS\".\nThe FCC and LightSquared have each made public commitments to solve the GPS interference issue before the network is allowed to operate. According to Chris Dancy of the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association, airline pilots with the type of systems that would be affected \"may go off course and not even realize it\". The problems could also affect the Federal Aviation Administration upgrade to the air traffic control system, United States Defense Department guidance, and local emergency services including 911.\nOn February 14, 2012, the FCC moved to bar LightSquared's planned national broadband network after being informed by the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), the federal agency that coordinates spectrum uses for the military and other federal government entities, that \"there is no practical way to mitigate potential interference at this time\". LightSquared is challenging the FCC's action.\nSimilar systems.\nFollowing the United States's deployment of GPS, other countries have also developed their own satellite navigation systems. These systems include:\nBackup system.\nIn the event of adverse space weather or the deployment of an anti-satellite weapon against GPS, the United States has no terrestrial backup system. The potential cost of such an event to the U.S. economy is estimated at $1\u00a0billion per day. The LORAN-C system was turned off in North America in 2010 and Europe in 2015. eLoran is proposed as an American terrestrial backup system, but as of 2024 has not received approval or funding.\nChina continues to operate LORAN-C transmitters, and Russia has a similar system called CHAYKA (\"Seagull\").\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11867", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11867", "title": "Germany", "text": "Country in Western and Central Europe\nGermany, officially the Federal Republic of Germany, is a country in Western and Central Europe. It lies between the Baltic Sea and the North Sea to the north and the Alps to the south. Its sixteen constituent states have a total population of over 83 million, making it the most populous member state of the European Union. Germany borders Denmark to the north; Poland and the Czech Republic to the east; Austria and Switzerland to the south; and France, Luxembourg, Belgium, and the Netherlands to the west. The nation's capital and most populous city is Berlin and its main financial centre is Frankfurt; the largest urban area is the Ruhr.\nSettlement in the territory of modern Germany began in the Lower Paleolithic, with various tribes inhabiting it from the Neolithic onward, chiefly the Celts, with Germanic tribes inhabiting the north. Romans named the area Germania. In 962, the Kingdom of Germany formed the bulk of the Holy Roman Empire. During the 16th century, northern German regions became the centre of the Protestant Reformation. Following the Napoleonic Wars and the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806, the German Confederation was formed in 1815.\nUnification of Germany into the modern nation-state, led by Prussia, established the German Empire in 1871. After World War I and a revolution, the Empire was replaced by the Weimar Republic. The Nazi rise to power in 1933 led to the establishment of a totalitarian dictatorship, World War II, and the Holocaust. In 1949, after the war and Allied occupation, Germany was organised into two separate polities with limited sovereignty: the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), or West Germany, and the German Democratic Republic (GDR), or East Germany. The FRG was a founding member of the European Economic Community in 1951, while the GDR was a communist Eastern Bloc state, and a founding member of the Warsaw Pact. After the fall of the communist led-government in East Germany, German reunification saw the former East German states join the FRG on 3 October 1990.\nGermany is a developed country with a strong economy; it has the largest economy in Europe by nominal GDP. As a major force in several industrial, scientific and technological sectors, Germany is both the world's third-largest exporter and third-largest importer. Widely considered a great power, Germany is part of multiple international organisations and forums. It has the third-highest number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites: 55, of which 52 are cultural.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"Germany\" derives from the Latin , which came into use after Julius Caesar adopted it for the peoples east of the Rhine. The German term , originally ('the German lands'), is derived from (cf. \"Dutch\"), which descended from Old High German 'of the people' (from or 'people'), originally used to distinguish the language of the common people from Latin and its Romance descendants. This in turn descends from Proto-Germanic 'of the people' (see also the Latinised form ), derived from , descended from Proto-Indo-European 'people', from which the word \"Teutons\" also originates.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nAncient humans were present in Germany at least 600,000 years ago. The first non-modern human fossil (the Neanderthal) was discovered in the Neander Valley. Similarly dated evidence of modern humans has been found in the Swabian Jura, including 42,000-year-old flutes which are the oldest musical instruments ever found, the 40,000-year-old Lion Man, and the 41,000-year-old Venus of Hohle Fels.\nGermanic tribes, Roman frontier and the Frankish Empire.\nThe Germanic peoples are thought to have emerged from the Jastorf culture during the Nordic Bronze Age or early Iron Age. From southern Scandinavia and northern Germany, they expanded south, east, and west, coming into contact with the Celtic, Iranian, Baltic, and Slavic tribes. Southern Germany was inhabited by Celtic-speaking peoples, who belonged to the wider La T\u00e8ne culture. They were later assimilated by the Germanic conquerors.\nUnder Augustus, the Roman Empire began to invade lands inhabited by the Germanic tribes, creating a short-lived Roman province of Germania between the Rhine and Elbe rivers. In 9 AD, three Roman legions were defeated by Arminius in the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest. The outcome of this battle dissuaded the Romans from their ambition of conquering Germania and is thus considered one of the most important events in European history. By 100 AD, when Tacitus wrote \"Germania\", Germanic tribes had settled along the Rhine and the Danube (the Limes Germanicus), occupying most of modern Germany. However, Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, southern Bavaria, southern Hesse and the western Rhineland had been incorporated into Roman provinces.\nAround 260, Germanic peoples broke into Roman-controlled lands. After the invasion of the Huns in 375, and with the decline of Rome from 395, Germanic tribes moved farther southwest: the Franks established the Frankish Kingdom and pushed east to subjugate Saxony and Bavaria. Areas of modern eastern Germany were inhabited by Western Slavic tribes.\nEast Francia and the Holy Roman Empire.\nCharlemagne founded the Carolingian Empire in 800; it was divided in 843. The eastern successor kingdom of East Francia stretched from the Rhine in the west to the Elbe river in the east and from the North Sea to the Alps. Subsequently, the Holy Roman Empire emerged from it. The Ottonian rulers (919\u20131024) consolidated several major duchies. In 996, Gregory V became the first German Pope, appointed by his cousin Otto III, whom he shortly after crowned Holy Roman Emperor. The Holy Roman Empire absorbed northern Italy and Burgundy under the Salian emperors (1024\u20131125), although the emperors lost power through the Investiture Controversy.\nUnder the Hohenstaufen emperors (1138\u20131254), German princes encouraged German settlement to the south and east (). Members of the Hanseatic League, mostly north German towns, prospered in the expansion of trade. The population declined starting with the Great Famine in 1315, followed by the Black Death of 1348\u20131350. The Golden Bull issued in 1356 provided the constitutional structure of the Empire and codified the election of the emperor by seven prince-electors.\nJohannes Gutenberg introduced moveable-type printing to Europe, laying the basis for the democratisation of knowledge. In 1517, Martin Luther incited the Protestant Reformation and his translation of the Bible began the standardisation of the language; the 1555 Peace of Augsburg tolerated the \"Evangelical\" faith (Lutheranism), but also decreed that the faith of the prince was to be the faith of his subjects (). From the Cologne War through the Thirty Years' Wars (1618\u20131648), religious conflict devastated German lands and significantly reduced the population.\nThe Peace of Westphalia ended religious warfare among the Imperial Estates. The legal system initiated by a series of Imperial Reforms (approximately 1495\u20131555) provided for considerable local autonomy and a stronger Imperial Diet. The House of Habsburg held the imperial crown from 1438 until the death of Charles VI in 1740. Following the War of the Austrian Succession and the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, Charles VI's daughter Maria Theresa ruled as empress consort when her husband, Francis I, became emperor.\nFrom 1740, dualism between the Austrian Habsburg monarchy and the Kingdom of Prussia dominated German history. In 1772, 1793, and 1795, Prussia and Austria, along with the Russian Empire, agreed to the Partitions of Poland. During the period of the French Revolutionary Wars, the Napoleonic era and the subsequent final meeting of the Imperial Diet, most of the Free Imperial Cities were annexed by dynastic territories; the ecclesiastical territories were secularised and annexed. In 1806 the was dissolved; France, Russia, Prussia, and the Habsburgs (Austria) competed for hegemony in the German states during the Napoleonic Wars.\nGerman Confederation and Empire.\nFollowing the fall of Napoleon, the Congress of Vienna founded the German Confederation, a loose league of 39 sovereign states. The appointment of the emperor of Austria as the permanent president reflected the Congress' rejection of Prussia's rising influence. Disagreement within restoration politics partly led to the rise of liberal movements, followed by new measures of repression by Austrian statesman Klemens von Metternich. The , a tariff union, furthered economic unity. In light of revolutionary movements in Europe, intellectuals and commoners started the revolutions of 1848 in the German states, raising the German question. King Frederick William IV of Prussia was offered the title of emperor, but with a loss of power; he rejected the crown and the proposed constitution, a temporary setback for the movement.\nKing William I appointed Otto von Bismarck as the Minister President of Prussia in 1862. Bismarck successfully concluded the war with Denmark in 1864; the subsequent decisive Prussian victory in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 enabled him to create the North German Confederation which excluded Austria. After the defeat of France in the Franco-Prussian War, the German princes proclaimed the founding of the German Empire in 1871. Prussia was the dominant constituent state of the new empire; the King of Prussia ruled as its Emperor (), and Berlin became its capital.\nIn the period following the unification of Germany, Bismarck's foreign policy as chancellor of Germany secured Germany's position as a great nation by forging alliances and avoiding war. However, under Wilhelm II, Germany took an imperialistic course, leading to friction with neighbouring countries. A dual alliance was created with the multinational realm of Austria-Hungary; the Triple Alliance of 1882 included Italy. Britain, France and Russia also concluded alliances to protect against Habsburg interference with Russian interests in the Balkans or German interference against France. At the Berlin Conference in 1884, Germany claimed several colonies including German East Africa, German South West Africa, Togoland, and Kamerun. Later, Germany further expanded its colonial empire to include holdings in the Pacific and China. The colonial government in South West Africa (present-day Namibia), from 1904 to 1908, carried out the annihilation of the local Herero and Nama peoples as punishment for an uprising; this was the 20th century's first genocide.\nThe assassination of Austria's crown prince on 28 June 1914 provided the pretext for Austria-Hungary to attack Serbia and trigger World War I. After four years of warfare, in which approximately two million German soldiers were killed, a general armistice ended the fighting. In the German Revolution (November 1918), Wilhelm II and the ruling princes abdicated their positions, and Germany was declared a federal republic. Germany's new leadership signed the Treaty of Versailles in 1919, accepting defeat by the Allies. Germans perceived the treaty as humiliating, which was seen by historians as influential in the rise of Adolf Hitler. Germany lost around 13% of its European territory and ceded all of its colonial possessions.\nWeimar Republic and Nazi Germany.\nOn 11 August 1919, President Friedrich Ebert signed the democratic Weimar Constitution. Communists briefly seized power in Bavaria and a few larger cities, while conservative elements failed to overthrow the central government in the 1920 Kapp Putsch. The occupation of the Ruhr by Belgian and French troops and a period of hyperinflation followed. A plan to restructure Germany's war reparations and the creation of a new currency in 1924 helped stabilise the government and ushered in the Golden Twenties, an era of artistic innovation and liberal cultural life.\nThe worldwide Great Depression hit Germany in 1929, and by 1932 the unemployment rate had risen to 24%. The Nazi Party led by Adolf Hitler became the largest party in the Reichstag after the election of July 1932, and President Hindenburg appointed Hitler chancellor on 30 January 1933. After the Reichstag fire, a decree abrogated basic civil rights, and the first Nazi concentration camp opened. On 23 March 1933, the Enabling Act gave Hitler unrestricted legislative power, overriding the constitution, and marked the beginning of Nazi Germany. His government established a centralised totalitarian state, withdrew from the League of Nations, and dramatically increased the country's rearmament. A government-sponsored programme for economic renewal focused on public works, the most famous of which was the .\nIn 1935, the regime withdrew from the Treaty of Versailles and introduced the Nuremberg Laws which targeted Jews and other minorities. Germany also reacquired control of the Saarland in 1935, remilitarised the Rhineland in 1936, annexed Austria in 1938, annexed the Sudetenland in 1938 with the Munich Agreement, and, in violation of the agreement, occupied Czechoslovakia in March 1939. (Night of Broken Glass) saw the burning of synagogues, the destruction of Jewish businesses, and mass arrests of Jewish people.\nIn August 1939, Hitler's government negotiated the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact that divided Eastern Europe into German and Soviet spheres of influence. On 1 September 1939, Germany invaded Poland, beginning World War II in Europe; Britain and France declared war on Germany on 3 September. In the spring of 1940, Germany conquered Denmark and Norway, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, and France, forcing the French government to sign an armistice. The British repelled German air attacks in the Battle of Britain in the same year. In 1941, German troops invaded Yugoslavia, Greece and the Soviet Union, and Germany declared war on the United States. By 1942, Germany and its allies controlled most of continental Europe and North Africa, but following the Soviet victory at the Battle of Stalingrad, the Allied reconquest of North Africa and invasion of Italy in 1943, German forces suffered repeated military defeats. In 1944, the Soviets pushed into Eastern Europe; the Western allies landed in France and entered Germany despite a final German counteroffensive. Following Hitler's suicide during the Battle of Berlin, Germany signed the surrender document on 8 May 1945, ending World War II in Europe and Nazi Germany. Following the end of the war, surviving Nazi officials were tried for war crimes at the Nuremberg trials.\nIn what later became known as the Holocaust, the German government persecuted minorities, including interning them in concentration and death camps across Europe. The regime systematically murdered around 6 million Jews, at least 130,000 Romani, 275,000 disabled, thousands of Jehovah's Witnesses, thousands of homosexuals, and hundreds of thousands of political and religious opponents. Nazi policies in German-occupied countries resulted in the deaths of an estimated 2.7\u00a0million Poles, 1.3\u00a0million Ukrainians, 1\u00a0million Belarusians and 3.5\u00a0million Soviet prisoners of war. German military casualties have been estimated at 5.3\u00a0million, and around 900,000 German civilians died. Around 12\u00a0million ethnic Germans were expelled from across Eastern Europe, and Germany lost roughly one-quarter of its pre-war territory.\nEast and West Germany.\nAfter the surrender of Nazi Germany, the Allies \"de jure\" abolished the German state and partitioned Berlin and Germany's remaining territory into four occupation zones. The western sectors, controlled by France, the United Kingdom, and the United States, were merged on 23 May 1949 to form the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) (); on 7 October 1949, the Soviet Zone became the German Democratic Republic (GDR) (; DDR). They were informally known as West Germany and East Germany. East Germany selected East Berlin as its capital, while West Germany chose Bonn as a provisional capital to emphasise its stance that the two-state solution was temporary.\nWest Germany was established as a federal parliamentary republic with a social market economy. In 1948, West Germany became a major recipient of reconstruction aid under the American Marshall Plan. Konrad Adenauer was elected the first federal chancellor of Germany in 1949. The country enjoyed prolonged economic growth () beginning in the early 1950s. West Germany joined NATO in 1955 and was a founding member of the European Economic Community. On 1 January 1957, the Saarland joined West Germany.\nEast Germany was an Eastern Bloc state under political and military control by the Soviet Union via occupation forces and the Warsaw Pact. Although East Germany claimed to be a democracy, political power was exercised solely by leading members () of the communist-controlled Socialist Unity Party of Germany, supported by the , an immense secret service. While East German propaganda was based on the benefits of the GDR's social programmes and the alleged threat of a West German invasion, many of its citizens looked to the West for freedom and prosperity. The Berlin Wall, built in 1961, prevented East German citizens from escaping to West Germany, becoming a symbol of the Cold War.\nTensions between East and West Germany were reduced in the late 1960s by Chancellor Willy Brandt's . In 1989, Hungary decided to dismantle the Iron Curtain and open its border with Austria, causing the emigration of thousands of East Germans to West Germany via Hungary and Austria. This had devastating effects on the GDR, where regular mass demonstrations received increasing support. In an effort to help retain East Germany as a state, the East German authorities eased border restrictions, but this actually led to an acceleration of the reform process, culminating in the \"Two Plus Four Treaty\" under which Germany regained full sovereignty. This permitted German reunification on 3 October 1990, with the accession of the five re-established states of the former GDR. The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 became a symbol of the fall of Communism, the dissolution of the Soviet Union, German reunification and (\"the turning point\").\nReunified Germany and the European Union.\nUnited Germany was considered the enlarged continuation of West Germany, so it retained its memberships in international organisations. Based on the Berlin/Bonn Act (1994), Berlin again became the capital of Germany, while Bonn obtained the unique status of a (federal city), retaining some federal ministries. The relocation of the government was completed in 1999, and modernisation of the East German economy was scheduled to last until 2019.\nSince reunification, Germany has taken a more active role in the European Union, signing the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 and the Lisbon Treaty in 2007, and co-founding the eurozone. Germany sent a peacekeeping force to secure stability in the Balkans and sent German troops to Afghanistan as part of a NATO effort to provide security in that country after the ousting of the Taliban.\nIn the 2005 elections, Angela Merkel became the first female chancellor. In 2009, the German government approved a \u20ac50\u00a0billion stimulus plan. Among the major German political projects of the early 21st century are the advancement of European integration, the country's energy transition () for a sustainable energy supply, the debt brake for balanced budgets, measures to increase the fertility rate (pronatalism), and high-tech strategies for the transition of the German economy, summarised as Industry 4.0. During the 2015 European migrant crisis, the country took in over a million refugees and migrants.\nGeography.\nGermany is the seventh-largest country in Europe. It borders Denmark to the north; Poland and the Czech Republic to the east; Austria and Switzerland to the south; and France, Luxembourg, Belgium, and the Netherlands to the west. Germany is also bordered by the North Sea and, at the north-northeast, the Baltic Sea. German territory covers . Elevation ranges from the mountains of the Alps (with the highest point being the Zugspitze at ) in the south to the shores of the North Sea () in the northwest and the Baltic Sea () in the northeast. The forested uplands of central Germany and the lowlands of northern Germany (lowest point: in the municipality Neuendorf-Sachsenbande, Wilstermarsch, at below sea level) are traversed by such major rivers as the Rhine, Danube and Elbe. Significant natural resources include iron ore, coal, potash, timber, lignite, uranium, copper, natural gas, salt, and nickel.\nClimate.\nMost of Germany has a temperate climate, ranging from oceanic in the north and west to continental in the east and southeast. Winters range from cold in the Southern Alps to cool and are generally overcast with limited precipitation, while summers can vary from hot and dry to cool and rainy. The northern regions have prevailing westerly winds that bring in moist air from the North Sea, moderating the temperature and increasing precipitation. Conversely, the southeast regions have more extreme temperatures.\nFrom February 2019\u2013February 2020, average monthly temperatures in Germany ranged from a low of in January 2020 to a high of in June 2019. Average monthly precipitation ranged from 30 litres per square metre in February and April 2019 to 125 litres per square metre in February 2020. Average monthly hours of sunshine ranged from 45 in November 2019 to 300 in June 2019.\nClimate change in Germany is leading to long-term impacts on agriculture, more intense heat waves and cold waves, flash and coastal flooding, and reduced water availability. These changes could cost Germany up to \u20ac900 billion by 2050. \nBiodiversity.\nThe territory of Germany can be divided into five terrestrial ecoregions: Atlantic mixed forests, Baltic mixed forests, Central European mixed forests, Western European broadleaf forests, and Alps conifer and mixed forests. As of 2016[ [update]], 51% of Germany's land area is devoted to agriculture, while 30% is forested and 14% is covered by settlements or infrastructure.\nPlants and animals include those generally common to Central Europe. According to the National Forest Inventory, beeches, oaks, and other deciduous trees constitute just over 40% of the forests; roughly 60% are conifers, particularly spruce and pine. There are many species of ferns, flowers, fungi, and mosses. Wild animals include roe deer, wild boar, mouflon (a subspecies of wild sheep), fox, badger, hare, and small numbers of the Eurasian beaver. The blue cornflower was once a German national symbol.\nThe 16 national parks in Germany include the Jasmund National Park, the Vorpommern Lagoon Area National Park, the M\u00fcritz National Park, the Wadden Sea National Parks, the Harz National Park, the Hainich National Park, the Black Forest National Park, the Saxon Switzerland National Park, the Bavarian Forest National Park and the Berchtesgaden National Park. In addition, there are 17 Biosphere Reserves, and 105 nature parks. More than 400 zoos and animal parks operate in Germany. The Berlin Zoo, which opened in 1844, is the oldest in Germany, and claims the most comprehensive collection of species in the world.\nPolitics.\nGermany is a federal, parliamentary, representative democratic republic. Federal legislative power is vested in the parliament consisting of the (Federal Diet) and (Federal Council), which together form the legislative body. The is elected through direct elections using the mixed-member proportional representation system. The members of the represent and are appointed by the governments of the sixteen federated states.\nThe German political system operates under a framework laid out in the 1949 constitution known as the (Basic Law). Amendments generally require a two-thirds majority of both the and the ; the fundamental principles of the constitution, as expressed in the articles guaranteeing human dignity, the separation of powers, the federal structure, and the rule of law, are valid in perpetuity.\nThe president, who has been Frank-Walter Steinmeier since 2017, is the head of state and invested primarily with representative responsibilities and powers. He is elected by the (federal convention), an institution consisting of the members of the and an equal number of state delegates. The second-highest official in the German order of precedence is the (president of the Bundestag), who is elected by the and responsible for overseeing the daily sessions of the body. The third-highest official and the head of government is the chancellor, who is appointed by the after being elected by the party or coalition with the most seats in the . The chancellor, who has been Friedrich Merz since 2025, is the head of government and exercises executive power through his Cabinet.\nSince 1949, the party system has been dominated by the Christian Democratic Union and the Social Democratic Party of Germany. So far every chancellor has been a member of one of these parties. However, the smaller liberal Free Democratic Party and the Alliance 90/The Greens have also been junior partners in coalition governments. Since 2007, the democratic socialist party The Left has been a staple in the German , though they have never been part of the federal government. In the 2017 German federal election, the right-wing populist Alternative for Germany gained enough votes to attain representation in the parliament for the first time.\nConstituent states.\nGermany is a federation comprising sixteen constituent states collectively referred to as . Each state () has its own constitution, and is largely autonomous in regard to its internal organisation. As of 2017[ [update]], Germany is divided into 401 districts () at a municipal level; these consist of 294 rural districts and 107 urban districts.\nLaw.\nGermany has a civil law system based on Roman law with some references to Germanic law. The (Federal Constitutional Court) is the German Supreme Court responsible for constitutional matters, with power of judicial review. Germany's specialised supreme court system includes the Federal Court of Justice for civil and criminal cases, along with the Federal Labour Court, Federal Social Court, Federal Fiscal Court, and Federal Administrative Court for other matters.\nCriminal and private laws are codified on the national level in the and the respectively. The German penal system seeks the rehabilitation of the criminal and the protection of the public. With the exceptions of petty crimes, tried by a single professional judge, and of serious political crimes, all charges are adjudicated by mixed tribunals where lay judges () and professional judges preside together.\nIn 2016, Germany's murder rate stood at a low of 1.18 murders per 100,000. In 2018, the overall crime rate in the country fell to its lowest since 1992, while in 2024, it was reported that violent crime reached a 15-year high, with overall crime rising as well.\nSame-sex marriage in Germany has been legal since 2017, and LGBT rights in the country are generally protected.\nForeign relations.\nGermany has a network of 227 diplomatic missions abroad and maintains relations with more than 190 countries. Germany is a member of the Council of Europe, NATO, the OECD, the G7, the G20, the World Bank and the IMF. It has played an influential role in the European Union since its inception and has maintained a strong alliance with France and all neighbouring countries since 1990. Germany promotes the creation of a more unified European political, economic and security apparatus. Because of its economic power and political influence, Germany is widely considered to be a great power. \nThe governments of Germany and the United States are close political allies. Cultural ties and economic interests have crafted a bond between the two countries resulting in Atlanticism.\nGermany's development policy functions as a distinct sector within its foreign policy framework. It is formulated by the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development and carried out by the implementing organisations. The German government sees development policy as a joint responsibility of the international community. Germany was the world's second-biggest aid donor in 2019 after the United States.\nMilitary.\nGermany's military, the (Federal Defence), is organised into the (Army and special forces KSK), (Navy), (Air Force) and (Cyber and Information Domain Service) branches. In absolute terms, German military spending in 2023 was the seventh-highest in the world. In response to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Chancellor Olaf Scholz announced that German military expenditure would be increased past the NATO target of 2%, along with a one-time 2022 infusion of 100\u00a0billion euros, representing almost double the 53\u00a0billion euro military budget for 2021. In 2023, military spending according to NATO criteria amounted to $73.1 billion, or 1.64% of the country's GDP, well below the NATO target of 2%. In 2024, Germany reported $97.7 billion to NATO, exceeding the NATO target of 2% at 2.12% of GDP.\nAs of \u00a02024[ [update]], the has a strength of 180,215 active soldiers and 80,761 civilians. Reservists are available to the armed forces and participate in defence exercises and deployments abroad. Until 2011, military service was compulsory for men at age 18, but this has been officially suspended and replaced with a voluntary service. Since 2001 women may serve in all functions of service without restriction. According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, Germany was the fifth-largest exporter of major arms in the world from 2020 to 2024.\nIn peacetime, the is commanded by the Minister of Defence. In a state of defence, the Chancellor would become commander-in-chief of the . The role of the is described in the Constitution of Germany as defensive only. But after a ruling of the Federal Constitutional Court in 1994, the term \"defence\" has been defined not only to include protection of the borders of Germany, but also crisis reaction and conflict prevention, or more broadly as guarding the security of Germany anywhere in the world. As of 2017,[ [update]] the German military has about 3,600 troops stationed in foreign countries as part of international peacekeeping forces, including about 1,200 supporting operations against Daesh, 980 in the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan, and 800 in Kosovo.\nEconomy.\nGermany has a social market economy with a highly skilled labour force, a low level of corruption, and a high level of innovation. It is the largest economy in Europe by nominal GDP, as well as the world's third-largest by nominal GDP and sixth-largest by PPP-adjusted GDP. Its PPP-adjusted GDP per capita amounted to 115% of the EU average in 2024. The country's service sector contributes approximately 72% of the total GDP, the industrial sector 27%\u2014with Germany having the largest manufacturing output in Europe\u2014and its agricultural sector 1%, as of 2023[ [update]]. The unemployment rate published by Eurostat amounts to 3.2% as of \u00a02020[ [update]], which is the fourth-lowest in the EU.\nGermany is part of the European single market which represents more than 450 million consumers. In 2017, the country accounted for 28% of the eurozone economy according to the International Monetary Fund. Germany introduced the common European currency, the euro, in 2002. Its monetary policy is set by the European Central Bank, which is based in Frankfurt, the country's largest financial centre. Germany is the world's third-largest exporter and third-largest importer, and it has the second-largest trade surplus after China. Its largest trading partners in 2024 were the United States, China, and the Netherlands. Germany's main exports are vehicles, machinery, and chemical goods.\nThe German automotive industry is regarded as one of the most competitive and innovative in the world. It was the sixth-largest by production and largest by export value in 2023. Germany is home to Volkswagen Group, the world's second-largest automotive manufacturer by vehicle production.\nOf the world's 500 largest stock market-listed companies by revenue in 2024, the \"Fortune\" Global 500, 29 were based in Germany. The DAX, Germany's stock market index operated by the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, includes 30 major Germany-based companies. Prominent German companies include Mercedes-Benz, BMW, Volkswagen, Audi, Porsche, Siemens, Adidas, SAP and Bosch. Berlin is a hub for startup companies and has become the leading location for venture capital-funded firms in the European Union. Germany is recognised for its large portion of specialised small and medium enterprises known as the ; these companies represent around 48% of the global market leaders in their segments, labelled hidden champions.\nResearch and development efforts form an integral part of the German economy, with the country ranking fourth in research and development expenditure since 2005. In 2018, Germany ranked fourth globally in terms of number of science and engineering research papers published and third in the quality-adjusted Nature Index in 2023. Research institutions in Germany include the Max Planck Society, the Helmholtz Association, the Fraunhofer Society, and the Leibniz Association. Germany is the largest contributor to the European Space Agency. The country was ranked 11th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nInfrastructure.\nWith its central position in Europe, Germany is a transport hub for the continent. Its road network is among the densest in Europe. The motorway (\"Autobahn\") is widely known for having no general federally mandated speed limit for some classes of vehicles. The Intercity Express or \"ICE\" train network serves major German cities as well as destinations in neighbouring countries with speeds up to . The largest German airports are Frankfurt Airport, Munich Airport and Berlin Brandenburg Airport. The Port of Hamburg is the third-busiest port in Europe and one of the twenty largest container ports in the world.\nIn 2019[ [update]], Germany was the world's seventh-largest consumer of energy. All German nuclear power plants were phased out in 2023. Germany meets its power demands using 40% renewable sources (2018), and has been called an \"early leader\" in solar panels and offshore wind. The German energy transition () is the recognised move to a sustainable economy by means of energy efficiency and renewable energy, with the country being called \"the world's first major renewable energy economy\". Germany has reduced its primary energy consumption by 11% between 1990 and 2015 and set itself goals of reducing it by 30% until 2030 and 50% by 2050.\nThe country is committed to the Paris Agreement and several other treaties promoting biodiversity, low emission standards, and water management. As of 2017, Germany's household recycling rate is among the highest in the world\u2014at around 65%. In 2023, Germany was the 14th highest emitting nation of greenhouse gases.\nTourism.\nDomestic and international travel and tourism combined directly contributed over \u20ac105.3\u00a0billion to German GDP in 2015. Including indirect and induced impacts, the industry supported nearly 4.2\u00a0million jobs in 2015. As of 2024, Germany is the seventh-most-visited country. Its most popular landmarks include Cologne Cathedral, the Brandenburg Gate, the Reichstag, the Dresden Frauenkirche, Neuschwanstein Castle, Heidelberg Castle, the Wartburg, and Sanssouci Palace. Europa-Park near Freiburg is Europe's second-most popular theme park resort.\nDemographics.\nWith a population of 84.7\u00a0million according to the 2023 German census, Germany is the most populous member state of the European Union, the second-most populous country in Europe after Russia, and the nineteenth-most populous country in the world. Its population density stands at . The fertility rate of 1.57 children born per woman (2022 estimates) is below the replacement rate of 2.1 and is one of the lowest in the world. Since the 1970s, Germany's death rate has exceeded its birth rate. However, the country is witnessing increased birth and migration rates since the early 2010s. Germany has the third oldest population in the world, with an average age of 47.4 years.\nFour sizeable groups of people are referred to as national minorities because their ancestors have lived in their respective regions for centuries: There is a Danish minority in the northernmost state of Schleswig-Holstein; the Sorbs, a Slavic population, are in the Lusatia region of Saxony and Brandenburg; the Roma and Sinti live throughout the country; and the Frisians are concentrated in Schleswig-Holstein's western coast and in the north-western part of Lower Saxony.\nGermany is a major destination for immigrants, ranking second in the world after the United States. In 2015, following the 2015 refugee crisis, the Population Division of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs listed Germany as host to the second-highest number of international migrants worldwide, about 5% or 12\u00a0million of all 244\u00a0million migrants. Refugee crises have resulted in substantial population increases; for example, the major influx of Ukrainian immigrants following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, whereby over 1.06\u00a0million refugees from Ukraine were recorded in Germany as of April 2023. In 2019, Germany ranked seventh among EU countries in terms of the percentage of migrants in the country's population, at 13.1%. In 2022, there were 23.8 million people\u201428.7 percent of the total population\u2014who had a migration background. \nGermany has over 2,000 cities and towns. There are 11 officially recognised metropolitan regions. The country's most populous city is Berlin, and its largest urban area is the Ruhr.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2022 census, Christianity is the largest religion in Germany at 49.7% of the population; 23.1% identified as Protestant and 25.1% as Catholic.\nA study in 2023 estimated that 46.2% of the population are not members of any religious organisation or denomination and that a majority of the population no longer belongs to a Christian denomination (48.5% Christians). Irreligion in Germany is strongest in major metropolitan areas and throughout the former East Germany, which used to be predominantly Protestant before the imposition of state atheism under communism.\nIslam is the second-largest religion in the country. In the 2011 census, 1.9% of respondents (1.52\u00a0million people) gave their religion as Islam, but this figure is deemed unreliable because a disproportionate number of adherents of this faith (and other religions, such as Judaism) are likely to have made use of their right not to answer the question. In 2019, there were an estimated 5.3\u20135.6 million Muslims with a migrant background (6.4\u20136.7% of the population), in addition to an unknown number of Muslims without a migrant background. Most of the Muslims are Sunnis and Alevis from Turkey, but there are a small number of Shi'ites, Ahmadiyyas and other denominations. Other religions each comprise less than one percent of Germany's population.\nIn 2011, formal members of the Jewish community represented no more than 0.2% of the total German population, and 60% of them resided in Berlin. An estimated 80 to 90 percent of these Jews in Germany are Russian-speaking immigrants from the former Soviet Union who came to Germany from the 1980s onwards.\nLanguages.\nGerman is the official and predominantly spoken language in Germany. It is one of 24 official and working languages of the European Union, and one of the three procedural languages of the European Commission, alongside English and French. German is the most widely spoken first language in the European Union, with around 100 million native speakers.\nRecognised native minority languages in Germany are Danish, Low German, Low Rhenish, Sorbian, Romani, North Frisian and Saterland Frisian; they are officially protected by the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. The most used immigrant languages are Turkish, Arabic, Kurdish, Polish, Italian, Greek, Spanish, Serbo-Croatian, Bulgarian and other Balkan languages, as well as Russian. Germans are typically multilingual: 74% of German citizens claim to be able to communicate in at least one foreign language and 35% in at least two.\nEducation.\nResponsibility for educational supervision in Germany is primarily organised within the individual states. Optional kindergarten education is provided for all children between three and six years old, after which school attendance is compulsory for at least nine years depending on the state. Primary education usually lasts for four to six years. Secondary schooling is divided into tracks based on whether students pursue academic or vocational education. A system of apprenticeship called leads to a skilled qualification which is almost comparable to an academic degree. It allows students in vocational training to learn in a company as well as in a state-run trade school. This model is well regarded and reproduced all around the world.\nMost of the German universities are public institutions, and students traditionally study without fee payment. The general requirement for attending university is the . According to an OECD report in 2014, Germany is the world's third leading destination for international study. The established universities in Germany include some of the oldest in the world, with Heidelberg University (established in 1386), Leipzig University (established in 1409) and the University of Rostock (established in 1419) being the oldest in the country. The Humboldt University of Berlin, founded in 1810 by the liberal educational reformer Wilhelm von Humboldt, became the academic model for many Western universities. In the contemporary era, Germany has developed eleven Universities of Excellence.\nHealth.\nGermany's system of hospitals, called , dates from medieval times, and the country has the world's oldest universal health care system, dating from Bismarck's social legislation of the 1880s. Since the 1880s, reforms and provisions have ensured a balanced health care system. The population is covered by a health insurance plan provided by statute, with criteria allowing some groups to opt for a private health insurance contract. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), Germany's health care system was 77% government-funded and 23% privately funded in 2013. In 2014, Germany spent 11.3% of its GDP on health care.\nGermany ranked 21st in the world in 2019 in life expectancy with 78.7 years for men and 84.8 years for women according to the WHO, and it had a very low infant mortality rate of 4 deaths per 1,000 live births. In 2019[ [update]], the principal cause of death was cardiovascular disease, at 37%. Obesity in Germany has been increasingly cited as a major health issue: a 2014 study showed that 52 percent of the adult German population was overweight or obese.\nCulture.\nCulture in German states has been shaped by major intellectual and popular currents in Europe, both religious and secular, and German scientists, writers and philosophers have played a significant role in the development of Western thought. Global opinion polls from the BBC revealed that Germany is recognised for having the most positive influence in the world in 2013 and 2014.\nGermany is well known for such folk festivals as the Oktoberfest and Christmas customs, which include Advent wreaths, Christmas pageants, Christmas trees, Stollen cakes, and other practices. As of 2025[ [update]], UNESCO inscribed 55 properties in Germany on the World Heritage List. There are a number of public holidays in Germany determined by each state; 3 October has been a national day of Germany since 1990, celebrated as the (German Unity Day).\nMusic.\nGerman classical music includes works by some of the world's most well-known composers. Dieterich Buxtehude, Johann Sebastian Bach and Georg Friedrich H\u00e4ndel were influential composers of the Baroque period. Ludwig van Beethoven was a crucial figure in the transition between the Classical and Romantic eras. Carl Maria von Weber, Felix Mendelssohn, Robert Schumann and Johannes Brahms were significant Romantic composers. Richard Wagner was known for his operas. Richard Strauss was a leading composer of the late Romantic and early modern eras. Karlheinz Stockhausen and Wolfgang Rihm are important composers of the 20th and early 21st centuries.\nIn 2013, Germany was the second-largest music market in Europe, and fourth-largest in the world. German popular music of the 20th and 21st centuries includes the movements of Neue Deutsche Welle, pop, Ostrock, heavy metal/rock, punk, pop rock, indie, Volksmusik (folk music), schlager pop and German hip hop. German electronic music gained global influence, with Kraftwerk and Tangerine Dream pioneering in this genre. DJs and artists of the techno and house music scenes of Germany have become well known (e.g. Paul van Dyk, Felix Jaehn, Paul Kalkbrenner, Robin Schulz and Scooter).\nArt, design and architecture.\nGerman painters have influenced Western art. Albrecht D\u00fcrer, Hans Holbein the Younger, Matthias Gr\u00fcnewald and Lucas Cranach the Elder were important German artists of the Renaissance, Johann Baptist Zimmermann of the Baroque, Caspar David Friedrich and Carl Spitzweg of Romanticism, Max Liebermann of Impressionism and Max Ernst of Surrealism. Several German art groups formed in the 20th century; (The Bridge) and (The Blue Rider) influenced the development of expressionism in Munich and Berlin. The New Objectivity arose in response to expressionism during the Weimar Republic. After World War II, broad trends in German art include neo-expressionism and the New Leipzig School.\nGerman designers became early leaders of modern product design. The Berlin Fashion Week and the fashion trade fair Bread &amp; Butter are held twice a year.\nArchitectural contributions from Germany include the Carolingian and Ottonian styles, which were precursors of Romanesque. Brick Gothic is a distinctive medieval style that evolved in Germany. Also in Renaissance and Baroque art, regional and typically German elements evolved (e.g. Weser Renaissance). Vernacular architecture in Germany is often identified by its timber framing () traditions and varies across regions, and among carpentry styles. When industrialisation spread across Europe, classicism and a distinctive style of historicism developed in Germany, sometimes referred to as \"style\". Expressionist architecture developed in the 1910s in Germany and influenced Art Deco and other modern styles. Germany was particularly important in the early modernist movement: it is the home of Werkbund initiated by Hermann Muthesius (New Objectivity), and of the Bauhaus movement founded by Walter Gropius. Ludwig Mies van der Rohe became one of the world's most renowned architects in the second half of the 20th century; he conceived of the glass fa\u00e7ade skyscraper. Renowned contemporary German architects and offices include Pritzker Prize winners Gottfried B\u00f6hm and Frei Otto.\nLiterature and philosophy.\nGerman literature can be traced back to the Middle Ages and the works of writers such as Walther von der Vogelweide and Wolfram von Eschenbach. Well-known German authors include Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Friedrich Schiller, Gotthold Ephraim Lessing and Theodor Fontane. The collections of folk tales published by the Brothers Grimm popularised German folklore on an international level. The Grimms also gathered and codified regional variants of the German language, grounding their work in historical principles; their , or German Dictionary, sometimes called the Grimm dictionary, was begun in 1838 and the first volumes published in 1854.\nInfluential authors of the 20th century include Gerhart Hauptmann, Thomas Mann, Hermann Hesse, Heinrich B\u00f6ll, and G\u00fcnter Grass. The German book market is the third-largest in the world, after the United States and China. The Frankfurt Book Fair is the most important in the world for international deals and trading, with a tradition spanning over 500 years. The Leipzig Book Fair also retains a major position in Europe.\nGerman philosophy is historically significant: Gottfried Leibniz's contributions to rationalism; the enlightenment philosophy by Immanuel Kant; the establishment of classical German idealism by Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling; Arthur Schopenhauer's composition of metaphysical pessimism; the formulation of communist theory by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels; Friedrich Nietzsche's development of perspectivism; Gottlob Frege's contributions to the dawn of analytic philosophy; Martin Heidegger's works on Being; Oswald Spengler's historical philosophy; and the development of the Frankfurt School have all been very influential.\nMedia.\nThe largest internationally operating media companies in Germany are Bertelsmann, Axel Springer SE and ProSiebenSat.1 Media. Germany's television market is the largest in Europe, with over 38\u00a0million TV households as of 2012. Around 90% of German households have cable or satellite TV, with a variety of free-to-view public and commercial channels. There are more than 300 public and private radio stations in Germany; Germany's national radio network is the Deutschlandradio, while the public Deutsche Welle is the main radio and television broadcaster in foreign languages. Germany's print market of newspapers and magazines is the largest in Europe. The papers with the highest circulation are , , and . The largest magazines include and . Germany has a large video gaming market, with over 34 million players nationwide. The annual Gamescom held in Cologne is the world's largest gaming convention.\nGerman cinema has made major technical and artistic contributions to film. The first works of the Skladanowsky Brothers were shown to an audience in 1895. The renowned Babelsberg Studio in Potsdam was established in 1912, thus being the first large-scale film studio in the world. Early German cinema was particularly influential with German expressionists such as Robert Wiene and Friedrich Wilhelm Murnau. Director Fritz Lang's \"Metropolis\" (1927) is referred to as the first major science-fiction film. After 1945, many of the films of the immediate post-war period can be characterised as (rubble film). East German film was dominated by the state-owned film studio DEFA, while the dominant genre in West Germany was the (\"homeland film\"). During the 1970s and 1980s, New German Cinema directors such as Volker Schl\u00f6ndorff, Werner Herzog, Wim Wenders, and Rainer Werner Fassbinder brought West German auteur cinema to critical acclaim.\nThe Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film (\"Oscar\") went to the German production \"The Tin Drum\" () in 1979, to \"Nowhere in Africa\" () in 2002, and to \"The Lives of Others\" () in 2007. Various Germans won an Oscar for their performances in other films. The annual European Film Awards ceremony is held every other year in Berlin, home of the European Film Academy. The Berlin International Film Festival, known as \"Berlinale\", awarding the \"Golden Bear\" and held annually since 1951, is one of the world's leading film festivals. The \"Lolas\" are annually awarded in Berlin, at the German Film Awards.\nCuisine.\nGerman cuisine varies across the country and neighbouring regions often share culinary similarities, such as those found in Bavaria, Franconia and Swabia, Switzerland, and Austria. International varieties such as pizza, sushi, Chinese food, Greek food, Indian cuisine, and doner kebab are popular as well.\nBread is a significant part of German cuisine, with German bakeries producing about 600 main types of bread and 1,200 types of pastries and rolls (). German cheeses account for about 22% of all cheese produced in Europe. In 2012 over 99% of all meat produced in Germany was either pork, chicken, or beef. Germans produce their ubiquitous sausages in almost 1,500 varieties, including Bratwurst and Wei\u00dfwurst.\nThe national alcoholic drink is beer. German beer consumption per capita stood at in 2013 and remains among the highest in the world. German beer purity regulations date back to the 16th century. Wine has become popular in many parts of the country, especially near the German wine regions. In 2019, Germany was the ninth-largest wine producer in the world.\nThe 2018 \"Michelin Guide\" awarded eleven restaurants in Germany three stars, giving the country a cumulative total of 300 stars.\nSports.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Germany. With more than 7\u00a0million official members, the German Football Association (\"Deutscher Fu\u00dfball-Bund\") is the largest single-sport organisation worldwide, and the German top league, the Bundesliga, attracts the second-highest average attendance of all professional sports leagues in the world. The German men's national football team won the FIFA World Cup in 1954, 1974, 1990, and 2014, the UEFA European Championship in 1972, 1980 and 1996, and the FIFA Confederations Cup in 2017.\nGermany is one of the leading motor sports countries in the world. Constructors like BMW and Mercedes are prominent manufacturers in motor sport. Porsche has won the 24 Hours of Le Mans race 19 times, and Audi 13 times (as of \u00a02024[ [update]]). The driver Michael Schumacher has set many motor sport records during his career, having won seven Formula One World Drivers' Championships. Sebastian Vettel is also among the most successful Formula One drivers of all time.\nGerman athletes historically have been successful contenders in the Olympic Games, ranking third in an all-time Olympic Games medal count when combining East and West German medals prior to German reunification. In 1936, Berlin hosted the Summer Games and the Winter Games in Garmisch-Partenkirchen. Munich hosted the Summer Games of 1972.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "11868", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11868", "title": "GeoCaching", "text": ""}
{"id": "11870", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11870", "title": "Gambler", "text": ""}
{"id": "11871", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11871", "title": "Gamblers Fallacy", "text": ""}
{"id": "11874", "revid": "49642083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11874", "title": "Guatemala City", "text": "Capital and largest city of Guatemala\nGuatemala City (), also known colloquially by the nickname Guate, is the national capital and largest city of the Republic of Guatemala. It serves as the municipal capital of the surrounding Guatemala Department. Its metropolitan area is also the largest in Central America. The city is located in a mountain valley called Valle de la Ermita () in the south-central part of the country.\nGuatemala City is the site of the native Mayan city of Kaminaljuyu in Mesoamerica, which was occupied primarily between 1500 BCE and 1200 CE. The present city was founded by the Spanish after their colonial capital, now called Antigua Guatemala, was destroyed by the devastating 1773 Santa Marta earthquake and its aftershocks. It became the third royal capital of the surrounding Captaincy General of Guatemala; which itself was part of the larger Viceroyalty of New Spain in imperial Spanish America and remained under colonial rule until the nineteenth century.\nIn September 1821, Guatemala City was the site of the famous Act of Independence of Central America, which declared the independence of the region from the Spanish Empire. It was ratified and enacted on 15 September, now celebrated annually as Guatemala's independence day and called the Dias Patrios. For the next several decades, Guatemala City was the federation capital of the newly established and independent government of the United Provinces of Central America, which was later reorganized and renamed the Federal Republic of Central America. In August 1847, Guatemala declared itself an independent republic, separate from the larger federation, and Guatemala City became its national capital.\nGuatemala City and the surrounding region were almost completely destroyed by the 1917\u20131918 Guatemala earthquakes and months of continued aftershocks. Reconstructions since have resulted in a more modern architectural landscape, including wider streets and a grid lay-out for new developments, inspired by post-18th century designs of architects in other national capital cities such as Paris, France and Washington, D.C.\nToday, Guatemala City is the political, cultural, religious and economic center of the Republic of Guatemala and exerts a wide financial, commercial, and cultural influence on the Central America region and beyond, throughout Latin America.\nNames.\nGuatemala City () is known colloquially by Guatemalans as ' or Guate. Its formal name is ' (New Guatemala of the Assumption). The latter name is derived from the fact that it was a new Guatemala after the old one () was ruined by an earthquake. Also, Assumption is in honor of the Virgin of the Assumption, whose festivity is 15 August, the city's feast day.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nHuman settlement on the present site of Guatemala City began with the native indigenous Maya people, who built a large ceremonial center at Kaminaljuyu. This large Maya settlement, the biggest outside the Maya lowlands in the Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula, of southeast Mexico, rose to prominence around 2,300 years ago, about 300 B.C. due to an increase in mining and trading of obsidian, a valuable commodity of volcanic glass (Igneous rock) for the Pre-Columbian American civilizations in Mesoamerica. Kaminaljuyu then mysteriously collapsed around A.D. 300 for as yet unknown historical causes.\nA series of devastating earthquakes in 1773 had left the old second Royal Spanish colonial / provincial capital city of La Antigua Guatemala, and surrounding area in ruins and unusable to the Imperial Spanish colonial authorities. During this period of the late 18th century after the move three years later in 1776 to the current site of modern Guatemala City, that the central plaza in the new town, with its premier landmark neo-classical style architecture of the immense Metropolitan Cathedral (officially named: Catedral Primada Metropolitana de Santiago), built 1782\u20131815, completed / dedicated 1871. Its the center of the country's Roman Catholic Church and its Archdiocese of Guatemala and the seat (chair) for the serving current Archbishop of Guatemala. Also erected in that post-1773 Santa Marta Earthquake was the massive regional colonial Royal Spanish government's Palace of the Captain-General, were constructed in the old second capital of the 1700s, now semi-ruined town Antigua Guatemala and preserved historic site, which later was partially repaired and maintained, even though the capital had been moved away to the current city in Emmita Valley. The old monumental palace served then as the headquarters for the colonial government regional jurisdiction of the Captaincy General of Guatemala, from its organization in 1542 to independence in 1821. Today it serves as the site for several current national government offices, national police, several tourism agencies along with galleries / exhibits of the National Museum of Guatemalan Art.\nA half-century later, after the ratification / enactment of the Act of Independence of Central America declaration, the city became the capital of the independent newly organized United Provinces of Central America in September 1821.\nThe subsequent decades in the 19th century saw the construction of some significant structures in the town, such as the monumental Carrera Theater in the 1850s, and the modern-day historic executive residence of the Casa Presidencial de Guatemala|Casa Presidencial de Guatemala (Presidential Palace of Guatemala) in the 1890s for the former and still occupied by the current President of the Republic. At this time, the capital city was expanding around the 30 de Junio Boulevard and elsewhere, unfortunately displacing native / indigenous peoples in the settlements on the peripheries of the growing city. The early 20th century series of earthquakes during the years of 1917\u20131918 destroyed many historic structures from the era of the late 18th and following 19th centuries of the first period of Guatemala City capital history, erected during the 144 years since the previous devastating tremors in the infamous Santa Marta Earthquake of 1773, (referred to previously further above), which destroyed the previous nearby Royal Spanish and colonial / provincial capital city of La Antigua Guatemala (now a historic site with preserved ruins).\nA decade later, under former military General, then elected 21st President (later unfortunately becoming an authoritarian dictator) of Jorge Ubico (1878\u20131946, ruled 1931\u20131944). General / President Ubico after clinging to power for 13 years, was later overthrown in the Guatemalan Revolution of 1944, a democratic pivotal event in the nation's history that is still celebrated annually 80 years later in the country, alongside the earlier 15 September Independence Day of Central America from 1821.\nIn the subsequent 1930s decade with the worldwide Great Depression affecting many nations' economies and commerce / trade during the Ubico dictatorship era, however using public works projects such as a hippodrome and many new public buildings were constructed in the period. This was highlighted by the design and construction of the monumental National Palace (built 1939\u20131943, as an official residence and offices for the President of the Republic, renovated 2010 and now known as the National Palace of Culture, and used as a national museum).\nAlthough slums that had formed with the major displacement of the city and region's population after the 1917\u20131918 series of earthquakes, continued to grow and spread around the edges of the capital city with the lack of civilized normal basic amenities and public services / utilities, such as fresh water piping, sewer drainage systems / filtration plants, electric power lines with paved / lighted streets and highways, etc.\nGuatemala City continues to be subject to an unusual amount of natural and climate-related disasters, (especially recurring earthquakes) with the latest being the two disasters that struck simultaneously in May 2010: the eruption of the Pacaya volcano and, two days later, the torrential downpours from Tropical Storm Agatha of 2010.\nContemporary history.\nGuatemala City serves as the economic, governmental, and cultural center of the nation of Guatemala. The city also functions as Guatemala's main transportation hub, hosting an international airport, La Aurora International Airport, and serving as the origination or end points for most of Guatemala's major highways. The city, with its robust economy, attracts hundreds of thousands of rural migrants from Guatemala's interior hinterlands and serves as the main entry point for most foreign immigrants seeking to settle in Guatemala.\nIn addition to a wide variety of restaurants, hotels, shops, and a modern BRT transport system (Transmetro), the city is home to many art galleries, theaters, sports venues and museums (including some fine collections of Pre-Columbian art) and provides a growing number of cultural offerings. Guatemala City not only possesses a history and culture unique to the Central American region, it also furnishes all the modern amenities of a world class city, ranging from an IMAX Theater to the \u00cdcaro film festival (Festival \u00cdcaro), where independent films produced in Guatemala and Central America are debuted.\nStructure and growth.\nGuatemala City is located in the mountainous regions of the country, between the Pacific coastal plain to the south and the northern lowlands of the Peten region.\nThe city's metropolitan area has recently grown very rapidly and has absorbed most of the neighboring municipalities of Villa Nueva, San Miguel Petapa, Mixco, San Juan Sacatepequez, San Jos\u00e9 Pinula, Santa Catarina Pinula, Fraijanes, San Pedro Ayampuc, Amatitl\u00e1n, Villa Canales, Palencia, and Chinautla, forming what is now known as the Guatemala City Metropolitan Area.\nThe city is subdivided into 22 zones (\"Zonas\") designed by the urban engineering of Ra\u00fal Aguilar Batres, each one with its own streets (\"Calles\"), avenues (\"Avenidas\") and, sometimes, \"Diagonal\" Streets, making it pretty easy to find addresses in the city. Zones are numbered 1\u201325, with Zones 20, 22 and 23 not existing as they would have fallen in two other municipalities' territory. Addresses are assigned according to the street or avenue number, followed by a dash and the number of metres it is away from the intersection.\nFor example, the INGUAT Office on \"7a Av. 1\u201317, Zona 4\" is a building which is located on Avenida 7, 17 meters away from the intersection with Calle 1, toward Calle 2 in zone 4.\n7a Av. 1\u201317, Zona 4; and 7a Av. 1\u201317, Zona 10, are two radically different addresses.\nShort streets/avenues do not get new sequenced number, for example, 6A Calle is a short street between 6a and 7a.\nSome \"avenidas\" or \"Calles\" have a name in addition to their number, if it is very wide; for example, Avenida la Reforma is an avenue which separates Zone 9 and 10, and Calle Mont\u00fafar is Calle 12 in Zone 9.\nCalle 1 Avenida 1 Zona 1 is the center of every city in Guatemala.\nZone One is the Historic Center (Centro Hist\u00f3rico), lying in the very heart of the city, the location of many important historic buildings, including the Palacio Nacional de la Cultura (National Palace of Culture), the Metropolitan Cathedral, the National Congress, the Casa Presidencial (Presidential House), the National Library, and Plaza de la Constituci\u00f3n (Constitution Plaza, old Central Park). Efforts to revitalize this important part of the city have been undertaken by the municipal government.\nBesides the parks, the city offers a portfolio of entertainment in the region, focused on the so-called Zona Viva and the Calzada Roosevelt, as well as four degrees North. Casino activity is considerable, with several located in different parts of the Zona Viva. The area around the East market is being redeveloped.\nWithin the financial district are the tallest buildings in the country, including: Club Premier, Tinttorento, Atlantis building, Atrium, Tikal Futura, Building of Finances, Towers Building Batteries, Torres Botticelli, Tadeus, building of the INTECAP, Royal Towers, Towers Geminis, Industrial Bank towers, Holiday Inn Hotel, Premier of the Americas, among many others to be used for offices, apartments, etc. Also included are projects such as Zona Pradera and Interamerica's World Financial Center.\nOne of the most outstanding mayors was the engineer Martin Prado V\u00e9lez, who took over in 1949, and ruled the city during the reformist presidents Juan Jos\u00e9 Ar\u00e9valo and Jacobo Arbenz Guzman, although he was not a member of the ruling party at the time and was elected due his well-known capabilities. Of cobanero origin, married with Marta Cobos, he studied at the University of San Carlos; under his tenure, among other modernist works of the city, infrastructure projects included El Incienso bridge, the construction of the Roosevelt Avenue, the main road axis from East to West of the city, the town hall building, and numerous road works which meant the widening of the colonial city, its order in the cardinal points and the generation of a ring road with the first cloverleaf interchange in the city.\nIn an attempt to control the rapid growth of the city, the municipal government (Municipalidad de Guatemala), headed by longtime Mayor \u00c1lvaro Arz\u00fa, has implemented a plan to focus growth along important arterial roads and apply Transit-oriented development (TOD) characteristics. This plan, denominated POT (Plan de Ordenamiento Territorial), aims to allow taller building structures of mixed uses to be built next to large arterial roads, and gradually decline in height and density moving away from such. It is also worth mentioning, that due to the airport being in the south of the city, height limits based on aeronautical considerations have been applied to the construction code. This limits the maximum height for a building, at in Zone 10, up to in Zone 1.\nClimate.\nDespite its location in the tropics, Guatemala City has a monsoon humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cwa\") due to its relatively high altitude which moderate the average temperatures. Guatemala City is generally very warm, almost springlike, throughout the course of the year.\nIt occasionally gets hot during the dry season, but not as hot and humid as in Central American cities at sea level. The hottest month is April. The rainy season extends from May to October, coinciding with the tropical storm and hurricane season in the western Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea, while the dry season extends from November to April. The city can at times be windy, which also leads to lower ambient temperatures.\nThe city's average annual temperature ranges are during the day and at night; its average relative humidity is 82% in the morning and 58% in the evening; and its average dew point is .\nVolcanic activity.\nFour stratovolcanoes are visible from the city, two of them active. The nearest and most active is Pacaya, which at times erupts a considerable amount of ash. These volcanoes lie to the south of the Valle de la Ermita, providing a natural barrier between Guatemala City and the Pacific lowlands that define the southern regions of Guatemala. Agua, Fuego, Pacaya, and Acatenango comprise a line of 33 stratovolcanoes that stretches across the breadth of Guatemala, from the Salvadorian border to the Mexican border.\nEarthquakes.\nLying on the Ring of Fire, the Guatemalan highlands and the Valle de la Ermita are frequently shaken by large earthquakes. The last large tremor to hit the Guatemala City region occurred in the 1976, on the Motagua Fault, a left-lateral strike-slip fault that forms the boundary between the Caribbean Plate and the North American Plate. The 1976 event registered 7.5 on the moment magnitude scale. Smaller, less severe tremors are frequently felt in Guatemala City and environs.\nMudslides.\nTorrential downpours, similar to the more famous monsoons, occur frequently in the Valle de la Ermita during the rainy season, leading to flash floods that sometimes inundate the city. Due to these heavy rainfalls, some of the slums perched on the steep edges of the canyons that criss-cross the Valle de la Ermita are washed away and buried under mudslides, as in October 2005. Tropical waves, tropical storms and hurricanes sometimes strike the Guatemalan highlands, which also bring torrential rains to the Guatemala City region and trigger these deadly mudslides.\nPiping pseudokarst.\nIn February 2007, a very large, deep circular hole with vertical walls opened in northeastern Guatemala City (), killing five people. This sinkhole, which is classified by geologists as either a \"piping feature\" or \"piping pseudokarst\", was deep, and apparently was created by fluid from a sewer eroding the loose volcanic ash, limestone, and other pyroclastic deposits that underlie Guatemala City. As a result, one thousand people were evacuated from the area. This piping feature has since been mitigated by City Hall by providing proper maintenance to the sewerage collection system, and plans to develop the site have been proposed. However, critics believe municipal authorities have neglected needed maintenance on the city's aging sewerage system, and have speculated that more dangerous piping features are likely to develop unless action is taken.\nThree years later, the 2010 Guatemala City sinkhole arose.\nDemographics.\nIt is estimated that the population of Guatemala City urban area is about 3 million. The growth of the city's population has been robust, abetted by the mass migration of Guatemalans from the rural hinterlands to the largest and most vibrant regional economy in Guatemala. Among inhabitants of Guatemala City, those of Spanish and Mestizo descent are the most numerous. Guatemala City also has sizable indigenous populations, divided among the 23 distinct Mayan groups present in Guatemala. The numerous Mayan languages are now spoken in certain quarters of Guatemala City, making the city a linguistically rich area. Foreigners and foreign immigrants comprise the final distinct group of Guatemala City inhabitants, representing a very small minority among the city's denizens.\nDue to mass migration from impoverished rural districts wracked with political instability, Guatemala City's population has exploded since the 1970s, severely straining the existing bureaucratic and physical infrastructure of the city. As a result, chronic traffic congestion, shortages of safe potable water in some areas of the city, and a sudden and prolonged surge in crime have become perennial problems. The infrastructure, although continuing to grow and improve in some areas, is lagging in relation to the increasing population of rural migrants, who tend to be poorer.\nCommunications.\nGuatemala City is headquarters to many communications and telecom companies, among them Tigo, Claro-Telgua, and Movistar-Telef\u00f3nica. These companies also offer cable television, internet services and telephone access. Due to Guatemala City's large and concentrated consumer base in comparison to the rest of the country, these telecom and communications companies provide most of their services and offerings within the confines of the city. There are also seven local television channels, in addition to numerous international channels. The international channels range from children's programming, like Nickelodeon and the Disney Channel, to more adult offerings, such as E! and HBO. While international programming is dominated by entertainment from the United States, domestic programming is dominated by shows from Mexico. Due to its small and relatively income-restricted domestic market, Guatemala City produces very little in the way of its own programming outside of local news and sports.\nEconomy and finance.\nGuatemala City, as the capital, is home to Guatemala's central bank, from which Guatemala's monetary and fiscal policies are formulated and promulgated. Guatemala City is also headquarters to numerous regional private banks, among them CitiBank, Banco Agromercantil, Banco Promerica, Banco Industrial, Banco GyT Continental, Banco de Antigua, Banco Reformador, Banrural, Grupo Financiero de Occidente, BAC Credomatic, and Banco Internacional.\nBy far the richest and most powerful regional economy within Guatemala, Guatemala City is the largest market for goods and services, which provides the greatest number of investment opportunities for public and private investors in all of Guatemala. Financing for these investments is provided by the regional private banks, as well as through foreign direct investment mostly coming from the United States. Guatemala City's ample consumer base and service sector is represented by the large department store chains present in the city, among them Siman, Hiper Paiz &amp; Paiz (Walmart), Price Smart, ClubCo, Cemaco, Sears, and Office Depot.\nPlaces of interest by zones.\nGuatemala City is divided into 22 zones in accordance with the urban layout plan designed by Ra\u00fal Aguilar Batres. Each zone has its own streets and avenues, facilitating navigation within the city. Zones are numbered 1 through 25. However, numbers 20, 22 and 23 have not been designated to zones, thus these zones do not exist within the city proper.\nTransportation.\nTraditional buses are now required to discharge passengers at transfer stations at the city's edge to board the Transmetro. This is being implemented as new Transmetro lines become established. In conjunction with the new mass transit implementation in the city, there is also a prepaid bus card system called Transurbano that is being implemented in the metro area to limit cash handling for the transportation system. A new fleet of buses tailored for this system has been purchased from a Brazilian firm.\nA light rail line known as Metro Riel is proposed.\nUniversities and schools.\nGuatemala City is home to ten universities, among them the oldest institution of higher education in Central America, the University of San Carlos of Guatemala. Founded in 1676, the Universidad de San Carlos is older than all North American universities except for Harvard University.\nThe other nine institutions of higher education to be found in Guatemala City include the Universidad Mariano G\u00e1lvez, the Universidad Panamericana, the Universidad Mesoamericana, the Universidad Rafael Landivar, the Universidad Francisco Marroqu\u00edn, the Universidad del Valle, the Universidad del Istmo, Universidad Galileo, Universidad da Vinci, and the Universidad Rural. Whereas these nine named universities are private, the Universidad de San Carlos remains the only public institution of higher learning.\nSports.\nGuatemala City possesses several sportsgrounds and is home to many sports clubs. Football is the most popular sport, with CSD Municipal, Aurora, and Comunicaciones being the main clubs.\nThe Estadio Doroteo Guamuch Flores, located in the Zone 5 of the city, is the largest stadium in the country, followed in capacity by the Estadio Cementos Progreso, Estadio del Ej\u00e9rcito, and Estadio El Tr\u00e9bol. An important multi-functional hall is the Domo Polideportivo de la CDAG.\nThe city has hosted several promotional functions and some international sports events: in 1950 it hosted the VI Central American and Caribbean Games, and in 2000 the FIFA Futsal World Championship. On 4 July 2007 the International Olympic Committee gathered in Guatemala City and voted Sochi to become the host for the 2014 Winter Olympics and Paralympics. In April 2010, it hosted the XIVth Pan-American Mountain Bike Championships.\nGuatemala City hosted the 2008 edition of the CONCACAF Futsal Championship, played at the Domo Polideportivo from 2 to 8 June 2008.\nThe 2024 Senior Pan American Championships will be held in the city from 7 to 9 June at Gimnasio Nacional Teodoro Palacios Flores.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nGuatemala City is twinned with:\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11875", "revid": "1126265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11875", "title": "GNU", "text": "Free software collection\nGNU ( ) is an extensive collection of free software (387 packages as of June\u00a02025[ [update]]), which can be used as an operating system or can be used in parts with other operating systems. The use of the completed GNU tools led to the family of operating systems popularly known as Linux. Most of GNU is licensed under the GNU Project's own General Public License (GPL).\nGNU is also the project within which the free software concept originated. Richard Stallman, the founder of the project, views GNU as a \"technical means to a social end\". Relatedly, Lawrence Lessig states in his introduction to the second edition of Stallman's book \"Free Software, Free Society\" that in it Stallman has written about \"the social aspects of software and how Free Software can create community and social justice\".\nName.\n\"GNU\" is a recursive acronym for \"GNU's Not Unix!\", chosen because GNU's design is Unix-like, but differs from Unix by being free software and containing no Unix code. Stallman chose the name by using various plays on words, including the song \"The Gnu\".45:30\nHistory.\nDevelopment of the GNU software was initiated by Richard Stallman while he worked at the MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. It was called the GNU Project, and was publicly announced on September 27, 1983, on the net.unix-wizards and net.usoft newsgroups by Stallman. Software development began on January 5, 1984, when Stallman quit his job at the Lab so that they could not claim ownership or interfere with distributing GNU components as free software.\nThe goal was to bring a completely free software operating system into existence. Stallman wanted computer users to be free to study the source code of the software they use, share software with other people, modify the behavior of software, and publish their modified versions of the software. This philosophy was published as the GNU Manifesto in March 1985.\nRichard Stallman's experience with the Incompatible Timesharing System (ITS), an early operating system written in assembly language that became obsolete due to discontinuation of PDP-10, the computer architecture for which ITS was written, led to a decision that a portable system was necessary.40:52 It was thus decided that the development would be started using C and Lisp as system programming languages, and that GNU would be compatible with Unix. At the time, Unix was already a popular proprietary operating system. The design of Unix was modular, so it could be reimplemented piece by piece.\nMuch of the needed software had to be written from scratch, but existing compatible third-party free software components were also used such as the TeX typesetting system, the X Window System, and the Mach microkernel that forms the basis of the GNU Mach core of GNU Hurd (the official kernel of GNU). With the exception of the aforementioned third-party components, most of GNU has been written by volunteers; some in their spare time, some paid by companies, educational institutions, and other non-profit organizations. In October 1985, Stallman set up the Free Software Foundation (FSF). In the late 1980s and 1990s, the FSF hired software developers to write the software needed for GNU.\nAs GNU gained prominence, interested businesses began contributing to development or selling GNU software and technical support. The most prominent and successful of these was Cygnus Solutions, now part of Red Hat.\nComponents.\nThe system's basic components include the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC), the GNU C library (glibc), and GNU Core Utilities (coreutils), but also the GNU Debugger (GDB), GNU Binary Utilities (binutils), and the GNU Bash shell. GNU developers have contributed to Linux ports of GNU applications and utilities, which are now also widely used on other operating systems such as BSD variants, Solaris and macOS.\nMany GNU programs have been ported to other operating systems, including proprietary platforms such as Microsoft Windows and macOS. GNU programs have been shown to be more reliable than their proprietary Unix counterparts.\nAs of June\u00a02024[ [update]], there are a total of 467 GNU packages (including decommissioned, 394 excluding) hosted on the official GNU development site.\nGNU as an operating system.\nIn its original meaning, and one still common in hardware engineering, the operating system is a basic set of functions to control the hardware and manage things like task scheduling and system calls. In modern terminology used by software developers, the collection of these functions is usually referred to as a kernel, while an 'operating system' is expected to have a more extensive set of programs. The GNU project maintains two kernels itself, allowing the creation of pure GNU operating systems, but the GNU toolchain is also used with non-GNU kernels. Due to the two different definitions of the term 'operating system', there is an ongoing debate concerning the naming of distributions of GNU packages with a non-GNU kernel. (See below.)\nWith kernels maintained by GNU and FSF.\nGNU Hurd.\nThe original kernel of GNU Project is the GNU Hurd (together with the GNU Mach microkernel), which was the original focus of the Free Software Foundation (FSF).\nWith the April 30, 2015 release of the Debian GNU/Hurd 2015 distro, GNU now provides all required components to assemble an operating system that users can install and use on a computer.\nHowever, the Hurd kernel is not yet considered production-ready but rather a base for further development and non-critical application usage.\nLinux-libre.\nIn 2012, a fork of the Linux kernel became officially part of the GNU Project in the form of Linux-libre, a variant of Linux with all proprietary components removed.\nThe GNU Project has endorsed Linux-libre distributions, such as Trisquel, Parabola GNU/Linux-libre, PureOS and GNU Guix System.\nWith non-GNU kernels.\nBecause of the development status of Hurd, GNU is usually paired with other kernels such as Linux or FreeBSD. Whether the combination of GNU libraries with external kernels is a GNU operating system with a kernel (e.g. GNU with Linux), because the GNU collection renders the kernel into a usable operating system as understood in modern software development, or whether the kernel is an operating system unto itself with a GNU layer on top (i.e. Linux with GNU), because the kernel can operate a machine without GNU, is a matter of ongoing debate. The FSF maintains that an operating system built using the Linux kernel and GNU tools and utilities should be considered a variant of GNU, and promotes the term \"GNU/Linux\" for such systems (leading to the GNU/Linux naming controversy). This view is not exclusive to the FSF. Notably, Debian, one of the biggest and oldest Linux distributions, refers to itself as \"Debian GNU/Linux\".\nCopyright, GNU licenses, and stewardship.\nThe GNU Project recommends that contributors assign the copyright for GNU packages to the Free Software Foundation, though the Free Software Foundation considers it acceptable to release small changes to an existing project to the public domain. However, this is not required; package maintainers may retain copyright to the GNU packages they maintain, though since only the copyright holder may enforce the license used (such as the GNU GPL), the copyright holder in this case enforces it rather than the Free Software Foundation.\nFor the development of needed software, Stallman wrote a license called the GNU General Public License (first called Emacs General Public License), with the goal to guarantee users freedom to share and change free software. Stallman wrote this license after his experience with James Gosling and a program called UniPress, over a controversy around software code use in the GNU Emacs program. For most of the 80s, each GNU package had its own license: the Emacs General Public License, the GCC General Public License, etc. In 1989, FSF published a single license they could use for all their software, and which could be used by non-GNU projects: the GNU General Public License (GPL).\nThis license is now used by most of GNU software, as well as a large number of free software programs that are not part of the GNU Project; it also historically has been the most commonly used free software license (though recently challenged by the MIT license). It gives all recipients of a program the right to run, copy, modify and distribute it, while forbidding them from imposing further restrictions on any copies they distribute. This idea is often referred to as copyleft.\nIn 1991, the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL), then known as the Library General Public License, was written for the GNU C Library to allow it to be linked with proprietary software. 1991 also saw the release of version 2 of the GNU GPL. The GNU Free Documentation License (FDL), for documentation, followed in 2000. The GPL and LGPL were revised to version 3 in 2007, adding clauses to protect users against hardware restrictions that prevent users from running modified software on their own devices.\nBesides GNU's packages, the GNU Project's licenses can and are used by many unrelated projects, such as the Linux kernel, often used with GNU software. A majority of free software such as the X Window System, is licensed under permissive free software licenses.\nLogo.\nThe logo for GNU is a gnu head. Originally drawn by Etienne Suvasa, a bolder and simpler version designed by Aurelio Heckert is now preferred. It appears in GNU software and in printed and electronic documentation for the GNU Project, and is also used in Free Software Foundation materials.\nThere was also a modified version of the official logo. It was created by the Free Software Foundation in September 2013 in order to commemorate the 30th anniversary of the GNU Project.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11877", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11877", "title": "Gradualism", "text": "Philosophy of step-by-step proceeding\nGradualism, from the Latin (\"step\"), is a hypothesis, a theory or a tenet assuming that change comes about gradually or that variation is gradual in nature and happens over time as opposed to in large steps. Uniformitarianism, incrementalism, and reformism are similar concepts.\nGradualism can also refer to desired, controlled change in society, institutions, or policies. For example, social democrats and democratic socialists see the socialist society as achieved through gradualism.\nGeology and biology.\nIn the natural sciences, gradualism is the theory which holds that profound change is the cumulative product of slow but continuous processes, often contrasted with catastrophism. The theory was proposed in 1795 by James Hutton, a Scottish geologist, and was later incorporated into Charles Lyell's theory of uniformitarianism. Tenets from both theories were applied to biology and formed the basis of early evolutionary theory.\nCharles Darwin was influenced by Lyell's \"Principles of Geology\", which explained both uniformitarian methodology and theory. Using uniformitarianism, which states that one cannot make an appeal to any force or phenomenon which cannot presently be observed (see catastrophism), Darwin theorized that the evolutionary process must occur gradually, not in saltations, since saltations are not presently observed, and extreme deviations from the usual phenotypic variation would be more likely to be selected against.\nGradualism is often confused with the concept of phyletic gradualism. It is a term coined by Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge to contrast with their model of punctuated equilibrium, which is gradualist itself, but argues that most evolution is marked by long periods of evolutionary stability (called stasis), which is punctuated by rare instances of branching evolution.\nPhyletic gradualism is a model of evolution which theorizes that most speciation is slow, uniform, and gradual. When evolution occurs in this mode, it is usually by the steady transformation of a whole species into a new one (through a process called anagenesis). In this view no clear line of demarcation exists between an ancestral species and a descendant species, unless splitting occurs.\nPunctuated gradualism is a microevolutionary hypothesis that refers to a species that has \"relative stasis over a considerable part of its total duration [and] underwent periodic, relatively rapid, morphologic change that did not lead to lineage branching\". It is one of the three common models of evolution. While the traditional model of palaeontology, the phylogenetic model, states that features evolved slowly without any direct association with speciation, the relatively newer and more controversial idea of punctuated equilibrium claims that major evolutionary changes do not happen over a gradual period but in localized, rare, rapid events of branching speciation. Punctuated gradualism is considered to be a variation of these models, lying somewhere in between the phyletic gradualism model and the punctuated equilibrium model. It states that speciation is not needed for a lineage to rapidly evolve from one equilibrium to another but may show rapid transitions between long-stable states.\nPolitics and society.\nIn politics, gradualism is the hypothesis that social change can be achieved in small, discrete increments rather than in abrupt strokes such as revolutions or uprisings. Gradualism is one of the defining features of political liberalism and reformism.\nGradualism in social change implemented through reformist means is a moral principle to which the Fabian Society is committed. In a more general way, reformism is the assumption that gradual changes through and within existing institutions can ultimately change a society's fundamental economic system and political structures; and that an accumulation of reforms can lead to the emergence of an entirely different economic system and form of society than present-day capitalism. That hypothesis of social change grew out of opposition to revolutionary socialism, which contends that revolution is necessary for fundamental structural changes to occur.\nIn socialist politics and within the socialist movement, the concept of gradualism is frequently distinguished from reformism, with the former insisting that short-term goals need to be formulated and implemented in such a way that they inevitably lead into long-term goals. It is most commonly associated with the libertarian socialist concept of dual power and is seen as a middle way between reformism and revolutionism.\nMartin Luther King Jr. was opposed to the idea of gradualism as a method of eliminating segregation. The United States government wanted to try to integrate African Americans and European Americans slowly into the same society, but many believed it was a way for the government to put off actually doing anything about racial segregation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is no time to engage in the luxury of cooling off or to take the tranquilizing drug of gradualism. Now is the time to make real the promises of democracy.\u2014\u200a\nConspiracy theories.\nIn the terminology of NWO-related speculations, gradualism refers to the gradual implementation of a totalitarian world government.\nLinguistics and language change.\nIn linguistics, language change is seen as gradual, the product of chain reactions and subject to cyclic drift. The view that creole languages are the product of catastrophism is heavily disputed.\nMorality.\nBuddhism, Theravada, and Yoga.\nGradualism is the approach of certain schools of Buddhism and other Eastern philosophies (e.g. Theravada or Yoga), that enlightenment can be achieved step by step, through an arduous practice. The opposite approach, that insight is attained all at once, is called subitism. The debate on the issue was very important to the history of the development of Zen, which rejected gradualism, and to the establishment of the opposite approach within the Tibetan Buddhism, after the Debate of Samye. It was continued in other schools of Indian and Chinese philosophy.\nPhilosophy.\nContradictorial gradualism is the paraconsistent treatment of fuzziness developed by Lorenzo Pe\u00f1a which regards true contradictions as situations wherein a state of affairs enjoys only partial existence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11878", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11878", "title": "Gravity (old version)", "text": ""}
{"id": "11879", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11879", "title": "GPL", "text": ""}
{"id": "11880", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11880", "title": "GothicLanguage", "text": ""}
{"id": "11881", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11881", "title": "Gas giants", "text": ""}
{"id": "11882", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11882", "title": "Greek", "text": "Greek may refer to:\nAnything of, from, or related to Greece, a country in Southern Europe:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "11883", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11883", "title": "Germanic languages", "text": "Branch of the Indo-European language family\nThe Germanic languages are a branch of the Indo-European language family spoken natively by a population of about 515 million people mainly in Europe, Northern America, Oceania, and Southern Africa. The most widely spoken Germanic language, English, is also the world's most widely spoken language with an estimated 2 billion speakers. All Germanic languages are derived from Proto-Germanic, spoken in Iron Age Scandinavia, Iron Age Northern Germany and along the North Sea and Baltic coasts.\nThe West Germanic languages include the three most widely spoken Germanic languages: English with around 360\u2013400 million native speakers; German, with over 100 million native speakers; and Dutch, with 24 million native speakers. Other West Germanic languages include Afrikaans, an offshoot of Dutch originating from the Afrikaners of South Africa, with over 7.1 million native speakers; Low German, considered a separate collection of unstandardized dialects, with roughly 4.35\u20137.15 million native speakers and probably 6.7\u201310 million people who can understand it 88 (at least 2.2 million in Germany (2016) and 2.15 million in the Netherlands (2003));88 Yiddish, once used by approximately 13 million Jews in pre-World War II Europe, now with approximately 1.5 million native speakers; Scots, with 1.5 million native speakers; Limburgish varieties with roughly 1.3 million speakers along the Dutch\u2013Belgian\u2013German border; and the Frisian languages with over 500,000 native speakers in the Netherlands and Germany.\nThe largest North Germanic languages are Swedish, Danish, and Norwegian, which are in part mutually intelligible and have a combined total of about 20 million native speakers in the Nordic countries and an additional five million second language speakers; since the Middle Ages, however, these languages have been strongly influenced by Middle Low German, a West Germanic language, and Low German words account for about 30\u201360% of their vocabularies according to various estimates. Other extant North Germanic languages are Faroese, Icelandic, and Elfdalian, which are more conservative languages with no significant Low German influence, more complex grammar and limited mutual intelligibility with other North Germanic languages today.\nThe East Germanic branch included Gothic, Burgundian and Vandalic. The last to die off was Crimean Gothic, spoken until the late 18th century in some isolated areas of Crimea.\nThe SIL \"Ethnologue\" lists 48 different living Germanic languages, 41 of which belong to the Western branch and six to the Northern branch; it places Riograndenser Hunsr\u00fcckisch German in neither of the categories, but it is often considered a German dialect by linguists. The total number of Germanic languages throughout history is unknown as some of them, especially the East Germanic languages, disappeared during or after the Migration Period. Some of the West Germanic languages also did not survive past the Migration Period, including Lombardic. As a result of World War II and subsequent mass expulsion of Germans, the German language suffered a significant loss of \"Sprachraum\", as well as moribundity and extinction of several of its dialects. In the 21st century, German dialects are dying out as Standard German gains primacy.\nThe common ancestor of all of the languages in this branch is called Proto-Germanic, also known as Common Germanic, which was spoken in about the middle of the 1st millennium BC in Iron Age Scandinavia and Iron Age Northern Germany. Proto-Germanic, along with all of its descendants, notably has a number of unique linguistic features, most famously the consonant change known as \"Grimm's law.\" Early varieties of Germanic entered history when the Germanic tribes moved south from Scandinavia and northern Germany in the 2nd century BC to settle in the area of today's western Germany and along the Baltic coasts.\nModern status.\nWest Germanic languages.\nEnglish is an official language of Belize, Canada, Nigeria, Falkland Islands, Saint Helena, Malta, New Zealand, Ireland, South Africa, Philippines, Jamaica, Dominica, Guyana, Trinidad and Tobago, American Samoa, Palau, St. Lucia, Grenada, Barbados, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Puerto Rico, Guam, Hong Kong, Singapore, Pakistan, India, Papua New Guinea, Namibia, Vanuatu, the Solomon Islands and former British colonies in Asia, Africa and Oceania. Furthermore, it is the \"de facto\" language of the United Kingdom, the United States and Australia, as well as a recognized language in Nicaragua and Malaysia.\nGerman is a language of Austria, Belgium, Germany, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg and Switzerland; it also has regional status in Italy, Poland, Namibia and Denmark. German also continues to be spoken as a minority language by immigrant communities in North America, South America, Central America, Mexico and Australia. A German dialect, Pennsylvania Dutch, is still used among various populations in the American state of Pennsylvania in daily life. A group of Alemannic German dialects commonly referred to as Alsatian is spoken in Alsace, part of modern France.\nDutch is an official language of Aruba, Belgium, Cura\u00e7ao, the Netherlands, Sint Maarten, and Suriname. The Netherlands also colonized Indonesia, but Dutch was scrapped as an official language after Indonesian independence. Today, it is only used by older or traditionally educated people. Dutch was until 1983 an official language in South Africa but evolved into and was replaced by Afrikaans, a partially mutually intelligible daughter language of Dutch.\nAfrikaans is one of the 12 official languages in South Africa and is a \"lingua franca\" of Namibia. It is used in other Southern African nations, as well.\nLow German is a collection of very diverse dialects spoken in the northeast of the Netherlands and northern Germany. Some dialects like East Pomeranian have been imported to South America.\nScots is one of the 3 official languages of Scotland and is spoken by over 1.5 million people, mostly in the Lowlands of Scotland but also in the northen isles (Orcadian, Shetlandic) and parts of Ulster (where the local dialect is known as Ulster Scots).\nFrisian is spoken among half a million people who live on the southern fringes of the North Sea in the Netherlands and Germany.\nLuxembourgish is a Moselle Franconian dialect that is spoken mainly in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, where it is considered to be an official language. Similar varieties of Moselle Franconian are spoken in small parts of Belgium, France, and Germany.\nYiddish, once a native language of some 11 to 13 million people, remains in use by some 1.5 million speakers in Jewish communities around the world, mainly in North America, Europe, Israel, and other regions with Jewish populations.\nLimburgish varieties are spoken in the Limburg and Rhineland regions, along the Dutch\u2013Belgian\u2013German border.\nNorth Germanic languages.\nIn addition to being the official language in Sweden, Swedish is also spoken natively by the Swedish-speaking minority in Finland, which is a large part of the population along the coast of western and southern Finland. Swedish is also one of the two official languages in Finland, along with Finnish, and the only official language in \u00c5land. Swedish is also spoken by some people in Estonia.\nDanish is an official language of Denmark and in its overseas territory of the Faroe Islands, and it is a \"lingua franca\" and language of education in its other overseas territory of Greenland, where it was one of the official languages until 2009. Danish, a locally recognized minority language, is also natively spoken by the Danish minority in the German state of Schleswig-Holstein. Danish was an official language of Iceland when it was a territory ruled by Denmark\u2013Norway; though its official status was terminated in 1944, it is still widely used and is a mandatory subject in school, taught as a second foreign language after English.\nNorwegian is the official language of Norway (both Bokm\u00e5l and Nynorsk). Norwegian is also the official language in the overseas territories of Norway such as Svalbard, Jan Mayen, Bouvet island, Queen Maud Land, and Peter I island.\nIcelandic is the official language of Iceland.\nFaroese is the official language of the Faroe Islands, and is also spoken by some people in Denmark.\nStatistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistory.\nAll Germanic languages are thought to be descended from a hypothetical Proto-Germanic, united by subjection to the sound shifts of Grimm's law and Verner's law. These probably took place during the Pre-Roman Iron Age of Northern Europe c.\u2009500 BC. Proto-Germanic itself was likely spoken after c.\u2009500 BC, and Proto-Norse from the 2nd century AD and later is still quite close to reconstructed Proto-Germanic, but other common innovations separating Germanic from Proto-Indo-European suggest a common history of pre-Proto-Germanic speakers throughout the Nordic Bronze Age.\nFrom the time of their earliest attestation, the Germanic varieties are divided into three groups: West, East, and North Germanic. Their exact relation is difficult to determine from the sparse evidence of runic inscriptions.\nThe western group would have formed in the late Jastorf culture, and the eastern group may be derived from the 1st-century variety of Gotland, leaving southern Sweden as the original location of the northern group. The earliest period of Elder Futhark (2nd to 4th centuries) predates the division in regional script variants, and linguistically essentially still reflects the Common Germanic stage. The Vimose inscriptions include some of the oldest datable Germanic inscriptions, starting in c.\u2009160 AD.\nThe earliest coherent Germanic text preserved is the 4th-century Gothic translation of the New Testament by Ulfilas. Early testimonies of West Germanic are in Old Frankish/Old Dutch (the 5th-century Bergakker inscription), Old High German (scattered words and sentences 6th century and coherent texts 9th century), and Old English (oldest texts 650, coherent texts 10th century). North Germanic is only attested in scattered runic inscriptions, as Proto-Norse, until it evolves into Old Norse by about 800.\nLonger runic inscriptions survive from the 8th and 9th centuries (Eggjum stone, R\u00f6k stone), longer texts in the Latin alphabet survive from the 12th century (), and some skaldic poetry dates back to as early as the 9th century.\nBy about the 10th century, the varieties had diverged enough to make mutual intelligibility difficult. The linguistic contact of the Viking settlers of the Danelaw with the Anglo-Saxons left traces in the English language and is suspected to have facilitated the collapse of Old English grammar that, combined with the influx of Romance Old French vocabulary after the Norman Conquest, resulted in Middle English from the 12th century.\nThe East Germanic languages were marginalized from the end of the Migration Period. The Burgundians, Goths, and Vandals became linguistically assimilated by their respective neighbors by about the 7th century, with only Crimean Gothic lingering on until the 18th century.\nDuring the early Middle Ages, the West Germanic languages were separated by the insular development of Middle English on one hand and by the High German consonant shift on the continent on the other, resulting in Upper German and Low Saxon, with graded intermediate Central German varieties. By early modern times, the span had extended into considerable differences, ranging from Highest Alemannic in the South to Northern Low Saxon in the North, and, although both extremes are considered German, they are hardly mutually intelligible. The southernmost varieties had completed the second sound shift, while the northern varieties remained unaffected by the consonant shift.\nThe North Germanic languages, on the other hand, remained unified until well past 1000 AD, and in fact the mainland Scandinavian languages still largely retain mutual intelligibility into modern times. The main split in these languages is between the mainland languages and the island languages to the west, especially Icelandic, which has maintained the grammar of Old Norse virtually unchanged, while the mainland languages have diverged greatly.\nDistinctive characteristics.\nGermanic languages possess a number of defining features compared with other Indo-European languages.\nSome of the best-known are the following:\nOther significant characteristics are:\nSome of the characteristics present in Germanic languages were not present in Proto-Germanic but developed later as areal features that spread from language to language:\nRoughly speaking, Germanic languages differ in how conservative or how progressive each language is with respect to an overall trend toward analyticity. Some, such as Icelandic and, to a lesser extent, German, have preserved much of the complex inflectional morphology inherited from Proto-Germanic (and in turn from Proto-Indo-European). Others, such as English, Swedish, and Afrikaans, have moved toward a largely analytic type.\nLinguistic developments.\nThe subgroupings of the Germanic languages are defined by shared innovations. It is important to distinguish innovations from cases of linguistic conservatism. That is, if two languages in a family share a characteristic that is not observed in a third language, that is evidence of common ancestry of the two languages \"only if\" the characteristic is an innovation compared to the family's proto-language.\nThe following innovations are common to the Northwest Germanic languages (all but Gothic):\nThe following innovations are also common to the Northwest Germanic languages but represent areal changes:\nThe following innovations are common to the West Germanic languages:\nThe following innovations are common to the Ingvaeonic subgroup of the West Germanic languages, affecting mainly English, Frisian, and to a lesser extent Low German (all of which are Ingvaeonic), as well as Dutch, but not High German:\nThe following innovations are common to the Anglo-Frisian subgroup of the Ingvaeonic languages:\nCommon linguistic features.\nPhonology.\nThe oldest Germanic languages all share a number of features, which are assumed to be inherited from Proto-Germanic. Phonologically, it includes the important sound changes known as Grimm's law and Verner's law, which introduced a large number of fricatives; late Proto-Indo-European had only one, /s/.\nThe main vowel developments are the merging (in most circumstances) of long and short /a/ and /o/, producing short /a/ and long /\u014d/. That likewise affected the diphthongs, with PIE /ai/ and /oi/ merging into /ai/ and PIE /au/ and /ou/ merging into /au/. PIE /ei/ developed into long /\u012b/. PIE long /\u0113/ developed into a vowel denoted as /\u01131/ (often assumed to be phonetically ), while a new, fairly uncommon long vowel /\u01132/ developed in varied and not completely understood circumstances. Proto-Germanic had no front rounded vowels, but all Germanic languages except for Gothic subsequently developed them through the process of i-umlaut.\nProto-Germanic developed a strong stress accent on the first syllable of the root, but remnants of the original free PIE accent are visible due to Verner's law, which was sensitive to this accent. That caused a steady erosion of vowels in unstressed syllables. In Proto-Germanic, that had progressed only to the point that absolutely-final short vowels (other than /i/ and /u/) were lost and absolutely-final long vowels were shortened, but all of the early literary languages show a more advanced state of vowel loss. This ultimately resulted in some languages (like Modern English) losing practically all vowels following the main stress and the consequent rise of a very large number of monosyllabic words.\nTable of outcomes.\nThe following table shows the main outcomes of Proto-Germanic vowels and consonants in the various older languages. For vowels, only the outcomes in stressed syllables are shown. Outcomes in unstressed syllables are quite different, vary from language to language and depend on a number of other factors (such as whether the syllable was medial or final, whether the syllable was open or closed and (in some cases) whether the preceding syllable was light or heavy).\nNotes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMorphology.\nThe oldest Germanic languages have the typical complex inflected morphology of old Indo-European languages, with four or five noun cases; verbs marked for person, number, tense and mood; multiple noun and verb classes; few or no articles; and rather free word order. The old Germanic languages are famous for having only two tenses (present and past), with three PIE past-tense aspects (imperfect, aorist, and perfect/stative) merged into one and no new tenses (future, pluperfect, etc.) developing. There were three moods: indicative, subjunctive (developed from the PIE optative mood) and imperative. Gothic verbs had a number of archaic features inherited from PIE that were lost in the other Germanic languages with few traces, including dual endings, an inflected passive voice (derived from the PIE mediopassive voice), and a class of verbs with reduplication in the past tense (derived from the PIE perfect). The complex tense system of modern English (e.g. \"In three months, the house will still be being built\" or \"If you had not acted so stupidly, we would never have been caught\") is almost entirely due to subsequent developments (although paralleled in many of the other Germanic languages).\nAmong the primary innovations in Proto-Germanic are the preterite present verbs, a special set of verbs whose present tense looks like the past tense of other verbs and which is the origin of most modal verbs in English; a past-tense ending; (in the so-called \"weak verbs\", marked with \"-ed\" in English) that appears variously as /d/ or /t/, often assumed to be derived from the verb \"to do\"; and two separate sets of adjective endings, originally corresponding to a distinction between indefinite semantics (\"a man\", with a combination of PIE adjective and pronoun endings) and definite semantics (\"the man\", with endings derived from PIE \"n\"-stem nouns).\nNote that most modern Germanic languages have lost most of the inherited inflectional morphology as a result of the steady attrition of unstressed endings triggered by the strong initial stress. (Contrast, for example, the Balto-Slavic languages, which have largely kept the Indo-European pitch accent and consequently preserved much of the inherited morphology.) Icelandic and to a lesser extent modern German best preserve the Proto\u2013Germanic inflectional system, with four noun cases, three genders, and well-marked verbs. English and Afrikaans are at the other extreme, with almost no remaining inflectional morphology.\nThe following shows a typical masculine \"a\"-stem noun, Proto-Germanic \"*fiskaz\" (\"fish\"), and its development in the various old literary languages:\nStrong vs. weak nouns and adjectives.\nOriginally, adjectives in Proto-Indo-European followed the same declensional classes as nouns. The most common class (the \"o/\u0101\" class) used a combination of \"o\"-stem endings for masculine and neuter genders and \"\u0101\"-stems ending for feminine genders, but other common classes (e.g. the \"i\" class and \"u\" class) used endings from a single vowel-stem declension for all genders, and various other classes existed that were based on other declensions. A quite different set of \"pronominal\" endings was used for pronouns, determiners, and words with related semantics (e.g., \"all\", \"only\").\nAn important innovation in Proto-Germanic was the development of two separate sets of adjective endings, originally corresponding to a distinction between indefinite semantics (\"a man\") and definite semantics (\"the man\"). The endings of indefinite adjectives were derived from a combination of pronominal endings with one of the common vowel-stem adjective declensions \u2013 usually the \"o/\u0101\" class (often termed the \"a/\u014d\" class in the specific context of the Germanic languages) but sometimes the \"i\" or \"u\" classes. Definite adjectives, however, had endings based on \"n\"-stem nouns. Originally both types of adjectives could be used by themselves, but already by Proto-Germanic times a pattern evolved whereby definite adjectives had to be accompanied by a determiner with definite semantics (e.g., a definite article, demonstrative pronoun, possessive pronoun, or the like), while indefinite adjectives were used in other circumstances (either accompanied by a word with indefinite semantics such as \"a\", \"one\", or \"some\" or unaccompanied).\nIn the 19th century, the two types of adjectives \u2013 indefinite and definite \u2013 were respectively termed \"strong\" and \"weak\", names which are still commonly used. These names were based on the appearance of the two sets of endings in modern German. In German, the distinctive case endings formerly present on nouns have largely disappeared, with the result that the load of distinguishing one case from another is almost entirely carried by determiners and adjectives. Furthermore, due to regular sound change, the various definite (\"n\"-stem) adjective endings coalesced to the point where only two endings (\"-e\" and \"-en\") remain in modern German to express the sixteen possible inflectional categories of the language (masculine/feminine/neuter/plural crossed with nominative/accusative/dative/genitive \u2013 modern German merges all genders in the plural). The indefinite (\"a/\u014d\"-stem) adjective endings were less affected by sound change, with six endings remaining (\"-, -e, -es, -er, -em, -en\"), cleverly distributed in a way that is capable of expressing the various inflectional categories without too much ambiguity. As a result, the definite endings were thought of as too \"weak\" to carry inflectional meaning and in need of \"strengthening\" by the presence of an accompanying determiner, while the indefinite endings were viewed as \"strong\" enough to indicate the inflectional categories even when standing alone. (This view is enhanced by the fact that modern German largely uses weak-ending adjectives when accompanying an indefinite article, and hence the indefinite/definite distinction no longer clearly applies.) By analogy, the terms \"strong\" and \"weak\" were extended to the corresponding noun classes, with \"a\"-stem and \"\u014d\"-stem nouns termed \"strong\" and \"n\"-stem nouns termed \"weak\".\nHowever, in Proto-Germanic \u2013 and still in Gothic, the most conservative Germanic language \u2013 the terms \"strong\" and \"weak\" are not clearly appropriate. For one thing, there were a large number of noun declensions. The \"a\"-stem, \"\u014d\"-stem, and \"n\"-stem declensions were the most common and represented targets into which the other declensions were eventually absorbed, but this process occurred only gradually. Originally the \"n\"-stem declension was not a single declension but a set of separate declensions (e.g., \"-an\", \"-\u014dn\", \"-\u012bn\") with related endings, and these endings were in no way any \"weaker\" than the endings of any other declensions. (For example, among the eight possible inflectional categories of a noun \u2014 singular/plural crossed with nominative/accusative/dative/genitive \u2014 masculine \"an\"-stem nouns in Gothic include seven endings, and feminine \"\u014dn\"-stem nouns include six endings, meaning there is very little ambiguity of \"weakness\" in these endings and in fact much less than in the German \"strong\" endings.) Although it is possible to group the various noun declensions into three basic categories \u2014 vowel-stem, \"n\"-stem, and other-consonant-stem (a.k.a. \"minor declensions\") \u2014 the vowel-stem nouns do not display any sort of unity in their endings that supports grouping them together with each other but separate from the \"n\"-stem endings.\nIt is only in later languages that the binary distinction between \"strong\" and \"weak\" nouns become more relevant. In Old English, the \"n\"-stem nouns form a single, clear class, but the masculine \"a\"-stem and feminine \"\u014d\"-stem nouns have little in common with each other, and neither has much similarity to the small class of \"u\"-stem nouns. Similarly, in Old Norse, the masculine \"a\"-stem and feminine \"\u014d\"-stem nouns have little in common with each other, and the continuations of the masculine \"an\"-stem and feminine \"\u014dn/\u012bn\"-stem nouns are also quite distinct. It is only in Middle Dutch and modern German that the various vowel-stem nouns have merged to the point that a binary strong/weak distinction clearly applies.\nAs a result, newer grammatical descriptions of the Germanic languages often avoid the terms \"strong\" and \"weak\" except in conjunction with German itself, preferring instead to use the terms \"indefinite\" and \"definite\" for adjectives and to distinguish nouns by their actual stem class.\nIn English, both sets of adjective endings were lost entirely in the late Middle English period.\nClassification.\nNote that divisions between and among subfamilies of Germanic are rarely precisely defined; most form continuous clines, with adjacent varieties being mutually intelligible and more separated ones not. Within the Germanic language family are East Germanic, West Germanic, and North Germanic. However, East Germanic languages became extinct several centuries ago.\nAll living Germanic languages belong either to the West Germanic or to the North Germanic branch.\nThe West Germanic group is the larger by far, further subdivided into Anglo-Frisian on one hand and Continental West Germanic on the other. Anglo-Frisian notably includes English and all its variants, while Continental West Germanic includes German (standard register and dialects), as well as Dutch (standard register and dialects). East Germanic includes most notably the extinct Gothic and Crimean Gothic languages.\nModern classification looks like this. For a full classification, see List of Germanic languages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWriting.\nBC.\nThe earliest evidence of Germanic languages comes from names recorded in the 1st century by Tacitus (especially from his work \"Germania\"), but the earliest Germanic writing occurs in a single instance in the 2nd century BC on the Negau helmet, written in Old Italic script.\nAD.\nFrom roughly the 1st to the 2nd century AD, or possibly even before AD (as per the dating of the Hole Runestone: 50 BC to 275 AD), certain speakers of early Germanic varieties developed the Elder Futhark, an early form of the runic alphabet. Early runic inscriptions also are largely limited to personal names and difficult to interpret.\nThe Gothic language was initially written with Elder runes, but starting from the 4th century, such was superseded by the Gothic alphabet, developed by Bishop Ulfilas for his translation of the Bible in the 4th century.\nLater, Christian priests and monks who spoke and read Latin, in addition to their native Germanic varieties, began writing the Germanic languages with slightly modified Latin letters. However, throughout the Viking Age and Middle Ages, runic writing remained in common use and development in Scandinavia, acting as the people's writing system alongside the state's Latin script, first diminishing properly when the printing press was introduced; however, the runic tradition survived regionally, especially in the Swedish province of Dalarna \u2013 see Dalecarlian runes.\nModern writing.\nModern Germanic languages mostly use an alphabet derived from the Latin Alphabet. In print, German used to be predominately set in blackletter typefaces (e.g., fraktur or schwabacher) until the 1940s, while \"Kurrent\" and, since the early 20th century, \"S\u00fctterlin\" were formerly used for German handwriting. Yiddish is written using an adapted Hebrew alphabet.\nVocabulary comparison.\nThe table compares cognates in several different Germanic languages. In some cases, the meanings may not be identical in each language.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11884", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11884", "title": "German language", "text": "West Germanic language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nGerman (, ) is a West Germanic language in the Indo-European language family, mainly spoken in Western and Central Europe. It is the majority and official (or co-official) language in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, and Liechtenstein. It is also an official language of Luxembourg, Belgium and the Italian autonomous province of South Tyrol, as well as a recognized national language in Namibia. There are also notable German-speaking communities in other parts of Europe, including: Poland (Upper Silesia), the Czech Republic (North Bohemia), Denmark (North Schleswig), Slovakia (Krahule), Romania, Hungary (Sopron), and France (Alsace). Overseas, sizeable communities of German-speakers are found in the Americas.\nGerman is one of the major languages of the world, with nearly 80 million native speakers and over 130 million total speakers as of 2024. It is the most spoken native language within the European Union. German is the second-most widely spoken Germanic language, after English, both as a first and as a second language. German is also widely taught as a foreign language, especially in continental Europe (where it is the third most taught foreign language after English and French) and in the United States (where it is the third most commonly learned second language in K-12 education and among the most studied foreign languages in higher education after Spanish and French). Overall, German is the fourth most commonly learned second language globally. The language has been influential in the fields of philosophy, theology, science, and technology. It is the second most commonly used language in science and the third most widely used language on websites. The German-speaking countries are ranked fifth in terms of annual publication of new books, with one-tenth of all books (including e-books) in the world being published in German.\nGerman is most closely related to other West Germanic languages, namely Afrikaans, Dutch, English, the Frisian languages, and Scots. It also contains close similarities in vocabulary to some languages in the North Germanic group, such as Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish. Modern German gradually developed from Old High German, which in turn developed from Proto-Germanic during the Early Middle Ages.\nGerman is an inflected language, with four cases for nouns, pronouns, and adjectives (nominative, accusative, genitive, dative); three genders (masculine, feminine, neuter) and two numbers (singular, plural). It has strong and weak verbs. The majority of its vocabulary derives from the ancient Germanic branch of the Indo-European language family, while a smaller share is partly derived from Latin and Greek, along with fewer words borrowed from French and Modern English. English, however, is the main source of more recent loanwords.\nGerman is a pluricentric language; the three standardized variants are German, Austrian, and Swiss Standard German. Standard German is sometimes called \"High German\", which refers to its regional origin. German is also notable for its broad spectrum of dialects, with many varieties existing in Europe and other parts of the world. Some of these non-standard varieties have become recognized and protected by regional or national governments.\nSince 2004, heads of state of the German-speaking countries have met every year, and the Council for German Orthography has been the main international body regulating German orthography.\nClassification.\nGerman is an Indo-European language that belongs to the West Germanic group of the Germanic languages. The Germanic languages are traditionally subdivided into three branches: North Germanic, East Germanic, and West Germanic. The first of these branches survives in modern Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, Faroese, and Icelandic, all of which are descended from Old Norse. The East Germanic languages are now extinct, and Gothic is the only language in this branch which survives in written texts. The West Germanic languages, however, have undergone extensive dialectal subdivision and are now represented in modern languages such as English, German, Dutch, Yiddish, Afrikaans, and others.\nWithin the West Germanic language dialect continuum, the Benrath and Uerdingen lines (running through D\u00fcsseldorf-Benrath and Krefeld-Uerdingen, respectively) serve to distinguish the Germanic dialects that were affected by the High German consonant shift (south of Benrath) from those that were not (north of Uerdingen). The various regional dialects spoken south of these lines are grouped as High German dialects, while those spoken to the north comprise the Low German and Low Franconian dialects. As members of the West Germanic language family, High German, Low German, and Low Franconian have been proposed to be further distinguished historically as Irminonic, Ingvaeonic, and Istvaeonic, respectively. This classification indicates their historical descent from dialects spoken by the Irminones (also known as the Elbe group), Ingvaeones (or North Sea Germanic group), and Istvaeones (or Weser\u2013Rhine group).\nStandard German is based on a combination of Thuringian-Upper Saxon and Upper Franconian dialects, which are Central German and Upper German dialects belonging to the High German dialect group. German is therefore closely related to the other languages based on High German dialects, such as Luxembourgish (based on Central Franconian dialects) and Yiddish. Also closely related to Standard German are the Upper German dialects spoken in the southern German-speaking countries, such as Swiss German (Alemannic dialects) and the various Germanic dialects spoken in the French region of Grand Est, such as Alsatian (mainly Alemannic, but also Central\u2013andUpper Franconian dialects) and Lorraine Franconian (Central Franconian).\nAfter these High German dialects, standard German is less closely related to languages based on Low Franconian dialects (e.g., Dutch and Afrikaans), Low German or Low Saxon dialects (spoken in northern Germany and southern Denmark), neither of which underwent the High German consonant shift. As has been noted, the former of these dialect types is Istvaeonic and the latter Ingvaeonic, whereas the High German dialects are all Irminonic; the differences between these languages and standard German are therefore considerable. Also related to German are the Frisian languages\u2014North Frisian (spoken in Nordfriesland), Saterland Frisian (spoken in Saterland), and West Frisian (spoken in Friesland)\u2014as well as the Anglic languages of English and Scots. These Anglo-Frisian dialects did not take part in the High German consonant shift, and the Anglic languages also adopted much vocabulary from both Old Norse and the Norman language.\nHistory.\nOld High German.\nThe history of the German language begins with the High German consonant shift during the Migration Period, which separated Old High German dialects from Old Saxon. This sound shift involved a drastic change in the pronunciation of both voiced and voiceless stop consonants (\"b\", \"d\", \"g\", and \"p\", \"t\", \"k\", respectively). The primary effects of the shift were the following below.\nWhile there is written evidence of the Old High German language in several Elder Futhark inscriptions from as early as the sixth century AD (such as the Pforzen buckle), the Old High German period is generally seen as beginning with the \"Abrogans\" (written c.\u2009765\u2013775), a Latin-German glossary supplying over 3,000 Old High German words with their Latin equivalents. After the \"Abrogans\", the first coherent works written in Old High German appear in the ninth century, chief among them being the \"Muspilli\", Merseburg charms, and ', and other religious texts (the \"Georgslied\", \"Ludwigslied\", \"Evangelienbuch\", and translated hymns and prayers). The \"Muspilli\" is a Christian poem written in a Bavarian dialect offering an account of the soul after the Last Judgment, and the Merseburg charms are transcriptions of spells and charms from the pagan Germanic tradition. Of particular interest to scholars, however, has been the ', a secular epic poem telling the tale of an estranged father and son unknowingly meeting each other in battle. Linguistically, this text is highly interesting due to the mixed use of Old Saxon and Old High German dialects in its composition. The written works of this period stem mainly from the Alamanni, Bavarian, and Thuringian groups, all belonging to the Elbe Germanic group (Irminones), which had settled in what is now southern-central Germany and Austria between the second and sixth centuries, during the great migration.\nIn general, the surviving texts of Old High German (OHG) show a wide range of dialectal diversity with very little written uniformity. The early written tradition of OHG survived mostly through monasteries and scriptoria as local translations of Latin originals; as a result, the surviving texts are written in highly disparate regional dialects and exhibit significant Latin influence, particularly in vocabulary. At this point monasteries, where most written works were produced, were dominated by Latin, and German saw only occasional use in official and ecclesiastical writing.\nMiddle High German.\nWhile there is no complete agreement over the dates of the Middle High German (MHG) period, it is generally seen as lasting from 1050 to 1350. This was a period of significant expansion of the geographical territory occupied by Germanic tribes, and consequently of the number of German speakers. Whereas during the Old High German period the Germanic tribes extended only as far east as the Elbe and Saale rivers, the MHG period saw a number of these tribes expanding beyond this eastern boundary into Slavic territory (known as the '). With the increasing wealth and geographic spread of the Germanic groups came greater use of German in the courts of nobles as the standard language of official proceedings and literature. A clear example of this is the ' employed in the Hohenstaufen court in Swabia as a standardized supra-dialectal written language. While these efforts were still regionally bound, German began to be used in place of Latin for certain official purposes, leading to a greater need for regularity in written conventions.\nWhile the major changes of the MHG period were socio-cultural, High German was still undergoing significant linguistic changes in syntax, phonetics, and morphology as well (e.g., diphthongization of certain vowel sounds: ' (OHG &amp; MHG \"house\")\"\u2192 (regionally in later MHG)\u2192\" (NHG), and weakening of unstressed short vowels to schwa [\u0259]: ' (OHG \"days\")\u2192\"\" (MHG)).\nA great wealth of texts survives from the MHG period. Significantly, these texts include a number of impressive secular works, such as the , an epic poem telling the story of the dragon-slayer Siegfried (c.\u2009thirteenth century), and the \"Iwein\", an Arthurian verse poem by Hartmann von Aue (c.\u20091203), lyric poems, and courtly romances such as \"Parzival\" and \"Tristan\". Also noteworthy is the \"\", the first book of laws written in Middle \"Low\" German (c.\u20091220). The abundance and especially the secular character of the literature of the MHG period demonstrate the beginnings of a standardized written form of German, as well as the desire of poets and authors to be understood by individuals on supra-dialectal terms.\nThe Middle High German period is generally seen as ending when the 1346\u201353 Black Death decimated Europe's population.\nEarly New High German.\nModern High German begins with the Early New High German (ENHG) period, which Wilhelm Scherer dates 1350\u20131650, terminating with the end of the Thirty Years' War. This period saw the further displacement of Latin by German as the primary language of courtly proceedings and, increasingly, of literature in the German states. While these states were still part of the Holy Roman Empire, and far from any form of unification, the desire for a cohesive written language that would be understandable across the many German-speaking principalities and kingdoms was stronger than ever. As a spoken language German remained highly fractured throughout this period, with a vast number of often mutually incomprehensible regional dialects being spoken throughout the German states; the invention of the printing press c.\u20091440 and the publication of Luther's vernacular translation of the Bible in 1534, however, had an immense effect on standardizing German as a supra-dialectal written language.\nThe ENHG period saw the rise of several important cross-regional forms of chancery German, one being ', used in the court of the Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I, and the other being ', used in the Electorate of Saxony in the Duchy of Saxe-Wittenberg.\nAlongside these courtly written standards, the invention of the printing press led to the development of a number of printers' languages (\"\") aimed at making printed material readable and understandable across as many diverse dialects of German as possible. The greater ease of production and increased availability of written texts brought about increased standardisation in the written form of German.\nOne of the central events in the development of ENHG was the publication of Luther's translation of the Bible into High German (the New Testament was published in 1522; the Old Testament was published in parts and completed in 1534). Luther based his translation primarily on the ' of Saxony, spending much time among the population of Saxony researching the dialect so as to make the work as natural and accessible to German speakers as possible. Copies of Luther's Bible featured a long list of glosses for each region, translating words which were unknown in the region into the regional dialect. Luther said the following concerning his translation method:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One who would talk German does not ask the Latin how he shall do it; he must ask the mother in the home, the children on the streets, the common man in the market-place and note carefully how they talk, then translate accordingly. They will then understand what is said to them because it is German. When Christ says ',' I would translate, if I followed the papists, '. But tell me is this talking German? What German understands such stuff? No, the mother in the home and the plain man would say, \"\". Luther's translation of the Bible into High German was also decisive for the German language and its evolution from Early New High German to modern Standard German. The publication of Luther's Bible was a decisive moment in the spread of literacy in early modern Germany, and promoted the development of non-local forms of language and exposed all speakers to forms of German from outside their own area. With Luther's rendering of the Bible in the vernacular, German asserted itself against the dominance of Latin as a legitimate language for courtly, literary, and now ecclesiastical subject-matter. His Bible was ubiquitous in the German states: nearly every household possessed a copy. Nevertheless, even with the influence of Luther's Bible as an unofficial written standard, a widely accepted standard for written German did not appear until the middle of the eighteenth century.\nHabsburg Empire.\nGerman was the language of commerce and government in the Habsburg Empire, which encompassed a large area of Central and Eastern Europe. Until the mid-nineteenth century, it was essentially the language of townspeople throughout most of the Empire. Its use indicated that the speaker was a merchant or someone from an urban area, regardless of nationality.\nPrague () and Budapest (Buda, ), to name two examples, were gradually Germanized in the years after their incorporation into the Habsburg domain. However, Prague had a large German-speaking population since the Middle Ages, as had Pressburg (Pozsony, now Bratislava), which was settled by Germans in the 10th century. Significant portions of Bohemia and Moravia, now part of the Czech Republic, had become German-speaking during Ostsiedlung. During the Habsburg time, Budapest and cities like Zagreb () or Ljubljana (), contained significant German minorities.\nIn the eastern provinces of Banat, Bukovina, and Transylvania (), German was the predominant language not only in the larger towns\u2014like (Timi\u0219oara), (Sibiu), and (Bra\u0219ov)\u2014but also in many smaller localities in the surrounding areas.\nStandardization.\nIn 1901, the Second Orthographic Conference ended with a (nearly) complete standardization of the Standard German language in its written form, and the Duden Handbook was declared its standard definition. Punctuation and compound spelling (joined or isolated compounds) were not standardized in the process.\nThe (lit.\u2009'German stage language') by Theodor Siebs had established conventions for German pronunciation in theatres, three years earlier; however, this was an artificial standard that did not correspond to any traditional spoken dialect. Rather, it was based on the pronunciation of German in Northern Germany, although it was subsequently regarded often as a general prescriptive norm, despite differing pronunciation traditions especially in the Upper-German-speaking regions that still characterise the dialect of the area today\u00a0\u2013 especially the pronunciation of the ending as [\u026ak] instead of [\u026a\u00e7]. In Northern Germany, High German was a foreign language to most inhabitants, whose native dialects were subsets of Low German. It was usually encountered only in writing or formal speech; in fact, most of High German was a written language, not identical to any spoken dialect, throughout the German-speaking area until well into the 19th century. However, wider standardization of pronunciation was established on the basis of public speaking in theatres and the media during the 20th century and documented in pronouncing dictionaries.\nOfficial revisions of some of the rules from 1901 were not issued until the controversial German orthography reform of 1996 was made the official standard by governments of all German-speaking countries. Media and written works are now almost all produced in Standard German which is understood in all areas where German is spoken.\nGeographical distribution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs a result of the German diaspora, as well as the popularity of German taught as a foreign language, the geographical distribution of German speakers (or \"Germanophones\") spans all inhabited continents.\nHowever, establishing an exact, global number of native German speakers is complicated by the existence of several varieties whose status as separate \"languages\" or \"dialects\" is disputed for political and linguistic reasons, including quantitatively strong varieties like certain forms of Alemannic and Low German. With the inclusion or exclusion of certain varieties, it is estimated that approximately 90\u201395 million people speak German as a first language, 10\u201325million speak it as a second language, and 75\u2013100million as a foreign language. This would imply the existence of approximately 175\u2013220million German speakers worldwide.\nGerman sociolinguist Ulrich Ammon estimated a number of 289 million German foreign language speakers without clarifying the criteria by which he classified a speaker.\nEurope.\nAs of 2012[ [update]], about 90million people, or 16% of the European Union's population, spoke German as their mother tongue, making it the second most widely spoken language on the continent after Russian and the second biggest language in terms of overall speakers (after English), as well as the most spoken native language.\nGerman Sprachraum.\nThe area in central Europe where the majority of the population speaks German as a first language and has German as a (co-)official language is called the \"German \"Sprachraum\"\". German is the official language of the following countries:\nAs a result of implementation of the Oder\u2013Neisse line and ensuing expulsion and ethnic cleansing in post-war Poland, the German Sprachraum significantly shrank, as well as by dissolution of the large German-speaking areas in Bohemia and Moravia. Former German-speaking exclaves of East Prussia, the Free City of Danzig and the Memelland ceased to exist, while Francization in Alsace and Lorraine removed use of German in these areas.\nGerman is a co-official language of the following countries:\nOutside the German Sprachraum.\nAlthough expulsions and (forced) assimilation after the two World wars greatly diminished them, minority communities of mostly bilingual German native speakers exist in areas both adjacent to and detached from the Sprachraum.\nWithin Europe, German is a recognized minority language in the following countries:\nIn France, the High German varieties of Alsatian and Moselle Franconian are identified as \"regional languages\", but the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages of 1998 has not yet been ratified by the government.\nIn the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, there are still around 8,000 members of the German minority (Baltic Germans, East Prussians, and Russian Germans) who speak Standard German and, to some extent, Low German. For Estonia, the number is estimated quite precisely at under 2,000 (in 2000: 1,870), for Latvia at just over 3,000 (in 2004: 3,311), and also for Lithuania at just over 3,000.\nIn 2010, 394,000 Germans lived in Russia, some of whom spoke German. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, many Russian Germans immigrated to Germany.\nAfrica.\nNamibia.\nNamibia also was a colony of the German Empire, from 1884 to 1915. About 30,000 people still speak German as a native tongue today, mostly descendants of German colonial settlers. The period of German colonialism in Namibia also led to the evolution of a Standard German-based pidgin language called \"Namibian Black German\", which became a second language for parts of the indigenous population. Although it is nearly extinct today, some older Namibians still have some knowledge of it.\nGerman remained a \"de facto\" official language of Namibia after the end of German colonial rule alongside English and Afrikaans, and had \"de jure\" co-official status from 1984 until its independence from South Africa in 1990. However, the Namibian government perceived Afrikaans and German as symbols of apartheid and colonialism, and decided English would be the sole official language upon independence, stating that it was a \"neutral\" language as there were virtually no English native speakers in Namibia at that time. German, Afrikaans, and several indigenous languages thus became \"national languages\" by law, identifying them as elements of the cultural heritage of the nation and ensuring that the state acknowledged and supported their presence in the country.\nToday, Namibia is considered to be the only German-speaking country outside of the \"Sprachraum\" in Europe. German is used in a wide variety of spheres throughout the country, especially in business, tourism, and public signage, as well as in education, churches (most notably the German-speaking Evangelical Lutheran Church in Namibia (GELK)), other cultural spheres such as music, and media (such as German language radio programs by the Namibian Broadcasting Corporation). The is one of the three biggest newspapers in Namibia and the only German-language daily in Africa.\nRest of Africa.\nAn estimated 12,000 people speak German or a German variety as a first language in South Africa, mostly originating from different waves of immigration during the 19th and 20th centuries. One of the largest communities consists of the speakers of \"Nataler Deutsch\", a variety of Low German concentrated in and around Wartburg. The South African constitution identifies German as a \"commonly used\" language and the Pan South African Language Board is obligated to promote and ensure respect for it.\nCameroon was also a colony of the German Empire from the same period (1884 to 1916). However, German was replaced by French and English, the languages of the two successor colonial powers, after its loss in World War I. Nevertheless, since the 21st century, German has become a popular foreign language among pupils and students, with 300,000 people learning or speaking German in Cameroon in 2010 and over 230,000 in 2020. Today Cameroon is one of the African countries outside Namibia with the highest number of people learning German.\nNorth America.\nIn the United States, German is the fifth most spoken language in terms of native and second language speakers after English, Spanish, French, and Chinese (with figures for Cantonese and Mandarin combined), with over 1 million total speakers. In the states of North Dakota and South Dakota, German is the most common language spoken at home after English. As a legacy of significant German immigration to the country, German geographical names can be found throughout the Midwest region, such as New Ulm and Bismarck (North Dakota's state capital), plus many other regions.\nA number of German varieties have developed in the country and are still spoken today, such as Pennsylvania Dutch and Texas German.\nSouth America.\nIn Brazil, the largest concentrations of German speakers are in the states of Rio Grande do Sul (where Riograndenser Hunsr\u00fcckisch developed), Santa Catarina, and Esp\u00edrito Santo.\nStandard German is a recognized language in the Brazilian municipalities of Pomerode and S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o do Oeste.\nMeanwhile, German dialects (namely Hunsrik and East Pomeranian) are recognized languages in the following municipalities in Brazil:\nIn Chile, during the 19th and 20th centuries, there was a massive immigration of Germans, Swiss and Austrians. Because of that, two dialects of German emerged, Lagunen-Deutsch and Chiloten-Deutsch. Immigrants even founded prosperous cities and towns. The impact of nineteenth century German immigration to southern Chile was such that Valdivia was for a while a Spanish-German bilingual city with \"German signboards and placards alongside the Spanish\". Currently, German and its dialects are spoken in many cities, towns and rural areas of southern Chile, such as Valdivia, Osorno, Puerto Montt, Puerto Varas, Frutillar, Nueva Braunau, Castro, Ancud, among many others.\nSmall concentrations of German-speakers and their descendants are also found in Argentina, Chile, Paraguay, Venezuela, and Bolivia.\nOceania.\nIn Australia, the state of South Australia experienced a pronounced wave of Prussian immigration in the 1840s (particularly from Silesia region). With the prolonged isolation from other German speakers and contact with Australian English, a unique dialect known as Barossa German developed, spoken predominantly in the Barossa Valley near Adelaide. Usage of German sharply declined with the advent of World War I, due to the prevailing anti-German sentiment in the population and related government action. It continued to be used as a first language into the 20th century, but its use is now limited to a few older speakers.\nAs of the 2013 census, 36,642 people in New Zealand spoke German, mostly descendants of a small wave of 19th century German immigrants, making it the third most spoken European language after English and French and overall the ninth most spoken language.\nA German creole named was historically spoken in the former German colony of German New Guinea, modern day Papua New Guinea. It is at a high risk of extinction, with only about 100 speakers remaining, and a topic of interest among linguists seeking to revive interest in the language.\nAs a foreign language.\nLike English, French, and Spanish, German has become a standard foreign language throughout the world, especially in the Western World. German ranks second on par with French among the best known foreign languages in the European Union (EU) after English, as well as in Russia, and Turkey. In terms of student numbers across all levels of education, German ranks third in the EU (after English and French) and in the United States (after Spanish and French). In British schools, where learning a foreign language is not mandatory, a dramatic decline in entries for German A-Level has been observed. In 2020, approximately 15.4million people were enrolled in learning German across all levels of education worldwide. This number has decreased from a peak of 20.1million in 2000. Within the EU, not counting countries where it is an official language, German as a foreign language is most popular in Eastern and Northern Europe, namely the Czech Republic, Croatia, Denmark, Greece, Hungary, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Serbia. German was once, and to some extent still is, a lingua franca in those parts of Europe.\nGerman-language media worldwide.\nA visible sign of the geographical extension of the German language is the German-language media outside the German-speaking countries.\nGerman is the second most commonly used scientific language as well as the third most widely used language on websites after English and Spanish.\nDeutsche Welle (German pronunciation: [\u02c8d\u0254\u028ft\u0283\u0259 \u02c8v\u025bl\u0259]; \"German Wave\" in German), or DW, is Germany's public international broadcaster. The service is available in 30 languages. DW's satellite television service consists of channels in German, English, Spanish, and Arabic.\nSee also:\nStandard German.\nThe basis of Standard German developed with the Luther Bible and the chancery language spoken by the Saxon court, part of the regional High German group. However, there are places where the traditional regional dialects have been replaced by new vernaculars based on Standard German; that is the case in large stretches of Northern Germany but also in major cities in other parts of the country. It is important to note, however, that the colloquial Standard German differs from the formal written language, especially in grammar and syntax, in which it has been influenced by dialectal speech.\nStandard German differs regionally among German-speaking countries in vocabulary and some instances of pronunciation and even grammar and orthography. This variation must not be confused with the variation of local dialects. Even though the national varieties of Standard German are only somewhat influenced by the local dialects, they are very distinct. German is thus considered a pluricentric language, with currently three national standard varieties of German: German Standard German, Austrian Standard German and Swiss Standard German. In comparison to other European languages (e.g., Portuguese, English), the multi-standard character of German is still not widely acknowledged. However, 90% of Austrian secondary school teachers of German consider German as having \"more than one\" standard variety. In this context, some scholars speak of a One Standard German Axiom that has been maintained as a core assumption of German dialectology.\nIn most regions, the speakers use a continuum, e.g., \"Umgangssprache\" (colloquial standards) from more dialectal varieties to more standard varieties depending on the circumstances.\nVarieties.\nIn German linguistics, German dialects are distinguished from varieties of Standard German.\nThe \"varieties of Standard German\" refer to the different local varieties of the pluricentric German. They differ mainly in lexicon and phonology, but also smaller grammatical differences. In certain regions, they have replaced the traditional German dialects, especially in Northern Germany.\nIn the German-speaking parts of Switzerland, mixtures of dialect and standard are very seldom used, and the use of Standard German is largely restricted to the written language. About 11% of the Swiss residents speak Standard German at home, but this is mainly due to German immigrants. This situation has been called a \"medial diglossia\". Swiss Standard German is used in the Swiss education system, while Austrian German is officially used in the Austrian education system.\nDialects.\nThe German dialects are the traditional local varieties of the language; many of them are not mutually intelligible with standard German, and they have great differences in lexicon, phonology, and syntax. If a narrow definition of language based on mutual intelligibility is used, many German dialects are considered to be separate languages (for instance by ISO 639-3). However, such a point of view is unusual in German linguistics.\nThe German dialect continuum is traditionally divided most broadly into High German and Low German, also called Low Saxon. However, historically, High German dialects and Low Saxon/Low German dialects do not belong to the same language. Nevertheless, in today's Germany, Low Saxon/Low German is often perceived as a dialectal variation of Standard German on a functional level even by many native speakers.\nThe variation among the German dialects is considerable, with often only neighbouring dialects being mutually intelligible. Some dialects are not intelligible to people who know only Standard German. However, all German dialects belong to the dialect continuum of High German and Low Saxon.\nLow German.\nMiddle Low German was the lingua franca of the Hanseatic League. It was the predominant language in Northern Germany until the 16th century. In 1534, the Luther Bible was published. It aimed to be understandable to a broad audience and was based mainly on Central and Upper German varieties. The Early New High German language gained more prestige than Low German and became the language of science and literature. Around the same time, the Hanseatic League, a confederation of northern ports, lost its importance as new trade routes to Asia and the Americas were established, and the most powerful German states of that period were located in Middle and Southern Germany.\nThe 18th and 19th centuries were marked by mass education in Standard German in schools. Gradually, Low German came to be politically viewed as a mere dialect spoken by the uneducated. The proportion of the population who can understand and speak it has decreased continuously since World War II.\nLow Franconian.\nThe Low Franconian dialects fall within a linguistic category used to classify a number of historical and contemporary West Germanic varieties most closely related to, and including, the Dutch language. Consequently, the vast majority of the Low Franconian dialects are spoken outside of the German language area. Low Franconian dialects are spoken in the Netherlands, Belgium, South Africa, Namibia, and Suriname, and along the Lower Rhine in Germany, in North Rhine-Westphalia. The region in Germany encompasses parts of the Rhine-Ruhr metropolitan region.\nThe Low Franconian dialects have three different standard varieties: In the Netherlands, Belgium and Suriname, it is Dutch, which is itself a Low Franconian language. In South Africa, it is Afrikaans, which is also categorized as Low Franconian. During the Middle Ages and Early Modern Period, the Low Franconian dialects now spoken in Germany, used Middle Dutch or Early Modern Dutch as their literary language and Dachsprache. Following a 19th-century change in Prussian language policy, use of Dutch as an official and public language was forbidden; resulting in Standard German taking its place as the region's official language. As a result, these dialects are now considered German dialects from a socio-linguistic point of view.\nThe Low Franconian dialects in Germany are divided by the Uerdingen line (north of which the word for \"I\" is pronounced as \"ik\" and south of which as \"ich\") into northern and southern Low Franconian. The northern variants comprise Kleverlandish, which is most similar to Standard Dutch. The other ones are transitional between Low Franconian and Ripuarian, but closer to Low Franconian.\nHigh German.\nThe High German dialects consist of the Central German, High Franconian and Upper German dialects. The High Franconian dialects are transitional dialects between Central and Upper German. The High German varieties spoken by the Ashkenazi Jews have several unique features and are considered as a separate language, Yiddish, written with the Hebrew alphabet.\nCentral German.\nThe Central German dialects are spoken in Central Germany, from Aachen in the west to G\u00f6rlitz in the east. Modern Standard German is mostly based on Central German dialects.\nWest Central German.\nThe West Central German dialects are the Central Franconian dialects (Ripuarian and Moselle Franconian) and the Rhenish Franconian dialects (Hessian and Palatine). These dialects are considered as\nLuxembourgish as well as Transylvanian Saxon and Banat Swabian are based on Moselle Franconian dialects.\nEast Central German.\nFurther east, the non-Franconian, East Central German dialects are spoken (Thuringian, Upper Saxon, Erzgebirgisch (dialect of the Ore Mountains) and North Upper Saxon\u2013South Markish, and earlier, in the then German-speaking parts of Silesia also Silesian, and in then German southern East Prussia also High Prussian).\nHigh Franconian.\nThe High Franconian dialects are transitional dialects between Central and Upper German. They consist of the East and South Franconian dialects.\nEast Franconian.\nThe East Franconian dialects are spoken in the region of Franconia. Franconia consists of the Bavarian districts of Upper, Middle, and Lower Franconia, the region of South Thuringia (those parts of Thuringia south of the Thuringian Forest), and the eastern parts of the region of Heilbronn-Franken (Tauber Franconia and Hohenlohe) in northeastern Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg. East Franconian is also spoken in most parts of Saxon Vogtland (in the Vogtland District around Plauen, Reichenbach im Vogtland, Auerbach/Vogtl., Oelsnitz/Vogtl. and Klingenthal). East Franconian is colloquially referred to as \"Fr\u00e4nkisch\" (Franconian) in Franconia (including Bavarian Vogtland), and as \"Vogtl\u00e4ndisch\" (Vogtlandian) in Saxon Vogtland.\nSouth Franconian.\nSouth Franconian is spoken in northern Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg and in the northeasternmost tip of Alsace (around Wissembourg) in France. In Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, they are considered dialects of German, and in Alsace a South Franconian variant of Alsatian.\nUpper German.\nThe Upper German dialects are the Alemannic and Swabian dialects in the west and the Austro-Bavarian dialects in the east.\nAlemannic and Swabian.\nAlemannic dialects are spoken in Switzerland (High Alemannic in the densely populated Swiss Plateau including Z\u00fcrich and Bern, in the south also Highest Alemannic, and Low Alemannic in Basel), Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg (Swabian and Low Alemannic, in the southwest also High Alemannic), Bavarian Swabia (Swabian, in the southwesternmost part also Low Alemannic), Vorarlberg/Austria (Low, High, and Highest Alemannic), Alsace/France (Low Alemannic, in the southernmost part also High Alemannic), Liechtenstein (High and Highest Alemannic), and in the district of Reutte in Tyrol, Austria (Swabian). The Alemannic dialects are considered\nIn Germany, the Alemannic dialects are often referred to as Swabian in Bavarian Swabia and in the historical region of W\u00fcrttemberg, and as Badian in the historical region of Baden.\nThe southernmost German-speaking municipality is in the Alemannic region: Zermatt in the Canton of Valais, Switzerland, as is the capital of Liechtenstein: Vaduz.\nAustro-Bavarian.\nThe Austro-Bavarian dialects are spoken in Austria (Vienna, Lower and Upper Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Salzburg, Burgenland, and in most parts of Tyrol), southern and eastern Bavaria (Upper and Lower Bavaria as well as Upper Palatinate), and South Tyrol. Austro-Bavarian is also spoken in southwesternmost Saxony: in the southernmost tip of Vogtland (in the Vogtland District around Adorf, Bad Brambach, Bad Elster and Markneukirchen), where it is referred to as Vogtl\u00e4ndisch (Vogtlandian), just like the East Franconian variant that dominates in Vogtland. There is also one single Austro-Bavarian village in Switzerland: Samnaun in the Canton of the Grisons.\nThe northernmost Austro-Bavarian village is Breitenfeld (municipality of Markneukirchen, Saxony), the southernmost village is Salorno sulla Strada del Vino (German: Salurn an der Weinstra\u00dfe), South Tyrol.\nGrammar.\nGerman is a fusional language with a moderate degree of inflection, with three grammatical genders; as such, there can be a large number of words derived from the same root.\nNoun inflection.\nGerman nouns inflect by case, gender, and number:\nThis degree of inflection is considerably less than in Old High German and other old Indo-European languages such as Latin, Ancient Greek, and Sanskrit, and it is also somewhat less than, for instance, Old English, modern Icelandic, or Russian. The three genders have collapsed in the plural. With four cases and three genders plus plural, there are 16 permutations of case and gender/number of the article (not the nouns), but there are only six forms of the definite article, which together cover all 16 permutations. In nouns, inflection for case is required in the singular for strong masculine and neuter nouns only in the genitive and in the dative (only in fixed or archaic expressions), and even this is losing ground to substitutes in informal speech. Weak masculine nouns share a common case ending for genitive, dative, and accusative in the singular. Feminine nouns are not declined in the singular. The plural has an inflection for the dative. In total, seven inflectional endings (not counting plural markers) exist in German: .\nCompounding.\nLike the other Germanic languages, German forms noun compounds in which the first noun modifies the category given by the second: (\"dog hut\"; specifically: \"dog kennel\"). Unlike English, whose newer compounds or combinations of longer nouns are often written \"open\" with separating spaces, German (like some other Germanic languages) nearly always uses the \"closed\" form without spaces, for example: (\"tree house\"). Like English, German allows arbitrarily long compounds in theory (see also English compounds). The longest German word verified to be actually in (albeit very limited) use is , which, literally translated, is \"beef labelling supervision duties assignment law\" [from (cattle), (meat), (labelling), (supervision), (duties), (assignment), (law)]. However, examples like this are perceived by native speakers as excessively bureaucratic, stylistically awkward, or even satirical. On the other hand, even this compound could be expanded by any native speaker.\nVerb inflection.\nThe inflection of standard German verbs includes:\nVerb prefixes.\nThe meaning of basic verbs can be expanded and sometimes radically changed through the use of a number of prefixes. Some prefixes have a specific meaning; the prefix ' refers to destruction, as in (to tear apart), (to break apart), (to cut apart). Other prefixes have only the vaguest meaning in themselves; ' is found in a number of verbs with a large variety of meanings, as in (to try) from (to seek), (to interrogate) from (to take), (to distribute) from (to share), (to understand) from (to stand).\nOther examples include the following:\n (to stick), (to detain); (to buy), (to sell); (to hear), (to cease); (to drive), (to experience).\nMany German verbs have a separable prefix, often with an adverbial function. In finite verb forms, it is split off and moved to the end of the clause and is hence considered by some to be a \"resultative particle\". For example, , meaning \"to go along\", would be split, giving (Literal: \"Go you with?\"; Idiomatic: \"Are you going along?\").\nIndeed, several parenthetical clauses may occur between the prefix of a finite verb and its complement (ankommen = to arrive, er kam an = he arrived, er ist angekommen = he has arrived):\nA selectively literal translation of this example to illustrate the point might look like this:\n He \"came\" on Friday evening, after a hard day at work and the usual annoyances that had time and again been troubling him for years now at his workplace, with questionable joy, to a meal which, as he hoped, his wife had already put on the table, finally home \"to\".\nWord order.\nGerman word order is generally with the V2 word order restriction and also with the SOV word order restriction for subordinate as well as for main clauses including an auxiliary verb. As to subordinate clauses, all verb forms occur at the very end. For yes\u2013no questions, exclamations, and wishes, the finite verb usually has the first position.\nGerman requires a verbal element (main verb, modal verb or auxiliary verb as finite verb) to appear second in the sentence. The verb is preceded by the topic of the sentence or an adverbial of flexible length. The element in focus appears at the end of the sentence. For a sentence without an auxiliary, these are several possibilities:\n (The old man gave me yesterday the book; normal subject-verb-object order)\n (The book gave [to] me yesterday the old man)\n (The book gave the old man [to] me yesterday)\n (The book gave [to] me the old man yesterday)\n (Yesterday gave [to] me the old man the book; normal order)\n (Yesterday gave the old man [to] me the book; verb-subject-object order)\n ([To] me gave the old man the book yesterday (entailing: as for someone else, it was another date))\nWhile the subject typically precedes the object, the position of a noun in a German sentence has no bearing on its being a subject, an object or another argument. In a declarative sentence in English, if the subject does not occur before the predicate, the sentence could well be misunderstood.\nHowever, German's flexible word order allows one to emphasise specific words:\nNormal word order:\n The manager entered yesterday at 10 o'clock with an umbrella in the hand his office.\nSecond variant in normal word order:\n The manager entered his office yesterday at 10 o'clock with an umbrella in the hand.\n This variant accentuates the time specification and that he carried an umbrella.\nObject in front:\n His office entered the manager yesterday at 10 o'clock with an umbrella in the hand.\n The object (his office) is thus highlighted; it could be the topic of the next sentence.\nAdverb of time in front:\n Yesterday entered the manager at 10 o'clock with an umbrella in the hand his office. (but today without umbrella)\nBoth time expressions in front:\n Yesterday at 10 o'clock entered the manager with an umbrella in the hand his office.\n The full-time specification is highlighted.\nAnother possibility:\n Yesterday at 10 o'clock entered the manager his office with an umbrella in the hand.\n Both the time specification and the fact he carried an umbrella are accentuated.\nSwapped adverbs:\n The manager entered with an umbrella in the hand yesterday at 10 o'clock his office.\n The phrase is highlighted.\nSwapped object:\n The manager entered yesterday at 10 o'clock his office with an umbrella in the hand.\n The time specification and the object (his office) are lightly accentuated.\nThe flexible word order also allows one to use language \"tools\" (such as poetic meter and figures of speech) more freely.\nAuxiliary verbs.\nWhen an auxiliary verb is present in the main clause, it appears in second position, and the main verb appears at the end. This occurs notably in the creation of the perfect tense. Many word orders are still possible:\n (The old man has [to] me today the book given.)\n (The book has the old man [to] me today given.)\n (Today has the old man [to] me the book given.)\nThe main verb may appear in first position to put stress on the action itself. The auxiliary verb is still in second position.\n (Given has me the old man the book today.) The bare fact that the book has been given is emphasized, as well as 'today'.\nModal verbs.\nSentences using modal verbs as finite verbs place the infinitive at the end. For example, the English sentence \"Should he go home?\" would be rearranged in German to say \"Should he (to) home go?\" (). Thus, in sentences with several subordinate or relative clauses, the infinitives are clustered at the end. Compare the similar clustering of prepositions in the following (highly contrived) English sentence: \"What did you bring that book that I do not like to be read to out of up for?\"\nMultiple infinitives.\nGerman subordinate clauses have all verbs clustered at the end, with the finite verb normally in the final position of the cluster. Given that auxiliaries encode future, passive, modality, and the perfect, very long chains of verbs at the end of the sentence can occur. In these constructions, the past participle formed with is often replaced by the infinitive.\n \"V psv perf mod\"\n One suspects that the deserter probably shot become be should.\n (\"It is suspected that the deserter probably had been shot\")\n He knew not that the agent a picklock had make let\n He knew not that the agent a picklock make let had\n (\"He did not know that the agent had had a picklock made\")\nThe order at the end of such strings is subject to variation, but the second one in the last example is unusual.\nVocabulary.\nMost German vocabulary is derived from the Germanic branch of the Indo-European language family. However, there is a significant number of loanwords from other languages, in particular Latin, Greek, Italian, French, and most recently English. In the early 19th century, Joachim Heinrich Campe estimated that one fifth of the total German vocabulary was of French or Latin origin.\nLatin words were already imported into the predecessor of the German language during the Roman Empire and underwent all the characteristic phonetic changes in German. Their origin is thus no longer recognizable for most speakers (e.g., , , , , from Latin , , , , ). Borrowing from Latin continued after the fall of the Roman Empire during Christianisation, mediated by the church and monasteries. Another important influx of Latin words can be observed during Renaissance humanism. In a scholarly context, the borrowings from Latin have continued until today, in the last few decades often indirectly through borrowings from English. During the 15th to 17th centuries, the influence of Italian was great, leading to many Italian loanwords in the fields of architecture, finance and music. The influence of the French language in the 17th to 19th centuries resulted in an even greater import of French words. The English influence was already present in the 19th century, but it did not become dominant until the second half of the 20th century.\nThus, Notker Labeo translated the Aristotelian treatises into pure (Old High) German in the decades after the year 1000. The tradition of loan translation revitalized in the 17th and 18th century with poets like Philipp von Zesen or linguists like Joachim Heinrich Campe, who introduced close to 300 words, which are still used in modern German. Even today, there are movements that promote the substitution of foreign words that are deemed unnecessary with German alternatives.\nAs in other Germanic languages, there are many pairs of synonyms due to the enrichment of the Germanic vocabulary with loanwords from Latin and Latinized Greek. These words often have different connotations from their Germanic counterparts and are usually perceived as more scholarly.\nThe size of the vocabulary of German is difficult to estimate. The (\"German Dictionary\"), initiated by the Brothers Grimm (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm) and the most comprehensive guide to the vocabulary of the German language, already contained over 330,000 headwords in its first edition. The modern German scientific vocabulary is estimated at nine million words and word groups (based on the analysis of 35 million sentences of a corpus in Leipzig, which as of July 2003 included 500million words in total).\nOrthography.\nWritten texts in German are easily recognisable as such by distinguishing features such as umlauts and certain orthographical features, such as the capitalization of all nouns, and the frequent occurrence of long compounds. Because legibility and convenience set certain boundaries, compounds consisting of more than three or four nouns are almost exclusively found in humorous contexts. (English also can string nouns together, though it usually separates the nouns with spaces: as, for example, \"toilet bowl cleaner\".)\nIn German orthography, nouns are capitalized, which makes it easier for readers to determine the function of a word within a sentence. This convention is almost unique to German today (shared perhaps only by the closely related Luxembourgish language and several insular dialects of the North Frisian language), but it was historically common in Northern Europe in the early modern era, including in languages such as Danish which abolished the capitalization of nouns in 1948, and English for a while, into the 1700s.\nPresent.\nBefore the German orthography reform of 1996, \"\u00df\" replaced \"ss\" after long vowels and diphthongs and before consonants, word-, or partial-word endings. In reformed spelling, \"\u00df\" replaces \"ss\" only after long vowels and diphthongs.\nSince there is no traditional capital form of \"\u00df\", it was replaced by \"SS\" (or \"SZ\") when capitalization was required. For example, (tape measure) became in capitals. An exception was the use of \u00df in legal documents and forms when capitalizing names. To avoid confusion with similar names, lower case \"\u00df\" was sometimes maintained (thus \" instead of \"). Capital \u00df (\u1e9e) was ultimately adopted into German orthography in 2017, ending a long orthographic debate (thus \" and \").\nUmlaut vowels (\u00e4, \u00f6, \u00fc) are commonly transcribed with ae, oe, and ue if the umlauts are not available on the keyboard or other medium used. In the same manner, \u00df can be transcribed as ss. Some operating systems use key sequences to extend the set of possible characters to include, amongst other things, umlauts; in Microsoft Windows this is done using Alt codes. German readers understand these transcriptions (although they appear unusual), but they are avoided if the regular umlauts are available, because they are a makeshift and not proper spelling. (In Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein, city and family names exist where the extra e has a vowel lengthening effect, e.g., \"Raesfeld\" , \"Coesfeld\" and \"Itzehoe\" , but this use of the letter e after a/o/u does not occur in the present-day spelling of words other than proper nouns.)\nThere is no general agreement on where letters with umlauts occur in the sorting sequence. Telephone directories treat them by replacing them with the base vowel followed by an e. Some dictionaries sort each umlauted vowel as a separate letter after the base vowel, but more commonly words with umlauts are ordered immediately after the same word without umlauts. As an example in a telephone book occurs after but before (because \u00c4 is replaced by Ae). In a dictionary comes after , but in some dictionaries and all other words starting with \"\u00c4\" may occur after all words starting with \"A\". In some older dictionaries or indexes, initial \"Sch\" and \"St\" are treated as separate letters and are listed as separate entries after \"S\", but they are usually treated as S+C+H and S+T.\nWritten German also typically uses an alternative opening inverted comma (quotation mark) as in .\nPast.\nUntil the early 20th century, German was printed in blackletter typefaces (in Fraktur, and in Schwabacher), and written in corresponding handwriting (for example Kurrent and S\u00fctterlin). These variants of the Latin alphabet are very different from the serif or sans-serif Antiqua typefaces used today, and the handwritten forms in particular are difficult for the untrained to read. The printed forms, however, were claimed by some to be more readable when used for Germanic languages. The Nazis initially promoted Fraktur and Schwabacher because they were considered Aryan, but abolished them in 1941, claiming the letters were Jewish. It is also believed this script was banned, as the German government understood Fraktur would inhibit communication in the territories occupied during World War II.\nThe Fraktur script however remains present in everyday life in pub signs, beer brands and other forms of advertisement, where it is used to convey a certain rusticality and antiquity.\nA proper use of the long s (), \u017f, is essential for writing German text in Fraktur typefaces. Many Antiqua typefaces also include the long s. A specific set of rules applies for the use of long s in German text, but nowadays it is rarely used in Antiqua typesetting. Any lower case \"s\" at the beginning of a syllable would be a long s, as opposed to a terminal s or short s (the more common variation of the letter s), which marks the end of a syllable; for example, in differentiating between the words (guard-house) and (tube of polish/wax). One can easily decide which \"s\" to use by appropriate hyphenation, ( vs. ). The long s only appears in lower case.\nLiterature.\nThe German language is used in German literature and can be traced back to the Middle Ages, with the most notable authors of the period being Walther von der Vogelweide and Wolfram von Eschenbach.\nThe , whose author remains unknown, is also an important work of the epoch. The fairy tales collected and published by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm in the 19th century became famous throughout the world.\nReformer and theologian Martin Luther, who translated the Bible into High German (a regional group or German varieties at southern and therefore \"higher\" regions), is widely credited for attributed to the basis for the modern Standard German language. Among the best-known poets and authors in German are Lessing, Goethe, Schiller, Kleist, Hoffmann, Brecht, Heine and Kafka. Fourteen German-speaking people have won the Nobel Prize in Literature: Theodor Mommsen, Rudolf Christoph Eucken, Paul von Heyse, Gerhart Hauptmann, Carl Spitteler, Thomas Mann, Nelly Sachs, Hermann Hesse, Heinrich B\u00f6ll, Elias Canetti, G\u00fcnter Grass, Elfriede Jelinek, Herta M\u00fcller and Peter Handke, making it the second most awarded linguistic region (together with French) after English.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11887", "revid": "35585582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11887", "title": "Greek language", "text": "Indo-European language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nGreek ( ; ) is an Indo-European language, constituting an independent Hellenic branch within the Indo-European language family. It is native to the territories that have had populations of Greeks since antiquity: Greece, Cyprus, Egypt, Italy (in Calabria and Salento), southern Albania, and other regions of the Balkans, Caucasus, the Black Sea coast, Asia Minor, and the Eastern Mediterranean. It has the longest documented history of any Indo-European language, spanning at least 3,400 years of written records. Its writing system is the Greek alphabet, which has been used for approximately 2,800 years; previously, Greek was recorded in writing systems such as Linear B and the Cypriot syllabary.\nThe Greek language holds a very important place in the history of the Western world. Beginning with the epics of Homer, ancient Greek literature includes many works of lasting importance in the European canon. Greek is also the language in which many of the foundational texts in science and philosophy were originally composed. The New Testament of the Christian Bible was also originally written in Greek. Together with the Latin texts and traditions of the Roman world, the Greek texts and Greek societies of antiquity constitute the objects of study of the discipline of Classics.\nDuring antiquity, Greek was by far the most widely spoken lingua franca in the Mediterranean world. It eventually became the official language of the Byzantine Empire and developed into Medieval Greek. In its modern form, Greek is the official language of Greece and Cyprus and one of the 24 official languages of the European Union. It is spoken by at least 13.5\u00a0million people today in Greece, Cyprus, Italy, Albania, Turkey, and the many other countries of the Greek diaspora.\nGreek roots have been widely used for centuries and continue to be widely used to coin new words in other languages; Greek and Latin are highly-influential on the English language and remain the predominant sources of international scientific vocabulary.\nHistory.\nGreek has been spoken in the Balkan peninsula since around the 3rd millennium BC, or possibly earlier. The earliest written evidence is a Linear B clay tablet found in Messenia that dates to between 1450 and 1350 BC, making Greek the world's oldest recorded living language. Among the Indo-European languages, its date of earliest written attestation is matched only by the now-extinct Anatolian languages.\nPeriods.\nThe Greek language is conventionally divided into the following periods:\nDiglossia.\nIn the modern era, the Greek language entered a state of diglossia: the coexistence of vernacular and archaising written forms of the language. What came to be known as the Greek language question was a polarisation between two competing varieties of Modern Greek: Dimotiki, the vernacular form of Modern Greek proper, and Katharevousa, meaning 'purified', a compromise between Dimotiki and Ancient Greek developed in the early 19th century that was used for literary and official purposes in the newly formed Greek state. In 1976, Dimotiki was declared the official language of Greece, after having incorporated features of Katharevousa and thus giving birth to Standard Modern Greek, used today for all official purposes and in education.\nHistorical unity.\nThe historical unity and continuing identity between the various stages of the Greek language are often emphasised. Although Greek has undergone morphological and phonological changes comparable to those seen in other languages, never since classical antiquity has its cultural, literary, and orthographic tradition been interrupted to the extent that one can speak of a new language emerging. Greek speakers today still tend to regard literary works of ancient Greek as part of their own rather than a foreign language. It is also often stated that the historical changes have been relatively slight compared with some other languages. According to one estimation, \"Homeric Greek is probably closer to Demotic than 12-century Middle English is to modern spoken English\".\nGeographic distribution.\nGreek is spoken today by at least 13 million people, principally in Greece and Cyprus along with a sizable Greek-speaking minority in Albania near the Greek-Albanian border. A significant percentage of Albania's population has knowledge of the Greek language due in part to the Albanian wave of immigration to Greece in the 1980s and '90s and the Greek community in the country. Prior to the Greco-Turkish War and the resulting population exchange in 1923 a very large population of Greek-speakers also existed in Turkey, though very few remain today. A small Greek-speaking community is also found in Bulgaria near the Greek-Bulgarian border. Greek is also spoken worldwide by the sizeable Greek diaspora which has notable communities in the United States, Australia, Canada, South Africa, Chile, Brazil, Argentina, Russia, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and throughout the European Union, especially in Germany.\nHistorically, significant Greek-speaking communities and regions were found throughout the Eastern Mediterranean, in what are today Southern Italy, Turkey, Cyprus, Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Palestine, Egypt, and Libya; in the area of the Black Sea, in what are today Turkey, Bulgaria, Romania, Ukraine, Russia, Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan; and, to a lesser extent, in the Western Mediterranean in and around colonies such as Massalia, Monoikos, and Mainake. It was also used as the official language of government and religion in the Christian Nubian kingdoms, for most of their history.\nOfficial status.\nGreek, in its modern form, is the official language of Greece, where it is spoken by almost the entire population. It is also the official language of Cyprus (alongside Turkish) and the British Overseas Territory of Akrotiri and Dhekelia (alongside English). Because of the membership of Greece and Cyprus in the European Union, Greek is one of the organization's 24 official languages. Greek is recognized as a minority language in Albania, and used co-officially in some of its municipalities, in the districts of Gjirokast\u00ebr and Sarand\u00eb. It is also an official minority language in the regions of Apulia and Calabria in Italy. In the framework of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, Greek is protected and promoted officially as a regional and minority language in Armenia, Hungary, Romania, and Ukraine. It is recognized as a minority language and protected in Turkey by the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne.\nCharacteristics.\nThe phonology, morphology, syntax, and vocabulary of the language show both conservative and innovative tendencies across the entire attestation of the language from the ancient to the modern period. The division into conventional periods is, as with all such periodizations, relatively arbitrary, especially because, in all periods, Ancient Greek has enjoyed high prestige, and the literate borrowed heavily from it.\nPhonology.\nAcross its history, the syllabic structure of Greek has varied little: Greek shows a mixed syllable structure, permitting complex syllabic onsets but very restricted codas. It has only oral vowels and a fairly stable set of consonantal contrasts. The main phonological changes occurred during the Hellenistic and Roman period (see Koine Greek phonology for details):\nMorphology.\nIn all its stages, the morphology of Greek shows an extensive set of productive derivational affixes, a limited but productive system of compounding and a rich inflectional system. Although its morphological categories have been fairly stable over time, morphological changes are present throughout, particularly in the nominal and verbal systems. The major change in the nominal morphology since the classical stage was the disuse of the dative case (its functions being largely taken over by the genitive). The verbal system has lost the infinitive, the synthetically-formed future, and perfect tenses and the optative mood. Many have been replaced by periphrastic (analytical) forms.\nNouns and adjectives.\nPronouns show distinctions in person (1st, 2nd, and 3rd), number (singular, dual, and plural in the ancient language; singular and plural alone in later stages), and gender (masculine, feminine, and neuter), and decline for case (from six cases in the earliest forms attested to four in the modern language). Nouns, articles, and adjectives show all the distinctions except for a person. Both attributive and predicative adjectives agree with the noun.\nVerbs.\nThe inflectional categories of the Greek verb have likewise remained largely the same over the course of the language's history but with significant changes in the number of distinctions within each category and their morphological expression. Greek verbs have synthetic inflectional forms for:\nSyntax.\nMany aspects of the syntax of Greek have remained constant: verbs agree with their subject only, the use of the surviving cases is largely intact (nominative for subjects and predicates, accusative for objects of most verbs and many prepositions, genitive for possessors), articles precede nouns, adpositions are largely prepositional, relative clauses follow the noun they modify and relative pronouns are clause-initial. However, the morphological changes also have their counterparts in the syntax, and there are also significant differences between the syntax of the ancient and that of the modern form of the language. Ancient Greek made great use of participial constructions and of constructions involving the infinitive, and the modern variety lacks the infinitive entirely (employing a raft of new periphrastic constructions instead) and uses participles more restrictively. The loss of the dative led to a rise of prepositional indirect objects (and the use of the genitive to directly mark these as well). Ancient Greek tended to be verb-final, but neutral word order in the modern language is verb\u2013subject\u2013object or subject\u2013verb\u2013object.\nVocabulary.\nModern Greek inherits most of its vocabulary from Ancient Greek, which in turn is an Indo-European language, but also includes a number of borrowings from the languages of the populations that inhabited Greece before the arrival of Proto-Greeks, some documented in Mycenaean texts; they include a large number of Greek toponyms. The form and meaning of many words have changed. Loanwords (words of foreign origin) have entered the language, mainly from Latin, Venetian, Ottoman Turkish and Semitic languages. During the older periods of Greek, loanwords into Greek acquired Greek inflections, thus leaving only a foreign root word. Modern borrowings (from the 20th century on), especially from French and English, are typically not inflected; other modern borrowings are derived from Slavic languages, Albanian and Eastern Romance languages (Romanian and Aromanian).\nLoanwords in other languages.\nGreek words have been widely borrowed into other languages, including English. Example words include: \"mathematics\", \"physics\", \"astronomy\", \"democracy\", \"philosophy\", \"athletics, theatre, rhetoric\", \"baptism\", \"evangelist\", etc. Moreover, Greek words and word elements continue to be productive as a basis for coinages (neologisms): \"anthropology\", \"photography\", \"telephony\", \"isomer\", \"biomechanics\", \"cinematography\", etc. Together with Latin words, they form the foundation of international scientific and technical vocabulary; for example, all words ending in \"-logy\" ('discourse'). There are many English words of Greek origin.\nClassification.\nGreek is an independent branch of the Indo-European language family. The ancient language most closely related to it may be Ancient Macedonian, which, by most accounts, was a distinct dialect of Greek itself, related to the Northwest Doric group. Aside from Ancient Macedonian, current consensus regards Phrygian as the closest relative of Greek, since they share a number of phonological, morphological and lexical isoglosses, with some being exclusive between them. Scholars have proposed a Graeco-Phrygian subgroup out of which Greek and Phrygian originated.\nAmong living languages, some Indo-Europeanists suggest that Greek may be most closely related to Armenian (see Graeco-Armenian) or the Indo-Iranian languages (see Graeco-Aryan), but little definitive evidence has been found. In addition, Albanian has also been considered somewhat related to Greek and Armenian, and it has been proposed that they all form a higher-order subgroup along with other extinct languages of the ancient Balkans; this higher-order subgroup is usually termed Palaeo-Balkan, and Greek has a central position in it.\nWriting system.\nLinear B.\nLinear B, attested as early as the late 15th century BC, was the first script used to write Greek. It is basically a syllabary, which was finally deciphered by Michael Ventris and John Chadwick in the 1950s (its precursor, Linear A, has not been deciphered and most likely encodes a non-Greek language). The language of the Linear B texts, Mycenaean Greek, is the earliest known form of Greek.\nCypriot syllabary.\nAnother similar system used to write the Greek language was the Cypriot syllabary (also a descendant of Linear A via the intermediate Cypro-Minoan syllabary), which is closely related to Linear B but uses somewhat different syllabic conventions to represent phoneme sequences. The Cypriot syllabary is attested in Cyprus from the 11th century BC until its gradual abandonment in the late Classical period, in favor of the standard Greek alphabet.\nGreek alphabet.\nGreek has been written in the Greek alphabet since approximately the 9th century BC. It was created by modifying the Phoenician alphabet, with the innovation of adopting certain letters to represent the vowels. The variant of the alphabet in use today is essentially the late Ionic variant, introduced for writing classical Attic in 403\u00a0BC. In classical Greek, as in classical Latin, only upper-case letters existed. The lower-case Greek letters were developed much later by medieval scribes to permit a faster, more convenient cursive writing style with the use of ink and quill.\nThe Greek alphabet consists of 24 letters, each with an uppercase (majuscule) and lowercase (minuscule) form. The letter sigma has an additional lowercase form (\u03c2) used in the final position of a word:\nDiacritics.\nIn addition to the letters, the Greek alphabet features a number of diacritical signs: three different accent marks (acute, grave, and circumflex), originally denoting different shapes of pitch accent on the stressed vowel; the so-called breathing marks (rough and smooth breathing), originally used to signal presence or absence of word-initial /h/; and the diaeresis, used to mark the full syllabic value of a vowel that would otherwise be read as part of a diphthong. These marks were introduced during the course of the Hellenistic period. Actual usage of the grave in handwriting saw a rapid decline in favor of uniform usage of the acute during the late 20th century, and it has only been retained in typography.\nAfter the writing reform of 1982, most diacritics are no longer used. Since then, Greek has been written mostly in the simplified monotonic orthography (or monotonic system), which employs only the acute accent and the diaeresis. The traditional system, now called the polytonic orthography (or polytonic system), is still used internationally for the writing of Ancient Greek.\nPunctuation.\nIn Greek, the question mark is written as the English semicolon, while the functions of the colon and semicolon are performed by a raised point (\u2022), known as the \"ano teleia\" (). In Greek the comma also functions as a silent letter in a handful of Greek words, principally distinguishing (\"\u00f3,ti\", 'whatever') from (\"\u00f3ti\", 'that').\nAncient Greek texts often used \"scriptio continua\" ('continuous writing'), which means that ancient authors and scribes would write word after word with no spaces or punctuation between words to differentiate or mark boundaries. Boustrophedon, or bi-directional text, was also used in Ancient Greek.\nLatin alphabet.\nGreek has occasionally been written in the Latin script, especially in areas under Venetian rule or by Greek Catholics. The term / applies when the Latin script is used to write Greek in the cultural ambit of Catholicism (because / is an older Greek term for West-European dating to when most of (Roman Catholic Christian) West Europe was under the control of the Frankish Empire). / (meaning 'Catholic Chiot') alludes to the significant presence of Catholic missionaries based on the island of Chios. Additionally, the term Greeklish is often used when the Greek language is written in a Latin script in online communications.\nThe Latin script is nowadays used by the Greek-speaking communities of Southern Italy.\nHebrew alphabet.\nThe Yevanic dialect was written by Romaniote and Constantinopolitan Karaite Jews using the Hebrew Alphabet.\nArabic alphabet.\nIn a tradition, that in modern time, has come to be known as Greek Aljamiado, some Greek Muslims from Crete wrote their Cretan Greek in the Arabic alphabet. The same happened among Epirote Muslims in Ioannina. This also happened among Arabic-speaking Byzantine rite Christians in the Levant (Lebanon, Palestine, Syria and Jordan). This usage is sometimes called aljamiado, as when Romance languages are written in the Arabic alphabet.\nExample text.\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in Greek:\nTranscription of the example text into Latin alphabet:\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in English:\n\"All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeneral background\nLanguage learning\nDictionaries\nLiterature"}
{"id": "11888", "revid": "82697", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11888", "title": "Golem", "text": "Being in Jewish folklore made from clay\nA golem ( ; ) is an animated anthropomorphic being in Jewish folklore that is created entirely from inanimate matter, usually clay or mud. The most famous golem narrative involves Judah Loew ben Bezalel, the late-16th-century rabbi of Prague. According to \"Moment\" magazine, \"the golem is a highly mutable metaphor with seemingly limitless symbolism. It can be a victim or villain, man or woman\u2014or sometimes both. Over the centuries, it has been used to connote war, community, isolation, hope, and despair.\"\nIn modern popular culture, the word has become generalized, and any crude automaton devised by a sorcerer may be termed a \"golem\".\nEtymology.\nThe word \"golem\" occurs once in the Bible, in Psalm 139, which uses the word (; 'my golem', 'my light form', 'raw material') to connote the unfinished human being before God's eyes. Pirkei Avot 5:9 uses the term to refer to someone who is unsophisticated: \"[There are] seven things [characteristic] in a clod, and seven in a wise man\" ().\nIn Modern Hebrew, is used to mean 'dumb', 'helpless', or 'pupa'. Similarly, it is often used today as a metaphor for a stupid man or other entity that serves a man under controlled conditions, but is hostile to him in other circumstances. \"Golem\" passed into Yiddish as , meaning someone who is lethargic or in a stupor.\nHistory.\nEarliest stories.\nThe oldest stories of golems date to early Judaism. In the Talmud (Tractate Sanhedrin 38b), Adam is initially created as a golem () when his dust is \"kneaded into a shapeless husk\". Like Adam, all golems are created from mud by those close to divinity, but no anthropogenic golem is fully human. Early on, the main disability of the golem was its inability to speak. Sanhedrin 65b describes Rava creating a man (), whom he then sends to Rav Zeira. Zeira speaks to the man, but he does not answer, whereupon Zeira says, \"You were created by the sages; return to your dust\".\nDuring the Middle Ages, passages from the \"Sefer Yetzirah\" were studied as a means to create and animate a golem, although little in the writings of Jewish mysticism supports this belief. The earliest known written account of how to create a golem can be found in the \"Sode Raza\", a commentary on Merkabah mysticism by Eleazar of Worms, who lived in the late 12th and early 13th centuries.\nIt was believed that golems could be activated by an ecstatic experience induced by the ritual use of various letters of the Hebrew alphabet forming one of the names of God. This was written on a piece of paper and inserted into the mouth or forehead of the golem.\nIn some tales, including certain stories of the Che\u0142m and Prague golems, a word such as 'truth' is inscribed on the golem, sometimes on its forehead. In this example, the golem could then be deactivated by removing the aleph (\u05d0), thus changing the inscription from \"truth\" to \"death\" (, , 'dead').\nOne source credits Solomon ibn Gabirol, who lived in the 11th century, with creating a golem. possibly female, for household chores. A legend also existed claiming that Samuel of Speyer created a golem in the 12th century.\nIn 1625, Joseph Solomon Delmedigo wrote that \"many legends of this sort are current, particularly in Germany.\"\nGolem of Che\u0142m.\nThe oldest description of the creation of a golem by a historical figure is included in a tradition connected to the Baal Shem (folk healer) named Elijah of Che\u0142m (1550\u20131583).\nA Polish Kabbalist, writing in about 1630\u20131650, reported the creation of a golem by Rabbi Eliyahu thusly:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And I have heard, in a certain and explicit way, from several respectable persons that one man [living] close to our time, whose name is R. Eliyahu, the master of the name, who made a creature out of matter [Heb. \"Golem\"] and form [Heb. \"tzurah\"] and it performed hard work for him, for a long period, and the name of \"emet\" was hanging upon his neck until he finally removed it for a certain reason, the name from his neck and it turned to dust.\nA similar account was reported by a Christian author, Christoph Arnold, in 1674.\nJacob Emden elaborated on the story in a book published in 1748:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As an aside, I'll mention here what I heard from my father's holy mouth regarding the Golem created by his ancestor, the Gaon R. Eliyahu Ba'al Shem of blessed memory. When the Gaon saw that the Golem was growing larger and larger, he feared that the Golem would destroy the universe. He then removed the Holy Name that was embedded on his forehead, thus causing him to disintegrate and return to dust. Nonetheless, while he was engaged in extracting the Holy Name from him, the Golem injured him, scarring him on the face.\nAccording to the Polish Kabbalist, \"the legend was known to several persons, thus allowing us to speculate that the legend had indeed circulated for some time before it was committed to writing and, consequently, we may assume that its origins are to be traced to the generation immediately following the death of R. Eliyahu, if not earlier.\"\nClassic narrative: The Golem of Prague.\nThe most famous golem narrative involves Judah Loew ben Bezalel, the late 16th-century rabbi of Prague, also known as the Maharal, who reportedly \"created a golem out of clay from the banks of the Vltava River and brought it to life through rituals and Hebrew incantations to defend the Prague ghetto from antisemitic attacks and pogroms\". Depending on the version of the legend, the Jews in Prague were to be either expelled or killed under the rule of Rudolf II, the Holy Roman Emperor. The Golem was called Josef and was known as Yossele. He was said to be able to make himself invisible and summon spirits from the dead. Rabbi Loew deactivated the Golem on Friday evenings by removing the \"shem\" before the Sabbath (Saturday) began, so as to let it rest on Sabbath.\nOne Friday evening, Rabbi Loew forgot to remove the \"shem\", and feared that the Golem would desecrate the Sabbath. A different story tells of a golem that fell in love, and when rejected, became the violent monster seen in most accounts. Some versions have the golem eventually going on a murderous rampage. The rabbi then managed to pull the \"shem\" from his mouth and immobilize him in front of the synagogue, whereupon the golem fell in pieces. The Golem's body was stored in the attic \"genizah\" of the Old New Synagogue, where it would be restored to life again if needed.\nRabbi Loew then forbade anyone except his successors from going into the attic. Rabbi Yechezkel Landau, a successor of Rabbi Loew, reportedly wanted to go up the steps to the attic when he was Chief Rabbi of Prague to verify the tradition. Rabbi Landau fasted and immersed himself in a mikveh, wrapped himself in phylacteries and a prayer-shawl and started ascending the steps. At the top of the steps, he hesitated and then came immediately back down, trembling and frightened. He then reiterated Rabbi Loew's original warning.\nAccording to legend, the body of Rabbi Loew's Golem still lies in the synagogue's attic. When the attic was renovated in 1883, no evidence of the Golem was found. Some versions of the tale state that the Golem was stolen from the \"genizah\" and entombed in a graveyard in Prague's \u017di\u017ekov district, where the \u017di\u017ekov Television Tower now stands. A recent legend tells of a Nazi agent ascending to the synagogue attic, dying under suspicious circumstances thereafter. The attic is not open to the general public.\nSome Orthodox Jews believe that the Maharal did actually create a golem. The evidence for this belief has been analyzed from an Orthodox Jewish perspective by Shnayer Z. Leiman.\nSources of the Prague narrative.\nThe general view of historians and critics is that the story of the Golem of Prague was a German literary invention of the early 19th century. According to John Neubauer, the first writers on the Prague Golem were:\nA few slightly earlier examples are known, in 1834 and 1836.\nAll of these early accounts of the Golem of Prague are in German by Jewish writers. They are suggested to have emerged as part of a Jewish folklore movement parallel with the contemporary German folklore movement.\nThe origins of the story have been obscured by attempts to exaggerate its age and to pretend that it dates from the time of the Maharal. Rabbi Yudel Rosenberg (1859\u20131935) of Tar\u0142\u00f3w, before moving to Canada where he became one of its most prominent rabbis, is said to have originated the idea that the narrative dates from the time of the Maharal. Rosenberg published \"Nifl'os Maharal\" (\"Wonders of Maharal\") (Piotrk\u00f3w, 1909), which purported to be an eyewitness account by the Maharal's son-in-law, who had helped to create the Golem. Rabbi Meir Mazuz commented that Rosenberg was a forger and stories of the Maharal creating a Golem stem from Rosenberg's fabrication.\nRosenberg claimed that the book was based upon a manuscript that he found in the main library in Metz. \"Wonders of Maharal\" \"is generally recognized in academic circles to be a literary hoax\". Gershom Sholem observed that the manuscript \"contains not ancient legends, but modern fiction\". Rosenberg's claim was further disseminated in Chayim Bloch's (1881\u20131973) \"The Golem: Legends of the Ghetto of Prague\", English edition 1925.\nThe \"Jewish Encyclopedia\" of 1906 cites the historical work \"Zemach David\" by David Gans, a disciple of the Maharal, published in 1592. In it, Gans writes of an audience between the Maharal and Rudolph II: \"Our lord the emperor\u00a0... Rudolph\u00a0... sent for and called upon our master Rabbi Low ben Bezalel and received him with a welcome and merry expression, and spoke to him face to face, as one would to a friend. The nature and quality of their words are mysterious, sealed, and hidden.\"\nBut it has been said of this passage, \"Even when [the Maharal is] eulogized, whether in David Gans' \"Zemach David\" or on his epitaph\u00a0..., not a word is said about the creation of a golem. No Hebrew work published in the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries (even in Prague) is aware that the Maharal created a golem.\" Furthermore, the Maharal himself did not refer to the Golem in his writings. Rabbi Yedidiah Tiah Weil (1721\u20131805), a Prague resident, who described the creation of golems, including those created by Rabbis Avigdor Kara of Prague (died 1439) and Eliyahu of Chelm, did not mention the Maharal. Rabbi Meir Perils' biography of the Maharal published in 1718 does not mention a golem.\nGolem of Vilna.\nA similar tradition relates to the Vilna Gaon or \"the saintly genius from Vilnius\" (1720\u20131797). Rabbi Chaim Volozhin (Lithuania 1749\u20131821) reported in an introduction to \"Sifra de Tzeniuta\" that he once presented to his teacher, the Vilna Gaon, ten different versions of a certain passage in the \"Sefer Yetzira\" and asked the Gaon to determine the correct text. The Gaon immediately identified one version as the accurate rendition of the passage.\nThe amazed student then commented to his teacher that, with such clarity, he should easily be able to create a live human. The Gaon affirmed Rabbi Chaim's assertion and said that he once began to create a person when he was a child, under the age of 13, but during the process, he received a sign from Heaven ordering him to desist because of his youth.\nTheme of hubris.\nThe existence of a golem is sometimes a mixed blessing. Golems are not intelligent; if commanded to perform a task, they will perform the instructions literally. In many depictions, golems are inherently perfectly obedient. In its earliest known modern form, the Golem of Che\u0142m became enormous and uncooperative. In one version of this story, the rabbi had to resort to trickery to deactivate it, whereupon it crumbled upon its creator and crushed him.\nA similar theme of hubris is seen in \"Frankenstein\", \"The Sorcerer's Apprentice\", and some other stories in popular culture, such as \"The Terminator\". The theme manifests itself in \"R.U.R.\" (\"Rossum's Universal Robots\"), Karel \u010capek's 1921 play that coined the term robot. The play was written in Prague, and while \u010capek denied that he modeled the robot after the golem, many similarities are seen in the plot.\nCulture of the Czech Republic.\nThe golem is a popular figure in the Czech Republic. The 1915 novel by Gustav Meyrink (\"The Golem\") was briefly popular and did much to keep the imagination about the golem going. Several restaurants and other businesses have names that make reference to the creature. A Czech strongman, Ren\u00e9 Richter goes by the nickname \"Golem\", and a Czech monster truck outfit calls itself the \"Golem Team\".\nAbraham Akkerman preceded his article on human automatism in the contemporary city with a short satirical poem on a pair of golems turning human.\nClay Boy variation.\nA Yiddish and Slavic folktale is the Clay Boy, which combines elements of the golem and \"The Gingerbread Man\", in which a lonely couple makes a child out of clay, with disastrous or comical consequences.\nIn one common Russian version, an older couple, whose children have left home, make a boy out of clay and dry him by their hearth. The Clay Boy (, ) comes to life; at first, the couple is delighted and treats him like a real child, but the Clay Boy does not stop growing and eats all their food, then all their livestock, and then the Clay Boy eats his parents. The Clay Boy rampages through the village until he is smashed by a quick-thinking goat.\nGolem in popular culture.\nIn popular culture, the term \"golem\" is often used to refer to \"any magically created human figure\" rather than specifically \"a humanoid formed by Kabbalistic means\".\nFilm and television.\nGolems are frequently depicted in movies and television shows. Programs with them in the title include:\nOther references to golems in popular culture include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11890", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11890", "title": "Genre Film Theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "11891", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11891", "title": "George Orwell", "text": "English author and journalist (1903\u20131950)\nEric Arthur Blair (25 June 1903 \u2013 21 January 1950) was an English novelist, poet, essayist, journalist, and critic who wrote under the pen name of George Orwell. His work is characterised by lucid prose, social criticism, opposition to all totalitarianism (both authoritarian communism and fascism), and support of democratic socialism.\nOrwell is best known for his allegorical novella \"Animal Farm\" (1945) and the dystopian novel \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" (1949), although his works also encompass literary criticism, poetry, fiction and polemical journalism. His non-fiction works, including \"The Road to Wigan Pier\" (1937), documenting his experience of working-class life in industrial Northern England, and \"Homage to Catalonia\" (1938), an account of his experiences soldiering for the Republican faction of the Spanish Civil War (1936\u20131939), are as critically respected as his essays on politics, literature, language and culture.\nOrwell's work remains influential in popular culture and in political culture, and the adjective \"Orwellian\"\u2014describing totalitarian and authoritarian social practices\u2014is part of the English language, like many of his neologisms, such as \"Big Brother\", \"Thought Police\", \"Room 101\", \"Newspeak\", \"memory hole\", \"doublethink\", and \"thoughtcrime\". In 2008, \"The Times\" named Orwell the second-greatest British writer since 1945.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nEric Arthur Blair was born on 25 June 1903 in Motihari, Bengal Presidency (now Bihar), British India, into what he described as a \"lower-upper-middle class\" family. His great-great-grandfather Charles Blair was a wealthy slave-owning country gentleman and absentee owner of two Jamaican plantations; hailing from Dorset, he married Lady Mary Fane, daughter of Thomas Fane, 8th Earl of Westmorland. His grandfather Thomas Richard Arthur Blair was an Anglican clergyman. Orwell's father was Richard Walmesley Blair, who worked as a Sub-Deputy Opium Agent in the Opium Department of the Indian Civil Service, overseeing the production and storage of opium for sale to China. Orwell's mother, Ida Mabel Blair (\"n\u00e9e\" Limouzin), grew up in Moulmein, Burma, where her French father was involved in speculative ventures. Eric had two sisters: Marjorie, five years older; and Avril, five years younger. When Eric was one year old, his mother took him and Marjorie to England. In 2014 restoration work began on Orwell's birthplace and ancestral house in Motihari.\nIn 1904, Ida settled with her children at Henley-on-Thames in Oxfordshire. Eric was brought up in the company of his mother and sisters and, apart from a brief visit in mid-1907, he did not see his father until 1912. Aged five, Eric was sent as a day student to a convent school in Henley-on-Thames. It was a Catholic convent run by French Ursuline nuns. His mother wanted him to have a public school education, but his family could not afford it. Through the social connections of Ida's brother Charles Limouzin, Blair gained a scholarship to St Cyprian's School in Eastbourne, East Sussex. Arriving in September 1911, he boarded for the next five years, returning home only for holidays. Although he knew nothing of the reduced fees, he \"soon recognised that he was from a poorer home\". Blair hated the school and many years later wrote an essay \"Such, Such Were the Joys\", published posthumously, based on his time there. At St Cyprian's, Blair first met Cyril Connolly, who became a writer and who, as the editor of \"Horizon\", published several of Orwell's essays.\nBefore the First World War, the family moved south to Shiplake, Oxfordshire, where Eric became friendly with the Buddicom family, especially their daughter Jacintha. When they first met, he was standing on his head in a field. Asked why, he said, \"You are noticed more if you stand on your head than if you are right way up.\" Growing up together, Buddicom and Blair became idealistic adolescent sweethearts, reading and writing poetry together, and dreaming of becoming famous writers. Blair also enjoyed shooting, fishing and birdwatching with Jacintha's brother and sister.\nWhile at St Cyprian's, Blair wrote two poems that were published in the \"Henley and South Oxfordshire Standard\". He came second to Connolly in the Harrow History Prize, had his work praised by the school's external examiner, and earned scholarships to Wellington and Eton. But inclusion on the Eton scholarship roll did not guarantee a place, and none was immediately available. He chose to stay at St Cyprian's until December 1916, in case a place at Eton became available.\nIn January, Blair took up the place at Wellington, where he spent the Spring term. In May 1917 a place became available as a King's Scholar at Eton. At this time the family lived at Mall Chambers, Notting Hill Gate. Blair remained at Eton until December 1921, when he left midway between his 18th and 19th birthdays. Wellington was \"beastly\", Blair told Jacintha, but he said he was \"interested and happy\" at Eton. His principal tutor was A. S. F. Gow, Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, who gave him advice later in his career. Blair was taught French by Aldous Huxley. Steven Runciman, who was at Eton with Blair, noted that he and his contemporaries appreciated Huxley's linguistic flair.\nBlair's performance reports suggest he neglected his studies, but he worked with Roger Mynors to produce a college magazine, \"The Election Times\", joined in the production of other publications\u2014\"College Days\" and \"Bubble and Squeak\"\u2014and participated in the Eton Wall Game. His parents could not afford to send him to university without another scholarship, and they concluded from his poor results he would not be able to win one. Runciman noted he had a romantic idea about the East, and the family decided Blair should join the Imperial Police, the precursor of the Indian Police Service. For this he had to pass an entrance examination. In December 1921, he left Eton and travelled to join his retired father, mother, and younger sister Avril, who that month had moved to 40 Stradbroke Road, Southwold, Suffolk, the first of their four homes in the town. Blair was enrolled at a crammer there called Craighurst, and brushed up on his Classics, English, and History. He passed the exam, coming seventh out of the 26 who passed.\nPolicing in Burma.\nBlair's maternal grandmother lived at Moulmein, so he chose a posting in Burma, then still a province of British India. In October 1922 he sailed on board SS \"Herefordshire\" to join the Indian Imperial Police in Burma. A month later, he arrived at Rangoon and travelled to the police training school in Mandalay. He was appointed an Assistant District Superintendent (on probation) on 29 November 1922, at the pay of Rs. 525 per month. After a short posting at Maymyo, Burma's principal hill station, he was posted to the frontier outpost of Myaungmya in the Irrawaddy Delta at the beginning of 1924.\nWorking as an imperial police officer gave him considerable responsibility while most of his contemporaries were still at university in England. When he was posted farther east in the Delta to Twante as a sub-divisional police officer, he was responsible for the security of some 200,000 people. At the end of 1924, he was posted to Syriam, closer to Rangoon. Syriam had the refinery of the Burmah Oil Company, \"the surrounding land a barren waste, all vegetation killed off by the fumes of sulphur dioxide pouring out day and night from the stacks of the refinery\". But the town was near Rangoon, a cosmopolitan seaport, and Blair went into the city as often as he could, \"to browse in a bookshop; to eat well-cooked food; to get away from the boring routine of police life\". In September 1925 he went to Insein, the home of Insein Prison. By this time, Blair had completed his training and was receiving a monthly salary of Rs.\u00a0740, including allowances.\nBlair recalled he faced hostility from the Burmese, \"in the end the sneering yellow faces of young men that met me everywhere, the insults hooted after me when I was at a safe distance, got badly on my nerves\". He recalled that \"I was stuck between my hatred of the empire I served and my rage against the evil-spirited little beasts who tried to make my job impossible\".\nIn Burma, Blair acquired a reputation as an outsider. He spent much of his time alone, reading or pursuing non-\"pukka\" activities, such as attending the churches of the Karen ethnic group. A colleague, Roger Beadon, recalled that Blair was fast to learn the language and that before he left Burma, \"was able to speak fluently with Burmese priests in 'very high-flown Burmese'\". Blair made changes to his appearance in Burma that remained for the rest of his life, including adopting a pencil moustache. Emma Larkin writes in the introduction to \"Burmese Days\":\nWhile in Burma, he acquired a moustache similar to those worn by officers of the British regiments stationed there. [He] also acquired some tattoos; on each knuckle he had a small untidy blue circle. Many Burmese living in rural areas still sport tattoos like this\u2014they are believed to protect against bullets and snake bites.\nIn April 1926 he moved to Moulmein, where his maternal grandmother lived. At the end of that year, he was assigned to Katha in Upper Burma, where he contracted dengue fever in 1927. Entitled to a leave in England that year, he was allowed to return in July due to his illness. While on holiday with his family in Cornwall in September 1927, he reappraised his life. Deciding against returning to Burma, he resigned from the Indian Imperial Police to become a writer, with effect from 12 March 1928. He drew on his experiences in the Burma police for the novel \"Burmese Days\" (1934) and the essays \"A Hanging\" (1931) and \"Shooting an Elephant\" (1936).\nLondon and Paris.\nIn England, he settled back in the family home at Southwold, renewing acquaintance with local friends and attending an Old Etonian dinner. He visited his old tutor Gow at Cambridge for advice on becoming a writer. In 1927 he moved to London. Ruth Pitter, a family acquaintance, helped him find lodgings, and by the end of 1927 he had moved into rooms in Portobello Road; a blue plaque commemorates his residence there. Pitter's involvement in the move \"would have lent it a reassuring respectability in Mrs. Blair's eyes\". Pitter had a sympathetic interest in Blair's writing, pointed out weaknesses in his poetry, and advised him to write about what he knew. In fact he decided to write of \"certain aspects of the present that he set out to know\" and ventured into the East End of London\u2014the first of the occasional sorties he would make intermittently over a period of five years to discover the world of poverty and the down-and-outers who inhabit it.\nIn imitation of Jack London, whose writing he admired (particularly \"The People of the Abyss\"), Blair started to explore the poorer parts of London. On his first outing he set out to Limehouse Causeway, spending his first night in a common lodging house, possibly George Levy's \"kip\". For a while he \"went native\" in his own country, dressing like a tramp, adopting the name P.S. Burton; he recorded his experiences of the low life for use in \"The Spike\", his first published essay in English, and in the second half of his first book, \"Down and Out in Paris and London\" (1933).\nIn early 1928 he moved to Paris. He lived in the rue du Pot de Fer, a working class district in the 5th arrondissement. His aunt Ellen (Nellie) Kate Limouzin also lived in Paris (with the Esperantist Eug\u00e8ne Lanti) and gave him social and, when necessary, financial support. He began to write novels, including an early version of \"Burmese Days\", but nothing else survives from that period. He was more successful as a journalist and published articles in \"Monde\", a political/literary journal edited by Henri Barbusse (his first article as a professional writer, \"La Censure en Angleterre\", appeared in that journal on 6 October 1928); \"G. K.'s Weekly\", where his first article to appear in England, \"A Farthing Newspaper\", was printed on 29 December 1928; and \"Le Progr\u00e8s Civique\" (founded by the left-wing coalition Le Cartel des Gauches). Three pieces appeared in successive weeks in \"Le Progr\u00e8s Civique\": discussing unemployment, a day in the life of a tramp, and the beggars of London, respectively. \"In one or another of its destructive forms, poverty was to become his obsessive subject\u2014at the heart of almost everything he wrote until \"Homage to Catalonia\".\"\nHe fell seriously ill in February 1929 and was taken to the H\u00f4pital Cochin, a free hospital where medical students were trained. His experiences there were the basis of his essay \"How the Poor Die\", published in 1946 (though he chose not to identify the hospital). Shortly afterwards, he had all his money stolen from his lodging house. Whether through necessity or to collect material, he undertook menial jobs such as dishwashing in a fashionable hotel on the rue de Rivoli, which he later described in \"Down and Out in Paris and London\". In August 1929, he sent a copy of \"The Spike\" to John Middleton Murry's \"New Adelphi\" magazine in London. The magazine was edited by Max Plowman and Sir Richard Rees, and Plowman accepted the work for publication.\nSouthwold.\nIn December 1929, after nearly two years in Paris, Blair returned to England and went directly to his parents' house in Southwold, a coastal town in Suffolk, which remained his base for the next five years. The family was well established in the town, where his sister Avril ran a tea-house. He became acquainted with many local people, including Brenda Salkeld, the clergyman's daughter who worked as a gym-teacher at St Felix Girls' School. Although Salkeld rejected his offer of marriage, she remained a friend and regular correspondent for many years. He also renewed friendships with older friends, such as Dennis Collings, whose girlfriend Eleanor Jacques was also to play a part in his life.\nIn early 1930 he stayed briefly in Bramley, Leeds, with his sister Marjorie and her husband Humphrey Dakin. Blair was writing reviews for \"Adelphi\" and acting as a private tutor to a disabled child at Southwold. He then became tutor to three young brothers, one of whom, Richard Peters, later became a distinguished academic. His history in these years is marked by dualities and contrasts. There is Blair leading a respectable, outwardly eventless life at his parents' house in Southwold, writing; then in contrast, there is Blair as Burton (the name he used in his down-and-out episodes) in search of experience in the kips and spikes, in the East End, on the road, and in the hop fields of Kent. He went painting and bathing on the beach, and there he met Mabel and Francis Fierz, who later influenced his career. Over the next year he visited them in London, often meeting their friend Max Plowman. He also often stayed at the homes of Ruth Pitter and Richard Rees, where he could \"change\" for his sporadic tramping expeditions. One of his jobs was domestic work at a lodgings for half a crown (two shillings and sixpence, or one-eighth of a pound) a day.\nBlair now contributed regularly to \"Adelphi\", with \"A Hanging\" appearing in August 1931. From August to September 1931 his explorations of poverty continued, and, like the protagonist of \"A Clergyman's Daughter\", he followed the East End tradition of working in the Kent hop fields. He kept a diary about his experiences there. Afterwards, he lodged in the Tooley Street kip, but could not stand it for long, and with financial help from his parents moved to Windsor Street, where he stayed until Christmas. \"Hop Picking\", by Eric Blair, appeared in the October 1931 issue of \"New Statesman\", whose editorial staff included his old friend Cyril Connolly. Mabel Fierz put him in contact with Leonard Moore, who became his literary agent in April 1932.\nAt this time Jonathan Cape rejected \"A Scullion's Diary\", the first version of \"Down and Out\". On the advice of Richard Rees, he offered it to Faber &amp; Faber, but their editorial director, T. S. Eliot, also rejected it. Blair ended the year by deliberately getting himself arrested, so that he could experience Christmas in prison, but after he was picked up and taken to Bethnal Green police station in the East End of London the authorities did not regard his \"drunk and disorderly\" behaviour as imprisonable, and after two days in a cell he returned home to Southwold.\nTeaching career.\nIn April 1932 Blair became a teacher at The Hawthorns High School, a school for boys, in Hayes, west London. This was a small private school, and had only 14 or 16 boys aged between ten and sixteen, and one other master. While at the school he became friendly with the curate of the local parish church and became involved with activities there. Mabel Fierz had pursued matters with Moore, and at the end of June 1932, Moore told Blair that Victor Gollancz was prepared to publish \"A Scullion's Diary\" for a \u00a340 advance, through his recently founded publishing house, Victor Gollancz Ltd, which was an outlet for radical and socialist works.\nAt the end of the summer term in 1932, Blair returned to Southwold, where his parents had used a legacy to buy their own home. Blair and his sister Avril spent the holidays making the house habitable while he also worked on \"Burmese Days\". He was also spending time with Eleanor Jacques, but her attachment to Dennis Collings remained an obstacle to his hopes of a more serious relationship.\n\"Clink\", an essay describing his failed attempt to get sent to prison, appeared in the August 1932 number of \"Adelphi\". He returned to teaching at Hayes and prepared for the publication of his book, now known as \"Down and Out in Paris and London\". He wished to publish under a different name to avoid any embarrassment to his family over his time as a \"tramp\". In a letter to Moore (dated 15 November 1932), he left the choice of pseudonym to Moore and to Gollancz. Four days later, he wrote to Moore, suggesting the pseudonyms P.S. Burton (a name he used when tramping), Kenneth Miles, George Orwell, and H. Lewis Allways. He finally adopted the pen name George Orwell because \"It is a good round English name.\" The name George was inspired by the patron saint of England, and Orwell after the River Orwell in Suffolk which was one of Orwell's favourite locations.\n\"Down and Out in Paris and London\" was published by Victor Gollancz in London on 9 January 1933 and received favourable reviews, with Cecil Day-Lewis complimenting Orwell's \"clarity and good sense\", and \"The Times Literary Supplement\" comparing Orwell's eccentric characters to the characters of Dickens. \"Down and Out\" was modestly successful and was next published by Harper &amp; Brothers in New York.\nIn mid-1933 Blair left Hawthorns to become a teacher at Frays College, in Uxbridge, west London. This was a much larger establishment with 200 pupils and a full complement of staff. He acquired a motorcycle and took trips through the surrounding countryside. On one of these expeditions he became soaked and caught a chill that developed into pneumonia. He was taken to a cottage hospital in Uxbridge, where for a time his life was believed to be in danger. When he was discharged in January 1934, he returned to Southwold to convalesce and, supported by his parents, never returned to teaching.\nHe was disappointed when Gollancz turned down \"Burmese Days\", mainly on the grounds of potential suits for libel, but Harper were prepared to publish it in the United States. Meanwhile, Blair started work on the novel \"A Clergyman's Daughter\", drawing upon his life as a teacher and on life in Southwold. Eventually in October, after sending \"A Clergyman's Daughter\" to Moore, he left for London to take a job that had been found for him by his aunt Nellie Limouzin.\nHampstead.\nThis job was as a part-time assistant in Booklovers' Corner, a second-hand bookshop in Hampstead run by Francis and Myfanwy Westrope, who were friends of Nellie Limouzin in the Esperanto movement. The Westropes were friendly and provided him with comfortable accommodation at Warwick Mansions, Pond Street. He was sharing the job with Jon Kimche, who also lived with the Westropes. Blair worked at the shop in the afternoons and had his mornings free to write and his evenings free to socialise. These experiences provided background for the novel \"Keep the Aspidistra Flying\" (1936). As well as the various guests of the Westropes, he was able to enjoy the company of Richard Rees and the \"Adelphi\" writers and Mabel Fierz. The Westropes and Kimche were members of the Independent Labour Party, although at this time Blair was not seriously politically active. He was writing for the \"Adelphi\" and preparing \"A Clergyman's Daughter\" and \"Burmese Days\" for publication.\nAt the beginning of 1935 he had to move out of Warwick Mansions, and Mabel Fierz found him a flat in Parliament Hill. \"A Clergyman's Daughter\" was published on 11 March 1935. In early 1935 Blair met his future wife Eileen O'Shaughnessy, when his landlady, Rosalind Obermeyer, who was studying for a master's degree in psychology at University College London, invited some of her fellow students to a party. One of these students, Elizaveta Fen, recalled Blair and his friend Richard Rees \"draped\" at the fireplace, looking, she thought, \"moth-eaten and prematurely aged\". Around this time, Blair had started to write reviews for \"The New English Weekly\".\nIn June, \"Burmese Days\" was published and Cyril Connolly's positive review in the \"New Statesman\" prompted Blair to re-establish contact with his old friend. In August, he moved into a flat, at 50 Lawford Road, Kentish Town, which he shared with Michael Sayers and Rayner Heppenstall. The relationship was sometimes awkward and Blair and Heppenstall even came to blows, though they remained friends and later worked together on BBC broadcasts. Blair was now working on \"Keep the Aspidistra Flying\", and also tried unsuccessfully to write a serial for the \"News Chronicle\". By October 1935 his flatmates had moved out and he was struggling to pay the rent on his own. He remained until the end of January 1936, when he stopped working at Booklovers' Corner. In 1980, English Heritage honoured Orwell with a blue plaque at his Kentish Town residence.\n\"The Road to Wigan Pier\".\nAt this time, Victor Gollancz suggested Orwell spend a short time investigating social conditions in economically depressed Northern England. The Depression had introduced a number of working-class writers from the North of England to the reading public. It was one of these working-class authors, Jack Hilton, whom Orwell sought for advice. Orwell had written to Hilton seeking lodging and asking for recommendations on his route. Hilton was unable to provide him lodging, but suggested that he travel to Wigan rather than Rochdale, \"for there are the colliers and they're good stuff\".\nOn 31 January 1936, Orwell set out by public transport and on foot. Arriving in Manchester after the banks had closed, he had to stay in a common lodging-house. The next day he picked up a list of contacts sent by Richard Rees. One of these, the trade union official Frank Meade, suggested Wigan, where Orwell spent February staying in dirty lodgings over a tripe shop. In Wigan, he visited many homes to see how people lived, went down Bryn Hall coal mine, and used the local public library to consult public health records and reports on working conditions in mines.\nDuring this time, he was distracted by concerns about style and possible libel in \"Keep the Aspidistra Flying\". He made a quick visit to Liverpool and during March, stayed in south Yorkshire, spending time in Sheffield and Barnsley. As well as visiting mines, including Grimethorpe, and observing social conditions, he attended meetings of the Communist Party and of Oswald Mosley (\"his speech the usual claptrap\u2014The blame for everything was put upon mysterious international gangs of Jews\") where he saw the tactics of the Blackshirts. He also made visits to his sister at Headingley, during which he visited the Bront\u00eb Parsonage at Haworth.\nOrwell needed somewhere he could concentrate on writing his book, and once again help was provided by Aunt Nellie, who was living at Wallington, Hertfordshire, in a very small 16th-century cottage called the \"Stores\". Orwell took over the tenancy and moved in on 2\u00a0April 1936. He started work on \"The Road to Wigan Pier\" by the end of April, but also spent hours working on the garden, planting a rose garden which is still extant, and revealing four years later that \"outside my work the thing I care most about is gardening, especially vegetable gardening\". He also tested the possibility of reopening the Stores as a village shop. \"Keep the Aspidistra Flying\" was published by Gollancz on 20\u00a0April 1936. On 4\u00a0August, Orwell gave a talk at the Adelphi Summer School held at Langham, entitled \"An Outsider Sees the Distressed Areas\"; others who spoke at the school included John Strachey, Max Plowman, Karl Polanyi and Reinhold Niebuhr.\nThe result of his journeys through the north was \"The Road to Wigan Pier\", published by Gollancz for the Left Book Club in 1937. The first half of the book documents his social investigations of Lancashire and Yorkshire, including an evocative description of working life in the coal mines. The second half is a long essay on his upbringing and the development of his political conscience, which includes an argument for socialism. Gollancz feared the second half would offend readers and added a disculpatory preface to the book while Orwell was in Spain. Orwell's research for \"The Road to Wigan Pier\" led to him being placed under surveillance by the Special Branch from 1936.\nOrwell married O'Shaughnessy on 9 June 1936. Shortly afterwards, the political crisis began in Spain and Orwell followed developments there closely. At the end of the year, concerned by Francisco Franco's military uprising, Orwell decided to go to Spain to take part in the Spanish Civil War on the Republican side. Under the erroneous impression that he needed papers from some left-wing organisation to cross the frontier, on John Strachey's recommendation he applied unsuccessfully to Harry Pollitt, leader of the British Communist Party. Pollitt was suspicious of Orwell's political reliability; he asked him whether he would undertake to join the International Brigades and advised him to get a safe-conduct from the Spanish Embassy in Paris. Not wishing to commit himself until he had seen the situation \"in situ\", Orwell instead used his Independent Labour Party contacts to get a letter of introduction to John McNair in Barcelona.\nSpanish Civil War.\nOrwell set out for Spain on about 23 December 1936, dining with Henry Miller in Paris on the way. Miller told Orwell that going to fight in the Civil War out of some sense of obligation or guilt was \"sheer stupidity\" and that the Englishman's ideas \"about combating Fascism, defending democracy, etc., etc., were all baloney\". A few days later in Barcelona, Orwell met John McNair of the Independent Labour Party (ILP) Office. The Republican government was supported by a number of factions with conflicting aims, including the Workers' Party of Marxist Unification (POUM), the anarcho-syndicalist Confederaci\u00f3n Nacional del Trabajo (CNT) and the Unified Socialist Party of Catalonia (a wing of the Spanish Communist Party). Orwell was at first exasperated by this \"kaleidoscope\" of political parties and trade unions. The ILP was linked to the POUM so Orwell joined the POUM.\nAfter a time at the Lenin Barracks in Barcelona he was sent to the relatively quiet Aragon Front under Georges Kopp. By January 1937 he was at Alcubierre above sea level, in the depth of winter. There was very little military action and Orwell was shocked by the lack of munitions, food and firewood as well as other extreme deprivations. With his Cadet Corps and police training, Orwell was quickly made a corporal. On the arrival of a British ILP Contingent about three weeks later, Orwell and the other English militiaman, Williams, were sent with them to Monte Oscuro and on to Huesca.\nMeanwhile, back in England, Eileen had been handling the issues relating to the publication of \"The Road to Wigan Pier\" before setting out for Spain herself, leaving Nellie Limouzin to look after The Stores. Eileen volunteered for a post in John McNair's office and with the help of Georges Kopp paid visits to her husband, bringing him English tea, chocolate and cigars. Orwell had to spend some days in hospital with a poisoned hand and had most of his possessions stolen by the staff. He returned to the front and saw some action in a night attack on the Nationalist trenches where he chased an enemy soldier with a bayonet and bombed an enemy rifle position.\nIn April, Orwell returned to Barcelona. Wanting to be sent to the Madrid front, which meant he \"must join the International Column\", he approached a Communist friend attached to the Spanish Medical Aid and explained his case. \"Although he did not think much of the Communists, Orwell was still ready to treat them as friends and allies. That would soon change.\" During the Barcelona May Days Orwell was caught up in the factional fighting. He spent much of the time on a roof, with a stack of novels, but encountered Jon Kimche from his Hampstead days during the stay. The subsequent campaign of lies and distortion carried out by the Communist press, in which the POUM was accused of collaborating with the fascists, had a dramatic effect on Orwell. Instead of joining the International Brigades as he had intended, he decided to return to the Aragon Front. Once the May fighting was over, he was approached by a Communist friend who asked if he still intended transferring to the International Brigades. Orwell expressed surprise that they should still want him, because according to the Communist press he was a fascist.\nAfter his return to the front, he was wounded in the throat by a sniper's bullet. At , Orwell was considerably taller than the Spanish fighters and had been warned against standing against the trench parapet. Unable to speak, and with blood pouring from his mouth, Orwell was carried on a stretcher to Si\u00e9tamo, loaded on an ambulance and sent to hospital in Lleida. He recovered sufficiently to get up and on 27\u00a0May 1937 was sent on to Tarragona and two days later to a POUM sanatorium in the suburbs of Barcelona. The bullet had missed his main artery by the barest margin and his voice was barely audible. It had been such a clean shot that the wound immediately went through the process of cauterisation. He received electrotherapy treatment and was declared medically unfit for service.\nBy the middle of June, the political situation in Barcelona had deteriorated and the POUM\u2014painted by the pro-Soviet Communists as a Trotskyist organisation\u2014was outlawed and under attack. Members, including Kopp, were arrested and others were in hiding. Orwell and his wife were under threat and had to lie low, although they broke cover to try to help Kopp. They finally escaped from Spain by train. In the first week of July 1937 Orwell arrived back at Wallington; on 13 July 1937 a deposition was presented to the Tribunal for Espionage and High Treason in Valencia, charging the Orwells with \"rabid Trotskyism\", and being agents of the POUM. The trial of the leaders of the POUM and of Orwell (in his absence) took place in Barcelona in October and November 1938. Observing events from French Morocco, Orwell wrote that they were \"only a by-product of the Russian Trotskyist trials and from the start every kind of lie, including flagrant absurdities, has been circulated in the Communist press\". Orwell's experiences in the Spanish Civil War gave rise to \"Homage to Catalonia\" (1938).\nIn his book, \"The International Brigades: Fascism, Freedom and the Spanish Civil War,\" Giles Tremlett writes that according to Soviet files, Orwell and his wife Eileen were spied on in Barcelona in May 1937.\nRest and recuperation.\nOrwell returned to England in June 1937, and stayed at the O'Shaughnessy home at Greenwich. He found his views on the Spanish Civil War out of favour, but praised the book \"Red Spanish Notebook: the first six months of revolution and the civil war\" by Juan Ram\u00f3n Bre\u00e1 and Mary Stanley Low in a review for \"Time and Tide\" magazine. Kingsley Martin rejected two of Orwell's works and Gollancz was equally cautious. At the same time, the communist \"Daily Worker\" was running an attack on \"The Road to Wigan Pier\", taking out of context Orwell writing that \"the working classes smell\"; a letter to Gollancz from Orwell threatening libel action brought a stop to this. Orwell was also able to find a more sympathetic publisher for his views in Fredric Warburg of Secker &amp; Warburg. Orwell returned to Wallington, which he found in disarray after his absence. He acquired goats, a cockerel (rooster) he called Henry Ford and a poodle puppy he called Marx; and settled down to animal husbandry and writing \"Homage to Catalonia\".\nThere were thoughts of going to India to work on \"The Pioneer\", a newspaper in Lucknow, but by March 1938 Orwell's health had deteriorated. He was admitted to Preston Hall Sanatorium at Aylesford, Kent, a Royal British Legion Industries hospital for ex-servicemen to which his brother-in-law Laurence O'Shaughnessy was attached. He was thought initially to be suffering from tuberculosis and stayed in the sanatorium until September. \"Homage to Catalonia\" was published in London by Secker &amp; Warburg and was a commercial flop; it re-emerged in the 1950s, following on the success of Orwell's later books.\nThe novelist L.H. Myers secretly funded a trip to French Morocco for half a year for Orwell to avoid the English winter and recover his health. The Orwells set out in September 1938 via Gibraltar and Tangier to avoid Spanish Morocco and arrived at Marrakesh. They rented a villa on the road to Casablanca and during that time Orwell wrote \"Coming Up for Air\". They arrived back in England on 30 March 1939 and \"Coming Up for Air\" was published in June. Orwell spent time in Wallington and Southwold working on an essay about Charles Dickens. In June 1939, Orwell's father died.\nSecond World War and \"Animal Farm\".\nAt the outbreak of the Second World War, Orwell's wife Eileen started working in the Censorship Department of the Ministry of Information in central London, staying during the week with her family in Greenwich. Orwell submitted his name to the Central Register for war work, but nothing transpired. He returned to Wallington, and in late 1939 he wrote material for his first collection of essays, \"Inside the Whale\". For the next year he was occupied writing reviews for plays, films and books for \"The Listener\", \"Time and Tide\" and \"New Adelphi\". On 29 March 1940 his long association with \"Tribune\" began with a review of a sergeant's account of Napoleon's retreat from Moscow. At the beginning of 1940, the first edition of Connolly's \"Horizon\" appeared, and this provided a new outlet for Orwell's work and new literary contacts. In May the Orwells took lease of a flat in London at Dorset Chambers, Chagford Street, Marylebone. It was the time of the Dunkirk evacuation, and the death in Flanders of Eileen's brother Laurence O'Shaughnessy caused her considerable grief and long-term depression.\nOrwell was declared \"unfit for any kind of military service\" by the Medical Board in June, but soon joined the Home Guard. He shared Tom Wintringham's socialist vision for the Home Guard as a revolutionary People's Militia. His lecture notes for instructing platoon members include advice on street fighting, field fortifications, and the use of mortars. Sergeant Orwell recruited Fredric Warburg to his unit. During the Battle of Britain he spent weekends with Warburg and his new Zionist friend, Tosco Fyvel, at Warburg's house at Twyford, Berkshire. At Wallington he worked on \"England Your England\" and in London wrote reviews for periodicals. Visiting Eileen's family in Greenwich brought him face-to-face with the effects of the German Blitz bombings. In 1940 he first worked for the BBC as a producer on their Indian Section, while the broadcaster and writer Venu Chitale was his secretary. In mid-1940, Warburg, Fyvel and Orwell planned Searchlight Books. Eleven volumes eventually appeared, of which Orwell's \"\", published in February 1941, was the first.\nEarly in 1941 he began to write for the American \"Partisan Review\" which linked Orwell with the New York Intellectuals who were also anti-Stalinist, and contributed to the Gollancz anthology \"The Betrayal of the Left\", written in the light of the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact. He applied unsuccessfully for a job at the Air Ministry. Meanwhile, he was still writing reviews of books and plays and met the novelist Anthony Powell. He took part in radio broadcasts for the Eastern Service of the BBC. In March the Orwells moved to a seventh-floor flat at Langford Court, St John's Wood, while at Wallington Orwell was \"digging for victory\" by planting potatoes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One could not have a better example of the moral and emotional shallowness of our time, than the fact that we are now all more or less pro Stalin. This disgusting murderer is temporarily on our side, and so the purges, etc., are suddenly forgotten.\u2014\u200a\nIn August 1941, Orwell finally obtained \"war work\" when he was taken on full-time by the BBC's Eastern Service. He supervised cultural broadcasts to India, to counter propaganda from Nazi Germany designed to undermine imperial links.\nAt the end of August he had a dinner with H. G. Wells which degenerated into a row because Wells had taken offence at observations Orwell made about him in a \"Horizon\" article. In October Orwell had a bout of bronchitis; the illness recurred frequently. David Astor was looking for a provocative contributor for \"The Observer\" Sunday newspaper, and invited Orwell to write for him; the first article appeared in March 1942. In early 1942 Eileen changed jobs to work at the Ministry of Food, and in mid-1942 the Orwells moved to a larger flat, 10a Mortimer Crescent in Maida Vale/Kilburn.\nAt the BBC, Orwell introduced \"Voice\", a literary programme for his Indian broadcasts, and by now was leading an active social life with literary friends, particularly on the political left. Late in 1942 he started writing regularly for the left-wing weekly \"Tribune\" directed by Labour MPs Aneurin Bevan and George Strauss. In March 1943, Orwell's mother died, and around this time he told Moore he was starting work on a book, which turned out to be \"Animal Farm\".\nIn September 1943, Orwell resigned from the BBC following a report confirming his fears that few Indians listened to the broadcasts, but he was also keen to concentrate on writing \"Animal Farm\". On 24\u00a0November 1943, six days before his last day of service, his adaptation of the fairy tale, Hans Christian Andersen's \"The Emperor's New Clothes\" was broadcast. It was a genre in which he was greatly interested and which appeared on \"Animal Farm\"'s title page. He resigned from the Home Guard on medical grounds.\nIn November 1943, Orwell was appointed literary editor at \"Tribune\", where his assistant was his friend Jon Kimche. Orwell was on the staff until early 1945, writing over 80 book reviews, and on 3\u00a0December 1943 started his regular personal column \"As I Please\". He was still writing reviews for other magazines, including \"Partisan Review\", \"Horizon\", and the New York \"Nation\". By April 1944 \"Animal Farm\" was ready for publication. Gollancz refused to publish it, considering it an attack on the regime of the Soviet Union, a crucial ally in the war. A similar fate was met from other publishers, including T.\u00a0S.\u00a0Eliot at Faber &amp; Faber, until Jonathan Cape agreed to take it.\nOrwell and Eileen wanted children, but he was sterile and she may also have been infertile due to uterine cancer. In May the Orwells had the opportunity to adopt a child, thanks to the contacts of Eileen's sister-in-law Gwen O'Shaughnessy, then a doctor in Newcastle upon Tyne. In June a V-1 flying bomb struck Mortimer Crescent and the Orwells had to find somewhere else to live. Orwell had to scrabble around in the rubble for his books, which he had finally managed to transfer from Wallington, carting them away in a wheelbarrow. Another blow was Cape's reversal of his plan to publish \"Animal Farm\". The decision followed his visit to Peter Smollett, an official at the Ministry of Information, who was later identified as a Soviet agent.\nThe Orwells spent time in the North East, near Carlton, County Durham, dealing with the adoption of a boy whom they named Richard Horatio Blair. By September 1944 they had set up home in Islington, at 27b\u00a0Canonbury Square. Baby Richard joined them there, and Eileen gave up her work at the Ministry of Food to look after her family. Secker &amp; Warburg had agreed to publish \"Animal Farm\", planned for the following March, although it did not appear in print until August 1945. By February 1945 David Astor had invited Orwell to become a war correspondent for \"The Observer\". He went to liberated Paris, then to Germany and Austria, to cities including Cologne and Stuttgart. He was never in the front line, under fire, but followed the troops closely, \"sometimes entering a captured town within a day of its fall while dead bodies lay in the streets\". Some of his reports were published in the \"Manchester Evening News\".\nWhile he was there, Eileen went into hospital for a hysterectomy. She had not given Orwell much notice about the operation because of worries about the cost, and because she expected to make a speedy recovery; however she died on 29\u00a0March 1945 of an allergic reaction to the anaesthetic she was given. It was expected that he would give up his nine-month-old adopted son, but he did not. Orwell returned home and then went back to Europe. He returned to London to cover the 1945 general election at the beginning of July. \"Animal Farm: A Fairy Story\" was published in Britain on 17\u00a0August 1945, and in America on 26\u00a0August 1946.\nJura and \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\".\n\"Animal Farm\" had particular resonance in the post-war climate and its worldwide success made Orwell a sought-after figure. For the next four years, Orwell mixed journalistic work\u2014mainly for \"Tribune\", \"The Observer\" and the \"Manchester Evening News\", though he also contributed to many small-circulation political and literary magazines\u2014with writing his best-known work, \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", which was published in 1949. He was a leading figure in the so-called Shanghai Club (named after a restaurant in Soho) of left-leaning and \u00e9migr\u00e9 journalists, among them E. H. Carr, Sebastian Haffner, Isaac Deutscher, Barbara Ward and Jon Kimche.\nIn the year following Eileen's death he published around 130 articles and a selection of his \"Critical Essays\", while remaining active in various political lobbying campaigns. He employed a housekeeper, Susan Watson, to look after his adopted son at the Islington flat, which visitors now described as \"bleak\". In September he spent a fortnight on the island of Jura in the Inner Hebrides and saw it as a place to escape from the hassle of London literary life. David Astor was instrumental in arranging a place for Orwell on Jura. Astor's family owned Scottish estates in the area and a fellow Old Etonian, Robin Fletcher, had a property on the island. In late 1945 and early 1946 Orwell made several hopeless and unwelcome marriage proposals to younger women, including Celia Kirwan; Ann Popham, who happened to live in the same block of flats; and Sonia Brownell, one of Connolly's coterie at the \"Horizon\" office. Orwell suffered a tubercular haemorrhage in February 1946 but disguised his illness. In 1945 or early 1946, while still living at Canonbury Square, Orwell wrote an article on \"British Cookery\", complete with recipes, commissioned by the British Council. Given the post-war shortages, both parties agreed not to publish it. His sister Marjorie died in May.\nOn 22 May 1946, Orwell set off with his two-year-old son, who he treated as a mini-adult, to live on Jura in Barnhill, an abandoned farmhouse without outbuildings. Conditions at the farmhouse were primitive but the natural history and the challenge of improving the place appealed to Orwell. His son found out later that Orwell was terrified of passing on his tuberculosis to him by hugging or kissing him, and concerned that this would interfere with his bonding with the child. Orwell returned to London in late 1946 and picked up his literary journalism again. Now a well-known writer, he was swamped with work. Apart from a visit to Jura in the new year he stayed in London for one of the coldest British winters on record and with such a national shortage of fuel that he burnt his furniture and his child's toys. The heavy smog in the days before the Clean Air Act 1956 did little to help his health, about which he was reticent, keeping clear of medical attention. Meanwhile, he had to cope with rival claims of publishers Gollancz and Warburg for publishing rights. About this time he co-edited a collection titled \"British Pamphleteers\" with Reginald Reynolds. \nAs a result of the success of \"Animal Farm\", Orwell was expecting a large bill from the Inland Revenue and he contacted a firm of accountants. The firm advised Orwell to establish a company to own his copyright and to receive his royalties and set up a \"service agreement\" so that he could draw a salary; \"George Orwell Productions Ltd\" (GOP Ltd) was set up on 12 September 1947.\nOrwell left London for Jura on 10 April 1947. In July he ended the lease on the Wallington cottage. Back on Jura he worked on \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". During that time his sister's family visited, and Orwell led a disastrous boating expedition, on 19 August, which nearly led to loss of life whilst trying to cross the notorious Gulf of Corryvreckan and gave him a soaking which was not good for his health. In December a chest specialist was summoned from Glasgow who pronounced Orwell seriously ill, and a week before Christmas 1947 he was in Hairmyres Hospital. Tuberculosis was diagnosed and the request for permission to import the new medicine streptomycin to treat Orwell went as far as Aneurin Bevan, then Minister of Health. David Astor helped with supply and payment and Orwell began his course of streptomycin on 19 or 20 February 1948. By the end of July 1948 Orwell was able to return to Jura and by December he had finished the manuscript of \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". In January 1949, in a very weak condition, he set off for a sanatorium at Cranham, Gloucestershire. However, streptomycin could not be continued, as he developed toxic epidermal necrolysis, a rare side effect.\nThe sanatorium at Cranham consisted of a series of small wooden chalets or huts in a remote part of the Cotswolds near Stroud. Visitors were shocked by Orwell's appearance and concerned by the shortcomings and ineffectiveness of the treatment. Friends were worried about his finances, but by now he was comparatively well off. He was writing to many of his friends, including Jacintha Buddicom, who had \"rediscovered\" him. In March 1949 he was visited by Celia Kirwan, who had just started working for a Foreign Office unit, the Information Research Department (IRD), set up by the Labour government to publish anti-communist propaganda; Orwell gave her a list of people he considered to be unsuitable as IRD authors because of their pro-communist leanings. Orwell's list, not published until 2003, consisted mainly of writers, and some actors and Labour MPs. To further promote \"Animal Farm\", the IRD commissioned cartoon strips, drawn by Norman Pett, to be placed in newspapers across the globe. Orwell received more streptomycin treatment and improved slightly. This repeat dose of streptomycin, especially after the side effect had been noticed, has been called \"ill-advised\". He then received penicillin, presumably to treat his bronchiectasis; doctors knew it was ineffective against tuberculosis. In June 1949 \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" was published to critical acclaim.\nFinal months and death.\nOrwell's health continued to decline. In mid-1949, he courted Sonia Brownell, believed to be the model for Julia, the heroine of \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", and they announced their engagement in September. Shortly afterwards he was removed to University College Hospital in London. Brownell took charge of Orwell's affairs and attended him diligently in the hospital. Friends of Orwell stated that Brownell helped him through the painful last months of his life and, according to Anthony Powell, cheered Orwell up greatly. However, others have argued that she may have been attracted to him primarily because of his fame.\nIn September 1949, Orwell invited his accountant Jack Harrison to visit him at the hospital, and Harrison claimed that Orwell then asked him to become director of GOP Ltd and to manage the company, but there was no independent witness. Orwell's wedding took place in the hospital room on 13 October 1949, with David Astor as best man. Further meetings were held with his accountant, at which Harrison and the Blairs were confirmed as directors of the company. Orwell's health was in decline again by Christmas. Harrison visited later and claimed that Orwell had given him 25% of the company. At the age of 46, Orwell suffered a pulmonary artery rupture due to complications of tuberculosis, and died in the early morning of 21 January 1950.\nOrwell had requested to be buried \"according to the rites of the Church of England, in the nearest convenient cemetery\". The graveyards in central London had no space, and so in an effort to ensure his last wishes could be fulfilled, his widow appealed to his friends to see whether any of them knew of a church with space in its graveyard. David Astor arranged for Orwell to be interred in the churchyard of All Saints' Church, Sutton Courtenay, on 26 January 1950. The funeral was organised by Anthony Powell and Malcolm Muggeridge. Powell chose the hymns: \"All people that on earth do dwell\", \"Guide me, O thou great Redeemer\" and \"Ten thousand times ten thousand\".\nOrwell's adopted son, Richard Horatio Blair, was brought up by Orwell's sister Avril, his legal guardian, and her husband, Bill Dunn. In 1979, Sonia Brownell brought a High Court action against Harrison when he declared an intention to subdivide his 25 per cent share of the company between his three children. For Sonia, the consequence of this manoeuvre would have made getting overall control of the company three times more difficult. She was considered to have a strong case, but was becoming increasingly ill and eventually was persuaded to settle out of court on 2 November 1980. She died on 11 December 1980, aged 62.\nWriting.\nDuring most of his career, Orwell was best known for his journalism, in essays, reviews, columns in newspapers and magazines and in his books of reportage: \"Down and Out in Paris and London\" (describing a period of poverty in these cities), \"The Road to Wigan Pier\" (describing the living conditions of the poor in northern England, and class division generally) and \"Homage to Catalonia\". According to Irving Howe, Orwell was \"the best English essayist since Hazlitt, perhaps since Dr\u00a0Johnson\".\nModern readers are more often introduced to Orwell as a novelist, particularly through his enormously successful \"Animal Farm\" and \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". The former is often thought to reflect degeneration in the Soviet Union after the Russian Revolution and the rise of Stalinism; the latter, life under totalitarian rule. In 1984, \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" and Ray Bradbury's \"Fahrenheit 451\" were honoured with the Prometheus Award for their contributions to dystopian literature. In 2011 he received it again for \"Animal Farm\". In 2003, \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" was listed at number 8 and \"Animal Farm\" at number 46 on the BBC's The Big Read poll. In 2021, readers of the \"New York Times Book Review\" rated \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" third in a list of \"The best books of the past 125 years\".\nLiterary influences.\nIn an autobiographical piece that Orwell sent to the editors of \"Twentieth Century Authors\" in 1940, he wrote:\nThe writers I care about most and never grow tired of are: Shakespeare, Swift, Fielding, Dickens, Charles Reade, Flaubert and, among modern writers, James Joyce, T.\u00a0S.\u00a0Eliot and D.\u00a0H.\u00a0Lawrence. But I believe the modern writer who has influenced me most is W.\u00a0Somerset Maugham, whom I admire immensely for his power of telling a story straightforwardly and without frills.\nElsewhere, Orwell strongly praised the works of Jack London, especially his book \"The Road\". Orwell's investigation of poverty in \"The Road to Wigan Pier\" strongly resembles that of Jack London's \"The People of the Abyss\", in which the American journalist disguises himself as an out-of-work sailor to investigate the lives of the poor in London. In his essay \"Politics vs. Literature: An Examination of Gulliver's Travels\" (1946) Orwell wrote: \"If I had to make a list of six books which were to be preserved when all others were destroyed, I would certainly put \"Gulliver's Travels\" among them.\" On H.\u00a0G.\u00a0Wells he wrote: \"The minds of all of us, and therefore the physical world, would be perceptibly different if Wells had never existed.\"\nOrwell was an admirer of Arthur Koestler and became a close friend during the three years that Koestler and his wife Mamain spent at the cottage of Bwlch Ocyn in the Vale of Ffestiniog. Orwell reviewed Koestler's \"Darkness at Noon\" for the \"New Statesman\" in 1941, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBrilliant as this book is as a novel, and a piece of brilliant literature, it is probably most valuable as an interpretation of the Moscow \"confessions\" by someone with an inner knowledge of totalitarian methods. What was frightening about these trials was not the fact that they happened\u2014for obviously such things are necessary in a totalitarian society\u2014but the eagerness of Western intellectuals to justify them.\nOther writers Orwell admired included Ralph Waldo Emerson, George Gissing, Graham Greene, Herman Melville, Henry Miller, Tobias Smollett, Mark Twain, Joseph Conrad, and Yevgeny Zamyatin. He was both an admirer and a critic of Rudyard Kipling, praising Kipling as a gifted writer and a \"good bad poet\" whose work is \"spurious\" and \"morally insensitive and aesthetically disgusting\", but undeniably seductive and able to speak to certain aspects of reality more effectively than more enlightened authors. He had a similarly ambivalent attitude to G.\u00a0K.\u00a0Chesterton, whom he regarded as a writer of considerable talent who had chosen to devote himself to \"Roman Catholic propaganda\", and to Evelyn Waugh, who was, he wrote, \"about as good a novelist as one can be (i.e. as novelists go today) while holding untenable opinions\".\nLiterary critic.\nThroughout his life Orwell continually supported himself as a book-reviewer. His reviews are well known and have had an influence on literary criticism. He wrote in the conclusion to his 1940 essay on Charles Dickens:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen one reads any strongly individual piece of writing, one has the impression of seeing a face somewhere behind the page. It is not necessarily the actual face of the writer. I feel this very strongly with Swift, with Defoe, with Fielding, Stendhal, Thackeray, Flaubert, though in several cases I do not know what these people looked like and do not want to know. What one sees is the face that the writer ought to have. Well, in the case of Dickens I see a face that is not quite the face of Dickens's photographs, though it resembles it. It is the face of a man of about forty, with a small beard and a high colour. He is laughing, with a touch of anger in his laughter, but no triumph, no malignity. It is the face of a man who is always fighting against something, but who fights in the open and is not frightened, the face of a man who is generously angry\u2014in other words, of a nineteenth-century liberal, a free intelligence, a type hated with equal hatred by all the smelly little orthodoxies which are now contending for our souls.\nGeorge Woodcock suggested that the last two sentences also describe Orwell.\nOrwell wrote a critique of George Bernard Shaw's play \"Arms and the Man\". He considered this Shaw's best play and the most likely to remain socially relevant. His 1945 essay \"In Defence of P.\u00a0G.\u00a0Wodehouse\" argues that his broadcasts from Germany during the war did not really make him a traitor. He accused the Ministry of Information of exaggerating Wodehouse's actions for propaganda purposes.\nFood writing.\nIn 1946, the British Council commissioned Orwell to write an essay on British food as part of a drive to promote British relations abroad. In his essay titled \"British Cookery\", Orwell described the British diet as \"a simple, rather heavy, perhaps slightly barbarous diet\" and where \"hot drinks are acceptable at most hours of the day\". He wrote that high tea in the United Kingdom consisted of a variety of savoury and sweet dishes, but \"no tea would be considered a good one if it did not include at least one kind of cake\", before adding \"as well as cakes, biscuits are much eaten at tea-time\". Orwell included his own recipe for marmalade, a popular British spread on toast. However, the British Council declined to publish the essay on the grounds that it was too problematic to write about food at the time of strict rationing in the UK following the war. In 2019, the essay was discovered in the British Council's archives along with the rejection letter. The British Council issued an official apology to Orwell over the rejection of the commissioned essay, publishing the original essay along with the rejection letter.\nPersonal life.\nChildhood.\nJacintha Buddicom's account, \"Eric &amp; Us\", provides an insight into Blair's childhood. She quoted his sister Avril that \"he was essentially an aloof, undemonstrative person\" and said herself of his friendship with the Buddicoms: \"I do not think he needed any other friends beyond the schoolfriend he occasionally and appreciatively referred to as 'CC'\". She could not recall him having schoolfriends to stay and exchange visits as her brother Prosper often did in holidays. Cyril Connolly provides an account of Blair as a child in \"Enemies of Promise\". Years later, Blair mordantly recalled his prep school in the essay \"Such, Such Were the Joys\", claiming among other things that he \"was made to study like a dog\" to earn a scholarship. Jacintha Buddicom repudiated Orwell's schoolboy misery described in the essay, stating that \"he was a specially happy child\". She noted that he did not like his name because it reminded him of a book he greatly disliked\u2014\"Eric, or, Little by Little\", a Victorian boys' school story.\nConnolly remarked of him as a schoolboy, \"The remarkable thing about Orwell was that alone among the boys he was an intellectual and not a parrot for he thought for himself\". At Eton, John Vaughan Wilkes, his former headmaster's son at St Cyprians, recalled that \"he was extremely argumentative\u2014about anything\u2014and criticising the masters and criticising the other boys\u00a0[...] We enjoyed arguing with him. He would generally win the arguments\u2014or think he had anyhow.\"\nBlair liked to carry out practical jokes. Buddicom recalls him swinging from the luggage rack in a railway carriage like an orangutan to frighten a woman passenger out of the compartment. At Eton, he played tricks on John Crace, his housemaster, among which was to enter a spoof advertisement in a college magazine implying pederasty. Gow, his tutor, said he \"made himself as big a nuisance as he could\" and \"was a very unattractive boy\". Later Blair was expelled from the crammer at Southwold for sending a dead rat as a birthday present to the town surveyor.\nBlair had an interest in natural history which stemmed from his childhood. In letters from school he wrote about caterpillars and butterflies, and Buddicom recalls his keen interest in ornithology. He also enjoyed fishing and shooting rabbits, and conducting experiments as in cooking a hedgehog or shooting down a jackdaw from the Eton roof to dissect it. His zeal for scientific experiments extended to explosives\u2014again Buddicom recalls a cook giving notice because of the noise. Later in Southwold, his sister Avril recalled him blowing up the garden. When teaching he enthused his students with his nature-rambles both at Southwold and at Hayes. His adult diaries are permeated with his observations on nature.\nRelationships and marriage.\nBlair's adolescent idyll with Buddicom was shattered in the summer of 1921, when he attempted to take their relationship further than Buddicom was ready for, in what was characterised as a \"botched seduction\". When Blair left for Burma the following year, he wrote to Buddicom but she soon stopped replying to his letters. Returning from Burma in 1927, Blair went in search of Buddicom at her family home to ask her to marry him but could not find her. What had been \"a very serious business indeed\" for Blair had apparently been dismissed by Buddicom, leaving Blair potentially emotionally vulnerable. Buddicom and Blair revisited those memories briefly in 1949 in three letters and three telephone calls but without closure.\nMabel Fierz, who later became Blair's confidante, said: \"He used to say the one thing he wished in this world was that he'd been attractive to women. He liked women and had many girlfriends I think in Burma. He had a girl in Southwold and another girl in London. He was rather a womaniser, yet he was afraid he wasn't attractive.\"\nBrenda Salkield (Southwold) preferred friendship to any deeper relationship and maintained a correspondence with Blair for many years, particularly as a sounding board for his ideas. She wrote: \"He was a great letter writer. Endless letters, and I mean when he wrote you a letter he wrote pages.\" His correspondence with Eleanor Jacques (London) was more prosaic, dwelling on a closer relationship and referring to past rendezvous or planning future ones in London and Burnham Beeches.\nWhen Orwell was in the sanatorium in Kent, his wife Eileen's friend Lydia Jackson visited. He invited her for a walk and out of sight \"an awkward situation arose.\" Jackson was to be the most critical of Orwell's marriage to Eileen, but their later correspondence hints at a complicity. At the time Eileen was more concerned about Orwell's closeness to Brenda Salkield. Orwell had an affair with his secretary at \"Tribune\" which caused Eileen much distress, and others have been mooted. In a letter to Ann Popham he wrote: \"I was sometimes unfaithful to Eileen, and I also treated her badly, and I think she treated me badly, too, at times, but it was a real marriage, in the sense that we had been through awful struggles together and she understood all about my work, etc.\" Similarly he suggested to Celia Kirwan that they had both been unfaithful. There are several testaments that it was a well-matched and happy marriage.\nIn June 1944, Orwell and Eileen adopted a three-week-old boy they named Richard Horatio. According to Richard, Orwell was a wonderful father who gave him devoted, if rather rugged, attention and a great degree of freedom.\nOrwell was very lonely after Eileen's death in 1945 and was desperate for a wife, both as companion for himself and as mother for Richard. He proposed marriage to four women, including Celia Kirwan, and eventually Sonia Brownell accepted. Orwell had met her when she was assistant to Cyril Connolly, at \"Horizon\" literary magazine. They were married on 13 October 1949, only three months before Orwell's death. Some maintain that Sonia was the model for Julia in \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\".\nSocial interactions.\nOrwell was noted for very close and enduring friendships with a few friends, but these were generally people with a similar background or with a similar level of literary ability. Ungregarious, he was out of place in a crowd and his discomfort was exacerbated when he was outside his own class. Though representing himself as a spokesman for the common man, he often appeared out of place with real working people. His brother-in-law Humphrey Dakin, a \"Hail fellow, well met\" type, who took him to a local pub in Leeds, said that he was told by the landlord: \"Don't bring that bugger in here again.\" Adrian Fierz commented \"He wasn't interested in racing or greyhounds or pub crawling or shove ha'penny. He just did not have much in common with people who did not share his intellectual interests.\" Awkwardness attended many of his encounters with working-class representatives, as with Pollitt and McNair, but his courtesy and good manners were often commented on. Jack Common observed on meeting him for the first time, \"Right away manners, and more than manners\u2014breeding\u2014showed through.\"\nIn his tramping days, he did domestic work for a time. His extreme politeness was recalled by a member of the family he worked for; she declared that the family referred to him as \"Laurel\" after the film comedian. With his gangling figure and awkwardness, Orwell's friends often saw him as a figure of fun. Geoffrey Gorer commented \"He was awfully likely to knock things off tables, trip over things. I mean, he was a gangling, physically badly co-ordinated young man. I think his feeling [was] that even the inanimate world was against him.\" At the BBC in the 1940s, \"everybody would pull his leg\" and Spender described him as having real entertainment value \"like, as I say, watching a Charlie Chaplin movie\". A friend of Eileen's reminisced about her tolerance and humour, often at Orwell's expense.\nOne biography of Orwell accused him of having had an authoritarian streak. One of his former pupils recalled being beaten so hard he could not sit down for a week. When sharing a flat with Orwell, Heppenstall came home late one night in an advanced stage of loud inebriation. The upshot was that Heppenstall ended up with a bloody nose and was locked in a room. When he complained, Orwell hit him across the legs with a shooting stick and Heppenstall then had to defend himself with a chair. Years later, after Orwell's death, Heppenstall wrote a dramatic account of the incident called \"The Shooting Stick\".\nOrwell got on well with young people. The pupil he beat considered him the best of teachers and the young recruits in Barcelona tried to drink him under the table without success.\nIn the wake of his most famous works, he attracted many uncritical hangers-on, but many others who sought him found him aloof and even dull. With his soft voice, he was sometimes shouted down or excluded from discussions. At this time, he was severely ill; it was wartime or the austerity period after it; during the war his wife suffered from depression; and after her death he was lonely and unhappy. In addition to that, he always lived frugally and seemed unable to care for himself properly. As a result of all this, people found his circumstances bleak. Some, like Michael Ayrton, called him \"Gloomy George\", but others developed the idea that he was an \"English secular saint\".\nLifestyle.\nOrwell was a heavy smoker, who rolled his own cigarettes from strong shag tobacco, despite his bronchial condition. His penchant for the rugged life often took him to cold and damp situations. Described by \"The Economist\" as \"perhaps the 20th century's best chronicler of English culture\", Orwell considered fish and chips, football, the pub, strong tea, cut-price chocolate, the movies, and radio among the chief comforts for the working class. He advocated a patriotic defence of a British way of life that could not be trusted to intellectuals or, by implication, the state:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We are a nation of flower-lovers, but also a nation of stamp-collectors, pigeon-fanciers, amateur carpenters, coupon-snippers, darts-players, crossword-puzzle fans. All the culture that is most truly native centres round things which even when they are communal are not official\u2014the pub, the football match, the back garden, the fireside and the \"nice cup of tea\". The liberty of the individual is still believed in, almost as in the nineteenth century. But this has nothing to do with economic liberty, the right to exploit others for profit. It is the liberty to have a home of your own, to do what you like in your spare time, to choose your own amusements instead of having them chosen for you from above.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBy putting the tea in first and stirring as one pours, one can exactly regulate the amount of milk, whereas one is likely to put in too much milk if one does it the other way round.\n One of Orwell's eleven rules for making tea from his essay \"A Nice Cup of Tea\", which appeared in the \"London Evening Standard\", 12 January 1946\nOrwell enjoyed strong tea\u2014he had Fortnum &amp; Mason's tea brought to him in Catalonia. His 1946 essay \"A Nice Cup of Tea\", appeared in the \"London Evening Standard\" article on how to make tea. He appreciated English beer, taken regularly and moderately, despised drinkers of lager, and wrote about an imagined, ideal British pub in his 1946 \"Evening Standard\" article \"The Moon Under Water\". Not as particular about food, he enjoyed the wartime \"Victory Pie\" and extolled canteen food at the BBC. He preferred traditional English dishes, such as roast beef, and kippers.\nHis dress sense was unpredictable and usually casual. In Southwold, he had the best cloth from the local tailor, but was equally happy in his tramping outfit. His attire in the Spanish Civil War, along with his size-12 boots, was a source of amusement. David Astor described him as looking like a prep school master, while according to the Special Branch dossier, Orwell's tendency to dress \"in Bohemian fashion\" revealed that the author was \"a Communist\".\nOrwell's confusing approach to matters of social decorum\u2014on the one hand expecting a working-class guest to dress for dinner and, on the other, slurping tea out of a saucer at the BBC canteen\u2014helped stoke his reputation as an English eccentric.\nViews.\nReligion.\nOrwell was an atheist who identified himself with the humanist outlook on life. Despite this, and despite his criticisms of both religious doctrine and religious organisations, he nevertheless regularly participated in the social and civic life of the church, including by attending Church of England Holy Communion. Acknowledging this contradiction, he once said: \"It seems rather mean to go to HC [Holy Communion] when one doesn't believe, but I have passed myself off for pious &amp; there is nothing for it but to keep up with the deception.\" He had two Anglican marriages and left instructions for an Anglican funeral. Orwell was also well-read in Biblical literature and could quote lengthy passages from the Book of Common Prayer from memory.\nHis extensive knowledge of the Bible came coupled with unsparing criticism of its philosophy, and as an adult he could not bring himself to believe in its tenets. He said in part V of his essay, \"Such, Such Were the Joys\", that \"Till about the age of fourteen I believed in God, and believed that the accounts given of him were true. But I was well aware that I did not love him.\" Orwell directly contrasted Christianity with secular humanism in his essay \"Lear, Tolstoy and the Fool\", finding the latter philosophy more palatable and less \"self-interested\". The literary critic James Wood wrote that in the struggle, as he saw it, between Christianity and humanism, \"Orwell was on the humanist side, of course\".\nOrwell's writing was often explicitly critical of religion, and Christianity in particular. He found the church to be a \"selfish\u00a0[...] church of the landed gentry\" with its establishment \"out of touch\" with the majority of its communicants and altogether a pernicious influence on public life. His contradictory and sometimes ambiguous views about the social benefits of religious affiliation mirrored the dichotomies between his public and private lives: Stephen Ingle wrote that it was as if the writer George Orwell \"vaunted\" his unbelief while Eric Blair the individual retained \"a deeply ingrained religiosity\".\nPolitics.\nOrwell liked to provoke arguments by challenging the status quo, but he was also a traditionalist with a love of old English values. He criticised and satirised, from the inside, the various social milieux in which he found himself. In his \"Adelphi\" days, he described himself as a \"Tory-anarchist\". Of colonialism in \"Burmese Days\", he portrays the English colonists as a \"dull, decent people, cherishing and fortifying their dullness behind a quarter of a million bayonets\". Writing for \"Le Progr\u00e8s Civique\", Orwell described the British colonial government in Burma and India:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe government of all the Indian provinces under the control of the British Empire is of necessity despotic, because only the threat of force can subdue a population of several million subjects. But this despotism is latent. It hides behind a mask of democracy... Care is taken to avoid technical and industrial training. This rule, observed throughout India, aims to stop India from becoming an industrial country capable of competing with England\u00a0... Foreign competition is prevented by an insuperable barrier of prohibitive customs tariffs. And so the English factory-owners, with nothing to fear, control the markets absolutely and reap exorbitant profits.\nThe Spanish Civil War played the most important part in defining Orwell's socialism. He wrote to Cyril Connolly from Barcelona on 8 June 1937: \"I have seen wonderful things and at last really believe in Socialism, which I never did before.\" Having witnessed anarcho-syndicalist communities and the subsequent brutal suppression of the anarcho-syndicalists, anti-Stalin communist parties and revolutionaries by the Soviet Union-backed Communists, Orwell returned from Catalonia a staunch anti-Stalinist and joined the British Independent Labour Party.\nIn Part 2 of \"The Road to Wigan Pier\", published by the Left Book Club, Orwell stated that \"a real Socialist is one who wishes\u2014not merely conceives it as desirable, but actively wishes\u2014to see tyranny overthrown.\" Orwell stated in \"Why I Write\" (1946): \"Every line of serious work that I have written since 1936 has been written, directly or indirectly, against totalitarianism and for democratic socialism, as I understand it.\" Orwell's conception of socialism was of a planned economy alongside democracy. Orwell was a proponent of a federal socialist Europe, a position outlined in his 1947 essay \"Toward European Unity\", which first appeared in \"Partisan Review\". According to biographer John Newsinger:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The other crucial dimension to Orwell's socialism was his recognition that the Soviet Union was not socialist. Unlike many on the left, instead of abandoning socialism once he discovered the full horror of Stalinist rule in the Soviet Union, Orwell abandoned the Soviet Union and instead remained a socialist\u2014indeed he became more committed to the socialist cause than ever.\nOrwell was opposed to rearmament against Nazi Germany and at the time of the Munich Agreement signed a manifesto entitled \"If War Comes We Shall Resist,\"\u2014but he changed his view after the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact and the outbreak of the war. He left the ILP because of its opposition to the war and adopted a political position of \"revolutionary patriotism.\" On 21\u00a0March 1940 Orwell wrote a review of Adolf Hitler's \"Mein Kampf\" for \"The New English Weekly\", in which he analysed the dictator's psychology. Asking \"how was it that he was able to put [his] monstrous vision across?,\" Orwell tried to understand why Hitler was worshipped by the German people:\nThe situation in Germany, with its seven million unemployed, was obviously favourable for demagogues. But Hitler could not have succeeded against his many rivals if it had not been for the attraction of his own personality, which one can feel even in the clumsy writing of \"Mein Kampf\", and which is no doubt overwhelming when one hears his speeches\u00a0... The fact is that there is something deeply appealing about him. The initial, personal cause of his grievance against the universe can only be guessed at; but at any rate the grievance is here. He is the martyr, the victim, Prometheus chained to the rock, the self-sacrificing hero who fights single-handed against impossible odds. If he were killing a mouse he would know how to make it seem like a dragon.\nIn December 1940 he wrote in \"Tribune\" (the Labour left's weekly): \"We are in a strange period of history in which a revolutionary has to be a patriot and a patriot has to be a revolutionary.\" During the war, Orwell was highly critical of the popular idea that an Anglo-Soviet alliance would be the basis of a post-war world of peace and prosperity. In his reply (dated 15 November 1945) to an invitation from the Duchess of Atholl to speak for the British League for European Freedom, he stated that he could not \"associate himself with an essentially Conservative body\" that claimed to \"defend democracy in Europe\" but had \"nothing to say about British imperialism\". His closing paragraph stated: \"I belong to the Left and must work inside it, much as I hate Russian totalitarianism and its poisonous influence in this country.\"\nOrwell joined the staff of \"Tribune\" magazine as literary editor, and from then until his death, was a left-wing (though hardly orthodox) Labour-supporting democratic socialist. On 1 September 1944, writing about the Warsaw uprising, Orwell expressed in \"Tribune\" his hostility against the influence of the alliance with the USSR over the allies: \"Do remember that dishonesty and cowardice always have to be paid for. Do not imagine that for years on end you can make yourself the boot-licking propagandist of the sovietic regime, or any other regime, and then suddenly return to honesty and reason. Once a whore, always a whore.\" According to Newsinger, although Orwell \"was always critical of the 1945\u201351 Labour government's moderation, his support for it began to pull him to the right politically. This did not lead him to embrace conservatism, imperialism or reaction, but to defend, albeit critically, Labour reformism.\"\nSpecial Branch, the intelligence division of the Metropolitan Police, maintained a file on Orwell for more than 20 years of his life. The dossier, published by The National Archives, states that, according to one investigator, Orwell had \"advanced Communist views and several of his Indian friends say that they have often seen him at Communist meetings\". MI5, the intelligence department of the Home Office, noted: \"It is evident from his recent writings\u2014'The Lion and the Unicorn'\u2014and his contribution to Gollancz's symposium \"The Betrayal of the Left\" that he does not hold with the Communist Party nor they with him.\"\nSexuality.\nSexual politics plays an important role in \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". In the novel, people's intimate relationships are strictly governed by the party's Junior Anti-Sex League, by opposing sexual relations and instead encouraging artificial insemination. Personally, Orwell disliked what he thought as misguided middle-class revolutionary emancipatory views, expressing disdain for \"every fruit-juice drinker, nudist, sandal-wearer, sex-maniacs\".\nOrwell was also openly against homosexuality. Daphne Patai said: \"Of course he was homophobic. That has nothing to do with his relations with his homosexual friends. Certainly, he had a negative attitude and a certain kind of anxiety, a denigrating attitude towards homosexuality. That is definitely the case. I think his writing reflects that quite fully.\"\nOrwell used the homophobic epithets \"nancy\" and \"pansy\", for example, in expressions of contempt for what he called the \"pansy Left\". The protagonist of \"Keep the Aspidistra Flying,\" Gordon Comstock, conducts an internal critique of his customers when working in a bookshop, and there is an extended passage of several pages in which he concentrates on a gay male customer, sneering at him for his \"nancy\" characteristics, including rhotacism. Stephen Spender \"thought Orwell's occasional homophobic outbursts were part of his rebellion against the public school\".\nLegacy.\nReception and evaluations of Orwell's works.\nArthur Koestler said that Orwell's \"uncompromising intellectual honesty made him appear almost inhuman at times\". Ben Wattenberg stated: \"Orwell's writing pierced intellectual hypocrisy wherever he found it.\" According to historian Piers Brendon, \"Orwell was the saint of common decency who would in earlier days, said his BBC boss Rushbrook Williams, 'have been either canonised\u2014or burnt at the stake'\". Raymond Williams in \"\" describes Orwell as a \"successful impersonation of a plain man who bumps into experience in an unmediated way and tells the truth about it\". Christopher Norris declared that Orwell's \"homespun empiricist outlook\u2014his assumption that the truth was just there to be told in a straightforward common-sense way\u2014now seems not merely na\u00efve but culpably self-deluding\". The American scholar Scott Lucas has described Orwell as an enemy of the Left. John Newsinger has argued that Lucas could only do this by portraying \"all of Orwell's attacks on Stalinism\u00a0[\u2013] as if they were attacks on socialism, despite Orwell's continued insistence that they were not\".\nOrwell's work has taken a prominent place in the school literature curriculum in England, with \"Animal Farm\" a regular examination topic at the end of secondary education (GCSE), and \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" a topic for subsequent examinations below university level (A\u00a0Levels). A 2016 UK poll saw \"Animal Farm\" ranked the nation's favourite book from school.\nThe historian John Rodden stated: \"John Podhoretz did claim that if Orwell were alive today, he'd be standing with the neo-conservatives and against the Left. And the question arises, to what extent can you even begin to predict the political positions of somebody who's been dead three decades and more by that time?\"\nRodden notes the \"undeniable conservative features in the Orwell physiognomy\" and remarks on how \"to some extent Orwell facilitated the kinds of uses and abuses by the Right that his name has been put to. In other ways there has been the politics of selective quotation.\" Rodden refers to the essay \"Why I Write\", in which Orwell refers to the Spanish Civil War as being his \"watershed political experience\", saying: \"The Spanish War and other events in 1936\u201337, turned the scale. Thereafter I knew where I stood. Every line of serious work that I have written since 1936 has been written directly or indirectly \"against\" totalitarianism and \"for\" democratic socialism as I understand it.\" (emphasis in original) Rodden goes on to explain how, during the McCarthy era, the introduction to the Signet edition of \"Animal Farm\" makes use of selective quotation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[\"Introduction\"]: If the book itself, \"Animal Farm\", had left any doubt of the matter, Orwell dispelled it in his essay \"Why I Write\": \"Every line of serious work that I've written since 1936 has been written directly or indirectly against Totalitarianism\u00a0...\"\n[\"Rodden\"]: dot, dot, dot, dot, the politics of ellipsis. \"For Democratic Socialism\" is vaporized, just like Winston Smith did it at the Ministry of Truth, and that's very much what happened at the beginning of the McCarthy era and just continued, Orwell being selectively quoted.\nFyvel wrote about Orwell:\nHis crucial experience\u00a0[...] was his struggle to turn himself into a writer, one which led through long periods of poverty, failure and humiliation, and about which he has written almost nothing directly. The sweat and agony was less in the slum-life than in the effort to turn the experience into literature.\nConversely, the historian Isaac Deutscher was far more critical of Orwell from a Marxist perspective and characterised him as a \"simple minded anarchist\". Deutscher argued that Orwell had struggled to comprehend the dialectical philosophy of Marxism, demonstrated personal ambivalence towards other strands of socialism and his works such as \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" had been appropriated for the purpose of anti-communist Cold War propaganda.\nInfluence on language and writing.\nIn his essay \"Politics and the English Language\" (1946), Orwell wrote about the importance of precise and clear language, arguing that vague writing can be used as a powerful tool of political manipulation. In that essay, Orwell provides six rules for writers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;# Never use a metaphor, simile or other figure of speech which you are used to seeing in print.\nOrwell worked as a journalist at \"The Observer\" for seven years, and its editor David Astor gave a copy of this celebrated essay to every new recruit. In 2003, the literary editor at the newspaper Robert McCrum wrote: \"Even now, it is quoted in our style book.\" The journalist Jonathan Heawood noted: \"Orwell's criticism of slovenly language is still taken very seriously.\"\nAndrew N. Rubin argues that \"Orwell claimed that we should be attentive to how the use of language has limited our capacity for critical thought just as we should be equally concerned with the ways in which dominant modes of thinking have reshaped the very language that we use.\"\nThe adjective \"Orwellian\" connotes an attitude and a policy of control by propaganda, surveillance, misinformation, denial of truth and manipulation of the past. In \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", Orwell described a totalitarian government that controlled thought by controlling language, making certain ideas literally unthinkable. Several words and phrases from \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" have entered popular language. \"Newspeak\" is a simplified and obfuscatory language designed to make independent thought impossible. \"Doublethink\" means holding two contradictory beliefs simultaneously. The \"Thought Police\" are those who suppress all dissenting opinion. \"Prolefeed\" is homogenised, manufactured superficial literature, film and music used to control and indoctrinate the populace through docility. \"Big Brother\" is a supreme dictator who watches everyone. Other neologisms from the novel include, \"Two Minutes Hate\", \"Room 101\", \"memory hole\", \"unperson\", and \"thoughtcrime\", as well as providing direct inspiration for the neologism \"groupthink\".\nOrwell may have been the first to use the term \"cold war\" in his essay, \"You and the Atom Bomb\", published in \"Tribune\" on 19 October 1945. He wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe may be heading not for general breakdown but for an epoch as horribly stable as the slave empires of antiquity. James Burnham's theory has been much discussed, but few people have yet considered its ideological implications\u2014this is, the kind of world-view, the kind of beliefs, and the social structure that would probably prevail in a State which was at once unconquerable and in a permanent state of \"cold war\" with its neighbours.\nIn 1965 the Marxist cultural studies critic Raymond Williams (the author of \"\") considered Orwell's concept of freedom and his writings in a review of books by Christopher Caudwell, who unlike Orwell (the better known writer) did not survive the Spanish Civil War. Williams cautions the reader \"not to rest in Orwell\" for \"he engages too easily with our intellectual and emotional habits... can reinforce a prejudice, delay recognition of a muddle, betray us emotionally at a point of new growth...\"\nModern culture.\nIn 2011, The Orwell Society was formed to promote understanding of the life and work of Orwell. Orwell's birthplace, a bungalow in Motihari, Bihar, India, was opened as a museum in May 2015.\nApart from theatre adaptations of his books, several works were written with Orwell as one of the main characters.\nArchive.\nIn 1960 Orwell's widow Sonia deposited his papers on permanent loan to University College London. The collection contains Orwell's literary notebooks, manuscripts and typescripts of his work, personal and political diaries, correspondence and family material. Since the initial donation the papers\u00a0\u2013 now known as the George Orwell Archive\u00a0\u2013 have been supplemented by further donations from family, friends and business associates. Orwell's son Richard Blair has purchased additional material for the collection since its inception; in 2023 Blair was awarded an Honorary Fellowship from University College London for his contributions.\nUniversity College London also holds an extensive collection of Orwell's books, including rare and early editions of his works, translations into other languages and titles from his own library.\nStatue.\nA statue of George Orwell, sculpted by the British sculptor Martin Jennings, was unveiled on 7 November 2017 outside Broadcasting House, the headquarters of the BBC. The wall behind the statue is inscribed with the following phrase: \"If liberty means anything at all, it means the right to tell people what they do not want to hear\". These are words from his proposed preface to \"Animal Farm\" and a rallying cry for the idea of free speech in an open society.\nOther honours.\nIn January 2025 the Royal Mint issued a new \u00a32 coin to mark the 75th anniversary of Orwell's death. The design, by Henry Gray, is an allusion to \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", showing an eye with a camera lens at its centre, and including two quotations from the book.\nBiographies.\nOrwell's will requested that no biography of him be written, and his widow, Sonia Brownell, repelled every attempt by those who tried to persuade her to let them write about him. Various recollections and interpretations were published in the 1950s and 1960s, but Sonia saw the 1968 \"Collected Works\" as the record of his life. She did appoint Malcolm Muggeridge as official biographer, but later biographers have seen this as deliberate spoiling as Muggeridge eventually gave up the work. In 1972, two American authors, Peter Stansky and William Abrahams, produced \"The Unknown Orwell\", an unauthorised account of his early years that lacked any support or contribution from Sonia Brownell.\nSonia Brownell then commissioned Bernard Crick to complete a biography and asked Orwell's friends to co-operate. Crick collated a considerable amount of material in his work, which was published in 1980, but his questioning of the factual accuracy of Orwell's first-person writings led to conflict with Brownell, and she tried to suppress the book. Crick concentrated on the facts of Orwell's life rather than his character, and presented primarily a political perspective.\nAfter Sonia Brownell's death, other works on Orwell were published in the 1980s, particularly in 1984. These included collections of reminiscences by Audrey Coppard and Crick and Stephen Wadhams. In 1991, Michael Shelden published a biography. More concerned with the literary nature of Orwell's work, he sought explanations for Orwell's character and treated his first-person writings as autobiographical. Shelden introduced new information that sought to build on Crick's work.\nPeter Davison's publication of the \"Complete Works of George Orwell\", completed in 2000, made most of the Orwell Archive accessible to the public. Jeffrey Meyers, a prolific American biographer, was first to take advantage of this and published a book in 2001 that investigated the darker side of Orwell and questioned his saintly image. \"Why Orwell Matters\" (released in the UK as \"Orwell's Victory\") was published by Christopher Hitchens in 2002.\nIn 2003, the centenary of Orwell's birth resulted in biographies by Gordon Bowker and D.J. Taylor. Taylor notes the stage management which surrounds much of Orwell's behaviour and Bowker highlights the essential sense of decency which he considers to have been Orwell's main motivation. An updated edition of Taylor's biography was released in 2023 as \"Orwell: The New Life\", published by Constable.\nIn 2018, Ronald Binns published the first detailed study of Orwell's years in Suffolk, \"Orwell in Southwold\". In 2020, Richard Bradford wrote a new biography, \"Orwell: A Man of Our Time\", while in 2021 Rebecca Solnit reflected on Orwell's interest in gardening in her book \"Orwell's Roses\".\nTwo books about Orwell's relationship with his first wife, Eileen O'Shaughnessy, and her role in his life and career, have been published: \"Eileen: The Making of George Orwell\" by Sylvia Topp (2020) and \"Wifedom: Mrs Orwell's Invisible Life\" by Anna Funder (2023). In her book Funder claims that Orwell was misogynistic and sadistic. This sparked a strong controversy among Orwell's biographers, particularly with Topp. Celia Kirwan's family also intervened in the discussion, believing that the attribution to their relative of a relationship with Orwell, as stated by Funder, is false. The publishing house of \"Wifedom\" was forced to remove that reference from the book.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11894", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11894", "title": "Goeldi's marmoset", "text": "Species of New World monkey\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGoeldi's marmoset, or Goeldi's monkey (Callimico goeldii), is a small New World monkey found on the South American continent, mainly in the upper Amazon basin of Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, and Per\u00fa. It is the only species classified in the monotypic genus Callimico, thus these monkeys are sometimes referred to as \"callimicos\". The species takes its name from its discoverer, Swiss-Brazilian naturalist Emil August Goeldi.\nLikely an evolutionary adaptation for camouflage and the evasion of predators, Goeldi's marmosets are a dark-furred species, usually a blackish-gray or darker brown in color. Superficially, the short hair on their head gives them a vague resemblance to the larger woolly monkey (\"Lagothrix\"); however, the back of their necks, their backside, and tails often display light, horizontal striping or highlights. Their bodies are about long, and their tails are about another long. Captive Goeldi's marmosets weigh around , while observed individuals were approximately in the wild. Their digits have claw-like nails, except for the hallux, which serves for clinging, scansorial (arboreal) movement and escape, and the extraction of certain food sources from trees, such as fruits, honey, seed pods, etc.\nTaxonomy and evolution.\nGoeldi's marmoset was first described in 1904, making \"Callimico\" one of the more recent monkey genera to be described. In older classification schemes it was sometimes placed in its own family Callimiconidae and sometimes, along with the marmosets and tamarins, in the subfamily Callitrichinae in the family Cebidae. More recently, Callitrichinae has been (re-)elevated to family status as Callitrichidae.\nMolecular phylogenetics shows that \"C. goeldii\" evolved from an ancestral callitrichine and shares this origin with marmosets making them sister taxa. One evolutionary argument to account for their differences, states that \"C. goeldii\" conserves primitive traits such as single births and a third molar lost in many marmosets. Alternatively, another evolutionary argument indicates that Callimicos came from a two-molar marmoset and reintroduced the remote traits, which in either case selectively give them the ability to access to different resources and occupy different niches. Similarities in delayed embryonic development and secondary limb-bone ossification between \"C. goeldii\" and marmosets are evidence of their close evolutionary relationship.\nReproduction.\nFemales reach sexual maturity at 8.5 months, males at 16.5 months. The gestation period lasts from 144 to 159 days. Callimicos studied in captivity in North America and Europe for near 40 years have shown to produce on average 3.5 offspring during their lifetime. However, 30% of the females and 45% of the males observed in these settings never reproduced.\nUnlike other New World monkeys, they have the capacity to give birth twice a year. Biannual births occur regularly in captivity and less consistently in the wild and are attributed to postpartum estrus that allows the female to be ready to reproduce soon after parturition. The availability of fungus -an important food source for \"C. goeldii\"- throughout the year also contributes to these multiple births.\nThe mother carries a single baby monkey per pregnancy, whereas most other species in the family Callitrichidae usually give birth to twins. These singleton births provide the offspring with longer maternal care and weaning delay that results in faster growth rates and in turn earlier sexual maturity than the other marmosets.\nInfant care.\nFor the first 2\u20133 weeks the mother acts as the primary caregiver after which the father and the helpers, who are often the siblings, share many of the responsibilities. However, mothers in the wild have been observed giving their babies to other members of the troop as early as 10 days after parturition, which is late for other marmosets.\nAt birth, \"Callimico\" offspring weigh 10% the weight of their mother's whereas the twinning marmosets weight double that amount, which explains the delay in allocare in \"C. goeldii\" since it is not as crucial as it is for its counterparts. Cooperative care in callitrichines is therefore necessary to help mothers recover from gestation, parturition, and lactation as well as to share the energetic cost of carrying the infant among the helpers and the father.\nCaregivers must also provide food to the infants when they turn 4 weeks of age. The task of food provisioning includes tolerance to food robbing since infants are at a stage of learning how to forage by themselves. Also at week 4, mothers stop nursing in the wild, but that behaviour is believed to be influenced by the presence of the observers and therefore, it is suspected that nursing resumes when humans are not present. Whereas \"C. goeldii\" in captivity, nursing extends until the infant is 8\u201315 weeks old. Thus, the offspring will be weaned when it becomes about 63 days of age. There is no difference between male and female helpers on the amount of involvement on infant care. Even juvenile \"C. goeldii\" participate as active caregivers.\nInfants are carried entirely during the first month and 63% of the time on the next month. They do not leave their guardian side until they become 2.5 months of age and around 3 months old, they are rarely carried, but locomotive independence comes more forcibly than voluntarily. Females outnumber males by 2 to 1. The life expectancy in captivity is about 10 years.\nDevelopment.\nFrom birth to about 18 months old, callimicos grow faster than other marmosets in part because the energy they would otherwise invest on thermal regulation and activity costs if they were not carried by their mothers is instead directed to growth. Likewise, a longer lactation period is also responsible for a faster development. Growth rate and weight gain is similar in both male and female infants and juveniles.\nDistribution and habitat.\n\"Callimicos\"'s geographic distribution extends from the Colombian Amazon and the R\u00edo Caquet\u00e1 (Portuguese: \"Japur\u00e1\") to the Peruvian and the western Brazilian Amazon, into the Pando department of northwestern Bolivia, where high densities have been reported. Its presence in Ecuador has yet to be officially confirmed. The distribution of the species is patchy, and its density seems to be dependent on polyspecific associations with tamarins.\nSightings of Goeldi's marmosets have been made at the base of the Cordillera Oriental of the Andes in Colombia, in the Department of Putumayo, along the Putumayo and Caquet\u00e1 Rivers.\nIn Per\u00fa's northern interior, they occur in the Pucacuro National Reserve, close to the R\u00edo Tigre, where they are known as \"chi-chi\" by locals. To the south, they have been found at the \"Centro de Investigaci\u00f3n y Capacitaci\u00f3n R\u00edo Los Amigos\" (or Los Amigos River Training and Research Center, CICRA), Manu National Park, and the \"Concesi\u00f3n de Conservaci\u00f3n Rodal Semillero Tahuamanu\" (CCRST), in addition to adjacent and surrounding areas. They were also spotted near the Yura River and Sierra del Divisor National Park in groups of three to twelve individuals.\nSome observations were previously recorded via the live-trapping of marmosets, beginning in the 1970s until the early 2010s; on one occasion, the captured marmosets were taken for closer examination and breeding at the \"Centro de Conservaci\u00f3n y Reproduci\u00f3n de Primates\", Iquitos. Using food baits at stationary sites, and recordings of their vocalizations, and those of tamarins, with whom they associate, were also employed to attract them.\nIn Brazil, Goeldi's marmosets occur in the southwest Amazon in the west-central state of Acre, over the Serra do Divisor, south near the Juru\u00e1 and into the Greg\u00f3rio, Amazonas; they can also be found near the Laco River, further south to the upper Pur\u00fas and in the Madeira basin, as well as near the Abun\u00e3 River, Rond\u00f4nia. High densities of this species have been recorded in the Pando department in Bolivia.\nGoeldi's marmosets prefer to forage in dense, scrubby undergrowth; perhaps because of this, they are rare, with groups living in separate patches of preferred habitat, separated by miles of unfavorable habitat. In the wet season, their diet includes fruits, flowers, flying insects, spiders, mollusks, small lizards, tree frogs and small or young snakes. In the dry season, they feed on fungi, the only tropical primates known to choose this as a source of sustenance. They live in small social groups, of approximately six individuals, that stay within a few feet of one another most of the time, staying in contact via high-pitched calls. They are also known to form polyspecific or interspecific groups with tamarins such as the white-lipped tamarin and brown-mantled tamarin. This is perhaps because Goeldi's marmosets are not known to have the X-linked polymorphism which enables some individuals of other New World monkey species to see in full tri-chromatic vision.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11895", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11895", "title": "GNU/GPL", "text": ""}
{"id": "11896", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11896", "title": "GNU/FDL", "text": ""}
{"id": "11897", "revid": "8551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11897", "title": "GNU/HURD", "text": ""}
{"id": "11898", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11898", "title": "GNU/Hurd", "text": ""}
{"id": "11899", "revid": "18819225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11899", "title": "GNU/Emacs", "text": ""}
{"id": "11901", "revid": "45", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11901", "title": "GNU/LGPL", "text": ""}
{"id": "11902", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11902", "title": "GNU/Linux", "text": ""}
{"id": "11906", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11906", "title": "GrungE", "text": ""}
{"id": "11907", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11907", "title": "Games/Cards", "text": ""}
{"id": "11908", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11908", "title": "Games/Board", "text": ""}
{"id": "11910", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11910", "title": "Games/Casino", "text": ""}
{"id": "11911", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11911", "title": "Games/RolePlaying", "text": ""}
{"id": "11912", "revid": "6917124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11912", "title": "Games/TradingCard", "text": ""}
{"id": "11913", "revid": "6917124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11913", "title": "Games/TableTop", "text": ""}
{"id": "11914", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11914", "title": "Games/Computer", "text": ""}
{"id": "11915", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11915", "title": "Games/Tile based", "text": ""}
{"id": "11916", "revid": "15934865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11916", "title": "Games/Die Siedler von Catan", "text": ""}
{"id": "11921", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11921", "title": "Gambling", "text": "Wagering something of value on a random event\nGambling (also known as betting or gaming) is the wagering of something of value (\"the stakes\") on a random event with the intent of winning something else of value, where instances of strategy are discounted. Gambling thus requires three elements to be present: consideration (an amount wagered), risk (chance), and a prize. The outcome of the wager is often immediate, such as a single roll of dice, a spin of a roulette wheel, or a horse crossing the finish line, but longer time frames are also common, allowing wagers on the outcome of a future sports contest or even an entire sports season.\nThe term \"gaming\" in this context typically refers to instances in which the activity has been specifically permitted by law. The two words are not mutually exclusive; \"i.e.\", a \"gaming\" company offers (legal) \"gambling\" activities to the public and may be regulated by one of many gaming control boards, for example, the Nevada Gaming Control Board. However, this distinction is not universally observed in the English-speaking world. For instance, in the United Kingdom, the regulator of gambling activities is called the Gambling Commission (not the Gaming Commission). The word \"gaming\" is used more frequently since the rise of computer and video games to describe activities that do not necessarily involve wagering, especially online gaming, with the new usage still not having displaced the old usage as the primary definition in common dictionaries. \"Gaming\" has also been used euphemistically to circumvent laws against \"gambling\". The media and others have used one term or the other to frame conversations around the subjects, resulting in a shift of perceptions among their audiences.\nGambling is also a major international commercial activity, with the legal gambling market totaling an estimated $335 billion in 2009. In other forms, gambling can be conducted with materials that have a value, but are not real money. For example, players of marbles games might wager marbles, and likewise games of \"Pogs\" or \"\" can be played with the collectible game pieces (respectively, small discs and trading cards) as stakes, resulting in a metagame regarding the value of a player's collection of pieces.\nHistory.\nGambling dates back at least to the Paleolithic period, before written history. In Mesopotamia the earliest six-sided dice date to about 3000\u00a0BCE. However, they were based on astragali dating back thousands of years earlier. In China, gambling houses were widespread in the first millennium BCE, and betting on fighting animals was common. Lotto games and dominoes (precursors of Pai Gow) appeared in China as early as the 10th century.\nPlaying cards appeared in the 9th century CE in China. Records trace gambling in Japan back at least as far as the 14th century.\nPoker, the most popular U.S. card game associated with gambling, derives from the Persian game As-Nas, dating back to the 17th century. \nThe first known casino, the Ridotto, started operating in 1638 in Venice, Italy.\nGreat Britain.\nGambling has been a main recreational activity in Great Britain for centuries. Queen Elizabeth I chartered a lottery that was drawn in 1569. Horseracing has been a favorite theme for over three centuries. It has been heavily regulated. Historically much of the opposition comes from Nonconformist Protestants, and from social reformers.\nSingapore.\nGambling has been part of Singapore's history, though it was strictly controlled by the government for many years. In the mid-20th century, illegal gambling was common. However, with the opening of regulated casinos in 2010, the approach shifted. Today, the government enforces strict laws to promote responsible gambling and prevent illegal activities.\nUnited States.\nGambling has been a popular activity in the United States for centuries. It has also been suppressed by law in many areas for almost as long. By the early 20th century, gambling was almost uniformly outlawed throughout the U.S. and thus became a largely illegal activity, helping to spur the growth of the mafia and other criminal organizations. The late 20th century saw a softening in attitudes towards gambling and a relaxation of laws against it.\nRegulation.\nMany jurisdictions, local as well as national, either ban gambling or heavily control it by licensing the vendors. Such regulation generally leads to gambling tourism and illegal gambling in the areas where it is not allowed. The involvement of governments, through regulation and taxation, has led to a close connection between many governments and gambling organizations, where legal gambling provides significant government revenue, such as in Monaco and Macau, China.\nMost jurisdictions that allow gambling require participants to be above a certain age. In some jurisdictions, the gambling age differs depending on the type of gambling. For example, in many American states one must be over 21 to enter a casino, but may buy a lottery ticket after turning 18.\nThere is generally legislation requiring that gambling devices be statistically random, to prevent manufacturers from making some high-payoff results impossible. Since these high payoffs have very low probability, a house bias can quite easily be missed unless the devices are checked carefully.\nInsurance.\nBecause contracts of insurance have many features in common with wagers, insurance contracts are often distinguished in law as agreements in which either party has an interest in the \"bet-upon\" outcome \"beyond\" the specific financial terms; for example, a \"bet\" with an insurer on whether one's house will burn down is not gambling, but rather \"insurance\", as the homeowner has an obvious interest in the continued existence of the home \"independent of\" the purely financial aspects of the \"bet\" (i.e., the insurance policy). Nonetheless, both insurance and gambling contracts are typically considered aleatory contracts under most legal systems, though they are subject to different types of regulation.\nAsset recovery.\nUnder common law, particularly English Law (English unjust enrichment), a gambling contract may not give a casino \"bona fide\" purchaser status, permitting the recovery of stolen funds in some situations. In \"Lipkin Gorman v Karpnale Ltd\", where a solicitor used stolen funds to gamble at a casino, the House of Lords overruled the High Court's previous verdict, adjudicating that the casino return the stolen funds less those subject to any change of position defence. U.S. Law precedents are somewhat similar. For case law on recovery of gambling losses where the loser had stolen the funds see \"Rights of owner of stolen money as against one who won it in gambling transaction from thief\".\nAn interesting question is what happens when the person trying to make recovery is the gambler's spouse, and the money or property lost was either the spouse's, or was community property. This was a minor plot point in a Perry Mason novel, \"The Case of the Singing Skirt\", and it cites an actual case \"Novo v. Hotel Del Rio\".\nReligious views.\nBuddhism.\nThe Buddha stated gambling as a source of destruction in Singalovada Sutra.\nProfessions that are seen to violate the precept against theft include working in the gambling industry.\nHinduism.\nAncient Hindu poems like the Gambler's Lament and the \"Mahabharata\" testify to the existence of gambling among ancient Indians, while highlighting its destructive impact. The text \"Arthashastra\" (c.\u20094th century BCE) recommends taxation and control of gambling.\nJudaism.\nAncient Jewish authorities frowned on gambling, even disqualifying professional gamblers from testifying in court.\nChristianity.\nAlthough the bible does not condemn gambling, instead the desire to get rich is called to account numerous times in the New Testament.\nCatholicism.\nThe Catholic Church holds the position that there is no moral impediment to gambling, so long as it is fair, all bettors have a reasonable chance of winning, there is no fraud involved, and the parties involved do not have actual knowledge of the outcome of the bet (unless they have disclosed this knowledge), and as long as the following conditions are met: the gambler can afford to lose the bet, and stops when the limit is reached, and the motivation is entertainment and not personal gain leading to the \"love of money\" or making a living. In general, Catholic bishops have opposed casino gambling on the grounds that it too often tempts people into problem gambling or addiction, and has particularly negative effects on poor people; they sometimes also cite secondary effects such as increases in loan sharking, prostitution, corruption, and general public immorality. Some parish pastors have also opposed casinos for the additional reason that they would take customers away from church bingo and annual festivals where games such as blackjack, roulette, craps, and poker are used for fundraising. St. Thomas Aquinas wrote that gambling should be especially forbidden where the losing bettor is underage or otherwise not able to consent to the transaction. Gambling has often been seen as having social consequences, as satirized by Balzac. For these social and religious reasons, most legal jurisdictions limit gambling, as advocated by Pascal.\nProtestantism.\nGambling views among Protestants vary, with some either discouraging or forbidding their members from participation in gambling. Methodists, in accordance with the doctrine of outward holiness, oppose gambling which they believe is a sin that feeds on greed. Other denominations that discourage gambling are the United Methodist Church, the Free Methodist Church, the Evangelical Wesleyan Church, the Salvation Army, and the Church of the Nazarene.\nOther Protestants that oppose gambling include Mennonites, Schwarzenau Brethren, Quakers, the Christian Reformed Church in North America, the Church of the Lutheran Confession, the Southern Baptist Convention, the Assemblies of God, and the Seventh-day Adventist Church.\nOther Christian denominations.\nOther churches that oppose gambling include the Jehovah's Witnesses, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the , and the Members Church of God International.\nIslam.\nThere is a consensus among the \"'Ulema'\" (, Scholars (of Islam)) that gambling is \"haraam\" (, sinful or forbidden). In assertions made during its prohibition, Muslim jurists describe gambling as being both un-Qur'anic, and as being generally harmful to the Muslim Ummah (, Community). The Arabic terminology for gambling is \"Maisir\". \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They ask you about intoxicants and gambling. Say: 'In them both lies grave sin, though some benefit, to mankind. But their sin is more grave than their benefit.'\nIn parts of the world that implement full Shari'ah, such as Aceh, punishments for Muslim gamblers can range up to 12 lashes or a one-year prison term and a fine for those who provide a venue for such practises. Some Islamic nations prohibit gambling; most other countries regulate it.\nBah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith.\nAccording to the Most Holy Book, paragraph 155, gambling is forbidden.\nTypes.\nCasino games.\nWhile almost any game can be played for money, and any game typically played for money can also be played just for fun, some games are generally offered in a casino setting.\nNon-casino games.\nGambling games that take place outside of casinos include bingo (as played in the US and UK), dead pool, lotteries, pull-tab games and scratchcards, and Mahjong.\nOther non-casino gambling games include:\nFixed-odds betting.\nFixed-odds betting and Parimutuel betting frequently occur at many types of sporting events, and political elections. In addition many bookmakers offer fixed odds on a number of non-sports related outcomes, for example the direction and extent of movement of various financial indices, the winner of television competitions such as \"Big Brother\", and election results. Interactive prediction markets also offer trading on these outcomes, with \"shares\" of results trading on an open market.\nParimutuel betting.\nOne of the most widespread forms of gambling involves betting on horse or greyhound racing. Wagering may take place through parimutuel pools, or bookmakers may take bets personally. Parimutuel wagers pay off at prices determined by support in the wagering pools, while bookmakers pay off either at the odds offered at the time of accepting the bet; or at the median odds offered by track bookmakers at the time the race started.\nSports betting.\nBetting on team sports has become an important service industry in many countries. Before the advent of the internet, millions of people played the football pools every week in the United Kingdom. In addition to organized sports betting, both legal and illegal, there are many side-betting games played by casual groups of spectators, such as NCAA basketball tournament Bracket Pools, Super Bowl Squares, Fantasy Sports Leagues with monetary entry fees and winnings, and in-person spectator games like Moundball.\nVirtual sports.\nBased on Sports Betting, Virtual Sports are fantasy and never played sports events made by software that can be played every time without wondering about external things like weather conditions.\nArbitrage betting.\nArbitrage betting is a theoretically risk-free betting system in which every outcome of an event is bet upon so that a known profit will be made by the bettor upon completion of the event regardless of the outcome. Arbitrage betting is a combination of the ancient art of arbitrage trading and gambling, which has been made possible by the large numbers of bookmakers in the marketplace, creating occasional opportunities for arbitrage.\nOther types of betting.\nOne can also bet with another person that a statement is true or false, or that a specified event will happen (a \"back bet\") or will not happen (a \"lay bet\") within a specified time. This occurs in particular when two people have opposing but strongly held views on truth or events. Not only do the parties hope to gain from the bet, they place the bet also to demonstrate their certainty about the issue. Some means of determining the issue at stake must exist. Sometimes the amount bet remains nominal, demonstrating the outcome as one of principle rather than of financial importance.\nBetting exchanges allow consumers to both back and lay at odds of their choice. Similar in some ways to a stock exchange, a bettor may want to back a horse (hoping it will win) or lay a horse (hoping it will lose, effectively acting as bookmaker).\nSpread betting allows gamblers to wager on the outcome of an event where the pay-off is based on the accuracy of the wager, rather than a simple \"win or lose\" outcome. For example, a wager can be based on the when a point is scored in the game in minutes and each minute away from the prediction increases or reduces the payout.\nStaking systems.\nMany betting systems have been created in an attempt to \"beat the house\" but no system can make a mathematically unprofitable bet in terms of expected value profitable over time. Widely used systems include:\nOther uses of the term.\nMany risk-return choices are sometimes referred to colloquially as \"gambling.\" Whether this terminology is acceptable is a matter of debate:\nInvestments are also usually not considered gambling, although some investments can involve significant risk. Examples of investments include stocks, bonds and real estate. Starting a business can also be considered a form of investment. Investments are generally not considered gambling when they meet the following criteria:\nSome speculative investment activities are particularly risky, but are sometimes perceived to be different from gambling:\nA \"levant\" or \"levanting\" characterises the act of absconding following the outcome of a bet.\nNegative consequences.\nProblem gambling has multiple symptoms. Gamblers often play again to try to win back money they have lost, and some gamble to relieve feelings of helplessness and anxiety.\nIn the United Kingdom, the Advertising Standards Authority has censured several betting firms for advertisements disguised as news articles suggesting falsely that a person had cleared debts and paid for medical expenses by gambling online. The firms face possible fines.\nA 2020 study of 32 countries found that the greater the amount of gambling activity in a given country, the more volatile that country's stock-market prices are. Legalization of online sports betting was found to decrease household saving, decrease investment with positive expected value and increase financial distress.\nPublic opinions against or for gambling varies by age. \nPsychological biases.\nGamblers may exhibit a number of cognitive and motivational biases that distort the perceived odds of events and that influence their preferences for gambles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11924", "revid": "50321486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11924", "title": "Game theory", "text": "Mathematical models of strategic interactions\nGame theory is the study of mathematical models of strategic interactions. It has applications in many fields of social science, and is used extensively in economics, logic, systems science and computer science. Initially, game theory addressed two-person zero-sum games, in which a participant's gains or losses are exactly balanced by the losses and gains of the other participant. In the 1950s, it was extended to the study of non zero-sum games, and was eventually applied to a wide range of behavioral relations. It is now an umbrella term for the science of rational decision making in humans, animals, and computers.\nModern game theory began with the idea of mixed-strategy equilibria in two-person zero-sum games and its proof by John von Neumann. Von Neumann's original proof used the Brouwer fixed-point theorem on continuous mappings into compact convex sets, which became a standard method in game theory and mathematical economics. His paper was followed by \"Theory of Games and Economic Behavior\" (1944), co-written with Oskar Morgenstern, which considered cooperative games of several players. The second edition provided an axiomatic theory of expected utility, which allowed mathematical statisticians and economists to treat decision-making under uncertainty.\nGame theory was developed extensively in the 1950s, and was explicitly applied to evolution in the 1970s, although similar developments go back at least as far as the 1930s. Game theory has been widely recognized as an important tool in many fields. John Maynard Smith was awarded the Crafoord Prize for his application of evolutionary game theory in 1999, and fifteen game theorists have won the Nobel Prize in economics as of 2020, including most recently Paul Milgrom and Robert B. Wilson.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nDiscussions on the mathematics of games began long before the rise of modern, mathematical game theory. Cardano wrote on games of chance in \"Liber de ludo aleae\" (\"Book on Games of Chance\"), written around 1564 but published posthumously in 1663. Influenced by the work of Fermat and Pascal on the problem of points, Huygens developed the concept of expectation on reasoning about the structure of games of chance, publishing his gambling calculus in \"De ratiociniis in ludo ale\u00e6\" (\"On Reasoning in Games of Chance\") in 1657.\nIn 1713, a letter attributed to Charles Waldegrave, an active Jacobite and uncle to British diplomat James Waldegrave, analyzed a game called \"le her\". Waldegrave provided a minimax mixed strategy solution to a two-person version of the card game, and the problem is now known as the Waldegrave problem.\nIn 1838, Antoine Augustin Cournot provided a model of competition in oligopolies. Though he did not refer to it as such, he presented a solution that is the Nash equilibrium of the game in his (\"Researches into the Mathematical Principles of the Theory of Wealth\"). In 1883, Joseph Bertrand critiqued Cournot's model as unrealistic, providing an alternative model of price competition which would later be formalized by Francis Ysidro Edgeworth.\nIn 1913, Ernst Zermelo published (\"On an Application of Set Theory to the Theory of the Game of Chess\"), which proved that the optimal chess strategy is strictly determined.\nFoundation.\nThe work of John von Neumann established game theory as its own independent field in the early-to-mid 20th century, with von Neumann publishing his paper \"On the Theory of Games of Strategy\" in 1928. Von Neumann's original proof used Brouwer's fixed-point theorem on continuous mappings into compact convex sets, which became a standard method in game theory and mathematical economics. Von Neumann's work in game theory culminated in his 1944 book \"Theory of Games and Economic Behavior\", co-authored with Oskar Morgenstern. The second edition of this book provided an axiomatic theory of utility, which reincarnated Daniel Bernoulli's old theory of utility (of money) as an independent discipline. This foundational work contains the method for finding mutually consistent solutions for two-person zero-sum games. Subsequent work focused primarily on cooperative game theory, which analyzes optimal strategies for groups of individuals, presuming that they can enforce agreements between them about proper strategies.\nIn his 1938 book and earlier notes, \u00c9mile Borel proved a minimax theorem for two-person zero-sum matrix games only when the pay-off matrix is symmetric and provided a solution to a non-trivial infinite game (known in English as Blotto game). Borel conjectured the non-existence of mixed-strategy equilibria in finite two-person zero-sum games, a conjecture that was proved false by von Neumann.\nIn 1950, John Nash developed a criterion for mutual consistency of players' strategies known as the Nash equilibrium, applicable to a wider variety of games than the criterion proposed by von Neumann and Morgenstern. Nash proved that every finite n-player, non-zero-sum (not just two-player zero-sum) non-cooperative game has what is now known as a Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies.\nGame theory experienced a flurry of activity in the 1950s, during which the concepts of the core, the extensive form game, fictitious play, repeated games, and the Shapley value were developed. The 1950s also saw the first applications of game theory to philosophy and political science. The first mathematical discussion of the prisoner's dilemma appeared, and an experiment was undertaken by mathematicians Merrill M. Flood and Melvin Dresher, as part of the RAND Corporation's investigations into game theory. RAND pursued the studies because of possible applications to global nuclear strategy.\nPrize-winning achievements.\nIn 1965, Reinhard Selten introduced his solution concept of subgame perfect equilibria, which further refined the Nash equilibrium. Later he would introduce trembling hand perfection as well. In 1994 Nash, Selten and Harsanyi became Economics Nobel Laureates for their contributions to economic game theory.\nIn the 1970s, game theory was extensively applied in biology, largely as a result of the work of John Maynard Smith and his evolutionarily stable strategy. In addition, the concepts of correlated equilibrium, trembling hand perfection and common knowledge were introduced and analyzed.\nIn 1994, John Nash was awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in the Economic Sciences for his contribution to game theory. Nash's most famous contribution to game theory is the concept of the Nash equilibrium, which is a solution concept for non-cooperative games, published in 1951. A Nash equilibrium is a set of strategies, one for each player, such that no player can improve their payoff by unilaterally changing their strategy.\nIn 2005, game theorists Thomas Schelling and Robert Aumann followed Nash, Selten, and Harsanyi as Nobel Laureates. Schelling worked on dynamic models, early examples of evolutionary game theory. Aumann contributed more to the equilibrium school, introducing equilibrium coarsening and correlated equilibria, and developing an extensive formal analysis of the assumption of common knowledge and of its consequences.\nIn 2007, Leonid Hurwicz, Eric Maskin, and Roger Myerson were awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics \"for having laid the foundations of mechanism design theory\". Myerson's contributions include the notion of proper equilibrium, and an important graduate text: \"Game Theory, Analysis of Conflict\". Hurwicz introduced and formalized the concept of incentive compatibility.\nIn 2012, Alvin E. Roth and Lloyd S. Shapley were awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics \"for the theory of stable allocations and the practice of market design\". In 2014, the Nobel went to game theorist Jean Tirole.\nDifferent types of games.\nCooperative / non-cooperative.\nA game is \"cooperative\" if the players are able to form binding commitments externally enforced (e.g. through contract law). A game is \"non-cooperative\" if players cannot form alliances or if all agreements need to be self-enforcing (e.g. through credible threats).\nCooperative games are often analyzed through the framework of \"cooperative game theory\", which focuses on predicting which coalitions will form, the joint actions that groups take, and the resulting collective payoffs. It is different from \"non-cooperative game theory\" which focuses on predicting individual players' actions and payoffs by analyzing Nash equilibria.\nCooperative game theory provides a high-level approach as it describes only the structure and payoffs of coalitions, whereas non-cooperative game theory also looks at how strategic interaction will affect the distribution of payoffs. As non-cooperative game theory is more general, cooperative games can be analyzed through the approach of non-cooperative game theory (the converse does not hold) provided that sufficient assumptions are made to encompass all the possible strategies available to players due to the possibility of external enforcement of cooperation.\nSymmetric / asymmetric.\nA symmetric game is a game where each player earns the same payoff when making the same choice. In other words, the identity of the player does not change the resulting game facing the other player. Many of the commonly studied 2\u00d72 games are symmetric. The standard representations of chicken, the prisoner's dilemma, and the stag hunt are all symmetric games.\nThe most commonly studied asymmetric games are games where there are not identical strategy sets for both players. For instance, the ultimatum game and similarly the dictator game have different strategies for each player. It is possible, however, for a game to have identical strategies for both players, yet be asymmetric. For example, the game pictured in this section's graphic is asymmetric despite having identical strategy sets for both players.\nZero-sum / non-zero-sum.\nZero-sum games (more generally, constant-sum games) are games in which choices by players can neither increase nor decrease the available resources. In zero-sum games, the total benefit goes to all players in a game, for every combination of strategies, and always adds to zero (more informally, a player benefits only at the equal expense of others). Poker exemplifies a zero-sum game (ignoring the possibility of the house's cut), because one wins exactly the amount one's opponents lose. Other zero-sum games include matching pennies and most classical board games including Go and chess.\nMany games studied by game theorists (including the famed prisoner's dilemma) are non-zero-sum games, because the outcome has net results greater or less than zero. Informally, in non-zero-sum games, a gain by one player does not necessarily correspond with a loss by another.\nFurthermore, \"constant-sum games\" correspond to activities like theft and gambling, but not to the fundamental economic situation in which there are potential gains from trade. It is possible to transform any constant-sum game into a (possibly asymmetric) zero-sum game by adding a dummy player (often called \"the board\") whose losses compensate the players' net winnings.\nSimultaneous / sequential.\nSimultaneous games are games where both players move simultaneously, or instead the later players are unaware of the earlier players' actions (making them \"effectively\" simultaneous). Sequential games (a type of dynamic games) are games where players do not make decisions simultaneously, and player's earlier actions affect the outcome and decisions of other players. This need not be perfect information about every action of earlier players; it might be very little knowledge. For instance, a player may know that an earlier player did not perform one particular action, while they do not know which of the other available actions the first player actually performed.\nThe difference between simultaneous and sequential games is captured in the different representations discussed above. Often, normal form is used to represent simultaneous games, while extensive form is used to represent sequential ones. The transformation of extensive to normal form is one way, meaning that multiple extensive form games correspond to the same normal form. Consequently, notions of equilibrium for simultaneous games are insufficient for reasoning about sequential games; see subgame perfection.\nIn short, the differences between sequential and simultaneous games are as follows:\nPerfect information and imperfect information.\nAn important subset of sequential games consists of games of perfect information. A game with perfect information means that all players, at every move in the game, know the previous history of the game and the moves previously made by all other players. An imperfect information game is played when the players do not know all moves already made by the opponent such as a simultaneous move game. Examples of perfect-information games include tic-tac-toe, checkers, chess, and Go.\nMany card games are games of imperfect information, such as poker and bridge. Perfect information is often confused with complete information, which is a similar concept pertaining to the common knowledge of each player's sequence, strategies, and payoffs throughout gameplay. Complete information requires that every player know the strategies and payoffs available to the other players but not necessarily the actions taken, whereas perfect information is knowledge of all aspects of the game and players. Games of incomplete information can be reduced, however, to games of imperfect information by introducing \"moves by nature\".\nBayesian game.\nOne of the assumptions of the Nash equilibrium is that every player has correct beliefs about the actions of the other players. However, there are many situations in game theory where participants do not fully understand the characteristics of their opponents. Negotiators may be unaware of their opponent's valuation of the object of negotiation, companies may be unaware of their opponent's cost functions, combatants may be unaware of their opponent's strengths, and jurors may be unaware of their colleague's interpretation of the evidence at trial. In some cases, participants may know the character of their opponent well, but may not know how well their opponent knows his or her own character.\nBayesian game means a strategic game with incomplete information. For a strategic game, decision makers are players, and every player has a group of actions. A core part of the imperfect information specification is the set of states. Every state completely describes a collection of characteristics relevant to the player such as their preferences and details about them. There must be a state for every set of features that some player believes may exist.\nFor example, where Player 1 is unsure whether Player 2 would rather date her or get away from her, while Player 2 understands Player 1's preferences as before. To be specific, supposing that Player 1 believes that Player 2 wants to date her under a probability of 1/2 and get away from her under a probability of 1/2 (this evaluation comes from Player 1's experience probably: she faces players who want to date her half of the time in such a case and players who want to avoid her half of the time). Due to the probability involved, the analysis of this situation requires to understand the player's preference for the draw, even though people are only interested in pure strategic equilibrium.\nCombinatorial games.\nGames in which the difficulty of finding an optimal strategy stems from the multiplicity of possible moves are called combinatorial games. Examples include chess and Go. Games that involve imperfect information may also have a strong combinatorial character, for instance backgammon. There is no unified theory addressing combinatorial elements in games. There are, however, mathematical tools that can solve some particular problems and answer some general questions.\nGames of perfect information have been studied in combinatorial game theory, which has developed novel representations, e.g. surreal numbers, as well as combinatorial and algebraic (and sometimes non-constructive) proof methods to solve games of certain types, including \"loopy\" games that may result in infinitely long sequences of moves. These methods address games with higher combinatorial complexity than those usually considered in traditional (or \"economic\") game theory. A typical game that has been solved this way is Hex. A related field of study, drawing from computational complexity theory, is game complexity, which is concerned with estimating the computational difficulty of finding optimal strategies.\nResearch in artificial intelligence has addressed both perfect and imperfect information games that have very complex combinatorial structures (like chess, go, or backgammon) for which no provable optimal strategies have been found. The practical solutions involve computational heuristics, like alpha\u2013beta pruning or use of artificial neural networks trained by reinforcement learning, which make games more tractable in computing practice.\nDiscrete and continuous games.\nMuch of game theory is concerned with finite, discrete games that have a finite number of players, moves, events, outcomes, etc. Many concepts can be extended, however. Continuous games allow players to choose a strategy from a continuous strategy set. For instance, Cournot competition is typically modeled with players' strategies being any non-negative quantities, including fractional quantities.\nDifferential games.\nDifferential games such as the continuous pursuit and evasion game are continuous games where the evolution of the players' state variables is governed by differential equations. The problem of finding an optimal strategy in a differential game is closely related to the optimal control theory. In particular, there are two types of strategies: the open-loop strategies are found using the Pontryagin maximum principle while the closed-loop strategies are found using Bellman's Dynamic Programming method.\nA particular case of differential games are the games with a random time horizon. In such games, the terminal time is a random variable with a given probability distribution function. Therefore, the players maximize the mathematical expectation of the cost function. It was shown that the modified optimization problem can be reformulated as a discounted differential game over an infinite time interval.\nEvolutionary game theory.\nEvolutionary game theory studies players who adjust their strategies over time according to rules that are not necessarily rational or farsighted. In general, the evolution of strategies over time according to such rules is modeled as a Markov chain with a state variable such as the current strategy profile or how the game has been played in the recent past. Such rules may feature imitation, optimization, or survival of the fittest.\nIn biology, such models can represent evolution, in which offspring adopt their parents' strategies and parents who play more successful strategies (i.e. corresponding to higher payoffs) have a greater number of offspring. In the social sciences, such models typically represent strategic adjustment by players who play a game many times within their lifetime and, consciously or unconsciously, occasionally adjust their strategies.\nStochastic outcomes (and relation to other fields).\nIndividual decision problems with stochastic outcomes are sometimes considered \"one-player games\". They may be modeled using similar tools within the related disciplines of decision theory, operations research, and areas of artificial intelligence, particularly AI planning (with uncertainty) and multi-agent system. Although these fields may have different motivators, the mathematics involved are substantially the same, e.g. using Markov decision processes (MDP).\nStochastic outcomes can also be modeled in terms of game theory by adding a randomly acting player who makes \"chance moves\" (\"moves by nature\"). This player is not typically considered a third player in what is otherwise a two-player game, but merely serves to provide a roll of the dice where required by the game.\nFor some problems, different approaches to modeling stochastic outcomes may lead to different solutions. For example, the difference in approach between MDPs and the minimax solution is that the latter considers the worst-case over a set of adversarial moves, rather than reasoning in expectation about these moves given a fixed probability distribution. The minimax approach may be advantageous where stochastic models of uncertainty are not available, but may also be overestimating extremely unlikely (but costly) events, dramatically swaying the strategy in such scenarios if it is assumed that an adversary can force such an event to happen. (See Black swan theory for more discussion on this kind of modeling issue, particularly as it relates to predicting and limiting losses in investment banking.)\nGeneral models that include all elements of stochastic outcomes, adversaries, and partial or noisy observability (of moves by other players) have also been studied. The \"gold standard\" is considered to be partially observable stochastic game (POSG), but few realistic problems are computationally feasible in POSG representation.\nMetagames.\nThese are games the play of which is the development of the rules for another game, the target or subject game. Metagames seek to maximize the utility value of the rule set developed. The theory of metagames is related to mechanism design theory.\nThe term metagame analysis is also used to refer to a practical approach developed by Nigel Howard, whereby a situation is framed as a strategic game in which stakeholders try to realize their objectives by means of the options available to them. Subsequent developments have led to the formulation of confrontation analysis.\nMean field game theory.\nMean field game theory is the study of strategic decision making in very large populations of small interacting agents. This class of problems was considered in the economics literature by Boyan Jovanovic and Robert W. Rosenthal, in the engineering literature by Peter E. Caines, and by mathematicians Pierre-Louis Lions and Jean-Michel Lasry.\nRepresentation of games.\nThe games studied in game theory are well-defined mathematical objects. To be fully defined, a game must specify the following elements: the \"players\" of the game, the \"information\" and \"actions\" available to each player at each decision point, and the \"payoffs\" for each outcome. (Eric Rasmusen refers to these four \"essential elements\" by the acronym \"PAPI\".) A game theorist typically uses these elements, along with a solution concept of their choosing, to deduce a set of equilibrium strategies for each player such that, when these strategies are employed, no player can profit by unilaterally deviating from their strategy. These equilibrium strategies determine an equilibrium to the game\u2014a stable state in which either one outcome occurs or a set of outcomes occur with known probability.\nMost cooperative games are presented in the characteristic function form, while the extensive and the normal forms are used to define noncooperative games.\nExtensive form.\nThe extensive form can be used to formalize games with a time sequencing of moves. Extensive form games can be visualized using game trees (as pictured here). Here each vertex (or node) represents a point of choice for a player. The player is specified by a number listed by the vertex. The lines out of the vertex represent a possible action for that player. The payoffs are specified at the bottom of the tree. The extensive form can be viewed as a multi-player generalization of a decision tree. To solve any extensive form game, backward induction must be used. It involves working backward up the game tree to determine what a rational player would do at the last vertex of the tree, what the player with the previous move would do given that the player with the last move is rational, and so on until the first vertex of the tree is reached.\nThe game pictured consists of two players. The way this particular game is structured (i.e., with sequential decision making and perfect information), \"Player 1\" \"moves\" first by choosing either F or U (fair or unfair). Next in the sequence, \"Player 2\", who has now observed \"Player 1\"'s move, can choose to play either A or R (accept or reject). Once \"Player 2\" has made their choice, the game is considered finished and each player gets their respective payoff, represented in the image as two numbers, where the first number represents Player 1's payoff, and the second number represents Player 2's payoff. Suppose that \"Player 1\" chooses U and then \"Player 2\" chooses A: \"Player 1\" then gets a payoff of \"eight\" (which in real-world terms can be interpreted in many ways, the simplest of which is in terms of money but could mean things such as eight days of vacation or eight countries conquered or even eight more opportunities to play the same game against other players) and \"Player 2\" gets a payoff of \"two\".\nThe extensive form can also capture simultaneous-move games and games with imperfect information. To represent it, either a dotted line connects different vertices to represent them as being part of the same information set (i.e. the players do not know at which point they are), or a closed line is drawn around them. (See example in the imperfect information section.)\nNormal form.\nThe normal (or strategic form) game is usually represented by a matrix which shows the players, strategies, and payoffs (see the example to the right). More generally it can be represented by any function that associates a payoff for each player with every possible combination of actions. In the accompanying example there are two players; one chooses the row and the other chooses the column. Each player has two strategies, which are specified by the number of rows and the number of columns. The payoffs are provided in the interior. The first number is the payoff received by the row player (Player 1 in our example); the second is the payoff for the column player (Player 2 in our example). Suppose that Player 1 plays \"Up\" and that Player 2 plays \"Left\". Then Player 1 gets a payoff of 4, and Player 2 gets 3.\nWhen a game is presented in normal form, it is presumed that each player acts simultaneously or, at least, without knowing the actions of the other. If players have some information about the choices of other players, the game is usually presented in extensive form.\nEvery extensive-form game has an equivalent normal-form game, however, the transformation to normal form may result in an exponential blowup in the size of the representation, making it computationally impractical.\nCharacteristic function form.\nIn cooperative game theory the characteristic function lists the payoff of each coalition. The origin of this formulation is in John von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern's book.\nFormally, a characteristic function is a function formula_1 from the set of all possible coalitions of players to a set of payments, and also satisfies formula_2. The function describes how much collective payoff a set of players can gain by forming a coalition.\nAlternative game representations.\nAlternative game representation forms are used for some subclasses of games or adjusted to the needs of interdisciplinary research. In addition to classical game representations, some of the alternative representations also encode time related aspects.\nGeneral and applied uses.\nAs a method of applied mathematics, game theory has been used to study a wide variety of human and animal behaviors. It was initially developed in economics to understand a large collection of economic behaviors, including behaviors of firms, markets, and consumers. The first use of game-theoretic analysis was by Antoine Augustin Cournot in 1838 with his solution of the Cournot duopoly. The use of game theory in the social sciences has expanded, and game theory has been applied to political, sociological, and psychological behaviors as well.\nAlthough pre-twentieth-century naturalists such as Charles Darwin made game-theoretic kinds of statements, the use of game-theoretic analysis in biology began with Ronald Fisher's studies of animal behavior during the 1930s. This work predates the name \"game theory\", but it shares many important features with this field. The developments in economics were later applied to biology largely by John Maynard Smith in his 1982 book \"Evolution and the Theory of Games\".\nIn addition to being used to describe, predict, and explain behavior, game theory has also been used to develop theories of ethical or normative behavior and to prescribe such behavior. In economics and philosophy, scholars have applied game theory to help in the understanding of good or proper behavior. Game-theoretic approaches have also been suggested in the philosophy of language and philosophy of science. Game-theoretic arguments of this type can be found as far back as Plato. An alternative version of game theory, called chemical game theory, represents the player's choices as metaphorical chemical reactant molecules called \"knowlecules\". \u00a0Chemical game theory then calculates the outcomes as equilibrium solutions to a system of chemical reactions.\nDescription and modeling.\nThe primary use of game theory is to describe and model how human populations behave. Some scholars believe that by finding the equilibria of games they can predict how actual human populations will behave when confronted with situations analogous to the game being studied. This particular view of game theory has been criticized. It is argued that the assumptions made by game theorists are often violated when applied to real-world situations. Game theorists usually assume players act rationally, but in practice, human rationality and/or behavior often deviates from the model of rationality as used in game theory. Game theorists respond by comparing their assumptions to those used in physics. Thus while their assumptions do not always hold, they can treat game theory as a reasonable scientific ideal akin to the models used by physicists. However, empirical work has shown that in some classic games, such as the centipede game, guess 2/3 of the average game, and the dictator game, people regularly do not play Nash equilibria. There is an ongoing debate regarding the importance of these experiments and whether the analysis of the experiments fully captures all aspects of the relevant situation.\nSome game theorists, following the work of John Maynard Smith and George R. Price, have turned to evolutionary game theory in order to resolve these issues. These models presume either no rationality or bounded rationality on the part of players. Despite the name, evolutionary game theory does not necessarily presume natural selection in the biological sense. Evolutionary game theory includes both biological as well as cultural evolution and also models of individual learning (for example, fictitious play dynamics).\nPrescriptive or normative analysis.\nSome scholars see game theory not as a predictive tool for the behavior of human beings, but as a suggestion for how people ought to behave. Since a strategy, corresponding to a Nash equilibrium of a game constitutes one's best response to the actions of the other players \u2013 provided they are in (the same) Nash equilibrium \u2013 playing a strategy that is part of a Nash equilibrium seems appropriate. This normative use of game theory has also come under criticism.\nEconomics.\nGame theory is a major method used in mathematical economics and business for modeling competing behaviors of interacting agents. Applications include a wide array of economic phenomena and approaches, such as auctions, bargaining, mergers and acquisitions pricing, fair division, duopolies, oligopolies, social network formation, agent-based computational economics, general equilibrium, mechanism design, and voting systems; and across such broad areas as experimental economics, behavioral economics, information economics, industrial organization, and political economy.\nThis research usually focuses on particular sets of strategies known as \"solution concepts\" or \"equilibria\". A common assumption is that players act rationally. In non-cooperative games, the most famous of these is the Nash equilibrium. A set of strategies is a Nash equilibrium if each represents a best response to the other strategies. If all the players are playing the strategies in a Nash equilibrium, they have no unilateral incentive to deviate, since their strategy is the best they can do given what others are doing.\nThe payoffs of the game are generally taken to represent the utility of individual players.\nA prototypical paper on game theory in economics begins by presenting a game that is an abstraction of a particular economic situation. One or more solution concepts are chosen, and the author demonstrates which strategy sets in the presented game are equilibria of the appropriate type. Economists and business professors suggest two primary uses (noted above): \"descriptive\" and \"prescriptive\".\nManagerial economics.\nGame theory also has an extensive use in a specific branch or stream of economics \u2013 Managerial Economics. One important usage of it in the field of managerial economics is in analyzing strategic interactions between firms. For example, firms may be competing in a market with limited resources, and game theory can help managers understand how their decisions impact their competitors and the overall market outcomes. Game theory can also be used to analyze cooperation between firms, such as in forming strategic alliances or joint ventures. Another use of game theory in managerial economics is in analyzing pricing strategies. For example, firms may use game theory to determine the optimal pricing strategy based on how they expect their competitors to respond to their pricing decisions. Overall, game theory serves as a useful tool for analyzing strategic interactions and decision making in the context of managerial economics.\nBusiness.\nThe Chartered Institute of Procurement &amp; Supply (CIPS) promotes knowledge and use of game theory within the context of business procurement. CIPS and TWS Partners have conducted a series of surveys designed to explore the understanding, awareness and application of game theory among procurement professionals. Some of the main findings in their third annual survey (2019) include:\nProject management.\nSensible decision-making is critical for the success of projects. In project management, game theory is used to model the decision-making process of players, such as investors, project managers, contractors, sub-contractors, governments and customers. Quite often, these players have competing interests, and sometimes their interests are directly detrimental to other players, making project management scenarios well-suited to be modeled by game theory.\nPiraveenan (2019) in his review provides several examples where game theory is used to model project management scenarios. For instance, an investor typically has several investment options, and each option will likely result in a different project, and thus one of the investment options has to be chosen before the project charter can be produced. Similarly, any large project involving subcontractors, for instance, a construction project, has a complex interplay between the main contractor (the project manager) and subcontractors, or among the subcontractors themselves, which typically has several decision points. For example, if there is an ambiguity in the contract between the contractor and subcontractor, each must decide how hard to push their case without jeopardizing the whole project, and thus their own stake in it. Similarly, when projects from competing organizations are launched, the marketing personnel have to decide what is the best timing and strategy to market the project, or its resultant product or service, so that it can gain maximum traction in the face of competition. In each of these scenarios, the required decisions depend on the decisions of other players who, in some way, have competing interests to the interests of the decision-maker, and thus can ideally be modeled using game theory.\nPiraveenan summarizes that two-player games are predominantly used to model project management scenarios, and based on the identity of these players, five distinct types of games are used in project management.\nIn terms of types of games, both cooperative as well as non-cooperative, normal-form as well as extensive-form, and zero-sum as well as non-zero-sum are used to model various project management scenarios.\nPolitical science.\nThe application of game theory to political science is focused in the overlapping areas of fair division, political economy, public choice, war bargaining, positive political theory, and social choice theory. In each of these areas, researchers have developed game-theoretic models in which the players are often voters, states, special interest groups, and politicians.\nEarly examples of game theory applied to political science are provided by Anthony Downs. In his 1957 book \"An Economic Theory of Democracy\", he applies the Hotelling firm location model to the political process. In the Downsian model, political candidates commit to ideologies on a one-dimensional policy space. Downs first shows how the political candidates will converge to the ideology preferred by the median voter if voters are fully informed, but then argues that voters choose to remain rationally ignorant which allows for candidate divergence. Game theory was applied in 1962 to the Cuban Missile Crisis during the presidency of John F. Kennedy.\nIt has also been proposed that game theory explains the stability of any form of political government. Taking the simplest case of a monarchy, for example, the king, being only one person, does not and cannot maintain his authority by personally exercising physical control over all or even any significant number of his subjects. Sovereign control is instead explained by the recognition by each citizen that all other citizens expect each other to view the king (or other established government) as the person whose orders will be followed. Coordinating communication among citizens to replace the sovereign is effectively barred, since conspiracy to replace the sovereign is generally punishable as a crime. Thus, in a process that can be modeled by variants of the prisoner's dilemma, during periods of stability no citizen will find it rational to move to replace the sovereign, even if all the citizens know they would be better off if they were all to act collectively.\nA game-theoretic explanation for democratic peace is that public and open debate in democracies sends clear and reliable information regarding their intentions to other states. In contrast, it is difficult to know the intentions of nondemocratic leaders, what effect concessions will have, and if promises will be kept. Thus there will be mistrust and unwillingness to make concessions if at least one of the parties in a dispute is a non-democracy.\nHowever, game theory predicts that two countries may still go to war even if their leaders are cognizant of the costs of fighting. War may result from asymmetric information; two countries may have incentives to mis-represent the amount of military resources they have on hand, rendering them unable to settle disputes agreeably without resorting to fighting. Moreover, war may arise because of commitment problems: if two countries wish to settle a dispute via peaceful means, but each wishes to go back on the terms of that settlement, they may have no choice but to resort to warfare. Finally, war may result from issue indivisibilities.\nGame theory could also help predict a nation's responses when there is a new rule or law to be applied to that nation. One example is Peter John Wood's (2013) research looking into what nations could do to help reduce climate change. Wood thought this could be accomplished by making treaties with other nations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. However, he concluded that this idea could not work because it would create a prisoner's dilemma for the nations.\nDefence science and technology.\nGame theory has been used extensively to model decision-making scenarios relevant to defence applications. Most studies that has applied game theory in defence settings are concerned with Command and Control Warfare, and can be further classified into studies dealing with (i) Resource Allocation Warfare (ii) Information Warfare (iii) Weapons Control Warfare, and (iv) Adversary Monitoring Warfare. Many of the problems studied are concerned with sensing and tracking, for example a surface ship trying to track a hostile submarine and the submarine trying to evade being tracked, and the interdependent decision making that takes place with regards to bearing, speed, and the sensor technology activated by both vessels.\nThe tool, for example, automates the transformation of public vulnerability data into models, allowing defenders to synthesize optimal defence strategies through Stackelberg equilibrium analysis. This approach enhances cyber resilience by enabling defenders to anticipate and counteract attackers\u2019 best responses, making game theory increasingly relevant in adversarial cybersecurity environments.\nHo et al. provide a broad summary of game theory applications in defence, highlighting its advantages and limitations across both physical and cyber domains.\nBiology.\nUnlike those in economics, the payoffs for games in biology are often interpreted as corresponding to fitness. In addition, the focus has been less on equilibria that correspond to a notion of rationality and more on ones that would be maintained by evolutionary forces. The best-known equilibrium in biology is known as the \"evolutionarily stable strategy\" (ESS), first introduced in . Although its initial motivation did not involve any of the mental requirements of the Nash equilibrium, every ESS is a Nash equilibrium.\nIn biology, game theory has been used as a model to understand many different phenomena. It was first used to explain the evolution (and stability) of the approximate 1:1 sex ratios. suggested that the 1:1 sex ratios are a result of evolutionary forces acting on individuals who could be seen as trying to maximize their number of grandchildren.\nAdditionally, biologists have used evolutionary game theory and the ESS to explain the emergence of animal communication. The analysis of signaling games and other communication games has provided insight into the evolution of communication among animals. For example, the mobbing behavior of many species, in which a large number of prey animals attack a larger predator, seems to be an example of spontaneous emergent organization. Ants have also been shown to exhibit feed-forward behavior akin to fashion (see Paul Ormerod's \"Butterfly Economics\").\nBiologists have used the game of chicken to analyze fighting behavior and territoriality.\nAccording to Maynard Smith, in the preface to \"Evolution and the Theory of Games\", \"paradoxically, it has turned out that game theory is more readily applied to biology than to the field of economic behaviour for which it was originally designed\". Evolutionary game theory has been used to explain many seemingly incongruous phenomena in nature.\nOne such phenomenon is known as biological altruism. This is a situation in which an organism appears to act in a way that benefits other organisms and is detrimental to itself. This is distinct from traditional notions of altruism because such actions are not conscious, but appear to be evolutionary adaptations to increase overall fitness. Examples can be found in species ranging from vampire bats that regurgitate blood they have obtained from a night's hunting and give it to group members who have failed to feed, to worker bees that care for the queen bee for their entire lives and never mate, to vervet monkeys that warn group members of a predator's approach, even when it endangers that individual's chance of survival. All of these actions increase the overall fitness of a group, but occur at a cost to the individual.\nEvolutionary game theory explains this altruism with the idea of kin selection. Altruists discriminate between the individuals they help and favor relatives. Hamilton's rule explains the evolutionary rationale behind this selection with the equation c &lt; b \u00d7 r, where the cost c to the altruist must be less than the benefit b to the recipient multiplied by the coefficient of relatedness r. The more closely related two organisms are causes the incidences of altruism to increase because they share many of the same alleles. This means that the altruistic individual, by ensuring that the alleles of its close relative are passed on through survival of its offspring, can forgo the option of having offspring itself because the same number of alleles are passed on. For example, helping a sibling (in diploid animals) has a coefficient of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442, because (on average) an individual shares half of the alleles in its sibling's offspring. Ensuring that enough of a sibling's offspring survive to adulthood precludes the necessity of the altruistic individual producing offspring. The coefficient values depend heavily on the scope of the playing field; for example if the choice of whom to favor includes all genetic living things, not just all relatives, we assume the discrepancy between all humans only accounts for approximately 1% of the diversity in the playing field, a coefficient that was &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 in the smaller field becomes 0.995. Similarly if it is considered that information other than that of a genetic nature (e.g. epigenetics, religion, science, etc.) persisted through time the playing field becomes larger still, and the discrepancies smaller.\nComputer science and logic.\nGame theory has come to play an increasingly important role in logic and in computer science. Several logical theories have a basis in game semantics. In addition, computer scientists have used games to model interactive computations. Also, game theory provides a theoretical basis to the field of multi-agent systems.\nSeparately, game theory has played a role in online algorithms; in particular, the k-server problem, which has in the past been referred to as \"games with moving costs\" and \"request-answer games\". Yao's principle is a game-theoretic technique for proving lower bounds on the computational complexity of randomized algorithms, especially online algorithms.\nThe emergence of the Internet has motivated the development of algorithms for finding equilibria in games, markets, computational auctions, peer-to-peer systems, and security and information markets. Algorithmic game theory and within it algorithmic mechanism design combine computational algorithm design and analysis of complex systems with economic theory.\nGame theory has multiple applications in the field of artificial intelligence and machine learning. It is often used in developing autonomous systems that can make complex decisions in uncertain environment. Some other areas of application of game theory in AI/ML context are as follows - multi-agent system formation, reinforcement learning, mechanism design etc. By using game theory to model the behavior of other agents and anticipate their actions, AI/ML systems can make better decisions and operate more effectively.\nPhilosophy.\nGame theory has been put to several uses in philosophy. Responding to two papers by W.V.O. Quine\u00a0(1960, 1967), used game theory to develop a philosophical account of convention. In so doing, he provided the first analysis of common knowledge and employed it in analyzing play in coordination games. In addition, he first suggested that one can understand meaning in terms of signaling games. This later suggestion has been pursued by several philosophers since Lewis. Following game-theoretic account of conventions, Edna Ullmann-Margalit (1977) and Bicchieri (2006) have developed theories of social norms that define them as Nash equilibria that result from transforming a mixed-motive game into a coordination game.\nGame theory has also challenged philosophers to think in terms of interactive epistemology: what it means for a collective to have common beliefs or knowledge, and what are the consequences of this knowledge for the social outcomes resulting from the interactions of agents. Philosophers who have worked in this area include Bicchieri (1989, 1993), Skyrms (1990), and Stalnaker (1999).\nThe synthesis of game theory with ethics was championed by R. B. Braithwaite. The hope was that rigorous mathematical analysis of game theory might help formalize the more imprecise philosophical discussions. However, this expectation was only materialized to a limited extent.\nIn ethics, some (most notably David Gauthier, Gregory Kavka, and Jean Hampton) authors have attempted to pursue Thomas Hobbes' project of deriving morality from self-interest. Since games like the prisoner's dilemma present an apparent conflict between morality and self-interest, explaining why cooperation is required by self-interest is an important component of this project. This general strategy is a component of the general social contract view in political philosophy (for examples, see and ).\nOther authors have attempted to use evolutionary game theory in order to explain the emergence of human attitudes about morality and corresponding animal behaviors. These authors look at several games including the prisoner's dilemma, stag hunt, and the Nash bargaining game as providing an explanation for the emergence of attitudes about morality (see, e.g., Skyrms\u00a0(1996, 2004) and Sober and Wilson\u00a0(1998)).\nEpidemiology.\nSince the decision to take a vaccine for a particular disease is often made by individuals, who may consider a range of factors and parameters in making this decision (such as the incidence and prevalence of the disease, perceived and real risks associated with contracting the disease, mortality rate, perceived and real risks associated with vaccination, and financial cost of vaccination), game theory has been used to model and predict vaccination uptake in a society.\nWell known examples of games.\nPrisoner's dilemma.\nWilliam Poundstone described the game in his 1993 book Prisoner's Dilemma:\nTwo members of a criminal gang, A and B, are arrested and imprisoned. Each prisoner is in solitary confinement with no means of communication with their partner. The principal charge would lead to a sentence of ten years in prison; however, the police do not have the evidence for a conviction. They plan to sentence both to two years in prison on a lesser charge but offer each prisoner a Faustian bargain: If one of them confesses to the crime of the principal charge, betraying the other, they will be pardoned and free to leave while the other must serve the entirety of the sentence instead of just two years for the lesser charge.\nThe dominant strategy (and therefore the best response to any possible opponent strategy), is to betray the other, which aligns with the sure-thing principle. However, both prisoners staying silent would yield a greater reward for both of them than mutual betrayal.\nBattle of the sexes.\nThe \"battle of the sexes\" is a term used to describe the perceived conflict between men and women in various areas of life, such as relationships, careers, and social roles. This conflict is often portrayed in popular culture, such as movies and television shows, as a humorous or dramatic competition between the genders. This conflict can be depicted in a game theory framework. This is an example of non-cooperative games.\nAn example of the \"battle of the sexes\" can be seen in the portrayal of relationships in popular media, where men and women are often depicted as being fundamentally different and in conflict with each other. For instance, in some romantic comedies, the male and female protagonists are shown as having opposing views on love and relationships, and they have to overcome these differences in order to be together.\nIn this game, there are two pure strategy Nash equilibria: one where both the players choose the same strategy and the other where the players choose different options. If the game is played in mixed strategies, where each player chooses their strategy randomly, then there is an infinite number of Nash equilibria. However, in the context of the \"battle of the sexes\" game, the assumption is usually made that the game is played in pure strategies.\nUltimatum game.\nThe ultimatum game is a game that has become a popular instrument of economic experiments. An early description is by Nobel laureate John Harsanyi in 1961.\nOne player, the proposer, is endowed with a sum of money. The proposer is tasked with splitting it with another player, the responder (who knows what the total sum is). Once the proposer communicates his decision, the responder may accept it or reject it. If the responder accepts, the money is split per the proposal; if the responder rejects, both players receive nothing. Both players know in advance the consequences of the responder accepting or rejecting the offer. The game demonstrates how social acceptance, fairness, and generosity influence the players decisions.\nUltimatum game has a variant, that is the dictator game. They are mostly identical, except in dictator game the responder has no power to reject the proposer's offer.\nTrust game.\nThe Trust Game is an experiment designed to measure trust in economic decisions. It is also called \"the investment game\" and is designed to investigate trust and demonstrate its importance rather than \"rationality\" of self-interest. The game was designed by Berg Joyce, John Dickhaut and Kevin McCabe in 1995.\nIn the game, one player (the investor) is given a sum of money and must decide how much of it to give to another player (the trustee). The amount given is then tripled by the experimenter. The trustee then decides how much of the tripled amount to return to the investor. If the recipient is completely self interested, then he/she should return nothing. However that is not true as the experiment conduct. The outcome suggest that people are willing to place a trust, by risking some amount of money, in the belief that there would be reciprocity.\nCournot Competition.\nThe Cournot competition model involves players choosing quantity of a homogenous product to produce independently and simultaneously, where marginal cost can be different for each firm and the firm's payoff is profit. The production costs are public information and the firm aims to find their profit-maximizing quantity based on what they believe the other firm will produce and behave like monopolies. In this game firms want to produce at the monopoly quantity but there is a high incentive to deviate and produce more, which decreases the market-clearing price. For example, firms may be tempted to deviate from the monopoly quantity if there is a low monopoly quantity and high price, with the aim of increasing production to maximize profit. However this option does not provide the highest payoff, as a firm's ability to maximize profits depends on its market share and the elasticity of the market demand. The Cournot equilibrium is reached when each firm operates on their reaction function with no incentive to deviate, as they have the best response based on the other firms output. Within the game, firms reach the Nash equilibrium when the Cournot equilibrium is achieved. \nBertrand Competition.\nThe Bertrand competition assumes homogenous products and a constant marginal cost and players choose the prices. The equilibrium of price competition is where the price is equal to marginal costs, assuming complete information about the competitors' costs. Therefore, the firms have an incentive to deviate from the equilibrium because a homogenous product with a lower price will gain all of the market share, known as a cost advantage.\nSee also.\nLists\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n*reprinted edition: "}
{"id": "11927", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11927", "title": "Germany/politics", "text": ""}
{"id": "11929", "revid": "51047355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11929", "title": "Demographics of Germany", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe demography of Germany is monitored by the \"Statistisches Bundesamt\" (Federal Statistical Office of Germany). According to the most recent data, Germany's population is 83,577,140 (31 December 2024) making it the most populous country in the European Union and the nineteenth-most populous country in the world. The total fertility rate was rated at 1.38 in 2023, significantly below the replacement rate of 2.1. For a long time Germany had one of the world's lowest fertility rates of around 1.3 to 1.4. Due to the low birth rate Germany has recorded more deaths than births every year since 1972, which means 2024 was the 53rd consecutive year the German population would have decreased without immigration. However, due to immigration the population has actually increased during the last half-century. In 2023 the number of people with a foreign background was 29.7%; this category includes foreigners, naturalized citizens, ethnic German repatriates from Eastern Europe and the children of all of the above.\nUntil the early 20th century Germany was also a large emigrant nation; in the 19th century more than 5 million citizens of the German Empire emigrated to the US alone, and in the early 20th century Germany lost another two million to the US as well as significant numbers to Latin America, Canada and Eastern Europe. However, after World War II immigration began to outweigh emigration, as around 14 million ethnic Germans were expelled from the former eastern provinces of the Reich and other areas in Eastern Europe. Of these, roughly 12 million made their way to present-day Germany and several hundred thousand settled in Austria and other countries, while several hundred thousand died. Some additional 4.5 million ethnic Germans from Eastern Europe repatriated after 1950, especially around the end of the Eastern Bloc and mostly from the former Soviet Union, Poland and Romania.\nLarge-scale immigration to West Germany began during the time of the Wirtschaftswunder from the 1950s to early 1970s when Germany had a shortage of workers and let in Southern Europeans from countries like Turkey, Italy and Spain on a temporary basis as guest workers. The liberalisation of guest worker legislation allowed many to stay and build a life in West Germany. Germany saw another large wave of immigration towards the end of the 20th century, driven by German reunification, refugee inflows from the Yugoslav Wars and large numbers of Turkish nationals seeking asylum. The next large immigration wave began after eastern expansion of the European Union in 2011 as Eastern Europeans were now allowed to live and work in Germany without a visa. During the European migrant crisis of 2015 Germany took in a large number of refugees, both in absolute terms and relative to other EU member states; the country recorded 476,649 asylum seekers in 2015, 745,545 in 2016 and declining numbers thereafter.\nGermany has one of the world's highest levels of education, technological development, and economic productivity. Since the end of World War II, the number of students entering university has more than tripled, and the trade and technical schools are among the world's best. With a per capita income of about \u20ac40,883 in 2018, Germany is a broadly middle-class society. However, there has been a strong increase in the number of children living in poverty. In 1965, one in 75 children was on the welfare rolls; but by 2007 this had increased to one child in six. These children live in relative poverty, but not necessarily in absolute poverty. Millions of Germans travel overseas each year. The social welfare system provides for universal health care, unemployment compensation, child benefits and other social programmes. Germany's aging population and struggling economy strained the welfare system in the 1990s. So the government adopted a wide-ranging programme of \u2013 still controversial \u2013 belt-tightening reforms, Agenda 2010, including the labour-market reforms known as Hartz concept.\nHistory.\n1945\u20131990.\nAfter the World War II border shifts and expulsions, the Germans from Central and Eastern Europe and the former eastern territories moved westward to post-war Germany. During the partition of Germany, many Germans from East Germany fled to West Germany for political and economic reasons. Since Germany's reunification, there are ongoing migrations from the eastern \"New L\u00e4nder\" to the western \"Old L\u00e4nder\" for economic reasons.\nThe Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic followed different paths when it came to demographics. The politics of the German Democratic Republic was pronatalistic while that of the Federal Republic was compensatory.\nFertility in the GDR was higher than that in the FRG. Demographic politics was only one of the reasons. Women in the GDR had fewer \"biographic options\". Young motherhood was expected of them. State funded cost-free childcare was available to all mothers.\nNote: Berlin is included into East Germany for the year 2002 and 2008. Source: Kreyenfeld (2002); Kreyenfeld et al. (2010); HFD Germany (2010)\n1990\u2013today.\nAbout 1.7 million people have left the new federal states (the East) since the fall of the Berlin Wall, or 12% of the population; a disproportionately high number of them were women under 35.\nAfter 1990, the total fertility rate (TFR) in the East dropped to 0.772 in 1994. This has been attributed to a \"demographic shock\": people not only had fewer children, they were also less likely to marry or divorce after the end of the GDR; the biographic options of the citizens of the former GDR had increased. Young motherhood seemed to be less attractive and the age of the first birth rose sharply.\nIn the following years, the TFR in the East started to rise again, surpassing 1.0 in 1997 and 1.3 in 2004, and reaching the West's TFR (1.37) in 2007. In 2010, the East's fertility rate (1.459) clearly exceeded that of the West (1.385), while Germany's overall TFR had risen to 1.393, the highest value since 1990, which was still far below the natural replacement rate of 2.1 and the birth rates seen under communism. In 2016, the TFR was 1.64 in the East and 1.60 in the West.\nBetween 1989 and 2009, about 2,000 schools closed because there were fewer children.\nIn some regions the number of women between the ages of 20 and 30 has dropped by more than 30%. In 2004, in the age group 18\u201329 (statistically important for starting families) there were only 90 women for every 100 men in the new federal states (the East, including Berlin).\nUntil 2007 family politics in the federal republic was compensatory, which means that poor families received more family benefits (such as the \"Erziehungsgeld\") than rich ones. In 2007 the so-called \"Elterngeld\" was introduced. According to Christoph Butterwegge the Elterngeld was meant to \"motivate highly educated women to have more children\"; the poor on the other hand were disadvantaged by the \"Elterngeld\", and now received lower child benefits than the middle classes. The very well-off (who earn more than 250.000 Euro per annum) and those on welfare receive no Elterngeld payments.\nIn 2013 the following most recent developments were noticed:\nIn the new federal states the fertility rate of college-educated women is now higher than that of those without college degrees. Differences in value priorities and the better availability of childcare in the eastern states are discussed as possible reasons.\nIn 2019, the non-profit Austrian Institute of Economic Research and the Bertelsmann Stiftung published a study about the economic impact of demographics. The researchers assume a reduction in the per capita income of \u20ac3,700 until 2040.\nPopulation.\nThe contemporary demographics of Germany used to also be measured by a series of full censuses mandated by the state, with the most recent held in 1987. Since reunification, German authorities rely on a \"micro census\".\nDemographic statistics according to the World Population Review. Due to the privacy concerns of the German population after reunification, Germany did not hold a regular census until the EU-mandated 2011 German Census. The requirement was met with large disapproval. As required by the EU, Germany now continues to hold censuses every 10 years.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nFertility.\nThe total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman. It is based on fairly good data for the entire period. Sources: Our World In Data and Gapminder Foundation.\nLife expectancy.\nSources: Our World In Data and the United Nations.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nLife expectancy at birth\nAge structure.\nMedian age:\nVital statistics.\nStatistics since 1817.\nPopulation statistics since 1817. Territorial changes of Germany occurred in 1866 (establishment of North German Confederation), 1871 (German unification and annexation of Alsace-Lorraine), 1918/1919, 1921/1922, 1945/1946 and in 1990. Death data is incomplete for both world wars, especially WWII.\nNotable events in German demographics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n\u2013 (e) = estimation. To be revised.\nIn 2023, 500,670 (72.25%) children were born to mothers with German citizenship, while 96,422 (13.91%) children were born to mothers with European citizenship (excluding Turkey) and 95,897 (13.84%) children were born to mothers with other citizenship.\n\"Sources for data from 2011: Population 2011 to 2021 (based on 2011 European Union census), Population from 2022 (based on 2022 German census), live births, live births, deaths and natural population change, deaths,\" \"total fertility rates, current news on population.\"\nCurrent vital statistics.\nSource:\nSocial issues.\nMost childbirths in Germany happen within marriage. Out of 778,080 births in 2019, 258,835 were to unmarried parents, which means that around 33% or one third of the children are born out of wedlock, while two thirds are within. This percentage of unmarried birth has long been growing and reached 33% in 2010, more than twice of what it was in 1990. However, in recent years it has started to stagnate or even decrease.\nThe Mikrozensus done in 2008 revealed that the number of children a German woman aged 40 to 75 had, was closely linked to her educational achievement. In Western Germany, women with tertiary education had the highest rates of childlessness \u2014 26% stated that they were childless. This rate dropped to 16% for those with intermediate education, and 11% for those with only compulsory education. In Eastern Germany however, 9% of the most educated women of that age group and 7% of those who had an intermediary education were childless, while 12% of those having only compulsory education were childless.\nThe reason for that east-western difference is that the GDR had an \"educated mother scheme\" and actively tried to encourage first births among the more educated. It did so by propagandizing the opinion that every educated woman should \"present at least one child to socialism\" and also by financially rewarding its more educated citizen to become parents. The government especially tried to persuade students to become parents while still in college and it was quite successful in doing so. In 1986, 38% of all women, who were about to graduate from college, were mothers of at least one child and an additional 14% were pregnant and 43% of all men, who were about to graduate from college, were fathers of at least one child. There was a sharp decline in the birth rate and especially in the birth rate of the educated after the fall of the Berlin wall. Nowadays, 5% of those about to graduate from college are parents.\nThe more educated a Western German mother aged 40 to 75 was in 2008, the less likely she was to have a big family.\nSource: \nThe same was true for a mother living in Eastern Germany in 2008.\nSource: \nIn 2011, this trend was reversed in Eastern Germany, where more highly educated women now had a somewhat higher fertility rate than the rest of the population.\nPersons who said they had no religion tend to have fewer children than those who identify as Christians, and studies also found that conservative-leaning Christians had more children compared to liberal-leaning Christians.\nA study done in 2005 in the western German state of Nordrhein-Westfalen by the HDZ revealed that childlessness was especially widespread among scientists. It showed that 78% of the women scientists and 71% of the male scientists working in that state were childless.\nEthnic minorities and migrant background (\"Migrationshintergrund\").\nGermany does not collect data on the ethnic and racial identifications of its citizens, but does collect data on the background group by birth of an individual. The Federal Statistical Office defines persons with a migrant background as all persons who migrated to the present area of the Federal Republic of Germany after 1949, plus all foreign nationals born in Germany and all persons born in Germany as German nationals with at least one parent who migrated to Germany or was born in Germany as a foreign national. The figures presented here are based on this definition only.\nIn 2010, 2.3 million families with children under 18 years were living in Germany, in which at least one parent had foreign roots. They represented 29% of the total of 8.1 million families with minor children. Compared with 2005\u00a0\u2013 the year when the microcensus started to collect detailed information on the population with a migrant background\u00a0\u2013 the proportion of migrant families has risen by 2 percentage points. In 2019, 40% children under 5 years old had migrant background.\nMost of the families with a migrant background live in the western part of Germany. In 2010, the proportion of migrant families in all families was 32% in the former territory of the Federal Republic. This figure was more than double that in the new L\u00e4nder (incl. Berlin) where it stood at 15%. Eastern Germany has a much lower proportion of immigrants than the West, as the GDR did not let in that many guest workers and Eastern Germany's economy is not doing as well as West Germany's and had a higher percentage of jobless persons until recently. However, in recent years the number of people with an immigrant background in East Germany has been growing as refugees (as well as German Repatriates) are distributed with the K\u00f6nigssteiner Schl\u00fcssel, so every German state has to take the same number of them compared to its population and economy. In 2019 19.036 million people or 89,6% of people with an immigrant background live in Western Germany (excluding Berlin), being 28,7% of its population, while 1.016 million people with immigrant background 4,8% live in Eastern States, being 8,2% of population, and 1.194 million people with an immigrant background 5,6% live in Berlin, being 33,1% of its population.\nIn 2019, 26% of Germans of any age group (up from 18,4% in 2008) and 39% of German children (up from 30% in 2008) had at least one parent born abroad. Average age for Germans with at least one parent born abroad was 35.6 years (up from 33.8 years in 2008), while that for Germans, who had two parents born in Germany was 47.3 years (up from 44.6 in 2008).\nIn 2022, 41 percent of the under-15 age group had a migrant background, 36 percent of the 15 to 49-year-old age group had a migrant background and 19 percent of the age group above (50+).\nThe largest groups of people with an immigrant background in Germany are people that have Turkey, Poland and Russia as their ancestral homelands.\nAs of 2022[ [update]], the population by background was as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFour other sizable groups of people are referred to as \"national minorities\" (\"nationale Minderheiten\") because they have lived in their respective regions for centuries: Danes, Frisians, Roma and Sinti, and Sorbs. There is a Danish minority (about 50,000, according to government sources) in the northernmost state of Schleswig-Holstein. Eastern and Northern Frisians live at Schleswig-Holstein's western coast, and in the north-western part of Lower Saxony. They are part of a wider community (Frisia) stretching from Germany to the northern Netherlands. The Sorbs, a Slavic people with about 60,000 members (according to government sources), are in the Lusatia region of Saxony and Brandenburg. They are the last remnants of the Slavs that lived in central and eastern Germany since the 7th century to have kept their traditions and not been completely integrated into the wider German nation.\nUntil World War II the Poles were recognized as one of the national minorities. In 1924 the Union of Poles in Germany had initiated cooperation between all national minorities in Germany under the umbrella organization Association of National Minorities in Germany. Some of the union members wanted the Polish communities in easternmost Germany (now Poland) to join the newly established Polish nation after World War I. Even before the German invasion of Poland, leading anti-Nazi members of the Polish minority were deported to concentration camps; some were executed at the Pia\u015bnica murder site. Minority rights for Poles in Germany were revoked by Hermann G\u00f6ring's World War II decree of 27 February 1940, and their property was confiscated.\nAfter the war ended, the German government did not re-implement national minority rights for ethnic Poles. The reason for this is that the areas of Germany which formerly had a native Polish minority were annexed to Poland and the Soviet Union, while almost all of the native German populations (formerly the ethnic majority) in these areas subsequently fled or were expelled by force. With the mixed German-Polish territories now lost, the German government subsequently regarded ethnic Poles residing in what remained of Germany as immigrants, just like any other ethnic population with a recent history of arrival. In contrast, Germans living in Poland are recognized as national minority and have granted seats in Polish Parliament. It must be said, however, that an overwhelming number of Germans in Poland have centuries-old historical ties to the lands they now inhabit, whether from living in territory that once belonged to the German state, or from centuries-old communities. In contrast, most Poles in present-day Germany are recent immigrants, though there are some communities which have been present since the 19th and perhaps even the 18th centuries. Despite protests by some in the older Polish-German communities, and despite Germany being now a signatory to the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities, Germany has so far refused to re-implement minority rights for ethnic Poles, based on the fact that almost all areas of historically mixed German-Polish heritage (where the minority rights formerly existed) are no longer part of Germany and because the vast majority of ethnic Poles now residing in Germany are recent immigrants.\nRoma people have been in Germany since the Middle Ages. They were persecuted by the Nazis, and thousands of Roma living in Germany were killed by the Nazi regime. Nowadays, they are spread all over Germany, mostly living in major cities. It is difficult to estimate their exact number, as the German government counts them as \"persons without migrant background\" in their statistics. There are also many assimilated Sinti and Roma. A vague figure given by the German Department of the Interior is about 70,000. In contrast to the old-established Roma population, the majority of them do not have German citizenship, and are classified as immigrants or refugees.\nAfter World War II, 14 million ethnic Germans were expelled from the eastern territories of Germany and homelands outside the former German Empire. The accommodation and integration of these \"Heimatvertriebene\" in the remaining part of Germany, in which many cities and millions of apartments had been destroyed, was a major effort in the post-war occupation zones and later states of Germany.\nSince the 1960s, ethnic Germans from the People's Republic of Poland and Soviet Union (especially from Kazakhstan, Russia, and Ukraine), have come to Germany. During the time of Perestroika, and after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the number of immigrants increased heavily. Some of these immigrants are of mixed ancestry. During the 10-year period between 1987 and 2001, a total of 1,981,732 ethnic Germans from the FSU immigrated to Germany, along with more than a million of their non-German relatives. After 1997, however ethnic Slavs or those belonging to Slavic-Germanic mixed origins outnumbered those with only Germanic descent amongst the immigrants. The total number of people currently living in Germany having FSU connection is around 4 to 4.5 million (Including Germans, Slavs, Jews, and those of mixed origins), out of that more than 50% are of German descent.\nGermany now has Europe's third-largest Jewish population. In 2004, twice as many Jews from former Soviet republics settled in Germany as in Israel, bringing the total inflow to more than 100,000 since 1991. Jews have a voice in German public life through the Central Council of Jews in Germany (Zentralrat der Juden in Deutschland). Some Jews from the former Soviet Union are of mixed heritage. Today, less than 0.1% of the total population of Germany is Jewish.\nIn 2019 there were also a growing number of at least 529,000 black Afro-Germans defined as people with an African migrant background. Out of them more than 400 thousand have a citizenship of a Subsahara-African country, with others being German citizens. Most of them live in Berlin and Hamburg. Numerous persons from northern African Tunisia and Morocco live in Germany. While they are considered members of a minority group, for the most part, they do not consider themselves \"Afro-Germans\", nor are most of them perceived as such by the German people. However, Germany does not keep any statistics regarding ethnicity or race. Hence, the exact number of Germans of African descent is unknown.\nGermany's biggest East Asian minorities are the Chinese people in Germany, numbering 189,000\nand Vietnamese people in Germany, numbering 188,000, many of whom living in Berlin and eastern Germany.\nAlso there are about 35,000 Japanese citizens residing in Germany. There are also groups of South Asian and Southeast Asian immigrants. Around 163,000 Indians and 124,000 Pakistanis live in Germany. Additionally some 30,000 Filipino citizens and more than 20,000 Indonesian citizens reside in Germany.\nNumerous descendants of the so-called \"Gastarbeiter\" live in Germany. The \"Gastarbeiter\" mostly came from Turkey, Italy, Greece, Spain, Morocco, Portugal, the former Yugoslavia, Tunisia and Chile.\nAlso included were Vietnam, Mongolia, North Korea, Angola, Mozambique and Cuba when the former East Germany existed until reunification in 1990. The (socialist) German Democratic Republic (East Germany) however had their guest-workers stay in single-sex dormitories. Female guest workers had to sign contracts saying that they were not allowed to fall pregnant during their stay. If they fell pregnant nevertheless they faced forced abortion or deportation. This is one of the reasons why the vast majority of ethnic minorities today lives in western Germany and also one of the reasons why minorities such as the Vietnamese have the most unusual population pyramid, with nearly all second-generation Vietnamese Germans born after 1989.\nForeign nationals in Germany.\nAs the end of 2023, the most common groups of resident foreign nationals in Germany were as follows:\nThis list does not include non-ethnic Germans with German nationality and foreign nationals without resident status.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nPopulation density and distribution.\nWith an estimated 83.2 million inhabitants in December 2020, Germany is the second-most populous country in Europe after Russia, and ranks as the 19th largest country in the world in terms of population. Its population density stands at 233 inhabitants per square kilometer.\nStates.\nGermany comprises sixteen states that are collectively referred to as \"L\u00e4nder\". Due to differences in size and population the subdivision of these states varies, especially between city-states (\"Stadtstaaten\") and states with larger territories (\"Fl\u00e4chenl\u00e4nder\"). For regional administrative purposes four states, namely Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Bavaria, Hesse and North Rhine-Westphalia, consist of a total of 19 Government Districts (\"Regierungsbezirke\"). As of 2019 Germany is divided into 400 districts (\"Kreise\") at municipal level; these consist of 294 rural districts and 106 urban districts.\nUrbanization.\nGermany officially has eleven metropolitan regions. In 2005, Germany had 82 cities with more than 100,000 inhabitants.\nImmigration.\nThe United Nations Population Fund lists Germany as host to the third-highest number of international migrants worldwide, behind the United States and Saudi Arabia. The largest ethnic group of non-German origin are the Turkish. Since the 1960s, West and later reunified Germany has attracted immigrants primarily from Southern and Eastern Europe as well as Turkey, many of whom (or their children) have acquired German citizenship over time. While most of these immigrants initially arrived as guest workers, changes to guest worker legislation allowed many to stay and to build lives in Germany.\nGermany had signed special visa agreements with several countries in times of severe labour shortages or when particular skills were deficient within the country. During the 1960s and 1970s, agreements were signed with the governments of Turkey, Yugoslavia, Italy and Spain to help Germany overcome its severe labour shortage.\nAs of 2012, after Germany fully legalized visa-free immigrants from the eastern states of the EU, the largest sources of net immigration to Germany were other European countries, most importantly Poland, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Italy, Spain, and Greece; notably, in the case of Turkey, German Turks moving to Turkey slightly outnumbered new immigrants in 2012, however, in recent years there are more Turkish immigrants in Germany than emigrants again, including illegal Turkish migrants.\nIn 2015, there was a large increase in asylum applications following the 2015 refugee crisis, mainly due to the violent conflicts in Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan: 476,649 asylum applications were counted that year. This number went up to even 745,545 in 2016 and began to decline after it.\nIn 2022, some 23.8 million people in Germany, or 28.7% of the population have migrant background.\nFollowing the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, over 1.06 million refugees from Ukraine were recorded in Germany as of April 2023.\nEducation.\nResponsibility for educational oversight in Germany lies primarily with the individual federated states. Since the 1960s, a reform movement has attempted to unify secondary education into a \"Gesamtschule\" (comprehensive school); several West German states later simplified their school systems to two or three tiers. A system of apprenticeship called \"Duale Ausbildung\" (\"dual education\") allows pupils in vocational training to learn in a company as well as in a state-run vocational school.\nOptional kindergarten education is provided for all children between three and six years old, after which school attendance is compulsory for at least nine years, depending on the state. Primary education usually lasts for four years and public schools are not stratified at this stage. In contrast, secondary education includes three traditional types of schools focused on different levels of academic ability: the \"Gymnasium\" enrols the most academically promising children and prepares students for university studies; the \"Realschule\" for intermediate students lasts six years; the \"Hauptschule\" prepares pupils for vocational education.\nIn addition Germany has a comprehensive school known as the \"Gesamtschule\". While some German schools such as the Gymnasium and the Realschule have rather strict entrance requirements, the Gesamtschule does not have such requirements. They offer college preparatory classes for the students who are doing well, general education classes for average students, and remedial courses for those who aren't doing that well. In most cases students attending a Gesamtschule may graduate with the Hauptschulabschluss, the Realschulabschluss or the Abitur depending on how well they did in school.\nThe percentage of students attending a Gesamtschule varies by Bundesland. In 2007 the State of Brandenburg more than 50% of all students attended a Gesamtschule, while in the State of Bavaria less than 1% did.\nThe general entrance requirement for university is Abitur, a qualification normally based on continuous assessment during the last few years at school and final examinations; however there are a number of exceptions, and precise requirements vary, depending on the state, the university and the subject. Germany's universities are recognised internationally; in the Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) for 2008, six of the top 100 universities in the world are in Germany, and 18 of the top 200. Nearly all German universities are public institutions, tuition fees in the range of \u20ac500 were introduced in some states after 2006, but quickly abolished again until 2014.\nLiteracy.\nOver 99% of those of age 15 and above are estimated to be able to read and write. However, a growing number of inhabitants are functionally illiterate. The young are much more likely to be functionally illiterate than the old. According to a study done by the University of Bremen in cooperation with the \"Bundesverband Alphabetisierung e.V.\", 10% of youngsters living in Germany are functionally illiterate and one quarter are able to understand only basic level texts. Illiteracy rates of youngsters vary by ethnic group and parents' socioeconomic class.\nHealth.\nThe life expectancy in Germany is 81.1 years (78.7 years males, 83.6 years females, 2020 est.).\nAs of 2009[ [update]], the principal cause of death was cardiovascular disease, at 42%, followed by malignant tumours, at 25%.\nAs of 2008[ [update]], about 82,000 Germans had been infected with HIV/AIDS and 26,000 had died from the disease (cumulatively, since 1982).\nAccording to a 2005 survey, 27% of German adults are smokers.\nA 2009 study shows Germany is near the median in terms of overweight and obese people in Europe.\nReligion.\nThe national constitutions of 1919 and 1949 guarantee freedom of faith and religion; earlier, these freedoms were mentioned only in state constitutions. The modern constitution of 1949 also states that no one may be discriminated against due to their faith or religious opinions. A state church does not exist in Germany (see Freedom of religion in Germany).\nAccording to a 1990s poll by \"Der Spiegel\", 45% of Germans believe in God, and a quarter in Jesus Christ. According to the Eurobarometer Poll 2010, 44% of German citizens responded that \"they believe there is a God\", 25% responded that \"they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force\" and 27% responded that \"they don't believe there is any sort of spirit, God or life force\". 4% gave no response.\nChristianity is the largest religion in Germany, comprising roughly half of the country's population.\nSmaller religious groups (less than 1%) include Judaism, Buddhism and Hinduism.\nThe two largest churches, the Roman Catholic Church and the Protestant Church in Germany (EKD), have lost significant number of adherents. In 2023 the Catholic Church accounted for 24% and the Evangelical Church for 21.9% of the population. Orthodox Church has 1.5% and other Christian churches and groups summed up to 1% of the population. Since the reunification of Germany, the number of non-religious people has grown and an estimated 46.2% of the country's population are not affiliated with any church or religion.\nThe other religions make up to less than 1% of the population. Buddhism has around 200,000 adherents (0.2%), Judaism has around 200,000 adherents (0.2%), Hinduism 90,000 (0.1%), Sikhism 75,000 (0.1%) and Yazidis religion (45,000\u201360,000). All other religious communities in Germany have fewer than 50,000 (&lt;0.1%) adherents.\nProtestantism is concentrated in the north and east and Roman Catholicism is concentrated in the south and west. According to the last nationwide census, Protestantism is more widespread among the population with German citizenship; there are slightly more Catholics total because of the Catholic immigrant population (including such groups as Poles and Italians). The former Pope, Benedict XVI, was born in Bavaria. Non-religious people, including atheists and agnostics are especially numerous in the former East Germany and major metropolitan areas.\nOf the roughly 4 million Muslims, most are Sunnis and Alevites from Turkey, but there are a small number of Shi'ites and other denominations. 1.5% of the country's overall population declare themselves Orthodox Christians, with Serbs, Greeks, Romanians, Ukrainians and Russians being the most numerous. Germany has Europe's third-largest Jewish population (after France and the United Kingdom). In 2004, twice as many Jews from former Soviet republics settled in Germany as in Israel, bringing the total Jewish population to more than 200,000, compared to 30,000 prior to German reunification. Large cities with significant Jewish populations include Berlin, Frankfurt and Munich. Around 250,000 active Buddhists live in Germany; 50% of them are Asian immigrants.\n2011 Census.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus results were as follows:\nLanguages.\nGerman is the only official and most widely spoken language. Standard German is understood throughout the country.\nMicrocensus data.\nSince 2017, the Federal Statistical Office of Germany included a new question regarding the language spoken at home in the micro-census, a large sample survey that yearly covers approximately 1% of the German population living in private households. In recent years, there has been a noticeable decline in the number and proportion of people in Germany who speak only German at home, accompanied by a corresponding increase in the use of other languages or multilingual households. This can be attributed to the increasing size of the Germans with a migration background and the decreasing size of the population without a migration background.\nThe following table provides the results of the 2024 microcensus, using 2022 census data as the basis for the projection, regarding the languages spoken at home. After German (81.34%), the most spoken languages were Turkish (2.61%), Russian (2.27%), Arabic (1.70%), English (1.26%) and Polish (1.19%), each with more than one million people speaking them in their homes.\nMinority languages.\nDanish, Low German, Low Rhenish, the Sorbian languages (Lower Sorbian and Upper Sorbian), and the two Frisian languages, Saterfrisian and North Frisian, are officially recognized and protected as minority languages by the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in their respective regions. With speakers of Romany living in all parts of Germany, the federal government has promised to take action to protect the language. Until now, only Hesse has followed Berlin's announcement, and agreed on implementing concrete measures to support Romany speakers.\nGermany is a strong supporter of the Charter, as evidenced by things like the 2022 report from the Secretary General of the Council of Europe specifically naming Germany as an example of how to incorporate minority languages in State media. Still, Germany\u2014like many other signatories of the Charter\u2014has room for improvement in its implementation of the Charter.\nHigh German dialects.\nGerman dialects \u2013 some quite distinct from the standard language \u2013 are used in everyday speech, especially in rural regions. Many dialects, for example the Upper German varieties, are to some degree cultivated as symbols of regional identity and have their own literature, theaters and some TV programming. While speaking a dialect outside its native region might be frowned upon, in their native regions some dialects can be spoken by all social classes. Nevertheless, partly due to the prevalence of Standard German in media, the use of dialects has declined over the past century, especially in the younger population.\nThe social status of different German dialects can vary greatly. The Alemannic and Bavarian dialects of the south are positively valued by their speakers and can be used in almost all social circumstances. The Saxonian and Thuringian dialects have less prestige and are subject to derision. While Bavarian and Alemannic have kept much of their distinctiveness, the Middle German dialects, which are closer to Standard German, have lost some of their distinctive lexical and grammatical features and tend to be only pronunciation variants of Standard German.\nLow Saxon dialects.\nAlthough Low Saxon is officially recognized as a language on its own, little official action has been taken to foster the language. Historically one third of Germany's territory and population was Low Saxon speaking. No data has ever been collected on the actual number of speakers, but today the number of speakers is around 5 million. Despite this relatively high number of speakers there is very little coverage in the media (mostly on NDR TV, no regular programming) and very little education in or on the language. The language is not fixed as part of the school curriculum, and Low Saxon is used as a medium of instruction in only one school in the whole of Germany (as a \"model project\" in primary school alongside education in Standard German). As a consequence the younger generation refused to adopt the native language of their parents. Language prevalence dropped from more than 90% (depending on the exact region) in the 1930s to less than 5% today. This accounts for a massive intergenerational gap in language use. Older people regularly use the language and take private initiatives to maintain the language, but the lack of innovative potential of the younger generation hinders language maintenance. The language also has its own literature (around 150 published books every year) and there are many theatres (mostly amateur dramatics, but some professional ones, such as Ohnsorg-Theater).\nUse of Low Saxon is mainly restricted to use among acquaintances, such as family members, neighbours and friends. A meeting of a village council can be held almost completely in Low Saxon if all participants know each other (as long as written protocols are written in Standard German), but a single foreigner can make the whole meeting switch to Standard German.\nThe Low Saxon dialects differ in their status too. There is a north\u2013south gradient in language maintenance. The southern dialects of Westfalian, Eastfalian and Brandenburgish have had much stronger speaker losses than the northern coastal dialects of Northern Low Saxon. While Eastfalian has lost speakers to Standard German, Westfalian has lost speakers both to Standard German and to the Standard German-based regiolect of the Rhine-Ruhr area. Brandenburgish speakers mostly switched to the Standard German-based regiolect of Berlin. Brandenburgish has been almost completely replaced by the Berlin regiolect. Northern Low Saxon speakers switched mostly to pure Standard German.\nForeign languages.\nEnglish is the most common foreign language and is almost universally taught at the secondary level; it is also taught at elementary level in some states. Other commonly-taught languages are French, Italian, Spanish and Russian. Dutch is taught in states bordering the Netherlands, and Polish in the eastern states bordering Poland. Latin and Ancient Greek are part of the classical education syllabus offered in many secondary schools.\nAccording to a 2004 survey, two-thirds of Germany's citizens have at least basic knowledge of English. About 20% consider themselves to be competent speakers of French, followed by speakers of Russian (7%), Italian (6.1%), and Spanish (5.6%). The relatively high number of Russian speakers is a result of immigration from the former Soviet Union to Germany for almost 10 consecutive years, plus its having been learned in school by many older former East Germans as compulsory first foreign language.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11930", "revid": "51063531", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11930", "title": "Economy of Germany", "text": "Germany has a highly developed social market economy. It is the largest national economy in Europe, the third-largest by nominal GDP in the world, and the sixth-largest by PPP-adjusted GDP. Due to a volatile currency exchange rate, Germany's GDP as measured in dollars fluctuates sharply, but it is among the world's top 4 since 1960. In 2025, the country accounted for 23.7% of the Euro area economy according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Germany is a founding member of the European Union and the eurozone.\nGermany is the third-largest exporter globally with $1.66 trillion worth of goods and services exported in 2024. In 2024, Germany recorded a trade surplus worth $255 billion, ranking 2nd worldwide. The service sector contributes around 70% of the total GDP, industry 29.1%, and agriculture 0.9%. Exports accounted for 50.3% of national output. The top 10 exports of Germany are vehicles, machinery, chemical goods, electronic products, electrical equipment, pharmaceuticals, transport equipment, basic metals, food products, and rubber and plastics. Germany is the largest manufacturing economy in Europe, contributing around one third of all manufacturing in Europe, which makes it more resilient to global economic crises. Germany conducts applied research with practical industrial value and sees itself as a bridge between the latest university insights and industry-specific product and process improvements. It generates a great deal of knowledge in its own laboratories. Among OECD members, Germany has a highly efficient and strong social security system, which comprises roughly 25% of GDP.\nGermany is rich in timber, lignite, potash, and salt. Some minor sources of natural gas are being exploited in the state of Lower Saxony. Until German reunification, the German Democratic Republic mined for uranium in the Ore Mountains (see also: SAG/SDAG Wismut). Energy in Germany is sourced predominantly by fossil fuels (30%), with wind power in second place, then gas, solar, biomass (wood and biofuels), and hydro. Germany is the first major industrialised nation to commit to the renewable energy transition called \"Energiewende\". Renewables produced 46% of electricity consumed in Germany (as of 2019). Germany has been called \"the world's first major renewable energy economy\". Germany has the world's second-largest gold reserve, with over 3,000 tonnes of gold. As of 2023, Germany spends around 3.1% of GDP, third among major economies, on research and development. It is also the world's second-largest high-technology exporter and ranks in the top 10 of countries by stock market capitalization.\nMore than 99 percent of all German companies belong to the German \"Mittelstand\", small and medium-sized enterprises, which are mostly family-owned. These companies represent 48% of the global market leaders in their segments, labelled hidden champions. Of the world's 500 largest publicly listed companies measured by revenue, the Fortune Global 500, 29 are headquartered in Germany, as are 26 of Europe's 100 largest. Germany is home to many financial centres and economically important cities, such as Berlin, Hamburg, Munich, Cologne, Frankfurt, and Stuttgart. Four German banks are among the biggest in the world. Germany is the world's top location for trade fairs; around two thirds of the world's leading trade fairs take place in Germany. Some of the largest international trade fairs and congresses are held in several German cities such as Hanover, Frankfurt, Cologne, Leipzig, and D\u00fcsseldorf.\nHistory.\nAge of Industrialisation.\nThe Industrial Revolution in Germany got underway approximately a century later than in the United Kingdom, France, and Belgium, partly because Germany only became a unified country in 1871.\nThe establishment of the \"Deutscher Zollverein\" (German Customs Union) in 1834 and the expansion of railway systems were the main drivers of Germany's industrial development and political union. From 1834, tariff barriers between increasing numbers of the \"Kleindeutschland\" German states were eliminated. In 1835 the first German railway linked the Franconian cities of Nuremberg and F\u00fcrth \u2013 it proved so successful that the decade of the 1840s saw \"railway mania\" in all the German states. Between 1845 and 1870, of rail had been built and in 1850 Germany was building its own locomotives. Over time, other German states joined the customs union and started linking their railroads, which began to connect the corners of Germany. The growth of free trade and a rail system across Germany intensified economic development which opened up new markets for local products, created a pool of middle managers, increased the demand for engineers, architects, and skilled machinists, and stimulated investments in coal and iron.\nAnother factor that propelled German industry forward was the unification of the monetary system, made possible in part by political unification. The Deutsche Mark, a new monetary coinage system backed by gold, was introduced in 1871. However, this system did not fully come into use as silver coins retained their value until 1907.\nThe victory of Prussia and her allies over Napoleon III of France in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-1871 marked the end of French hegemony in Europe and resulted in the proclamation of the German Empire in 1871. The establishment of the empire inherently presented Europe with the reality of a new populous and industrialising polity possessing a considerable, and undeniably increasing, economic and diplomatic presence. The influence of French economic principles produced important institutional reforms in Germany, including the abolition of feudal restrictions on the sale of large landed estates, the reduction of the power of the guilds in the cities, and the introduction of a new, more efficient commercial law. Nonetheless, political decisions about the economy of the empire were still largely controlled by a coalition of \"rye and iron\", that is the Prussian Junker landowners of the east and the Ruhr heavy industry of the west.\nRegarding politics and society, between 1881 and 1889 Chancellor Otto von Bismarck promoted laws that provided social insurance and improved working conditions. He instituted the world's first welfare state. Germany was the first to introduce social insurance programmes including universal healthcare, compulsory education, sickness insurance, accident insurance, disability insurance, and a retirement pension. Moreover, the government's universal education policy bore fruit with Germany achieving the highest literacy rate in the world \u2013 99% \u2013 education levels that provided the nation with more people good at handling numbers, more engineers, chemists, opticians, skilled workers for its factories, skilled managers, knowledgeable farmers, and skilled military personnel.\nBy 1900, Germany surpassed Britain in steel production and became the largest producer behind only the United States. The German economic miracle was also intensified by unprecedented population growth from 35 million in 1850 to 67 million in 1913. From 1895 to 1907, the number of workers engaged in machine building doubled from half a million to well over a million. Only 40 percent of Germans lived in rural areas by 1910, a drop from 67% at the birth of the Empire. Industry accounted for 60 percent of the gross national product in 1913. The German chemical industry became the most advanced in the world, and by 1914 the country was producing half the world's electrical equipment.\nThe rapid advance to industrial maturity led to a drastic shift in Germany's economic situation \u2013 from a rural economy into a major exporter of finished goods. The ratio of the finished product to total exports jumped from 38% in 1872 to 63% in 1912. By 1913 Germany had come to dominate all the European markets. By 1914 Germany had become one of the biggest exporters in the world.\nWeimar Republic and Third Reich.\nThe Nazis rose to power while unemployment was very high, but achieved full employment later thanks to massive public works programmes such as the \"Reichsbahn\", \"Reichspost\", and the \"Reichsautobahn\" projects. In 1935 rearmament in contravention of the Treaty of Versailles added to the economy.\nThe post-1931 financial crisis economic policies of expansionary fiscal policies (as Germany was off the gold standard) was advised by their non-Nazi Minister of Economics, Hjalmar Schacht, who in 1933 became the president of the central bank. Schacht later resigned from the post in 1938 and was replaced by Hermann G\u00f6ring.\nThe trading policies of the Third Reich aimed at self-sufficiency but with a lack of raw materials Germany would have to maintain trade links but on bilateral preferences, foreign exchange controls, import quotas, and export subsidies under what was called the \"New Plan\"(\"Neuer Plan\") of 19 September 1934. The \"New Plan\" was based on trade with less developed countries who would trade raw materials for German industrial goods saving currency. Southern Europe was preferable to Western Europe and North America as there could be no trade blockades. This policy became known as the \"Grosswirtschaftsraum\" (\"greater economic area\") policy.\nEventually, the Nazi party developed strong relationships with big business and abolished trade unions in 1933 in order to form the Reich Labour Service (RAD), German Labour Front (DAF) to set working hours, Beauty of Labour (SDA) which set working conditions, and Strength through Joy (KDF) to ensure sports clubs for workers.\nWest Germany.\nBeginning with the replacement of the Reichsmark with the Deutsche Mark as legal tender, a lasting period of low inflation and rapid industrial growth was overseen by the government led by German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer and his minister of economics, Ludwig Erhard, raising West Germany from total wartime devastation to one of the most developed nations in modern Europe.\nIn 1953 it was decided that Germany was to repay $1.1 billion of the aid it had received. The last repayment was made in June 1971.\nApart from these factors, hard work and long hours at full capacity among the population in the 1950s, 1960s, and early 1970s and extra labour supplied by thousands of \"Gastarbeiter\" (\"guest workers\") provided a vital base for the economic upturn.\nEast Germany.\nBy the early 1950s, the Soviet Union had seized reparations in the form of agricultural and industrial products and demanded further heavy reparation payments. Silesia with the Upper Silesian Coal Basin, and Stettin, a prominent natural port, were lost to Poland.\nExports from West Germany exceeded $323 billion in 1988. In the same year, East Germany exported $30.7 billion worth of goods; 65% to other communist states. East Germany had zero unemployment.\nCar markers like the Automobilwerk Eisenach and the HQM Sachsenring GmbH produced icons of the East German economy like the Trabant line and the Wartburg line.\nFederal Republic.\nThe German economy practically stagnated in the beginning of the 2000s. The worst growth figures were achieved in 2002 (+1.4%), in 2003 (+1.0%), and in 2005 (+1.4%). Unemployment was also chronically high. Due to these problems, together with Germany's aging population, the welfare system came under considerable strain. This led the government to push through a wide-ranging programme of belt-tightening reforms, Agenda 2010, including the labour market reforms known as Hartz I - IV.\nIn the later part of the first decade of 2000, the world economy experienced high growth, from which Germany as a leading exporter also profited. Some credit the Hartz reforms with achieving high growth and declining unemployment but others contend that they resulted in a massive decrease in standards of living and that its effects are limited and temporary.\nThe nominal GDP of Germany contracted in the second and third quarters of 2008, putting the country in a technical recession following a global and European recession cycle. German industrial output dropped to 3.6% in September vis-\u00e0-vis August. In January 2009 the German government under Angela Merkel approved a \u20ac50 billion ($70 billion) economic stimulus plan to protect several sectors from a downturn and a subsequent rise in unemployment rates. Germany exited the recession in the second and third quarters of 2009, mostly due to rebounding manufacturing orders and exports - primarily from outside the eurozone - and relatively steady consumer demand.\nGermany is a founding member of the EU, the G8, and the G20, and was the world's largest exporter from 2003 to 2008. In 2011 it remained the third largest exporter and third largest importer. Most of the country's exports are in engineering, especially machinery, automobiles, chemical goods, and metals. Germany is a leading producer of wind turbines and solar-power technology. Annual trade fairs and congresses are held in cities throughout Germany. 2011 was a record-breaking year for the German economy. German companies exported goods worth over \u20ac1 trillion ($1.3 trillion), the highest figure in history. The number of people in work has risen to 41.6 million, the highest recorded figure.\nThrough 2012, Germany's economy continued to be stronger relative to local neighbouring nations. In 2023, Germany experienced economic difficulties as a result of the closure of Russian natural gas resources due to international sanctions following the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Germany imported 55% of its gas from Russia at the time when Russia started the invasion in 2022. Amid a global energy crisis, Chancellor Olaf Scholz committed to weaken dependence on Russian energy imports by halting certification of Nord Stream 2, while also committing to his long-term predecessor Angela Merkel's policy of phasing out nuclear energy.\nAs of December 2023, Germany is the third largest economy in nominal terms in the world after the United States and China, and the largest economy in Europe. It is the third largest export nation in the world.\nIn April 2024, a report by the German Economic Institute revealed that despite attempts to expand into other markets, the German economy remains heavily reliant on China for various products and raw materials.\nDuring 2024, the German economy experienced its second consecutive year of contraction. Europe's largest economy declined by 0.2% over the year, following a 0.3% contraction in 2023. Germany's trade surplus with the United States, reported by Reuters to have reached a record \u20ac65 billion (\u00a354.7 billion) during the first 11 months of 2024, has made the nation a likely target for potential tariffs from Donald Trump's administration. The economic climate has also been affected by widespread layoffs across major German corporations. Companies such as Siemens, Bosch, Thyssenkrupp, and Deutsche Bahn, all featured in the Fortune 500, are estimated to have collectively cut over 60,000 jobs during the first 10 months of 2024. Bosch, a highly regarded manufacturing firm, announced in November alone plans to reduce its workforce by approximately 7,000 employees.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132024 (with IMF staff estimates in 2025\u20132029). Inflation below 5% is in green.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCompanies.\nOf the world's 500 largest stock-market-listed companies measured by revenue in 2024, the Fortune Global 500, 29 are headquartered in Germany. 40 Germany-based companies are included in the DAX, the most popular German stock market index. 26 of Europe's 100 largest are German, among them Allianz, the world's largest insurance company and one of the largest financial services groups and asset managers, largest in Europe; Munich Re, also one of the largest insurance companies; Daimler, Volkswagen, and BMW, among the biggest car markers in the world; Siemens, the world's biggest industrial machinery company; Deutsche Telekom, one of the world's largest telecommunication companies; Bayer, among the biggest biomedical companies; BASF, the world's biggest chemical producer, and SAP, Europe's biggest software company. Other major companies include Lufthansa, Europe's largest airline, Deutsche Post, the largest logistics company worldwide, Deutsche Bahn, the largest railway company in the world, Bosch, the world's largest automotive supplier, Uniper, the world's largest energy company, and Aldi and Schwarz Gruppe, Europe's largest retailers.\nGermany is recognised for its specialised small and medium enterprises, known as the \"Mittelstand\" model. SMEs account for more than 99 percent of German companies. Around 1,000 of these companies are global market leaders in their segment and are labelled hidden champions.\nFrom 1991 to 2010, 40,301 mergers and acquisitions with an involvement of German firms with a total known value of 2,422 billion EUR have been announced. The largest transactions since 1991 are: the acquisition of Mannesmann by Vodafone for 204.8 billion EUR in 1999, the merger of Daimler-Benz with Chrysler to form DaimlerChrysler in 1998 valued at 36.3 billion EUR.\nBerlin developed an international startup ecosystem and became a leading location for venture capital funded firms in the European Union.\nThe sector with the highest number of companies registered in Germany is Services with 1,443,708 companies followed by Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate and Construction with 480,593 and 173,167 companies respectively.\nThe list includes the largest German companies by revenue in 2011:\nMergers and acquisitions.\nSince German reunification, there have been 52,258 mergers or acquisitions deals inbound or outbound in Germany. The most active year in terms of value was 1999 with a total value of 48 billion EUR, twice as much as the runner up which was 2006 with 24 billion EUR.\nHere is a list of the top 10 deals (ranked by value) that include a German company. The Vodafone\u2013Mannesmann deal is still the biggest deal in global history.\nEconomic region.\nGermany as a federation is a polycentric country and does not have a single economic centre. The stock exchange is located in Frankfurt am Main, the largest Media company (Bertelsmann SE &amp; Co. KGaA) is headquartered in G\u00fctersloh; the largest car manufacturers are in Wolfsburg (Volkswagen), Stuttgart (Mercedes-Benz and Porsche), and Munich (Audi and BMW).\nGermany is an advocate of closer European economic and political integration. Its commercial policies are increasingly determined by agreements among European Union (EU) members and EU single market legislation. Germany introduced the common European currency, the euro on 1 January 1999. Its monetary policy is set by the European Central Bank in Frankfurt.\nThe southern states (\"Bundesl\u00e4nder\"), especially Bayern, Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, and Hessen, are economically stronger than the northern states. One of Germany's traditionally strongest (and at the same time oldest) economic regions is the Ruhr area in the west, between Duisburg and Dortmund. 27 of the country's 100 largest companies are located there. In recent years, however, the area, whose economy is based on natural resources and heavy industry, has seen a substantial rise in unemployment (2010: 8.7%).\nThe economy of Bayern and Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, the states with the lowest number of unemployed people (2018: 2.7%, 3.1%), on the other hand, is based on high-value products. Important sectors are automobiles, electronics, aerospace, and biomedicine, among others. Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg is an industrial centre especially for the automobile and machine-building industry and the home of brands like Mercedes-Benz (Daimler), Porsche and Bosch.\nWith the reunification on 3 October 1990, Germany began the major task of reconciling the economic systems of the two former republics. Interventionist economic planning ensured gradual development in eastern Germany up to the level of former West Germany, but the standard of living and annual income remains significantly higher in western German states. The modernisation and integration of the eastern German economy continues to be a long-term process scheduled to last until the year 2019, with annual transfers from west to east amounting to roughly $80 billion. The overall unemployment rate has consistently fallen since 2005 and reached a 20-year low in 2012. The country in July 2014 began legislating to introduce a federally mandated minimum wage which would come into effect on 1 January 2015.\nOn 25 May 2023, a declaration of a recession in the German economy was made. It was reported that Gross Domestic Product (GDP) had contracted by 0.3% between January and March. This contraction was largely due to increased prices which discouraged consumer spending. The statistics office in Germany reported that household spending had dropped by 1.2% in the first quarter of the year.\nWealth.\nThe following top 10 list of German billionaires is based on an annual assessment of wealth and assets compiled and published by \"Forbes\" magazine on 1 March 2016.\nWolfsburg is the city in Germany with the country's highest per capita GDP, at $128,000. The following top 10 list of German cities with the highest per capita GDP is based on a study by the Cologne Institute for Economic Research on 31 July 2013.\nSectors.\nGermany has a social market economy characterised by a highly qualified labour force, a developed infrastructure, a large capital stock, a low level of corruption, and a high level of innovation. It has the largest national economy in Europe, the third largest by nominal GDP in the world, and ranked fifth by GDP (PPP) in 2023.\nThe service sector contributes around 70% of the total GDP, industry 29.1%, and agriculture 0.9%.\nPrimary.\nIn 2010 agriculture, forestry, and mining accounted for only 0.9% of Germany's gross domestic product (GDP) and employed only 2.4% of the population, down from 4% in 1991. Agriculture is extremely productive, and Germany can cover 90% of its nutritional needs with domestic production. Germany is the third-largest agricultural producer in the European Union after France and Italy. Germany's principal agricultural products are potatoes, wheat, barley, sugar beets, fruit, and cabbages.\nDespite the country's high level of industrialisation, almost one-third of its territory is covered by forest. The forestry industry provides for about two-thirds of domestic consumption of wood and wood products, so Germany is a net importer of these items.\nThe German soil is relatively poor in raw materials. Only lignite (brown coal) and potash salt (\"Kalisalz\") are available in significant quantities. However, the former GDR's Wismut mining company produced a total of 230,400 tonnes of uranium between 1947 and 1990 and made East Germany the fourth-largest producer of uranium ore worldwide (largest in USSR's sphere of control) at the time. Oil, natural gas, and other resources are, for the most part, imported from other countries.\nPotash salt is mined in the centre of the country (Niedersachsen, Sachsen-Anhalt, and Th\u00fcringen). The most important producer is K+S (formerly Kali und Salz AG).\nGermany's bituminous coal deposits were created more than 300 million years ago from swamps which extended from the present-day South England, over the Ruhr area to Poland. Lignite deposits developed similarly, but during a later period, about 66 million years ago. Because the wood is not yet completely transformed into coal, brown coal contains less energy than bituminous coal.\nLignite is extracted in the extreme western and eastern parts of the country, mainly in Nordrhein-Westfalen, Sachsen, and Brandenburg. Considerable amounts are burned in coal plants near the mining areas, to produce electricity. Transporting lignite over far distances is not economically feasible, therefore the plants are located practically next to the extraction sites. Bituminous coal is mined in Nordrhein-Westfalen and Saarland. Most power plants burning bituminous coal operate on imported material, therefore the plants are located not only near to the mining sites, but throughout the country.\nIn 2019, the country was the world's 3rd largest producer of selenium, the world's 5th largest producer of potash, the world's 5th largest producer of boron, the world's 7th largest producer of lime, the world's 13th largest producer of fluorspar, the world's 14th largest producer of feldspar, the world's 17th largest producer of graphite, the world's 18th largest producer of sulfur, in addition to being the 4th largest world producer of salt.\nIndustry.\nIndustry and construction accounted for 30.7% of the gross domestic product in 2017 and employed 24.2% of the workforce. Germany excels in the production of automobiles, machinery, electrical equipment, and chemicals. With the manufacture of 5.2 million vehicles in 2009, Germany was the world's fourth-largest producer and largest exporter of automobiles. German automotive companies enjoy an extremely strong position in the so-called premium segment, with a combined world market share of about 90%. All new automobiles sold in Germany must be zero-emission vehicles from 2035.\nSmall- to medium-sized manufacturing firms (\"Mittelstand\" companies) which specialise in technologically advanced niche products and are often family-owned form a major part of the German economy. It is estimated that about 1,500 German companies occupy a top three position in their respective market segment worldwide. In about two thirds of all industry sectors German companies belong to the top three competitors.\nGermany is the only country among the top five arms exporters that is not a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council.\nServices.\nIn 2017 services constituted 68.6% of gross domestic product (GDP), and the sector employed 74.3% of the workforce. The subcomponents of services are financial, renting, and business activities (30.5%); trade, hotels and restaurants, and transport (18%); and other service activities (21.7%).\nGermany is the seventh most visited country in the world, with a total of 407 million overnights during 2012. This number includes 68.83 million nights by foreign visitors. In 2012, over 30.4 million international tourists arrived in Germany. Berlin has become the third most visited city destination in Europe. Additionally, more than 30% of Germans spend their holiday in their own country, with the biggest share going to Mecklenburg-Vorpommern. Domestic and international travel and tourism combined directly contribute over EUR43.2 billion to German GDP. Including indirect and induced impacts, the industry contributes 4.5% of German GDP and supports 2 million jobs (4.8% of total employment). The largest annual international trade fairs and congresses are held in several German cities such as Hannover, Frankfurt, and Berlin.\nGovernment finances.\nThe debt-to-GDP ratio of Germany had its peak in 2010 when it stood at 80.3% and decreased since then. According to Eurostat, the government gross debt of Germany amounts to \u20ac2,152.0 billion or 71.9% of its GDP in 2015. The federal government achieved a budget surplus of \u20ac12.1 billion ($13.1 billion) in 2015. Germany's credit rating by credit rating agencies Standard &amp; Poor's, Moody's, and Fitch Ratings stands at the highest possible rating \"AAA\" with a stable outlook in 2016.\nGermany's \"debt clock\" (\"Schuldenuhr\") reversed for the first time in 20 years in January 2018. It is now currently increasing at 10,424.00 per second (October 2020).\nEconomists generally see Germany's current account surplus as undesirable.\nInfrastructure.\nEnergy.\nGermany is the world's fifth-largest consumer of energy, and two-thirds of its primary energy was imported in 2002. In the same year, Germany was Europe's largest consumer of electricity, totaling 512.9 terawatt-hours. Government policy promotes energy conservation and the development of renewable energy sources, such as solar, wind, biomass, hydroelectric, and geothermal energy. As a result of energy-saving measures, energy efficiency has been improving since the beginning of the 1970s. The government has set the goal of meeting half the country's energy demands from renewable sources by 2050. Renewable energy also plays an increasing role in the labour market: Almost 700,000 people are employed in the energy sector. About 50 percent of them work with renewable energies.\nIn 2000, the red-green coalition under Chancellor Schr\u00f6der and the German nuclear power industry agreed to phase out all nuclear power plants by 2021. The conservative coalition under Chancellor Merkel reversed this decision in January 2010, electing to keep plants open. The nuclear disaster of the Japanese nuclear plant Fukushima in March 2011 however, changed the political climate fundamentally: Older nuclear plants have been shut down. Germany is seeking to have wind, solar, biogas, and other renewable energy sources play a bigger role, as the country looks to completely phase out nuclear power by 2022 and coal-fired power plants by 2038. Renewable energy yet still plays a more modest role in energy consumption, though German solar and wind power industries play a leading role worldwide. Germany has been called \"the world's first major renewable energy economy\".\nIn 2009, Germany's total energy consumption (not just electricity) came from the following sources: oil 34.6%, natural gas 21.7%, lignite 11.4%, bituminous coal 11.1%, nuclear power 11.0%, hydro and wind power 1.5%, others 9.0%.\nIn the first half of 2021, coal, natural gas, and nuclear energy comprised 56% of the total electricity fed into Germany's grid in the first half of 2021. Coal was the leader out of the conventional energy sources, comprising over 27% of Germany's electricity. Wind power's contribution to the electric grid was 22%.\nThere are 3 major entry points for oil pipelines: in the northeast (the Druzhba pipeline, coming from Gda\u0144sk), west (coming from Rotterdam) and southeast (coming from Nelahozeves). The oil pipelines of Germany do not constitute a proper network, and sometimes only connect two different locations. Major oil refineries are located in or near the following cities: Schwedt, Spergau, Vohburg, Burghausen, Karlsruhe, Cologne, Gelsenkirchen, Lingen, Wilhelmshaven, Hamburg, and Heide.\nGermany's network of natural gas pipelines, on the other hand, is dense and well-connected. Imported pipeline gas comes mostly from Russia, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom.\nTransport.\nWith its central position in Europe, Germany is an important transportation hub. This is reflected in its dense and modern transportation networks. The extensive motorway (\"Autobahn\") network ranks worldwide third largest in its total length and features a lack of blanket speed limits on the majority of routes.\nGermany has established a polycentric network of high-speed trains. The Intercity Express or \"ICE\" is the most advanced service category of the Deutsche Bahn and serves major German cities as well as destinations in neighbouring countries. The train maximum speed varies between 200\u00a0km/h and 320\u00a0km/h (125-200\u00a0mph). Connections are offered at either 30-minute, hourly, or two-hourly intervals. German railways are heavily subsidised, receiving \u20ac17.0 billion in 2014.\nThe largest German airports are Frankfurt Airport and Munich Airport, both are global hubs of Lufthansa. Other major airports are Berlin Brandenburg Airport, D\u00fcsseldorf, Hamburg, Hanover, Cologne/Bonn, and Stuttgart.\nBanking system.\nSeven German banks are among the biggest in the world. As of 2019, Germany is the country in Europe with the highest number of credit institutions: between 1,600 and 1,800. The types of institutions are in strong competition with each other: 390 \"Sparkassen\" and 8 public \"Landesbanken\" groups (1,200 billion euros of deposits), private commercial banks (DB, Commerzbank, and Unicredit-HypoVereinsbank, for 780 billion), cooperative credit banks (700 billion euros), savings banks, and \"Raiffeisen\". The total of the system is worth 3,800 billion. 75% of retail customer deposits are managed by savings banks and cooperative credit banks. Deutsche Bank and the Sparkassen-Finanzgruppe are among the biggest financial services groups worldwide.\nAccording to Eurostat, in 2022 Germany also recorded the highest European rate of gross savings (19.9% of disposable income).\nTechnology.\nGermany's achievements in sciences have been among the world\u00b4s best, and research and development efforts form an integral part of the economy.\nGermany is also one of the leading countries in developing and using green technologies. Companies specialising in green technology have an estimated turnover of \u20ac200 billion. German expertise in engineering, science, and research is eminently respectable.\nThe lead markets of Germany's green technology industry are power generation, sustainable mobility, material efficiency, energy efficiency, waste management and recycling, sustainable water management.\nRegarding triadic patents, Germany is in third place after the U.S. and Japan. With more than 26,500 registrations for patents submitted to the European Patent Office, Germany is the leading European nation. Siemens, Bosch, and BASF, with almost 5,000 registrations for patents between them in 2008, are among the top 5 of more than 35,000 companies registering patents. Together with the U.S. and Japan, about patents for nano, bio, and new technologies Germany is one of the world's most active nations. With around one-third of triadic patents, Germany leads the way worldwide in the field of vehicle emission reduction.\nAccording to Winfried Kretschmann, who is premier of the region where Daimler is based, \"China dominates the production of solar cells. Tesla is ahead in electric cars and Germany has lost the first round of digitalization to Google, Apple, and the like. Whether Germany has a future as an industrial economy will depend on whether we can manage the ecological and digital transformation of our economy\".\nChallenges.\nDespite economic prosperity, Germany's biggest threat to future economic development is the nation's declining birthrate, which is among the lowest in the world. This is particularly prevalent in parts of society with higher education. As a result, the numbers of workers are expected to decrease and the government spending needed to support pensioners and healthcare will increase if the trend is not reversed.\nIn the case of compensation law, the Jewish Political Studies Review argues that Germany still holds 80% of the value of assets stolen by the Nazi regime, mainly \"financial assets, enterprises, and household items\" estimated at more than $115-$175 billion to be restored to their owners.\nLess than a quarter of German people expect living conditions to improve in the coming decades.\nOn August 25, 2020, Federal Statistical Office of Germany revealed that the German economy plunged by 9.7% in the second quarter which is the worst on record. The latest figures show how hard the German economy was hit by the government measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nEnergy-intensive German industry and German exporters were hit particularly hard by the 2022 global energy crisis. Economy Minister Robert Habeck warned that the planned end of Russian energy imports will permanently raise energy prices for German industry and consumers.\nIn the early 21st century, German governments supported the European Green Deal and Germany's transition to green energy. Germany planned to phase out coal by 2030. The last three nuclear power plants in Germany were shut down on 15 April 2023.\nSpeaking at the COP28 climate summit in Dubai in December 2023, German Chancellor Olaf Scholz called for a phase-out of fossil fuels, including coal, oil and natural gas, and reiterated Germany's commitment to be climate neutral by 2045, saying, \"The technologies are there: wind power, photovoltaics, electric motors, green hydrogen.\"\nIn April 2025, the German government cut its economic growth forecast for 2025 to zero, citing the impact of US President Donald Trump's trade policies. The United States is Germany\u2019s largest trading partner, and Habeck said Trump\u2019s tariffs were going to hit the German economy harder than other nations because it is so reliant on exports.\nImmigration.\nIn October 2023, Economy Minister Robert Habeck called for more immigration to Germany, saying the shortage of skilled workers was the country's \"most pressing structural problem\". Net immigration to Germany was 663,000 in 2023, down from a record 1,462,000 in 2022.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11932", "revid": "47532688", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11932", "title": "Transport in Germany", "text": "As a densely populated country in a central location in Europe and with a developed economy, Germany has a dense transport infrastructure.\nOne of the first limited-access highway systems in the world to have been built, the extensive German Autobahn network has no general speed limit for light vehicles (although there are speed limits in many sections today, and there is an limit for trucks). The country's most important waterway is the river Rhine, and largest port is that of Hamburg. Frankfurt Airport is a major international airport and European transport hub. Air travel is used for greater distances within Germany but faces competition from the state-owned Deutsche Bahn's rail network. High-speed trains called ICE connect cities for passenger travel with speeds up to 300\u00a0km/h. Many German cities have rapid transit systems and public transport is available in most areas. Buses have historically only played a marginal role in long-distance passenger service, as all routes directly competing with rail services were technically outlawed by a law dating to 1935 (during the Nazi era). Only in 2012 was this law officially amended and thus a long-distance bus market has also emerged in Germany since then.\nSince German reunification substantial effort has been made to improve and expand transport infrastructure in what was formerly East Germany. Due to Germany's varied history, main traffic flows have changed from primarily east\u2013west (old Prussia and the German Empire) to primarily north\u2013south (the 1949-1990 German partition era) to a more balanced flow with both major north\u2013south and east\u2013west corridors, both domestically and in transit. Infrastructure, which was further hampered by the havoc wars and scorched earth policies as well as reparations wrought, had to be adjusted and upgraded with each of those shifts.\nVerkehrsmittel () and Verkehrszeichen - Transportation signs in Germany are available here in German and English.\nRoad and automotive transport.\nOverview.\nThe volume of traffic in Germany, especially goods transportation, is at a very high level due to its central location in Europe.\nIn the past few decades, much of the freight traffic shifted from rail to road, which led the Federal Government to introduce a motor toll for trucks in 2005. Individual road usage increased resulting in a relatively high traffic density to other nations. A further increase of traffic is expected in the future. In 2023, 286 billion tonnes-kilometres are travelled by freight. In 2018, 630 billion kilometers were driven by german cars. In 2023, 591 billion kilometers were driven by german cars.\nFrom 2019 to 2021, road death per billion traveled kilometres is in range 3.7 to 4.0. The Common strategy for road safety activities in Germany from 2021 to 2030 is known as the \u201cRoad Safety Pact\u201d.\nIn Germany urban mobility is mostly performed as a driver by car (about 58%) by urban rail or by train (about 14%) or as passenger car (12%).\nGermany has 229,601 kilometers of road in its road network, which make a density of 0.60 kilometer of road per square kilometer. 5.7% of those roads are known as motorways in European English and eventually in British English (Autobahn).\nHigh-speed vehicular traffic has a long tradition in Germany given that the first freeway (Autobahn) in the world, the AVUS, and the world's first automobile were developed and built in Germany. Germany possesses one of the most dense road systems of the world. German motorways have no blanket speed limit for light vehicles. However, posted limits are in place on many dangerous or congested stretches as well as where traffic noise or pollution poses a problem (20.8% under static or temporary limits and an average 2.6% under variable traffic control limit applications as of 2015).\nThe German government has had issues with upkeep of the country's autobahn network, having had to revamp the Eastern portion's transport system since the unification of Germany between the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) and the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany). With that, numerous construction projects have been put on hold in the west, and a vigorous reconstruction has been going since the late 1990s. However, ever since the European Union formed, an overall streamlining and change of route plans have occurred as faster and more direct links to former Soviet bloc countries now exist and are in the works, with intense co-operation among European countries.\nIntercity bus service within Germany fell out of favour as post-war prosperity increased, and became almost extinct when legislation was introduced in the 1980s to protect the national railway. After that market was deregulated in 2012, some 150 new intercity bus lines have been established, leading to a significant shift from rail to bus for long journeys. The market has since consolidated with Flixbus controlling over 90% of it and also expanding into neighboring countries.\nRoads.\nGermany has approximately 650,000\u00a0km of roads, of which 231,000\u00a0km are non-local roads. The road network is extensively used with nearly 2 trillion km travelled by car in 2005, in comparison to just 70 billion km travelled by rail and 35 billion km travelled by plane.\nThe Autobahn is the German federal highway system. The official German term is ' (plural ', abbreviated 'BAB'), which translates as 'federal motorway'. Where no local speed limit is posted, the advisory limit \"(Richtgeschwindigkeit)\" is 130\u00a0km/h. The \"Autobahn\" network had a total length of about in 2016, which ranks it among the most dense and longest systems in the world. Only federally built controlled-access highways meeting certain construction standards including at least two lanes per direction are called \"Bundesautobahn\". They have their own, blue-coloured signs and their own numbering system. All \"Autobahnen\" are named by using the capital letter A, followed by a blank and a number (for example A\u00a08).\nThe main \"Autobahnen\" going all across Germany have single digit numbers. Shorter highways of regional importance have double digit numbers (like A\u00a024, connecting Berlin and Hamburg). Very short stretches built for heavy local traffic (for example ring roads or the A\u00a0555 from Cologne to Bonn) usually have three digits, where the first digit depends on the region.\nEast\u2013west routes are usually even-numbered, north\u2013south routes are usually odd-numbered. The numbers of the north\u2013south \"Autobahnen\" increase from west to east; that is to say, the more easterly roads are given higher numbers. Similarly, the east\u2013west routes use increasing numbers from north to south.\nThe autobahns are considered the safest category of German roads: for example, in 2012, while carrying 31% of all motorized road traffic, they only accounted for 11% of Germany's traffic fatalities.&lt;ref name=\"http://www.bast.de 2012\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nGerman autobahns are still toll-free for light vehicles, but on 1 January 2005, a blanket mandatory toll on heavy trucks was introduced.\nThe national roads in Germany are called \"Bundesstra\u00dfen\" (federal roads). Their numbers are usually well known to local road users, as they appear (written in black digits on a yellow rectangle with black border) on direction traffic signs and on street maps. A Bundesstra\u00dfe is often referred to as \"B\" followed by its number, for example \"B1\", one of the main east\u2013west routes. More important routes have lower numbers. Odd numbers are usually applied to north\u2013south oriented roads, and even numbers for east\u2013west routes. Bypass routes are referred to with an appended \"a\" (alternative) or \"n\" (new alignment), as in \"B\u00a056n\".\nOther main public roads are maintained by the \"Bundesl\u00e4nder\" (states), called \"Landesstra\u00dfe\" (country road) or \"Staatsstra\u00dfe\" (state road). The numbers of these roads are prefixed with \"L\", \"S\" or \"St\", but are usually not seen on direction signs or written on maps. They appear on the kilometre posts on the roadside. Numbers are unique only within one state.\nThe \"Landkreise\" (districts) and municipalities are in charge of the minor roads and streets within villages, towns and cities. These roads have the number prefix \"K\" indicating a \"Kreisstra\u00dfe\".\nRail transport.\nOverview.\nGermany features a total of 43,468\u00a0km railways, of which at least 19,973\u00a0km are electrified (2014).\nDeutsche Bahn (German Rail) is the major German railway infrastructure and service operator. Though Deutsche Bahn is a private company, the government still holds all shares and therefore Deutsche Bahn can still be called a state-owned company. Since its reformation under private law in 1994, Deutsche Bahn no longer publishes details of the tracks it owns; in addition to the DBAG system there are about 280 privately or locally owned railway companies which own an approximate 3,000\u00a0km to 4,000\u00a0km of the total tracks and use DB tracks in \"open access\".\nRailway subsidies amounted to \u20ac17.0 billion in 2014 and there are significant differences between the financing of long-distance and short-distance (or local) trains in Germany. While long-distance trains can be run by any railway company, the companies also receive no subsidies from the government. Local trains however are subsidised by the German states, which pay the operating companies to run these trains and indeed in 2013, 59% of the cost of short-distance passenger rail transport was covered by subsidies. This resulted in many private companies offering to run local train services as they can provide cheaper service than the state-owned Deutsche Bahn. Track construction is entirely and track maintenance partly government financed both for long and short range trains. On the other hand, all rail vehicles are charged track access charges by DB Netz which in turn delivers (part of) its profits to the federal budget.\nHigh speed rail started in the early 1990s with the introduction of the Inter City Express (ICE) into revenue service after first plans to modernize the rail system had been drawn up under the government of Willy Brandt. While the high speed network is not as dense as those of France or Spain, ICE or slightly slower (max. speed 200\u00a0km/h) Intercity (IC) serve most major cities. Several extensions or upgrades to high speed lines are under construction or planned for the near future, some of them after decades of planning.\nThe fastest high-speed train operated by Deutsche Bahn, the InterCityExpress or ICE connects major German and neighbouring international centres such as Z\u00fcrich, Vienna, Copenhagen, Paris, Amsterdam and Brussels. The rail network throughout Germany is extensive and provides services in most areas. On regular lines, at least one train every two hours will call even in the smallest of villages during the day. Nearly all larger metropolitan areas are served by S-Bahn, U-Bahn, Stra\u00dfenbahn and/or bus networks.\nThe German government on 13 February 2018 announced plans to make public transportation free as a means to reduce road traffic and decrease air pollution to EU-mandated levels. The new policy will be put to the test by the end of the year in the cities of Bonn, Essen, Herrenberg, Reutlingen and Mannheim. Issues remain concerning the costs of such a move as ticket sales for public transportation constitute a major source of income for cities.\nInternational freight trains.\nWhile Germany and most of contiguous Europe use , differences in signalling, rules and regulations, electrification voltages, etc. create obstacles for freight operations across borders. These obstacles are slowly being overcome, with international (in- and outgoing) and transit (through) traffic being responsible for a large part of the recent uptake in rail freight volume. EU regulations have done much to harmonize standards, making cross border operations easier. Maschen Marshalling Yard near Hamburg is the second biggest in the world and the biggest in Europe. It serves as a freight hub distributing goods from Scandinavia to southern Europe and from Central Europe to the port of Hamburg and overseas. Being a densely populated prosperous country in the center of Europe, there are many important transit routes through Germany. The Mannheim\u2013Karlsruhe\u2013Basel railway has undergone upgrades and refurbishments since the 1980s and will likely undergo further upgrades for decades to come as it is the main route from the North Sea Ports to northern Italy via the Gotthard Base Tunnel.\nS-Bahn.\nAlmost all major metro areas of Germany have suburban rail systems called S-Bahnen (\"Schnellbahnen\"). These usually connect larger agglomerations to their suburbs and often other regional towns, although the Rhein-Ruhr S-Bahn connects several large cities. An S-Bahn calls at all intermediate stations and runs more frequently than other trains. In Berlin and Hamburg the S-Bahn has a U-Bahn-like service and uses a third rail whereas all other S-Bahn services rely on catenary power supply.\nRapid transit (U-Bahn).\nRelatively few cities have a full-fledged underground U-Bahn system; S-Bahn (suburban commuter railway) systems are far more common. In some cities the distinction between U-Bahn and S-Bahn systems is blurred; for instance, some S-Bahn systems run underground, have frequencies similar to U-Bahn, and form part of the same integrated transport network. A larger number of cities has upgraded their tramways to light rail standards. These systems are called Stadtbahn (not to be confused with S-Bahn).\nCities with U-Bahn systems are:\nWith the exception of Hamburg, all of those aforementioned cities also have a tram system, often with new lines built to light rail standards. Berlin and Hamburg (as well as the then independent city of Sch\u00f6neberg whose lone subway line is today's line 4 of the Berlin U-Bahn) began building their networks before World War I whereas Nuremberg and Munich - despite earlier attempts in the 1930s and 1940s - only opened their networks in the 1970s (in time for the 1972 Summer Olympics in the case of Munich).\nCities with \"Stadtbahn\" systems can be found in the article Trams in Germany. Locals sometimes confuse \"Stadtbahn\" and \"proper\" \"U-Bahn\" as the logo for the former sometimes employs a white U on a blue background similar to the logo of the latter (in most cases, however, the Stadtbahn-logo includes additions to that U-logo). Furthermore, Stadtbahn systems often include partially or wholly underground sections (especially in city centers) and in the case of Frankfurt U-Bahn what is properly a \"Stadtbahn\" is even officially called an U-Bahn. To some extent this confusion was deliberate at the time of the opening of the Stadtbahn networks, as it was seen at the time to be more desirable to have a \"proper\" U-Bahn system than a \"mere\" tram system and many cities which embarked on Stadtbahn building projects did so with the official goal of eventually converting the entire network to U-Bahn standards.\nTrams (Stra\u00dfenbahn).\nGermany was among the first countries to have electric streetcars, and Berlin has one of the longest tram networks in the world. Many West German cities abandoned their previous tram systems in the 1960s and 1970s while others upgraded them to \"Stadtbahn\" (~light rail) standard, often including underground sections. In the East, most cities retained or even expanded their tram systems and since reunification a trend towards new tram construction can be observed in most of the country. Today the only major German city without a tram or light rail system is Hamburg. Tram-train systems like the Karlsruhe model first came to prominence in Germany in the early 1990s and are implemented or discussed in several cities, providing coverage far into the rural areas surrounding cities. Trams exist in all but two of the states of Germany (Hamburg and Schleswig Holstein being the exception) and in 13 of the 16 state capitals (Wiesbaden being the capital outside the aforementioned states without a tram system). While there have been attempts to (re)-establish tram systems in many cities that formerly had them (for example Aachen, Kiel, Hamburg) as well as in some cities that never had them, but are comparatively close to a city that does (for example Erlangen, Wolfsburg), only a handful of such proposals have come to fruition since World War II - the Saarbahn (trams defunct in 1965; Saarbahn established in 1997) in Saarbr\u00fccken, Heilbronn Stadtbahn (defunct in 1955, re-established as an extension of Stadtbahn Karlsruhe in 1998) and a few extensions across the border - the Strasbourg tramway to Kehl and the Trams in Basel to Weil am Rhein.\nAir transport.\nShort distances and the extensive network of motorways and railways make airplanes uncompetitive for travel within Germany. Only about 1% of all distance travelled was by plane in 2002. But due to a decline in prices with the introduction of low-fares airlines, domestic air travel is becoming more attractive. In 2013 Germany had the fifth largest passenger air market in the world with 105,016,346 passengers. However, the advent of new faster rail lines often leads to cuts in service by the airlines or even total abandonment of routes like Frankfurt-Cologne, Berlin-Hannover or Berlin-Hamburg.\n\"see: List of airlines of Germany\"\nAirlines.\nGermany's largest airline is Lufthansa, which was privatised in the 1990s. Lufthansa also operates two regional subsidiaries under the Lufthansa Regional brand and a low-cost subsidiary, Eurowings, which operates independently. Lufthansa flies a dense network of domestic, European and intercontinental routes. Germany's second-largest airline was Air Berlin, which also operated a network of domestic and European destinations with a focus on leisure routes as well as some long-haul services. Air Berlin declared bankruptcy in 2017 with the last flight under its own name in October of that year.\nCharter and leisure carriers include Condor, TUIfly, MHS Aviation and Sundair. Major German cargo operators are Lufthansa Cargo, European Air Transport Leipzig (which is a subsidiary of DHL) and AeroLogic (which is jointly owned by DHL and Lufthansa Cargo).\n\"see: List of airports in Germany\"\nAirports.\nFrankfurt Airport is Germany's largest airport, a major transportation hub in Europe and the world's twelfth busiest airport. It is one of the airports with the largest number of international destinations served worldwide. Depending on whether total passengers, flights or cargo traffic are used as a measure, it ranks first, second or third in Europe alongside London Heathrow Airport and Paris-Charles de Gaulle Airport. Germany's second biggest international airport is Munich Airport, followed by Berlin Brandenburg Airport and D\u00fcsseldorf Airport.\nThere are several more scheduled passenger airports throughout Germany, mainly serving European metropolitan and leisure destinations. Intercontinental long-haul routes are operated to and from the airports in Frankfurt, Munich, Berlin, D\u00fcsseldorf, Cologne/Bonn, Hamburg and Stuttgart.\nAirports \u2014 with paved runways:\nAirports \u2014 with unpaved runways:\nHeliports: 23 (2013 est.)\nWater transport.\nWaterways: 7,467\u00a0km (2013); major rivers include the Rhine and Elbe; Kiel Canal is an important connection between the Baltic Sea and North Sea and one of the busiest waterways in the world, the Rhine-Main-Danube Canal links Rotterdam on the North Sea with the Black Sea. It passes through the highest point reachable by ocean-going vessels from the sea. The Canal has gained importance for leisure cruises in addition to cargo traffic. There are also regular boat trips on lakes, such as Lake Constance ().\nPipelines: oil 2,400\u00a0km (2013)\nPorts and harbours: Berlin, Bonn, Brake, Bremen, Bremerhaven, Cologne, Dortmund, Dresden, Duisburg, Emden, F\u00fcrth, Hamburg, Karlsruhe, Kiel, L\u00fcbeck, Magdeburg, Mannheim, Nuremberg, Oldenburg, Rostock, Stuttgart, Wilhelmshaven\nThe port of Hamburg is the largest sea-harbour in Germany and ranks #3 in Europe (after Rotterdam and Antwerpen), #17 worldwide (2016), in total container traffic.\nMerchant marine:\n&lt;br&gt;total: 427 ships \n&lt;br&gt;Ships by type: barge carrier 2, bulk carrier 6, cargo ship 51, chemical tanker 15, container ship 298, Liquified Gas Carrier 6, passenger ship 4, petroleum tanker 10, refrigerated cargo 3, roll-on/roll-off ship 6 (2010 est.)\nFerries operate mostly between mainland Germany and its islands, serving both tourism and freight transport. Car ferries also operate across the Baltic Sea to the Nordic countries, Russia and the Baltic countries. Rail ferries operate across the Fehmahrnbelt, from Rostock to Sweden (both carrying passenger trains) and from the Mukran port in Sassnitz on the island of R\u00fcgen to numerous Baltic Sea destinations (freight only).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; travel guide from Wikivoyage&lt;br&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; travel guide from Wikivoyage\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11933", "revid": "27810432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11933", "title": "Military of Germany (disambiguation)", "text": "The military of Germany refers to the Bundeswehr, the current armed forces of Germany (and West Germany prior to reunification) since 1955.\nMilitary of Germany may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "11934", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11934", "title": "Foreign relations of Germany", "text": "The Federal Republic of Germany (up until 1990 abbreviated as FRG, opposed to GDR) is a Central European country and founding member of the European Union, a member of G4, G7, the G20, the Organizations for Economic Co-operation and Development, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the only remaining of two former German members of the United Nations. It maintains a network of 229 diplomatic missions abroad and holds relations with more than 190 countries. As one of the world's leading industrialized countries it is recognized as a major power in European and global affairs.\nGermany's relations to other powers are characterized by its past and by its commitment to promote peace, stability, the rule of law and democracy, while it seeks a progressing integration into the European Union. The heavily West-aligned Germany inherited diplomatic relations and missions from communist East Germany, which was \"Germany\" to those countries which had only relations to one of the two German states. However, due to its allegiance and market economy, the perception of Germany by some of the former Eastern bloc countries changed with Germany's reunification.\nHistory.\nThe history of German foreign policy covers diplomatic developments and international history since the foundation of Germany in 1871.\nBefore 1866, Habsburg Austria and its German Confederation were the nominal leader in German affairs, but the Hohenzollern Kingdom of Prussia exercised increasingly dominant influence in German affairs, owing partly to its ability to participate in German Confederation politics through its Brandenburg holding, and its ability to influence trade through its Zollverein network. The question of excluding or including Austria's influence was settled by the Prussian victory in the Austro-Prussian War (also named the \"German War\" or the \"German-German War\") in 1866, excluding the Austrian Empire from Germany. The unification of Germany was the political purpose of the Franco-Prussian War of 1870\u201371, in which the smaller German states joined behind remaining Prussia in a smashing victory over France. The German Empire was erected in 1871 by Otto von Bismarck, who dominated German and indeed all of European diplomatic history until he was forced to resign in 1890.\nGermany's diplomatic weight increased by transitioning its economy and society from an agrarian country to Europe's second industrial powerhouse, which soon sought competition with the leading economic power of that era, Great Britain. As from 1884, Germany engaged \u2013 as the last major European power \u2013 in oversea colonization, but held only few colonies for economical exploitation, leaving Germany vulnerable to the protectionist mercantilism of other colonial powers who controlled the world's market of raw materials. Germany's development and transition led to internal tensions, which Emperor Wilhelm II., infamous for his Hun speech throughout Europe and an increasing diplomatic liability, sought to hedge with naval armament and increased imperialism much to the suspicion of the other European powers, especially the Entente Cordiale. Encircled by the Triple Entente, and due to the negligence of Germany's emperor and his diplomatic advisors by giving Austria-Hungary a \"blank cheque\" on treating Entente-allied Serbia for the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand, the Empire of Germany had to fight back its enemies in a war on multiple fronts and was cut off from international trade routes, leading to hunger and impoverishment in Europe's most populous country.\nGermany was defeated in the battlefield in 1918, with its riches turning to spoils for the victors. The country had neither say nor seat at the table on which the victors negotiated how Germany and its treasures would be apportioned. The Treaty of Versailles forced Germany to convey away Alsace-Lorraine to France, a part of East Prussia to the Second Polish Republic and to accept the occupation of major industrial areas around Germany's centers for coal and steel production in Silesia and the Rhine province. When Germany was unable to fulfill the Allied demand for reparations in gold, France occupied the Ruhr valley to shave Germany's coal production. The Weimar Republic had to solve these crises to gain back its international stand in diplomacy, which lead Germany to joining the League of Nations in 1926.\nHowever, the ransack and ongoing compromisation of Germany after World War I came with a toll on its internal stability and put the republic's attempt to establish peace and order to failure and its diplomatic influence from marginal to inept. Political extremist factions from left and right put the screws on Germany's politics by rallying against the weakened republic. International indifference to the events in the defeated country only turned into cautious unease after the Reichstag fire and Adolf Hitler's rise to power in 1933. The newly appointed chancellor ran on a platform of revising the Treaty of Versailles by rearmament, shaking off the shackles of occupation and \"gaining room to live\" (occupation) in the East. Racial and genocidal undertones in his program were internationally ignored as the new government was able to establish the long-sought peace and order in Germany and pursued international recognition as a stabilizing power: although Hitler's government withdrew Germany's membership from the League of Nations in 1933 much to the wary of the remaining nations, Germany managed to appease the world by hosting the Olympic Games of 1936 and presenting the world a stable, progressive and prospering country while secretly starting a program for rearmament at the same time. Shortly after the games, Germany signed the Anti-Comintern Pact with Japan, which sought to establish a common sphere of interest between Germany and Japan and their allied countries as well. Initially the pact was directed against the Soviet Union.\nDespite its public presentation, Germany soon would raise suspicion by its rapidly progressing military programs, which weren't overlooked by international press. With massive interference in the internal affairs of Austria, which was unable to overcome economical challenges for 20 years after the fall of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, Germany managed to annex Austria in the Anschluss, reversing the resolution of the German war 70 years earlier and violating the Treaty of Versailles once again, which forbade the union of both countries. Germany tested its newly gained strength on boosting the Sudeten crisis of 1938, as Sudeten Germans, attracted by Germany and its success, rebelled against Czechoslovak authorities. The crisis lead to the Munich Agreement, the first gain in territory for Germany since World War I. However, Hitler was dissatisfied with how the crisis was solved peacefully. The policy of appeasement by Neville Chamberlain allowed for Hitler to violate the agreement shortly after signing it, by dissolving the Czechoslovak government and occupying the rest of the country in 1939, followed by the wary European powers of France and Great Britain to draw a red line for Poland. Germany signed the Pact of Steel with Italy, shaping with the Anti-Comintern Pact with Japan before and with the Tripartite Pact later on, what will come to be the Axis alliance.\nAfter signing the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact with the USSR on 24 August 1939, which led Japan to distance itself from Germany until the Tripartite Pact was signed in 1940, Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939, with the declaration of war followed by Britain and France three days later. The declarations of war did little to change the outcome of the Blitzkrieg against Poland, which soon was occupied by German and Soviet forces. Less than two years later, Germany would invade the USSR under violation of the pact. The same year, the Axis-allied Japanese Empire would attack Pearl Harbor, and as Germany was bound to aid Japan diplomatically by the Tripartite Pact, Hitler declared war against the USA four days after, unintentionally ending any remaining meaningful isolationist opposition in the U.S. against joining the European war and changing the U.S. stance to the rest of the world to this day.\nThe following years, German diplomacy is occupied with supporting the war effort and keeping together the Axis alliance as well as attending to the minor Axis-allied governments in Europe, such as Hungary, Romania, Slovakia, Bulgaria (all Warsaw Pact states after the Soviet Union won the war in the East) and Croatia to facilitate the \"Final Solution\". As Germany found itself on the losing side over time, Germany's diplomacy lost its ability to back up the increasingly futile war effort. Only the invocation of favors and long-lasting diplomatic aid and relationships with countries like Chile and Argentina, as well as their own network, enabled the escape of some Nazi high-ranks and collaborators into exile, such as Dr. Josef Mengele. The government of Germany, and therefore its diplomatic corps, ceased to exist according to the Allied Control Council's 1st Proclamation.\nGermany as a state was only reestablished in August 1949 in three of the four Allied occupation zones, but international representation for the state was not reestablished until 15 March 1951. As a habit, chancellor Konrad Adenauer employed former Nazis for his administration, and for foreign affairs, he employed former NSDAP diplomats, which left a dark stain on the founding history of the newly formed \"Federal Foreign Office\" as a democratic institution. \nThe first years of the Bonn republic were characterized by the efforts of a second democratic Germany to rehabilitate itself in the eyes of the world. Adenauer's government decided to align West Germany with the Western bloc and made controversial decisions in its early years. Only ten years after World War II has ended, his government decided to rearm Germany once again, founding the Bundeswehr in 1955 and joining the NATO, after he discarded Stalin's attempt to negotiate reunification and neutralization of Germany in 1952. The years of Germany's division and the relations of the two German states, West-German FRG and East-German GDR, to each other mirrored the grander conflict at the Iron Curtain and the two systems. Mutual distrust, exclusion and agitation against one another captured the division of the two German nations. The FRG would characterize any attempt to open diplomatic relations to \"the other German state\" as an unfriendly act which would provoke the closure of the West-German diplomatic mission in the attempting country. The GDR assumed the sole right of representation for all Germans within the Eastern bloc. However, West Germany attracted some of the communist countries to open diplomatic missions despite the risk of spurning the East-German government, as the Eastern bloc was in dire need of hard currency and its members tried to open channels to markets which would trade in such.\nIn the 1970s, chancellor Willy Brandt would attempt to ease the relations between the two German states to prevent future confrontations like the Cuba crisis a few years earlier, in which the world narrowly escaped a World War III and nuclear annihilation. West Germany acknowledged the borders which were established after World War II, namely the Oder\u2013Neisse line with Poland. The chancellor's \"Kniefall von Warschau\" would mark a major pivot point in the international perception of Germany, from a defeated and criminal warmongering power to a society which collectively would feel ashamed by its past, would swear to abstain military power and dominance and to uphold peace and to seek friendly relations with the People Germany wronged in the past. The gesture found cautiously positive remarks internationally, and Willy Brandt was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize of 1971, to this day the only German chancellor ever being awarded the prize. 1973, both East and West Germany became United Nations members.\nWilly Brandt's policies helped grander diplomatic efforts between the two super powers and would bear fruit shortly after his tenure, when the Helsinki Accords were signed in 1975. The Accords enabled organizations of the civil society and NGOs to assess whether the Soviet Union would abide the legally binding declarations it signed, for the rule of law, civil liberties and guarantees of property. They also lead to the arising of human rights activism in the East bloc and to media activity directed from the West towards the East. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Leonid Brezhnev had looked forward, Anatoly Dobrynin recalls, to the 'publicity he would gain... when the Soviet public learned of the final settlement of the postwar boundaries for which they had sacrificed so much'... '[Instead, the Helsinki Accords] gradually became a manifesto of the dissident and liberal movement'... What this meant was that the people who lived under these [communist] systems \u2014 at least the more courageous \u2014 could claim official permission to say what they thought.\"\u2014\u200a\nEspecially for the partaking East German government, which was confident at first the Accords would denote a victory for East bloc diplomacy, the Accords would turn out to be a calamity in internal affairs. West German media, consumed by the East German population despite attempts of inhibition, informed their audience about their rights the East German government just signed off on, very much including the sensitive issue of freedom of movement, especially between the two German states which shared a fortified and dangerous-to-life border, symbolized by the Berlin Wall. Ever since the Accords have been signed, the East German government had to face increasing mail of citizens who petitioned for \"permanent departure\" to West Germany, invoking the Helsinki Accords. \nAs East Germany's economical situation became untenable in the 1980s, West German prime minister of Bavaria, Franz Josef Strau\u00df, procured a new credit line for the GDR in 1983, which (by its interest) would impede the economical collapse of East Germany. Combined with the growing frictions within East Germany's society and the continuous escape movement of Germans through Eastern Europe and diplomatic missions of Germany, the GDR would survive its 40th anniversary and peaceful protests by only less than a year, with the collapse of its communist government heavily quickened by negotiations of West Germany to enable the \"permanent departure\" of Germans by a non-stop train from the Czech Republic through East Germany to West Germany. The departure met intense media coverage, creating a lasting impression on both sides of the German border and forecasting the eventual fall of the Berlin Wall.\nIn 1990, both German states with both freely elected governments, as well as the four former occupying powers, would sign an agreement about Germany's future. The agreement became effective on 3 October of the same year, which became the German Unity Day. \nPrimary institutions and actors.\nFederal Cabinet.\nThe three cabinet-level ministries responsible for guiding Germany's foreign policy are the Ministry of Defense, the Ministry of Economic Cooperation and Development and the Federal Foreign Office. In practice, most German federal departments play some role in shaping foreign policy in the sense that there are few policy areas left that remain outside of international jurisdiction. The bylaws of the Federal Cabinet (as delineated in Germany's Basic Law), however, assign the Federal Foreign Office a coordinating function. Accordingly, other ministries may only invite foreign guests or participate in treaty negotiations with the approval of the Federal Foreign Office.\nBundestag.\nWith respect to foreign policy, the Bundestag acts in a supervisory capacity. Each of its committees \u2013 most notably the foreign relations committee \u2013 oversees the country's foreign policy. The consent of the Bundestag (and insofar as L\u00e4nder are impacted, the Bundesrat) is required to ratify foreign treaties. If a treaty legislation passes first reading, it is referred to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, which is capable of delaying ratification and prejudice decision through its report to the Bundestag.\nIn 1994, a full EU Committee was also created for the purpose of addressing the large flow of EU-related topics and legislation. Also, the committee has the mandate to speak on behalf of the Bundestag and represent it when deciding an EU policy position. A case in point was the committee's involvement regarding the European Union's eastern enlargement wherein the Committee on Foreign Affairs is responsible for relations with ECE states while the EU Committee is tasked with the negotiations.\nNGOs.\nThere is a raft of NGOs in Germany that engage foreign policy issues. These NGOs include think-tanks (German Council on Foreign Relations), single-issue lobbying organizations (Amnesty International), as well as other organizations that promote stronger bilateral ties between Germany and other countries (Atlantic Bridge). While the budgets and methods of NGOs are distinct, the overarching goal to persuade decision-makers to the wisdom of their own views is a shared one. In 2004, a new German governance framework, particularly on foreign and security policy areas, emerged where NGOs are integrated into actual policymaking. The idea is that the cooperation between state and civil society groups increases the quality of conflict resolution, development cooperation and humanitarian aid for fragile states. The framework seeks to benefit from the expertise of the NGOs in exchange for these groups to have a chance for influencing foreign policy.\nDisputes.\nIn 2001, the discovery that the terrorist cell which carried out the attacks against the United States on 11 September 2001, was based in Hamburg, sent shock waves through the country.\nThe government of Chancellor Gerhard Schr\u00f6der backed the following U.S. military actions, sending Bundeswehr troops to Afghanistan to lead a joint NATO program to provide security in the country after the ousting of the Taliban.\nNearly all of the public was strongly against America's 2003 invasion of Iraq, and any deployment of troops. This position was shared by the SPD/Green government, which led to some friction with the United States.\nIn August 2006, the German government disclosed a botched plot to bomb two German trains. The attack was to occur in July 2006 and involved a 21-year-old Lebanese man, identified only as Youssef Mohammed E. H. Prosecutors said Youssef and another man left suitcases stuffed with crude propane-gas bombs on the trains.\nAs of February 2007, Germany had about 3,000 NATO-led International Security Assistance Force force in Afghanistan as part of the war on terrorism, the third largest contingent after the United States (14,000) and the United Kingdom (5,200). German forces are mostly in the more secure north of the country.\nHowever, Germany, along with some other larger European countries (with the exception of the UK and the Netherlands), have been criticised by the UK and Canada for not sharing the burden of the more intensive combat operations in southern Afghanistan.\nGlobal initiatives.\nHumanitarian aid and development cooperation.\nGermany is the second largest net contributor to the United Nations. The development policy of the Federal Republic of Germany is an independent area of German foreign policy. It is formulated by the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) and carried out by the implementing organisations, which are currently working in more than 60 countries. The German government sees development policy as a joint responsibility of the international community. In 2024 Germany was the second biggest donor of development cooperation after the United States, spending 32.4 billion USD, equivalent to 0.67% of GNI, on Official development assistance.\nInternational organizations.\nGermany is a member of the P5+1, Council of Europe, European Union, European Space Agency, G4, G7, International Monetary Fund, NATO, OECD, Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, UN, World Bank Group and the World Trade Organization.\nEuropean Union.\nEuropean integration has gone a long way since the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) and the Elys\u00e9e Treaty. Peaceful collaborations with its neighbors remain one of Germany's biggest political objectives, and Germany has been on the forefront of most achievements made in European integration:\nMost of the social issues facing European countries in general: immigration, aging populations, straining social-welfare and pension systems \u2013 are all important in Germany.\nGermany seeks to maintain peace through the \"deepening\" of integration among current members of the European Union member states\nGermany has been the largest net contributor to EU budgets for decades (in absolute terms \u2013 given Germany's comparatively large population \u2013 not per capita) and seeks to limit the growth of these net payments in the enlarged union.\nNATO.\nUnder the doctrine introduced by the 2003 Defense Policy Guidelines, Germany continues to give priority to the transatlantic partnership with the United States through the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. However, Germany is giving increasing attention to coordinating its policies with the European Union through the Common Foreign and Security Policy.\nUN.\nThe German Federal Government began an initiative to obtain a permanent seat in the United Nations Security Council, as part of the Reform of the United Nations. This would require approval of a two-thirds majority of the member states and approval of all five Security Council veto powers.\nThis aspiration could be successful due to Germany's good relations with the People's Republic of China and the Russian Federation. Germany is a stable and democratic republic and a G7 country which are also favourable attributes. The United Kingdom and France support German ascension to the supreme body. The U.S. is sending mixed signals.\nNATO member states, including Germany, decided not to sign the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, a binding agreement for negotiations for the total elimination of nuclear weapons, supported by more than 120 nations.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which the Federal Republic of Germany maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nEurope.\nThe German government was a strong supporter of the enlargement of NATO.\nGermany was one of the first nations to recognize Croatia and Slovenia as independent nations, rejecting the concept of Yugoslavia as the only legitimate political order in the Balkans (unlike other European powers, who first proposed a pro-Belgrade policy). This is why Serb authorities sometimes referred to \"new German imperialism\" as one of the main reasons for Yugoslavia's collapse. German troops participate in the multinational efforts to bring \"peace and stability\" to the Balkans.\nWeimar triangle (France, Germany and Poland); Germany continues to be active economically in the states of Central Europe, and to actively support the development of democratic institutions. In the 2000s, Germany has been arguably the centerpiece of the European Union (though the importance of France cannot be overlooked in this connection).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11935", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11935", "title": "Politics of Germany", "text": "Political system of Germany\nGermany is a democratic and federal parliamentary republic, where federal legislative power is vested in the (the parliament of Germany) and the (the representative body of the , Germany's regional states).\nThe federal system has, since 1949, been dominated by the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD). The judiciary of Germany is independent of the executive and the legislature, while it is common for leading members of the executive to be members of the legislature as well. The political system is laid out in the 1949 constitution, the (Basic Law), which remained in effect with minor amendments after German reunification in 1990.\nThe constitution emphasizes the protection of individual liberty in an extensive catalogue of human and civil rights and divides powers both between the federal and state levels and between the legislative, executive and judicial branches.\nWest Germany was a founding member of the European Community in 1958, which became the EU in 1993. Germany is part of the Schengen Area, and has been a member of the eurozone since 1999. It is a member of the United Nations, NATO, the G7, the G20 and the OECD.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Germany a \"full democracy\" in . According to the V-Dem Democracy indices, in 2023 Germany was the 15th most electoral democratic country in the world.\nHistory.\nBefore 1998.\nBeginning with the election of Konrad Adenauer in 1949, the Federal Republic of Germany had Christian Democratic chancellors for 20 years until a coalition between the Social Democrats and the Liberals took over. From 1982, Christian Democratic leader Helmut Kohl was chancellor in a coalition with the Liberals for 16 years. In this period fell the reunification of Germany, in 1990: the German Democratic Republic joined the Federal Republic. In the former GDR's territory, five \"L\u00e4nder\" (states) were established or reestablished. The two parts of Berlin united as one \"Land\" (state).\nThe political system of the Federal Republic remained more or less unchanged. Specific provisions for the former GDR territory were enabled via the \"unification treaty\" between the Federal Republic and the GDR prior to the unification day of 3 October 1990. However, Germany saw in the following two distinct party systems: the Green party and the Liberals remained mostly West German parties, while in the East the former socialist state party, now called The Left Party, flourished along with the Christian Democrats and Social Democrats.\n1998\u20132005.\nAfter 16 years of the Christian\u2013Liberal coalition, led by Helmut Kohl, the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) together with the Greens won the Bundestag elections of 1998. SPD vice chairman Gerhard Schr\u00f6der positioned himself as a centrist candidate, in contradiction to the leftist SPD chairman Oskar Lafontaine. The Kohl government was hurt at the polls by slower economic growth in the East in the previous two years, and constantly high unemployment. The final margin of victory was sufficiently high to permit a \"red-green\" coalition of the SPD with Alliance 90/The Greens (), bringing the Greens into a national government for the first time.\nInitial problems of the new government, marked by policy disputes between the moderate and traditional left wings of the SPD, resulted in some voter disaffection. Lafontaine left the government (and later his party) in early 1999. The CDU won in some important state elections but was hit in 2000 by a party donation scandal from the Kohl years. As a result of this Christian Democratic Union (CDU) crisis, Angela Merkel became chair.\nThe next election for the was on 22 September 2002. Gerhard Schr\u00f6der led the coalition of SPD and Greens to an eleven-seat victory over the Christian Democrat challengers headed by Edmund Stoiber (CSU). Three factors are generally cited that enabled Schr\u00f6der to win the elections despite poor approval ratings a few months before and a weaker economy: good handling of the 100-year flood, firm opposition to the US 2003 invasion of Iraq, and Stoiber's unpopularity in the east, which cost the CDU crucial seats there.\nIn its second term, the red\u2013green coalition lost several very important state elections, for example in Lower Saxony where Schr\u00f6der was the prime minister from 1990 to 1998. On 20 April 2003, chancellor Schr\u00f6der announced massive labor market reforms, called Agenda 2010, that cut unemployment benefits. Although these reforms sparked massive protests, they are now credited with being in part responsible for the relatively strong economic performance of Germany during the euro-crisis and the decrease in unemployment in Germany in the years 2006\u20132007.\n2005\u20132009.\nOn 22 May 2005 the SPD received a devastating defeat in its former heartland, North Rhine-Westphalia. Half an hour after the election results, the SPD chairman Franz M\u00fcntefering announced that the chancellor would clear the way for new federal elections.\nThis took the republic by surprise, especially because the SPD was below 20% in polls at the time. The CDU quickly announced Angela Merkel as Christian Democrat candidate for chancellor, aspiring to be the first female chancellor in German history.\nNew for the 2005 election was the alliance between the newly formed Electoral Alternative for Labor and Social Justice (WASG) and the PDS, planning to fuse into a common party (see Left Party.PDS). With the former SPD chairman, Oskar Lafontaine for the WASG and Gregor Gysi for the PDS as prominent figures, this alliance soon found interest in the media and in the population. Polls in July saw them as high as 12%.\nWhereas in May and June 2005 victory of the Christian Democrats seemed highly likely, with some polls giving them an absolute majority, this picture changed shortly before the election on 18 September 2005.\nThe election results of 18 September were surprising because they differed widely from the polls of the previous weeks. The Christian Democrats even lost votes compared to 2002, narrowly reaching the first place with only 35.2%, and failed to get a majority for a \"black\u2013yellow\" government of CDU/CSU and liberal FDP. But the red\u2013green coalition also failed to get a majority, with the SPD losing votes, but polling 34.2% and the greens staying at 8.1%. The Left reached 8.7% and entered the \"Bundestag\", whereas the far-right NPD only got 1.6%.\nThe most likely outcome of coalition talks was a so-called grand coalition between the Christian Democrats (CDU/CSU) and the Social Democrats (SPD). Three party coalitions and coalitions involving The Left had been ruled out by all interested parties (including The Left itself). On 22 November 2005, Angela Merkel was sworn in by President Horst K\u00f6hler for the office of Bundeskanzlerin.\nThe existence of the grand coalition on federal level helped smaller parties' electoral prospects in state elections. Since in 2008, the CSU lost its absolute majority in Bavaria and formed a coalition with the FDP, the grand coalition had no majority in the \"Bundesrat\" and depended on FDP votes on important issues. In November 2008, the SPD re-elected its already retired chair Franz M\u00fcntefering and made Frank-Walter Steinmeier its leading candidate for the federal election in September 2009.\nAs a result of that federal election, the grand coalition brought losses for both parties and came to an end. The SPD suffered the heaviest losses in its history and was unable to form a coalition government. The CDU/CSU had only little losses but also reached a new historic low with its worst result since 1949. The three smaller parties thus had more seats in the German \"Bundestag\" than ever before, with the liberal party FDP winning 14.6% of votes.\n2009\u20132013.\nThe CDU/CSU and FDP together held 332 seats (of 622 total seats) and had been in coalition since 27 October 2009. Angela Merkel was re-elected as chancellor, and Guido Westerwelle served as the foreign minister and vice chancellor of Germany. After being elected into the federal government, the FDP suffered heavy losses in the following state elections. The FDP had promised to lower taxes in the electoral campaign, but after being part of the coalition they had to concede that this was not possible due to the economic crisis of 2008. Because of the losses, Guido Westerwelle had to resign as chair of the FDP in favor of Philipp R\u00f6sler, federal minister of health, who was consequently appointed as vice chancellor. Shortly after, Philipp R\u00f6sler changed office and became federal minister of economics and technology.\nAfter their electoral fall, the Social Democrats were led by Sigmar Gabriel, a former federal minister and prime minister of Lower Saxony, and by Frank-Walter Steinmeier as the head of the parliamentary group. He resigned on 16 January 2017 and proposed his longtime friend and president of European Parliament Martin Schulz as his successor and chancellor candidate.\nGermany has seen increased political activity by citizens outside the established political parties with respect to local and environmental issues such as the location of Stuttgart 21, a railway hub, and construction of Berlin Brandenburg Airport.\n2013\u20132017.\nThe 18th federal elections in Germany resulted in the re-election of Angela Merkel and her Christian democratic parliamentary group of the parties CDU and CSU, receiving 41.5% of all votes. Following Merkel's first two historically low results, her third campaign marked the CDU/CSU's best result since 1994 and only for the second time in German history the possibility of gaining an absolute majority. Their former coalition partner, the FDP, narrowly failed to reach the 5% threshold and did not gain seats in the Bundestag.\nNot having reached an absolute majority, the CDU/CSU formed a grand coalition with the social-democratic SPD after the longest coalition talks in history, making the head of the party Sigmar Gabriel vice-chancellor and federal minister for economic affairs and energy. Together they held 504 of a total 631 seats (CDU/CSU 311 and SPD 193). The only two opposition parties were The Left (64 seats) and Alliance '90/The Greens (63 seats), which was acknowledged as creating a critical situation in which the opposition parties did not even have enough seats to use the special controlling powers of the opposition.\n2017\u20132021.\nThe 19th federal elections in Germany took place on 24 September 2017. The two big parties, the conservative parliamentary group CDU/CSU and the social democrat SPD were in a similar situation as in 2009, after the last grand coalition had ended, and both had suffered severe losses; reaching their second worst and worst result respectively in 2017.\nMany votes in the 2017 elections went to smaller parties, leading the right-wing populist party AfD (Alternative for Germany) into the Bundestag which marked a big shift in German politics since it was the first far-right party to win seats in parliament since the 1950s.\nWith Merkel's candidacy for a fourth term, the CDU/CSU only reached 33.0% of the votes, but won the highest number of seats, leaving no realistic coalition option without the CDU/CSU. As all parties in the Bundestag strictly ruled out a coalition with the AfD, the only options for a majority coalition were a so-called \"Jamaican\" coalition (CDU/CSU, FDP, Greens; named after the party colors resembling those of the Jamaican flag) and a grand coalition with the SPD, which was at first opposed by the Social Democrats and their leader Martin Schulz.\nCoalition talks between the three parties of the \"Jamaican\" coalition were held but the final proposal was rejected by the liberals of the FDP, leaving the government in limbo. Following the unprecedented situation, for the first time in German history different minority coalitions or even direct snap coalitions were also heavily discussed. At this point, Federal President Steinmeier invited leaders of all parties for talks about a government, being the first president in the history of the Federal Republic to do so.\nOfficial coalition talks between CDU/CSU and SPD started in January 2018 and led to a renewal of the grand coalition on 12 March 2018 as well as the subsequent re-election of Angela Merkel as chancellor.\n2021\u20132025.\nScheduled elections for the new Bundestag were held on 26 September 2021 during the COVID-19 pandemic. Angela Merkel did not stand for a fifth term but handed her post over after the second longest term for a chancellor in German history. Olaf Scholz was sworn in as the new chancellor on 8 December 2021. His Social Democrats had won the plurality of votes and formed a liberal-left coalition government with The Greens and the FDP.\nFor the first time since 1949 the South Schleswig Voters' Association was able to gain a seat in the Bundestag. As a party which represents Frisian and Danish minorities in Germany it is not bound by the 5% threshold.\nThe Left party missed that threshold as well and was only able to enter the Bundestag by winning three direct mandates. This was only the fourth time in history that this clause on the minimum number of constituency seats required for party representation in Parliament was applied.\nIn February 2022, Frank-Walter Steinmeier was elected for a second five-year term as Germany's president. Although a largely ceremonial post, he has been seen as a symbol of consensus and continuity.\nIn a highly publicized break with her former party, The Left, Sahra Wagenknecht formed her own left-wing but culturally and socially conservative populist party, the Sahra Wagenknecht Alliance in 2024. Along with 9 other former members of The Left who held on to their seats in the Bundestag after leaving the party, they now hold 1.36% of mandates and cost The Left party its status as a parliamentary group.\nOn 6 November 2024, chancellor Olaf Scholz dismissed Christian Lindner from his post as finance minister, starting the 2024 German government crisis. After the FDP left the coalition, Scholz announced a vote of confidence which he lost. President Steinmeier would dissolve the Bundestag on 27 December 2024, paving the way for new federal elections in Germany.\nElections for the 21st German Bundestag were held on February 23rd 2025. The CDU/CSU came first with 28.6% of the vote with the SPD suffering their worst result in German history with 16.4% of the vote, hence losing the chancellorship. Following the elections CDU/CSU and SPD formed a coalition and the Bundestag elected Friedrich Merz as chancellor on May 6th 2025.\nConstitution.\nThe \"Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany\" (Grundgesetz der Bundesrepublik Deutschland) is the Constitution of Germany. It was formally approved on 8 May 1949, and, with the signature of the Allies of World War II on 12 May, came into effect on 23 May, as the constitution of those states of West Germany that were initially included within the Federal Republic. The 1949 Basic Law is a response to the perceived flaws of the 1919 Weimar Constitution, which failed to prevent the rise of the Nazi party in 1933. Since 1990, in the course of the reunification process after the fall of the Berlin Wall, the Basic Law also applies to the eastern states of the former German Democratic Republic.\nExecutive.\nHead of state.\nThe German head of state is the federal president. As in Germany's parliamentary system of government, the federal chancellor runs the government and day-to-day politics, while the role of the federal president is mostly ceremonial. The federal president, by their actions and public appearances, represents the state itself, its existence, its legitimacy, and unity. Their office involves an integrative role. Nearly all actions of the federal president become valid only after a countersignature of a government member of Germany.\nThe president is not obliged by Constitution to refrain from political views. The president is expected to give direction to general political and societal debates, but not in a way that is linked to party politics. Most German presidents were active politicians and party members prior to the office, which means that they have to change their political style when becoming president. The function comprises the official residence of Bellevue Palace.\nUnder Article 59 (1) of the Basic Law, the federal president represents the Federal Republic of Germany in matters of international law, concludes treaties with foreign states on its behalf and accredits diplomats.\nAll federal laws must be signed by the president before they can come into effect. The president does not have formal a veto, but the conditions for refusing to sign a law on the basis of unconstitutionality are the subject of debate. The office is currently held by Frank-Walter Steinmeier (since 2017). \nThe federal president does have a role in the political system, especially at the establishment of a new government and the dissolution of the Bundestag (parliament). This role is usually nominal but can become significant in case of political instability. Additionally, a federal president together with the Federal Council can support the government in a \"legislatory emergency state\" to enable laws against the will of the Bundestag (Article 81 of the Basic Law). However, so far the federal president has never had to use these \"reserve powers\".\nHead of government.\nThe \"Bundeskanzler\" (federal chancellor) heads the \"Bundesregierung\" (federal government) and thus the executive branch of the federal government. They are elected by and responsible to the \"Bundestag\", Germany's parliament. The other members of the government are the federal ministers; they are chosen by the Chancellor. Germany, like the United Kingdom, can thus be classified as a parliamentary system. The office is currently held by Friedrich Merz (since 2025). \nThe Chancellor cannot be removed from office during a four-year term unless the \"Bundestag\" has agreed on a successor. This constructive vote of no confidence is intended to avoid a similar situation to that of the Weimar Republic in which the executive did not have enough support in the legislature to govern effectively, but the legislature was too divided to name a successor. The current system also prevents the Chancellor from calling a snap election.\nExcept in the periods 1969\u20131972 and 1976\u20131982, when the Social Democratic party of Chancellors Brandt and Schmidt came in second in the elections, the chancellor has always been the candidate of the largest party, usually supported by a coalition of two parties with a majority in the parliament. The chancellor appoints one of the federal ministers as their deputy, who has the unofficial title Vice Chancellor (). The office is currently held by Lars Klingbeil (since 2025). \nCabinet.\nThe German Cabinet ( or ) is the chief executive body of the Federal Republic of Germany. It consists of the chancellor and the cabinet ministers. The fundamentals of the cabinet's organization are set down in articles 62\u201369 of the Basic Law.\nAgencies.\nAgencies of the German government include:\nLegislature.\nFederal legislative power is divided between the \"Bundestag\" and the \"Bundesrat\". The \"Bundestag\" is directly elected by the German people, while the \"Bundesrat\" represents the governments of the regional states (\"L\u00e4nder\"). The federal legislature has powers of exclusive jurisdiction and concurrent jurisdiction with the states in areas specified in the constitution.\nThe \"Bundestag\" is more powerful than the \"Bundesrat\" and only needs the latter's consent for proposed legislation related to revenue shared by the federal and state governments, and the imposition of responsibilities on the states. In practice, however, the agreement of the \"Bundesrat\" in the legislative process is often required, since federal legislation frequently has to be executed by state or local agencies. In the event of disagreement between the \"Bundestag\" and the \"Bundesrat\", either side can appeal to the Vermittlungsausschuss (Mediation Committee), a conference committee-like body of 16 \"Bundesrat\" and 16 \"Bundestag\" members, to find a compromise.\nBundestag.\nThe \"Bundestag\" (Federal Diet) is elected for a four-year term and consists of 598 or more members elected by a means of mixed-member proportional representation, which Germans call \"personalised proportional representation\". 299 members represent single-seat constituencies and are elected by a first-past-the-post electoral system (Direktmandat), where others (Listenkandidat) are elected from a state list. \nA party must receive either 5% of the national vote or three direct constituencies to be eligible for non-constituency seats in the \"Bundestag\". This rule, often called the \"five-percent hurdle\", was incorporated into Germany's election law to prevent political fragmentation and minority parties from becoming disproportionately influential. Parties representing ethnic minorities are exempt from this threshold. \nParties that obtain fewer constituency seats than their national share of the vote are allotted seats from state party lists to make up the difference. In contrast, parties that obtain more constituency seats than their national share of the vote are allowed to keep these so-called overhang seats. In federal elections since 2013, other parties obtain extra seats (\"balance seats\") that offset advantages from their rivals' overhang seats. The current \"Bundestag\" is the largest in German history with 736 members.\nA 2023 reform of German election law limits the size of the \"Bundestag\" to 630 members for upcoming federal elections. Unless exempt from the hurdle, parties that do not make the 5% threshold will no longer be granted representation in parliament even if their candidates win three constituencies. In the same context, the system of overhang and balance seats will also be abolished. Opposition parties have announced they will challenge the decision in Federal Constitutional Court.\nThe first \"Bundestag\" elections were held in the Federal Republic of Germany (\"West Germany\") on 14 August 1949. Following reunification, elections for the first all-German \"Bundestag\" were held on 2 December 1990. The last federal election was held on 23 February 2025.\nJudiciary.\nGermany follows the civil law tradition. The judicial system comprises three types of courts.\nThe main difference between the Federal Constitutional Court and the Federal Court of Justice is that the Federal Constitutional Court may only be called if a constitutional matter within a case is in question (e.g. a possible violation of human rights in a criminal trial), while the Federal Court of Justice may be called in any case.\nForeign relations.\nGermany maintains a network of 229 diplomatic missions abroad and holds relations with more than 190 countries. It is the largest contributor to the budget of the European Union (providing 27%) and third largest contributor to the United Nations (providing 8%). Germany is a member of the NATO defence alliance, the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the G7, the G20, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).\nGermany has played a leading role in the European Union since its inception and has maintained a strong alliance with France since the end of World War II. The alliance was especially close in the late 1980s and early 1990s under the leadership of Christian Democrat Helmut Kohl and Socialist Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand. Germany is at the forefront of European states seeking to advance the creation of a more unified European political, defence, and security apparatus. For a number of decades after WWII, the Federal Republic of Germany kept a notably low profile in international relations, because of both its recent history and its occupation by foreign powers.\nDuring the Cold War, Germany's partition by the Iron Curtain made it a symbol of East\u2013West tensions and a political battleground in Europe. However, Willy Brandt's \"Ostpolitik\" was a key factor in the \"d\u00e9tente\" of the 1970s. In 1999, Chancellor Gerhard Schr\u00f6der's government defined a new basis for German foreign policy by taking a full part in the decisions surrounding the NATO war against Yugoslavia and by sending German troops into combat for the first time since World War II.\nThe governments of Germany and the United States are close political allies. The 1948 Marshall Plan and strong cultural ties have crafted a strong bond between the two countries, although Schr\u00f6der's very vocal opposition to the Iraq War had suggested the end of Atlanticism and a relative cooling of German\u2013American relations. The two countries are also economically interdependent: 5.0% of German exports in goods are US-bound and 3.5% of German imported goods originate from the US with a trade deficit of -63,678.5 million dollars for the United States (2017). Other signs of the close ties include the continuing position of German\u2013Americans as the largest reported ethnic group in the US, and the status of Ramstein Air Base (near Kaiserslautern) as the largest US military community outside the US.\nIn 1952 the German government agreed to pay reparations to the Jewish state of Israel amounting to 3 billion marks, equivalent to $8.8 billion today, for the costs of \"resettling so great a number of uprooted and destitute Jewish refugees\" after the Second World War, and for compensating individual Jews for the losses of livelihood and property due to Nazi persecution, after there emerged a clear moral imperative for societal and political leaders to confront the past. Diplomatic relations were eventually established in 1965 after significant reconciliation efforts, particularly from religious institutions such as the German Coordinating-Council for Christian-Jewish cooperation and the Action Reconciliation Service for Peace. This context means that there is a special relationship between Germany and Israel which continues to the present day.\nThe policy on foreign aid is an important area of German foreign policy. It is formulated by the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) and carried out by the implementing organisations. The German government sees development policy as a joint responsibility of the international community. In 2024 Germany was the second biggest donor of development cooperation after the United States, spending 32.4 billion USD, equivalent to 0.67% of GNI, on Official development assistance.\nAdministrative divisions.\nGermany comprises sixteen states that are collectively referred to as . Due to differences in size and population, the subdivision of these states varies especially between city-states () and states with larger territories (). For regional administrative purposes five states, namely Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Bavaria, Hesse, North Rhine-Westphalia and Saxony, consist of a total of 22 government districts (). As of 2009 Germany is divided into 403 districts () on municipal level, these consist of 301 rural districts and 102 urban districts.\nCoalitions.\nWhile East-Germany was under a single-party system, there was only a brief period when the SPD governed West-Germany alone on a federal level as a minority party following the dissolution of its coalition with the FDP in 1982. Otherwise, all governments in West- and post-reunification Germany have been coalitions between two or more parties. In German political tradition, these usually receive a name often based on the parties' colors:\nDue to the cordon sanitaire (usually called , firewall, in Germany) all other parties have established against the AfD, hypothetical coalitions involving the AfD are rarely discussed. A coalition of CDU/CSU, AfD and FDP would have had a majority in the 20th Bundestag elected in 2021, but was not seriously discussed publicly by either media or politicians. Such a coalition does not have a common nickname, but the term \"Bahamas coalition\", in reference to the colors of the flag of the Bahamas (including the AfD's light blue), was coined in 2013. Other coalitions involving the AfD are considered even more unlikely due to lack of parliamentary majority, ideological differences and the cordon sanitaire.\nEast\u2013West Divide.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe divide between the East and the West Germany can be seen in contemporary German elections. The Alternative for Germany (AfD), a far-right party has a stronghold in the former East Germany. The left-wing populist Die Linke party (which has roots in the SED) used to have a stronghold in the East as well. The far-right National Democratic Party of Germany (NPD) used to have representation in the East where they were stronger. This is in stark distinction from West Germany where the more centrist parties such as the CDU/CSU, SPD, The Greens, and the FDP dominate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11936", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11936", "title": "Germany/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "11947", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11947", "title": "Good argument", "text": ""}
{"id": "11952", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11952", "title": "Gnu/Linux", "text": ""}
{"id": "11953", "revid": "47922939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11953", "title": "History of geometry", "text": "Historical development of geometry\nGeometry (from the ; \"geo-\" \"earth\", \"-metron\" \"measurement\") arose as the field of knowledge dealing with spatial relationships. Geometry was one of the two fields of pre-modern mathematics, the other being the study of numbers (arithmetic).\nClassic geometry was focused in compass and straightedge constructions. Geometry was revolutionized by Euclid, who introduced mathematical rigor and the axiomatic method still in use today. His book, \"The Elements\" is widely considered the most influential textbook of all time, and was known to all educated people in the West until the middle of the 20th century.\nIn modern times, geometric concepts have been generalized to a high level of abstraction and complexity, and have been subjected to the methods of calculus and abstract algebra, so that many modern branches of the field are barely recognizable as the descendants of early geometry. (See Areas of mathematics and Algebraic geometry.)\nEarly geometry.\nThe earliest recorded beginnings of geometry can be traced to early peoples, such as the ancient Indus Valley (see Harappan mathematics) and ancient Babylonia (see Babylonian mathematics) from around 3000\u00a0BC. Early geometry was a collection of empirically discovered principles concerning lengths, angles, areas, and volumes, which were developed to meet some practical need in surveying, construction, astronomy, and various crafts. Among these were some surprisingly sophisticated principles, and a modern mathematician might be hard put to derive some of them without the use of calculus and algebra. For example, both the Egyptians and the Babylonians were aware of versions of the Pythagorean theorem about 1500 years before Pythagoras and the Indian Sulba Sutras around 800\u00a0BC contained the first statements of the theorem; the Egyptians had a correct formula for the volume of a frustum of a square pyramid.\nEgyptian geometry.\nThe ancient Egyptians knew that they could approximate the area of a circle as follows:\nArea of Circle \u2248 [ (Diameter) \u00d7 8/9 ]2.\nProblem 50 of the Ahmes papyrus uses these methods to calculate the area of a circle, according to a rule that the area is equal to the square of 8/9 of the circle's diameter. This assumes that \u03c0 is 4\u00d7(8/9)2 (or 3.160493...), with an error of slightly over 0.63 percent. This value was slightly less accurate than the calculations of the Babylonians (25/8 = 3.125, within 0.53 percent), but was not otherwise surpassed until Archimedes' approximation of 211875/67441 = 3.14163, which had an error of just over 1 in 10,000.\nAhmes knew of the modern 22/7 as an approximation for \u03c0, and used it to split a hekat, hekat x 22/x x 7/22 = hekat; however, Ahmes continued to use the traditional 256/81 value for \u03c0 for computing his hekat volume found in a cylinder.\nProblem 48 involved using a square with side 9 units. This square was cut into a 3x3 grid. The diagonal of the corner squares were used to make an irregular octagon with an area of 63 units. This gave a second value for \u03c0 of 3.111...\nThe two problems together indicate a range of values for \u03c0 between 3.11 and 3.16.\nProblem 14 in the Moscow Mathematical Papyrus gives the only ancient example finding the volume of a frustum of a pyramid, describing the correct formula:\nformula_1\nwhere \"a\" and \"b\" are the base and top side lengths of the truncated pyramid and \"h\" is the height.\nBabylonian geometry.\nThe Babylonians may have known the general rules for measuring areas and volumes. They measured the circumference of a circle as three times the diameter and the area as one-twelfth the square of the circumference, which would be correct if \"\u03c0\" is estimated as 3. The volume of a cylinder was taken as the product of the base and the height, however, the volume of the frustum of a cone or a square pyramid was incorrectly taken as the product of the height and half the sum of the bases. The Pythagorean theorem was also known to the Babylonians. Also, there was a recent discovery in which a tablet used \"\u03c0\" as 3 and 1/8. The Babylonians are also known for the Babylonian mile, which was a measure of distance equal to about seven miles today. This measurement for distances eventually was converted to a time-mile used for measuring the travel of the Sun, therefore, representing time. There have been recent discoveries showing that ancient Babylonians may have discovered astronomical geometry nearly 1400 years before Europeans did.\nVedic India geometry.\nThe Indian Vedic period had a tradition of geometry, mostly expressed in the construction of elaborate altars.\nEarly Indian texts (1st millennium BC) on this topic include the \"Satapatha Brahmana\" and the \"\u015aulba S\u016btras\".\nThe \"\u015aulba S\u016btras\" has been described as \"the earliest extant verbal expression of the Pythagorean Theorem in the world, although it had already been known to the Old Babylonians.\" They make use of Pythagorean triples, which are particular cases of Diophantine equations.\nAccording to mathematician S. G. Dani, the Babylonian cuneiform tablet Plimpton 322 written c. 1850 BC \"contains fifteen Pythagorean triples with quite large entries, including (13500, 12709, 18541) which is a primitive triple, indicating, in particular, that there was sophisticated understanding on the topic\" in Mesopotamia in 1850\u00a0BC. \"Since these tablets predate the Sulbasutras period by several centuries, taking into account the contextual appearance of some of the triples, it is reasonable to expect that similar understanding would have been there in India.\" Dani goes on to say:\n As the main objective of the \"Sulvasutras\" was to describe the constructions of altars and the geometric principles involved in them, the subject of Pythagorean triples, even if it had been well understood may still not have featured in the \"Sulvasutras\". The occurrence of the triples in the \"Sulvasutras\" is comparable to mathematics that one may encounter in an introductory book on architecture or another similar applied area, and would not correspond directly to the overall knowledge on the topic at that time. Since, unfortunately, no other contemporaneous sources have been found it may never be possible to settle this issue satisfactorily.\nGreek geometry.\nThales and Pythagoras.\nThales (635\u2013543 BC) of Miletus (now in southwestern Turkey), was the first to whom deduction in mathematics is attributed. There are five geometric propositions for which he wrote deductive proofs, though his proofs have not survived. Pythagoras (582\u2013496 BC) of Ionia, and later, Italy, then colonized by Greeks, may have been a student of Thales, and traveled to Babylon and Egypt. The theorem that bears his name may not have been his discovery, but he was probably one of the first to give a deductive proof of it. He gathered a group of students around him to study mathematics, music, and philosophy, and together they discovered most of what high school students learn today in their geometry courses. In addition, they made the profound discovery of incommensurable lengths and irrational numbers.\nPlato.\nPlato (427\u2013347 BC) was a philosopher, highly esteemed by the Greeks. There is a story that he had inscribed above the entrance to his famous school, \"Let none ignorant of geometry enter here.\" However, the story is considered to be untrue. Though he was not a mathematician himself, his views on mathematics had great influence. Mathematicians thus accepted his belief that geometry should use no tools but compass and straightedge \u2013 never measuring instruments such as a marked ruler or a protractor, because these were a workman's tools, not worthy of a scholar. This dictum led to a deep study of possible compass and straightedge constructions, and three classic construction problems: how to use these tools to trisect an angle, to construct a cube twice the volume of a given cube, and to construct a square equal in area to a given circle. The proofs of the impossibility of these constructions, finally achieved in the 19th century, led to important principles regarding the deep structure of the real number system. Aristotle (384\u2013322 BC), Plato's greatest pupil, wrote a treatise on methods of reasoning used in deductive proofs (see Logic) which was not substantially improved upon until the 19th century.\nHellenistic geometry.\nEuclid.\nEuclid (c. 325\u2013265 BC), of Alexandria, probably a student at the Academy founded by Plato, wrote a treatise in 13 books (chapters), titled \"The Elements of Geometry\", in which he presented geometry in an ideal axiomatic form, which came to be known as Euclidean geometry. The treatise is not a compendium of all that the Hellenistic mathematicians knew at the time about geometry; Euclid himself wrote eight more advanced books on geometry. We know from other references that Euclid's was not the first elementary geometry textbook, but it was so much superior that the others fell into disuse and were lost. He was brought to the university at Alexandria by Ptolemy I, King of Egypt.\n\"The Elements\" began with definitions of terms, fundamental geometric principles (called \"axioms\" or \"postulates\"), and general quantitative principles (called \"common notions\") from which all the rest of geometry could be logically deduced. Following are his five axioms, somewhat paraphrased to make the English easier to read.\nConcepts, that are now understood as algebra, were expressed geometrically by Euclid, a method referred to as Greek geometric algebra.\nArchimedes.\nArchimedes (287\u2013212 BC), of Syracuse, Sicily, when it was a Greek city-state, was one of the most famous mathematicians of the Hellenistic period. He is known for his formulation of a hydrostatic principle (known as Archimedes' principle) and for his works on geometry, including Measurement of the Circle and On Conoids and Spheroids. His work On Floating Bodies is the first known work on hydrostatics, of which Archimedes is recognized as the founder. Renaissance translations of his works, including the ancient commentaries, were enormously influential in the work of some of the best mathematicians of the 17th century, notably Ren\u00e9 Descartes and Pierre de Fermat.\nAfter Archimedes.\nAfter Archimedes, Hellenistic mathematics began to decline. There were a few minor stars yet to come, but the golden age of geometry was over. Proclus (410\u2013485), author of \"Commentary on the First Book of Euclid\", was one of the last important players in Hellenistic geometry. He was a competent geometer, but more importantly, he was a superb commentator on the works that preceded him. Much of that work did not survive to modern times, and is known to us only through his commentary. The Roman Republic and Empire that succeeded and absorbed the Greek city-states produced excellent engineers, but no mathematicians of note.\nThe great Library of Alexandria was later burned. There is a growing consensus among historians that the Library of Alexandria likely suffered from several destructive events, but that the destruction of Alexandria's pagan temples in the late 4th century was probably the most severe and final one. The evidence for that destruction is the most definitive and secure. Caesar's invasion may well have led to the loss of some 40,000\u201370,000 scrolls in a warehouse adjacent to the port (as Luciano Canfora argues, they were likely copies produced by the Library intended for export), but it is unlikely to have affected the Library or Museum, given that there is ample evidence that both existed later.\nCivil wars, decreasing investments in maintenance and acquisition of new scrolls and generally declining interest in non-religious pursuits likely contributed to a reduction in the body of material available in the Library, especially in the 4th century. The Serapeum was certainly destroyed by Theophilus in 391, and the Museum and Library may have fallen victim to the same campaign.\nClassical Indian geometry.\nIn the Bakhshali manuscript, there is a handful of geometric problems (including problems about volumes of irregular solids). The Bakhshali manuscript also \"employs a decimal place value system with a dot for zero.\" Aryabhata's \"Aryabhatiya\" (499) includes the computation of areas and volumes.\nBrahmagupta wrote his astronomical work \"\" in 628. Chapter 12, containing 66 Sanskrit verses, was divided into two sections: \"basic operations\" (including cube roots, fractions, ratio and proportion, and barter) and \"practical mathematics\" (including mixture, mathematical series, plane figures, stacking bricks, sawing of timber, and piling of grain). In the latter section, he stated his famous theorem on the diagonals of a cyclic quadrilateral:\nBrahmagupta's theorem: If a cyclic quadrilateral has diagonals that are perpendicular to each other, then the perpendicular line drawn from the point of intersection of the diagonals to any side of the quadrilateral always bisects the opposite side.\nChapter 12 also included a formula for the area of a cyclic quadrilateral (a generalization of Heron's formula), as well as a complete description of rational triangles (\"i.e.\" triangles with rational sides and rational areas).\nBrahmagupta's formula: The area, \"A\", of a cyclic quadrilateral with sides of lengths \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"d\", respectively, is given by\n formula_2\nwhere \"s\", the semiperimeter, given by: formula_3\nBrahmagupta's Theorem on rational triangles: A triangle with rational sides formula_4 and rational area is of the form:\nformula_5\nfor some rational numbers formula_6 and formula_7.\nParameshvara Nambudiri was the first mathematician to give a formula for the radius of the circle circumscribing a cyclic quadrilateral. The expression is sometimes attributed to Lhuilier [1782], 350 years later. With the sides of the cyclic quadrilateral being \"a, b, c,\" and \"d\", the radius \"R\" of the circumscribed circle is:\nformula_8\nChinese geometry.\nThe first definitive work (or at least oldest existent) on geometry in China was the \"Mo Jing\", the Mohist canon of the early philosopher Mozi (470\u2013390 BC). It was compiled years after his death by his followers around the year 330 BC. Although the \"Mo Jing\" is the oldest existent book on geometry in China, there is the possibility that even older written material existed. However, due to the infamous Burning of the Books in a political maneuver by the Qin dynasty ruler Qin Shihuang (r. 221\u2013210 BC), multitudes of written literature created before his time were purged. In addition, the \"Mo Jing\" presents geometrical concepts in mathematics that are perhaps too advanced not to have had a previous geometrical base or mathematic background to work upon.\nThe \"Mo Jing\" described various aspects of many fields associated with physical science, and provided a small wealth of information on mathematics as well. It provided an 'atomic' definition of the geometric point, stating that a line is separated into parts, and the part which has no remaining parts (i.e. cannot be divided into smaller parts) and thus forms the extreme end of a line is a point. Much like Euclid's first and third definitions and Plato's 'beginning of a line', the \"Mo Jing\" stated that \"a point may stand at the end (of a line) or at its beginning like a head-presentation in childbirth. (As to its invisibility) there is nothing similar to it.\" Similar to the atomists of Democritus, the \"Mo Jing\" stated that a point is the smallest unit, and cannot be cut in half, since 'nothing' cannot be halved. It stated that two lines of equal length will always finish at the same place, while providing definitions for the \"comparison of lengths\" and for \"parallels\", along with principles of space and bounded space. It also described the fact that planes without the quality of thickness cannot be piled up since they cannot mutually touch. The book provided definitions for circumference, diameter, and radius, along with the definition of volume.\nThe Han dynasty (202 BC\u00a0\u2013 220 AD) period of China witnessed a new flourishing of mathematics. One of the oldest Chinese mathematical texts to present geometric progressions was the \"Su\u00e0n sh\u00f9 sh\u016b\" of 186 BC, during the Western Han era. The mathematician, inventor, and astronomer Zhang Heng (78\u2013139 AD) used geometrical formulas to solve mathematical problems. Although rough estimates for pi (\u03c0) were given in the \"Zhou Li\" (compiled in the 2nd century BC), it was Zhang Heng who was the first to make a concerted effort at creating a more accurate formula for pi. Zhang Heng approximated pi as 730/232 (or approx 3.1466), although he used another formula of pi in finding a spherical volume, using the square root of 10 (or approx 3.162) instead. Zu Chongzhi (429\u2013500 AD) improved the accuracy of the approximation of pi to between 3.1415926 and 3.1415927, with 355\u2044113 (\u5bc6\u7387, Mil\u00fc, detailed approximation) and 22\u20447 (\u7ea6\u7387, Yuel\u00fc, rough approximation) being the other notable approximation. In comparison to later works, the formula for pi given by the French mathematician Franciscus Vieta (1540\u20131603) fell halfway between Zu's approximations.\n\"The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art\".\n\"The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art\", the title of which first appeared by 179\u00a0AD on a bronze inscription, was edited and commented on by the 3rd century mathematician Liu Hui from the Kingdom of Cao Wei. This book included many problems where geometry was applied, such as finding surface areas for squares and circles, the volumes of solids in various three-dimensional shapes, and included the use of the Pythagorean theorem. The book provided illustrated proof for the Pythagorean theorem, contained a written dialogue between of the earlier Duke of Zhou and Shang Gao on the properties of the right angle triangle and the Pythagorean theorem, while also referring to the astronomical gnomon, the circle and square, as well as measurements of heights and distances. The editor Liu Hui listed pi as 3.141014 by using a 192 sided polygon, and then calculated pi as 3.14159 using a 3072 sided polygon. This was more accurate than Liu Hui's contemporary Wang Fan, a mathematician and astronomer from Eastern Wu, would render pi as 3.1555 by using 142\u204445. Liu Hui also wrote of mathematical surveying to calculate distance measurements of depth, height, width, and surface area. In terms of solid geometry, he figured out that a wedge with rectangular base and both sides sloping could be broken down into a pyramid and a tetrahedral wedge. He also figured out that a wedge with trapezoid base and both sides sloping could be made to give two tetrahedral wedges separated by a pyramid. Furthermore, Liu Hui described Cavalieri's principle on volume, as well as Gaussian elimination. From the \"Nine Chapters\", it listed the following geometrical formulas that were known by the time of the Former Han dynasty (202 BCE\u00a0\u2013 9 CE).\nAreas for the\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVolumes for the\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nContinuing the geometrical legacy of ancient China, there were many later figures to come, including the famed astronomer and mathematician Shen Kuo (1031\u20131095 CE), Yang Hui (1238\u20131298) who discovered Pascal's Triangle, Xu Guangqi (1562\u20131633), and many others.\nIslamic Golden Age.\nTh\u0101bit ibn Qurra, using what he called the method of reduction and composition, provided two different general proofs of the Pythagorean theorem for all triangles, before which proofs only existed for the theorem for the special cases of a special right triangle.\nA 2007 paper in the journal \"Science\" suggested that girih tiles possessed properties consistent with self-similar fractal quasicrystalline tilings such as the Penrose tilings.\nRenaissance.\nThe transmission of the Greek Classics to medieval Europe via the Arabic literature of the 9th to 10th century \"Islamic Golden Age\" began in the 10th century and culminated in the Latin translations of the 12th century.\nA copy of Ptolemy's \"Almagest\" was brought back to Sicily by Henry Aristippus (d. 1162), as a gift from the Emperor to King William I (r. 1154\u20131166). An anonymous student at Salerno travelled to Sicily and translated the \"Almagest\" as well as several works by Euclid from Greek to Latin. Although the Sicilians generally translated directly from the Greek, when Greek texts were not available, they would translate from Arabic. Eugenius of Palermo (d. 1202) translated Ptolemy's \"Optics\" into Latin, drawing on his knowledge of all three languages in the task. The rigorous deductive methods of geometry found in Euclid's \"Elements of Geometry\" were relearned, and further development of geometry in the styles of both Euclid (Euclidean geometry) and Khayyam (algebraic geometry) continued, resulting in an abundance of new theorems and concepts, many of them very profound and elegant.\nAdvances in the treatment of perspective were made in Renaissance art of the 14th to 15th century which went beyond what had been achieved in antiquity. \nIn Renaissance architecture of the \"Quattrocento\", concepts of architectural order were explored and rules were formulated. A prime example of is the Basilica di San Lorenzo in Florence by Filippo Brunelleschi (1377\u20131446).\nIn c. 1413 Filippo Brunelleschi demonstrated the geometrical method of perspective, used today by artists, by painting the outlines of various Florentine buildings onto a mirror. \nSoon after, nearly every artist in Florence and in Italy used geometrical perspective in their paintings, notably Masolino da Panicale and Donatello. Melozzo da Forl\u00ec first used the technique of upward foreshortening (in Rome, Loreto, Forl\u00ec and others), and was celebrated for that. Not only was perspective a way of showing depth, it was also a new method of composing a painting. Paintings began to show a single, unified scene, rather than a combination of several.\nAs shown by the quick proliferation of accurate perspective paintings in Florence, Brunelleschi likely understood (with help from his friend the mathematician Toscanelli), but did not publish, the mathematics behind perspective. Decades later, his friend Leon Battista Alberti wrote \"De pictura\" (1435/1436), a treatise on proper methods of showing distance in painting based on Euclidean geometry. Alberti was also trained in the science of optics through the school of Padua and under the influence of Biagio Pelacani da Parma who studied Alhazen's \"Optics\".\nPiero della Francesca elaborated on Della Pittura in his \"De Prospectiva Pingendi\" in the 1470s. Alberti had limited himself to figures on the ground plane and giving an overall basis for perspective. Della Francesca fleshed it out, explicitly covering solids in any area of the picture plane. Della Francesca also started the now common practice of using illustrated figures to explain the mathematical concepts, making his treatise easier to understand than Alberti's. Della Francesca was also the first to accurately draw the Platonic solids as they would appear in perspective.\nPerspective remained, for a while, the domain of Florence. Jan van Eyck, among others, was unable to create a consistent structure for the converging lines in paintings, as in London's The Arnolfini Portrait, because he was unaware of the theoretical breakthrough just then occurring in Italy. However he achieved very subtle effects by manipulations of scale in his interiors. Gradually, and partly through the movement of academies of the arts, the Italian techniques became part of the training of artists across Europe, and later other parts of the world.\nThe culmination of these Renaissance traditions finds its ultimate synthesis in the research of the architect, geometer, and optician Girard Desargues on perspective, optics and projective geometry.\nThe \"Vitruvian Man\" by Leonardo da Vinci (c. 1490) depicts a man in two superimposed positions with his arms and legs apart and inscribed in a circle and square. The drawing is based on the correlations of ideal human proportions with geometry described by the ancient Roman architect Vitruvius in Book III of his treatise \"De Architectura\".\nModern geometry.\nThe 17th century.\nIn the early 17th century, there were two important developments in geometry. The first and most important was the creation of analytic geometry, or geometry with coordinates and equations, by Ren\u00e9 Descartes (1596\u20131650) and Pierre de Fermat (1601\u20131665). This was a necessary precursor to the development of calculus and a precise quantitative science of physics. The second geometric development of this period was the systematic study of projective geometry by Girard Desargues (1591\u20131661). Projective geometry is the study of geometry without measurement, just the study of how points align with each other. There had been some early work in this area by Hellenistic geometers, notably Pappus (c.\u00a0340). The greatest flowering of the field occurred with Jean-Victor Poncelet (1788\u20131867).\nIn the late 17th century, calculus was developed independently and almost simultaneously by Isaac Newton (1642\u20131727) and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646\u20131716). This was the beginning of a new field of mathematics now called analysis. Though not itself a branch of geometry, it is applicable to geometry, and it solved two families of problems that had long been almost intractable: finding tangent lines to odd curves, and finding areas enclosed by those curves. The methods of calculus reduced these problems mostly to straightforward matters of computation.\nThe 18th and 19th centuries.\nNon-Euclidean geometry.\nThe very old problem of proving Euclid's Fifth Postulate, the \"Parallel Postulate\", from his first four postulates had never been forgotten. Beginning not long after Euclid, many attempted demonstrations were given, but all were later found to be faulty, through allowing into the reasoning some principle which itself had not been proved from the first four postulates. Though Omar Khayy\u00e1m was also unsuccessful in proving the parallel postulate, his criticisms of Euclid's theories of parallels and his proof of properties of figures in non-Euclidean geometries contributed to the eventual development of non-Euclidean geometry. By 1700 a great deal had been discovered about what can be proved from the first four, and what the pitfalls were in attempting to prove the fifth. Saccheri, Lambert, and Legendre each did excellent work on the problem in the 18th century, but still fell short of success. In the early 19th century, Gauss, Johann Bolyai, and Lobachevsky, each independently, took a different approach. Beginning to suspect that it was impossible to prove the Parallel Postulate, they set out to develop a self-consistent geometry in which that postulate was false. In this they were successful, thus creating the first non-Euclidean geometry. By 1854, Bernhard Riemann, a student of Gauss, had applied methods of calculus in a ground-breaking study of the intrinsic (self-contained) geometry of all smooth surfaces, and thereby found a different non-Euclidean geometry. This work of Riemann later became fundamental for Einstein's theory of relativity.\nIt remained to be proved mathematically that the non-Euclidean geometry was just as self-consistent as Euclidean geometry, and this was first accomplished by Beltrami in 1868. With this, non-Euclidean geometry was established on an equal mathematical footing with Euclidean geometry.\nWhile it was now known that different geometric theories were mathematically possible, the question remained, \"Which one of these theories is correct for our physical space?\" The mathematical work revealed that this question must be answered by physical experimentation, not mathematical reasoning, and uncovered the reason why the experimentation must involve immense (interstellar, not earth-bound) distances. With the development of relativity theory in physics, this question became vastly more complicated.\nIntroduction of mathematical rigor.\nAll the work related to the Parallel Postulate revealed that it was quite difficult for a geometer to separate his logical reasoning from his intuitive understanding of physical space, and, moreover, revealed the critical importance of doing so. Careful examination had uncovered some logical inadequacies in Euclid's reasoning, and some unstated geometric principles to which Euclid sometimes appealed. This critique paralleled the crisis occurring in calculus and analysis regarding the meaning of infinite processes such as convergence and continuity. In geometry, there was a clear need for a new set of axioms, which would be complete, and which in no way relied on pictures we draw or on our intuition of space. Such axioms, now known as Hilbert's axioms, were given by David Hilbert in 1894 in his dissertation \"Grundlagen der Geometrie\" (\"Foundations of Geometry\").\nAnalysis situs, or topology.\nIn the mid-18th century, it became apparent that certain progressions of mathematical reasoning recurred when similar ideas were studied on the number line, in two dimensions, and in three dimensions. Thus the general concept of a metric space was created so that the reasoning could be done in more generality, and then applied to special cases. This method of studying calculus- and analysis-related concepts came to be known as analysis situs, and later as topology. The important topics in this field were properties of more general figures, such as connectedness and boundaries, rather than properties like straightness, and precise equality of length and angle measurements, which had been the focus of Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry. Topology soon became a separate field of major importance, rather than a sub-field of geometry or analysis.\nGeometry of more than 3 dimensions.\nThe 19th century saw the development of the general concept of Euclidean space by Ludwig Schl\u00e4fli, who extended Euclidean geometry beyond three dimensions. He discovered all the higher-dimensional analogues of the Platonic solids, finding that there are exactly six such regular convex polytopes in dimension four, and three in all higher dimensions.\nIn 1878 William Kingdon Clifford introduced what is now termed geometric algebra, unifying William Rowan Hamilton's quaternions with Hermann Grassmann's algebra and revealing the geometric nature of these systems, especially in four dimensions. The operations of geometric algebra have the effect of mirroring, rotating, translating, and mapping the geometric objects that are being modeled to new positions.\nThe 20th century.\nDevelopments in algebraic geometry included the study of curves and surfaces over finite fields as demonstrated by the works of among others Andr\u00e9 Weil, Alexander Grothendieck, and Jean-Pierre Serre as well as over the real or complex numbers. Finite geometry itself, the study of spaces with only finitely many points, found applications in coding theory and cryptography. With the advent of the computer, new disciplines such as computational geometry or digital geometry deal with geometric algorithms, discrete representations of geometric data, and so forth.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
