{"id": "15341", "revid": "1329099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15341", "title": "Into the Woods", "text": "1986 musical by Stephen Sondheim and James Lapine\nInto the Woods is a 1986 musical with music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim and book by James Lapine.\nThe musical intertwines the plots of several Brothers Grimm fairy tales, exploring the consequences of the characters' wishes and quests. The main characters are taken from \"Little Red Riding Hood\" (spelled \"Ridinghood\" in the published vocal score), \"Jack and the Beanstalk\", \"Rapunzel\", \"Cinderella\", and several others. The musical is tied together by a story involving a childless baker and his wife and their quest to begin a family (the original beginning of the Grimm Brothers' \"Rapunzel\"), their interaction with a witch who has placed a curse on them and encounters with other storybook characters during their journey.\nThe second collaboration between Sondheim and Lapine after \"Sunday in the Park with George\" (1984), \"Into the Woods\" debuted in San Diego at the Old Globe Theatre in 1986 and premiered on Broadway on November 5, 1987, where it won three major Tony Awards (Best Score, Best Book, and Best Actress in a Musical for Joanna Gleason), in a year dominated by \"The Phantom of the Opera\". The musical has since been produced many times, with a 1988 U.S. national tour, a 1990 West End production, a 1997 10th-anniversary concert, a 2002 Broadway revival, a 2010 outdoor Regent's Park Open Air Theatre production in London, which transferred to a Shakespeare in the Park production in New York City, and a 2022 Broadway revival.\nA Disney film adaptation, directed by Rob Marshall, was released in 2014. The film grossed over $213 million worldwide, and received three nominations at both the Academy Awards and the Golden Globe Awards.\nSynopsis.\nAct I.\nThe Narrator introduces the main characters in the story. Cinderella wishes to attend a festival held by the king, much to the dismay of her Stepmother and Stepsisters. Jack wishes his cow, Milky White, would give milk, and his Mother wishes that Jack would sell Milky White. A Baker and his Wife wish to have a child, and Little Red Riding Hood wishes for bread to bring to her ill Grandmother. Little Red obtains bread from the Baker, who then is visited by a neighbor, an ugly old Witch. She reveals that the Baker and his Wife cannot have children because, when the Baker's father stole vegetables from her garden, she cursed his family tree to \"be a barren one\" and took the couple's other child, Rapunzel. If the Witch is brought four items \u2013 \"the cow as white as milk, the cape as red as blood, the hair as yellow as corn, and the slipper as pure as gold\" \u2013 in three days time, she will lift the curse. All begin their journey into the woods. Jack to sell Milky White, Cinderella to visit her mother's grave after her family left for the festival without her, Little Red to visit her Grandmother, and the Baker \u2013 refusing his wife's help \u2013 to find the ingredients (\"Into the Woods\"). \nCinderella receives a gown and golden slippers from her mother's spirit (\"Cinderella at the Grave\"). A Mysterious Man mocks Jack for valuing his cow more than a \"sack of beans\". Little Red meets a hungry Wolf who intends to eat her (\"Hello, Little Girl\"), which The Baker sees, and notices her cape. His Wife follows him; they meet Jack and convince him to trade Milky White for beans found in the Baker's jacket after lying and saying they're magic. Jack bids a tearful goodbye to Milky White (\"I Guess This Is Goodbye\"). The Baker regrets lying, but his Wife reassures him (\"Maybe They're Magic\").\nThe Witch has raised Rapunzel in a tall tower accessible only by climbing Rapunzel's long, golden hair (\"Our Little World\"), and a Prince spies Rapunzel, falling in love. Little Red and her Grandmother are eaten by the Wolf, but the Baker, in pursuit of the cape, saves them and kills the wolf. To thank the Baker, Little Red gifts him the cape (\"I Know Things Now\"). Jack returns to his Mother with the beans, which she angrily throws on the ground. After attending the festival, Cinderella flees from a Prince who has fallen in love with her. She meets the Baker's Wife who helps her hide (\"A Very Nice Prince\"). The Baker's Wife tries to grab one of Cinderella's slippers, but loses Milky White. As the day ends, the characters recall their morals from the day (\"First Midnight\").\nJack describes his adventure climbing a beanstalk the beans sprouted and meeting a giant couple (\"Giants in The Sky\"). Having stolen money from the giants, he tries to buy Milky White back, though the Baker refuses. After Jack returns up the beanstalk to get more treasure, the Mysterious Man takes the money from the Baker. Cinderella's and Rapunzel's Princes, who are brothers, compare their maidens (\"Agony\"). The Baker's Wife, hearing of a girl with golden hair, finds Rapunzel, fools her into letting down her hair, and plucks some strands. The Mysterious Man finds Milky White and returns her to the Baker, and the Baker's Wife again fails to take Cinderella's slippers. The Baker admits they must work together (\"It Takes Two\"). Jack arrives with a hen that lays golden eggs, but Milky White keels over dead as midnight chimes (\"Second Midnight\").\nThe Witch discovers the Prince's visits to Rapunzel and demands she stay sheltered from the world. Rapunzel refuses, and the Witch cuts off her hair and banishes her to a remote desert (\"Stay with Me\"). The Mysterious Man gives the Baker money to buy another cow. Jack meets Little Red, now sporting a cape made from the wolf skin, and she goads him into stealing more from the giants. Torn between staying with her Prince or escaping, Cinderella leaves him a slipper as a clue (\"On the Steps of the Palace\") and trades shoes with the Baker's Wife. The Baker buys a new cow, and the two find the Witch.\nWith a loud crash, Jack's Mother runs in crying over a dead giant in her backyard, but is brushed off by the group. The Witch discovers that the cow is not Milky White, but an ordinary cow covered with flour, but is able to resurrect Milky White. When no milk is produced, she is angered when discovering the hair is Rapunzel's. The Mysterious Man suggests using corn silk instead, which works. The Witch reveals the Mysterious Man is the Baker's father, and drinks the potion. The curse is broken, the Mysterious Man falls dead, and the Witch regains her youth and beauty.\nCinderella's Prince looks for Cinderella. Her Stepmother forces her stepsisters to mutilate their feet to fit in the shoe, then hesitantly brings Cinderella to put on the shoe. It fits perfectly, and the two are reunited (\"Careful My Toe\"). Rapunzel bears twins and finds her Prince in the desert. When Rapunzel refuses to return to her, the Witch finds her powers were lost when the curse was broken. At Cinderella's wedding to her Prince, the Baker's Wife thanks Cinderella for her help. As the cast celebrates living \"happily ever after\", nobody notices another beanstalk growing (\"Ever After\").\nAct II.\nThe narrator returns, reintroducing the cast, who have new wishes. The Baker's Wife wishes their house was bigger, but the Baker refuses to move out of his father's home. Jack misses the kingdom in the sky, and Cinderella is bored with her new life. With a loud crash, the Baker's house and the Witch's garden are destroyed (\"So Happy\"). The Baker goes to the castle to warn Cinderella, but is escorted out by the Steward. Little Red's house is also destroyed, and the Baker and his Wife offer to escort her to her Grandmother's home. Jack, hearing of the destruction from the Baker, goes to the woods to slay the giant, and Cinderella disguises herself to investigate the destruction of her mother's grave (\"Into the Woods (Reprise)\").\nRapunzel, driven mad by her long confinement, also flees to the woods. Her Prince follows her and meets his brother, and the two confess their lust for new women, Snow White and Sleeping Beauty (\"Agony (Reprise)\"). The group meet an angry Giantess, who demands Jack's whereabouts, saying he killed her husband (the giant who landed in Jack's yard). The Narrator is found by the group, and the Witch offers him up to the Giantess, but she drops and kills him. Jack's Mother arrives and defends her son, but the Steward kills her in a panic to protect the group. Rapunzel flees from the Witch, but is trampled by the Giantess. The Witch mourns Rapunzel (\"Witch's Lament\").\nThe Royal Family and Steward flee. The Witch vows to find Jack and offer him to the Giantess, so the Baker and his Wife split up to find him first, leaving Little Red with their son. Cinderella's Prince, searching for Cinderella, meets the Baker's Wife and seduces her (\"Any Moment\"). Meanwhile, the Baker finds Cinderella and convinces her to join him. The Baker's Wife is conflicted over her affair (\"Moments In The Woods\"), but before she can return to the Baker, she is trampled by the Giantess. The Witch finds Jack crying over the Baker's Wife's corpse and brings him to Cinderella, Little Red, and the Baker, informing them of her death. The group all blame each other for her death, before turning on the Witch (\"Your Fault\"). The Witch laments the group's impending doom and mocks them for not taking responsibility, then throws away the remaining beans and vanishes (\"Last Midnight\").\nStricken by grief, the Baker decides to abandon his son and leave. The Mysterious Man returns in spirit, pleading that the Baker not make the same mistakes he made; the Baker stays (\"No More\"). Cinderella discovers her Prince's infidelity and asks him to leave her alone. Little Red mourns her Grandmother after discovering she was killed by the Giantess, and is comforted by Cinderella. Meanwhile, the Baker informs Jack of his mother's death (\"No One Is Alone\").\nAfter slaying the Giantess, Jack, Little Red, Cinderella, and the Baker begin their journey back to the village. The Princes return with their new princesses, as do the spirits of the Royal Family, who starved to death. The Baker doubts his abilities to be a parent on his own, and his Wife's spirit returns to comfort him. She asks him to tell their story, and the Baker does so (reciting the same line the narrator says at the beginning of Act I). The Witch returns and warns the audience to be careful of their wishes or stories told to children, and the group leaves the woods (\"Children Will Listen\").\nMusical numbers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n*Not included in the original Broadway cast recording\n**Added for the 1990 West End production\nDevelopment.\nThe development of \"Into the Woods\" first started when James Lapine and Stephen Sondheim came together for their second collaborative project after \"Sunday in the Park with George\". Lapine and Sondheim wanted a fairy tale\u2013themed musical; they tried writing their own quest fairy tale, but this was scrapped. Lapine suggested combining several folktales into one musical. They discussed incorporating \"One Thousand and One Nights\" stories, or styling the production as a fantasy computer game.\n\"Into the Woods\" first appeared as a workshop performance at the Old Globe Theatre in San Diego, California, on December 4, 1986, which ran for 50 performances under the direction of Lapine. Many of the performers from that production were in the Broadway cast. Kay McClelland, who played Rapunzel and Florinda in San Diego, played Florinda on Broadway.\nThroughout the run, dialogue, plot details, and songs were being rewritten or even cut entirely. For example, the Baker's Wife in the Old Globe production was not crushed by the Giantess. Instead, she ate a poisoned apple, in the manner of \"Snow White\". A reference to \"The Three Little Pigs\" in San Diego later returned for the 2002 Broadway revival. The song \"Giants in the Sky\" had different lyrics, and \"So Happy\", \"Lament\", and \"Second Midnight\" had extra lyrics. Many longer versions of the songs were cut for Broadway, but the longer version of \"Lament\" was preserved in the Broadway cast recording and was used in later productions.\nProductions.\nOriginal Broadway (1987).\n\"Into the Woods\" opened on Broadway at the Martin Beck Theatre on November 5, 1987, and closed on September 3, 1989, after 765 performances. It starred Bernadette Peters as the Witch, Joanna Gleason as the Baker's Wife, Chip Zien as the Baker, Robert Westenberg as the Wolf/Cinderella's Prince, Tom Aldredge as the Narrator/Mysterious Man, Kim Crosby as Cinderella, Danielle Ferland as Little Red Ridinghood, Ben Wright as Jack, Chuck Wagner as Rapunzel's Prince, Barbara Bryne as Jack's Mother, Pamela Winslow as Rapunzel, Merle Louise as Cinderella's Mother/Granny/Giantess, Edmund Lyndeck as Cinderella's father, Joy Franz as Cinderella's Stepmother, Philip Hoffman as the Steward, Lauren Mitchell as Lucinda, Kay McClelland as Florinda, Jean Kelly as Snow White, and Maureen Davis as Sleeping Beauty. It was directed by Lapine, with musical staging by Lar Lubovitch, sets by Tony Straiges, lighting by Richard Nelson, and costumes by Ann Hould-Ward (based on original concepts by Patricia Zipprodt and Ann Hould-Ward). The production won the 1988 New York Drama Critics' Circle Award and the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Musical, and the original cast recording won a Grammy Award for Best Musical Theater Album at the 31st Annual Grammy Awards. The show was nominated for ten Tony Awards at the 42nd Tony Awards, and won three: Best Original Score (Sondheim), Best Book (Lapine) and Best Actress in a Musical (Gleason).\nPeters left the show after almost five months, and replacements for the Witch were Betsy Joslyn; Phylicia Rashad, Nancy Dussault and Ellen Foley. Other notable cast replacements included Dick Cavett as the Narrator, Edmund Lyndeck as the Mysterious Man, Patricia Ben Peterson as Cinderella, LuAnne Ponce returning as Little Red, Jeff Blumenkrantz as Jack, Marin Mazzie as Rapunzel, Dean Butler as Rapunzel's Prince, Cindy Robinson as Snow White, and Cynthia Sikes and Mary Gordon Murray as the Baker's Wife. From May 23 to 25, 1989, the original cast (except with Cindy Robinson as Snow White) reunited for three performances to tape the show for the Season 10 premiere episode of PBS's \"American Playhouse\", which first aired on March 15, 1991. The show was filmed on the set of the Martin Beck Theatre in front of audiences, with certain elements slightly changed for the recording to better fit the screen, and with lighting and minor costume differences. There were also pick-up shots not filmed in front of an audience. The video was later released on VHS and DVD and, on occasion, remastered and rereleased.\nTenth Anniversary benefit performances were held on November 9, 1997, at the Broadway Theatre in New York, with most of the original cast. Wagner played the Wolf/Cinderella's Prince, Jonathan Dokuchitz played Rapunzel's Prince, and Blumenkrantz played the Steward. This concert included the duet \"Our Little World\". On November 9, 2014, most of the original cast reunited for a reunion concert and discussion in Costa Mesa, California. Mo Rocca hosted and interviewed Sondheim, Lapine, and each cast member. Appearing were Peters, Gleason, Zien, Ferland, Wright and husband and wife Westenberg and Crosby. The same group presented another discussion/concert on June 21, 2015, at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, New York City.\nUS tour (1988).\nA U.S. tour started performances on November 22, 1988. The cast included Cleo Laine as the Witch, Rex Robbins as the Narrator and Mysterious Man, Ray Gill and Mary Gordon Murray as the Baker and his wife, Kathleen Rowe McAllen as Cinderella, Chuck Wagner as the Wolf/Cinderella's Prince, Douglas Sills as Rapunzel's Prince, Robert Duncan McNeill and Charlotte Rae as Jack and his mother, Marcus Olson as the Steward, and Susan Gordon Clark reprising her role as Florinda from the Broadway production. The set was almost completely reconstructed, and there were certain changes to the script, changing certain story elements. Notable cast replacements included Joslyn as the Witch, Peter Walker as the Narrator/Mysterious Man, Olson as the Baker, Stuart Zagnit as the Steward, and Patricia Ben Peterson as Cinderella. The tour ran at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts from June to July 1989, where \"The Washington Post\" review called the \"lovely score \u2013 poised between melody and dissonance ... the perfect measure of our tenuous condition. The songs invariably follow the characters' thinking patterns, as they weigh their options and digest their experience. Needless to say, that doesn't make for traditional show-stoppers. But it does make for vivacity of another kind. And Sondheim's lyrics ... are brilliant. ... I think you'll find these cast members alert and engaging.\"\nOriginal West End (1990).\nThe original West End production opened on September 25, 1990, at the Phoenix Theatre and closed on February 23, 1991, after 197 performances. It was directed by Richard Jones and produced by David Mirvish, with set design by Richard Hudson, choreography by Anthony Van Laast, costumes by Sue Blane, and orchestrations by Jonathan Tunick. The cast featured Julia McKenzie as the Witch, Ian Bartholomew as the Baker, Imelda Staunton as the Baker's Wife and Clive Carter as the Wolf/Cinderella's prince. The show was nominated for seven Olivier Awards in 1991, winning Best Actress in a Musical (Staunton) and Best Director of a Musical (Jones).\nThe song \"Our Little World\" was added. A duet for the Witch and Rapunzel, it gives further insight into the Witch's care for her self-proclaimed daughter and the desire Rapunzel has to see the world outside her tower. The show's overall feel was darker than that of the original Broadway production. Critic Michael Billington wrote: \"But the evening's triumph belongs also to director Richard Jones, set designer Richard Hudson and costume designer Sue Blane]who evoke exactly the right mood of haunted theatricality. Old-fashioned footlights give the faces a sinister glow. The woods themselves are a semi-circular, black-and-silver screen punctuated with nine doors and a crazy clock: they achieve exactly the 'agreeable terror' of Gustave Dor\u00e9's children's illustrations. And the effects are terrific: doors open to reveal the rotating magnified eyeball or the admonitory finger of the predatory giant.\"\nLondon revival (1998).\nAn intimate production of the show opened at the Donmar Warehouse on November 16, 1998, closing on February 13, 1999. It was directed by John Crowley and designed by his brother, Bob Crowley. The cast included Clare Burt as the Witch, Nick Holder as the Baker, Sophie Thompson as the Baker's Wife, Jenna Russell as Cinderella, Sheridan Smith as Little Red, Damian Lewis as the Wolf/Cinderella's Prince, and Frank Middlemass as the Narrator. Thompson won the 1999 Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actress in a Musical; the production was nominated for Outstanding Musical Production.\nBroadway revival (2002).\nA revival opened at the Ahmanson Theatre in Los Angeles, running from February 1 to March 24, 2002. It had the same director, choreographer, and principal cast that began performances on Broadway a month later.\nThe 2002 Broadway revival, directed by Lapine and choreographed by John Carrafa, began previews on April 13, 2002, and opened on April 30 at the Broadhurst Theatre, closing on December 29 after a run of 18 previews and 279 regular performances. It starred Vanessa Williams as the Witch, John McMartin as the Narrator/Mysterious Man, Stephen DeRosa as the Baker, Kerry O'Malley as the Baker's Wife, Gregg Edelman as the Wolf/Cinderella's prince, Christopher Sieber as the Wolf/Rapunzel's prince, Molly Ephraim as Little Red, Adam Wylie as Jack, and Laura Benanti as Cinderella. Judi Dench provided the Giantess's pre-recorded voice. The production featured designs by Douglas W. Schmidt (sets), Susan Hilferty (costumes), Brian MacDevitt (lighting), Dan Moses Schreier (sound) and Elaine J. McCarthy (projection). The revival won Tonys for the best revival and lighting design at the 56th Tony Awards.\nLapine revised the script slightly for this production, with a cameo appearance of the Three Little Pigs restored from the earlier San Diego production. There were also various small dialogue changes; a new song \"Our Little World\"; a second wolf who ogles the Three Little Pigs (portrayed by the same actor as Rapunzel's prince); Milky White was played by a live performer (Chad Kimball) in an intricate costume; new lyrics for \"Last Midnight\", now a menacing lullaby sung by the Witch to the Baker's baby; and the ending also got new lyrics. The Witch starts aging again due to her losing the beans, and she sinks into the stage crying out: \"Mother, here I come!\", as opposed to the traditional \"and the boom\u2013crunch!\"\nLondon Royal Opera House (2007).\nA revival at the Royal Opera House's Linbury Studio in Covent Garden ran from June 14 to 30, 2007, followed by a short stint at The Lowry theatre, Salford Quays, Manchester on July 4\u20137. The production mixed opera singers, musical theatre actors, and film and television actors, including Anne Reid (Jack's mother) and Gary Waldhorn (the narrator), Suzie Toase (Little Red), Peter Caulfield (Jack), Beverley Klein (Witch), Anna Francolini (Baker's Wife), Clive Rowe (Baker), Nicholas Garrett (Wolf/Cinderella's Prince), and Lara Pulver (Lucinda). This was the second Sondheim musical to be staged by the Opera House, following 2003's \"\".. Directed by Will Tuckett, it received mixed reviews, although there were clear standout performances.\nThe production completely sold out three weeks before opening. As it was billed as an opera production, the show and its performers were not considered in the musical theatre nominations for the 2008 Laurence Olivier Awards.\nRegent's Park Open Air Theatre (2010).\nA production at Regent's Park Open Air Theatre in London, directed by Timothy Sheader and choreographed by Liam Steel, ran from 6 August to 11 September 2010. The cast included Hannah Waddingham as the Witch, Mark Hadfield as the Baker, Jenna Russell as the Baker's Wife, Helen Dallimore as Cinderella, Michael Xavier as the Wolf/Cinderella's prince, and Judi Dench as the recorded voice of the Giantess. Gareth Valentine was the musical director. The musical was performed outdoors in a wooded area. While the book remained mostly unchanged, the subtext of the plot was dramatically altered by casting the role of the Narrator as a young school boy lost in the woods following a family argument \u2013 a device used to further illustrate the musical's themes of parenting and adolescence.\nThe production opened to wide critical acclaim, with much of the press commenting on the effectiveness of the open-air setting. \"The Daily Telegraph\" reviewer, for example, wrote: \"It is an inspired idea to stage this show in the magical, sylvan surroundings of Regent's Park, and designer Soutra Gilmour has come up with a marvellously rickety, adventure playground of a set, all ladders, stairs and elevated walkways, with Rapunzel discovered high up in a tree.\" \"The New York Times\" reviewer commented: \"The natural environment makes for something genuinely haunting and mysterious as night falls on the audience\". The production won the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Musical Revival at the 2011 Laurence Olivier Awards. It was captured by live by Digital Theatre+.\nDelacorte Theater (2012).\nThe Regent's Park production transferred to the Public Theater's 2012 free summer series, Shakespeare in the Park, at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, New York City, with an American cast and new designers. The cast included Amy Adams as the Baker's Wife, Donna Murphy as the Witch, Denis O'Hare as the Baker, Chip Zien (the Baker in the 1987 Broadway cast) as the Mysterious Man/Cinderella's father, Ivan Hernandez as the Wolf/Cinderella's prince, Jessie Mueller as Cinderella, Jack Broderick as the young Narrator, Gideon Glick as Jack, Cooper Grodin as Rapunzel's Prince, Sarah Stiles as Little Red, Josh Lamon as the Steward, and Glenn Close as the voice of the Giantess. Sheader again directed, and Steel served as co-director and choreographer. Performances ran from July 24 until September 1. The set was a collaboration between Gilmour and John Lee Beatty and rose \"over 50 feet in the air, with a series of tree-covered catwalks and pathways\". There were reports of a possible Broadway transfer, but scheduling conflicts prevented this.\nHollywood Bowl (2019).\nFor its annual fully staged musical, the Hollywood Bowl produced \"Into the Woods\" from July 26\u201328, 2019, directed and choreographed by Robert Longbottom. The cast included Skylar Astin as the Baker, Sutton Foster as the Baker's Wife, Patina Miller as the Witch, Sierra Boggess as Cinderella, Cheyenne Jackson as the Wolf/Cinderella's Prince, Chris Carmack as Rapunzel's Prince, Gaten Matarazzo as Jack, Anthony Crivello as the Mysterious Man, Edward Hibbert as the Narrator, Shanice Williams as Little Red, Hailey Kilgore as Rapunzel, Rebecca Spencer as Jack's Mother, original Broadway cast member Gregory North as Cinderella's father, and Whoopi Goldberg as the voice of the Giantess The production featured Ann Hould-Ward's costumes from the original Broadway production.\nEncores! concert (2022).\nNew York City Center staged \"Into the Woods\" as part of its Encores! series from May 4\u201315, 2022, directed by Encores! artistic director Lear deBessonet. The cast starred Heather Headley as the Witch, Neil Patrick Harris as The Baker and Sara Bareilles as the Baker's Wife, with Den\u00e9e Benton as Cinderella, Cole Thompson as Jack, Ann Harada as Jack's Mother, Julia Lester as Little Red, Shereen Pimentel as Rapunzel, Gavin Creel as Cinderella's Prince/Wolf, Jordan Donica as Rapunzel's Prince, Annie Golden as Grandmother/Cinderella's Mother/Giant's Wife, David Patrick Kelly as Narrator/Mysterious Man, Ta'nika Gibson as Lucinda, Lauren Mitchell (who played Lucinda in the 1987 Broadway production) as Cinderella's StepmotherAlbert Guerzon as Cinderella's Father, Brooke Ishibashi as Florinda, Kennedy Kanagawa as Milky White, Lauren Mitchell as Cinderella's Stepmother and David Turner as Steward Donica tested positive for COVID-19, and so Jason Forbach played Rapunzel's Prince for the first week of performances.\nBroadway revival (2022).\nThe Encores! production transferred to Broadway at the St. James Theatre, with an official opening on July 10, 2022, after previews beginning on June 28, to universally positive reviews. Most of the Encores! cast transferred, except that Brian d'Arcy James played the Baker, Patina Miller was the Witch, Phillipa Soo was Cinderella, Joshua Henry was Rapunzel's Prince, Nancy Opel was Cinderella's Stepmother, Aymee Garcia was Jack's Mother, and Alysia Velez was Rapunzel. From July 24 to August 2, Cheyenne Jackson filled in as the Wolf and Cinderella's Prince. \nOn September 6, 2022, married couple Stephanie J. Block and Sebastian Arcelus replaced Bareilles and James as the Baker's Wife and the Baker. Other replacements included Krysta Rodriguez as Cinderella and Jim Stanek as the Steward. Montego Glover began sharing the role of the Witch with Miller, and Andy Karl played the Wolf/Cinderella's Prince from September 6\u201315. Harada joined the cast as Jack's mother on September 27. James returned to the cast as the Baker starting October 25, and Karl returned, this time as Rapunzel's Prince, starting October 11. The cast album was released on September 30. Benton joined the cast as Cinderella from November 21 to December 24. Joaquina Kalukango played the Witch from December 16. On December 2, Henry resumed the role of Rapunzel's Prince. Arcelus returned as the Baker starting January 3.\nThe production closed on January 8, 2023. The cast recording won the Grammy Award for Best Musical Theater Album at the 65th Annual Grammy Awards. The production was nominated for six Tony Awards.\nUS tour (2023).\nThe 2022 Broadway revival production toured the U.S. in 2023, starting on February 18. Glover, Arcelus, Block, Creel, Thompson, Geraghty, Kelly, Opel, Garcia, (from Boston onward), Gibson, Ishibashi, Stanek, Velez, Kanagawa and Phelan all reprised their Broadway roles. Jason Forbach and Felicia Curry played Rapunzel's Prince and the Giantess/Cinderella's Mother/Granny, respectively. Rayanne Gonzales was Jack's Mother (in Buffalo and Washington, D.C. only), Josh Breckenridge was Cinderella's father/puppeteer.\nOn February 25\u201326, Andy Karl reprised his Broadway role of Rapunzel's Prince during the opening weekend of the tour's engagement in Washington, D.C., and Forbach stepped into the role of the Baker for an injured Arcelus from February 25 for two weeks. Rodriguez reprised her Broadway role of Cinderella in the Los Angeles portion of the tour. The tour visited ten cities.\nPlanned London revival (2025).\nA production directed by Jordan Fein and designed by Tom Scutt is scheduled to play at London's Bridge Theatre with previews planned to begin on 2 December. It is scheduled to run until 18 April 2026. The production is set to star Jamie Parker as the Baker, Katie Brayben as the Baker's Wife, Kate Fleetwood as the Witch, Michael Gould as the Narrator/Mysterious Man, Chumisa Dornford-May as Cinderella, and Oliver Savile as the Wolf/Cinderella's Prince.\nOther productions.\nA production played in Sydney from March 19 to June 5, 1993, at the Drama Theatre, Sydney Opera House. It starred Judi Connelli as the Witch, Geraldine Turner as the Baker's Wife, Tony Sheldon as the Baker, Philip Quast as the Wolf/Cinderella's Prince, Pippa Grandison as Cinderella, Sharon Millerchip as Little Red, and D. J. Foster as Rapunzel's Prince. Melbourne Theatre Company played the musical from January 17 to February 21, 1998, at the Playhouse, Victorian Arts Centre. It starred Rhonda Burchmore as the Witch, John McTernan as the Baker, Gina Riley as the Baker's Wife, Lisa McCune as Cinderella, Robert Grubb as the Wolf/Cinderella's Prince, Peter Carroll as the Narrator/Mysterious Man, and Tamsin Carroll as Little Red. \nIn 2000, a U.S. regional production starred Pat Harrington, Jr. as the Narrator, Brian d'Arcy James as the Baker, Leah Hocking as the Baker's Wife, Tracy Katz as Little Red, Liz McCartney as the Witch, and Patricia Ben Peterson as Cinderella at the Ordway Center for the Performing Arts in Saint Paul, Minnesota. In 2009, a production was staged in Sacramento, California, by the Wells Fargo Pavilion. It starred Yvette Cason as the Witch, Jeffry Denman as the Baker, Vicki Lewis as his wife, Tracy Katz reprising her role as Little Red from the first national tour, Jason Forbach as the Wolf/Rapunzel's Prince, Gordon Goodman as Cinderella's Prince, Kim Huber as Cinderella, Matthew Wolpe as Jack, and Michael G. Hawkins as the Narrator/Mysterious Man. A 25th-anniversary co-production in 2012 between Baltimore, Maryland's Center Stage and Westport Country Playhouse, directed by Mark Lamos, cast the original Little Red, Danielle Ferland, as the Baker's Wife. The cast also included Erik Liberman as the Baker, Lauren Kennedy as the Witch, Jeffry Denman as the Narrator, Nik Walker as the Wolf/Cinderella's Prince, Dana Steingold as Little Red, Justin Scott Brown as Jack, Jenny Latimer as Cinderella, Cheryl Stern as Jack's Mother, Robert Lenzi as Rapunzel's Prince/Cinderella's father, Alma Cuervo as Cinderella's Stepmother/Granny/Giantess, Britney Coleman as Rapunzel/Cinderella's Mother, Nikka Lanzarone as Florinda, Eleni Delopoulos as Lucinda, and Jeremy Lawrence as the Mysterious Man. \nThe first professional Spanish language production, \"Dentro del Bosque\", was produced by University of Puerto Rico Repertory Theatre and premiered in San Juan at Teatro de la Universidad (University Theatre) on March 14, 2013. The cast included V\u00edctor Santiago as the baker, Ana Isabelle as the Baker's Wife and Lourdes Robles as the Witch. In 2014, a production premiered in Paris, France, at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre du Ch\u00e2telet from April 1\u201312. It starred Nicholas Garrett as the Baker, Francesca Jackson as Little Red, Kimy McLaren as Cinderella, Christine Buffle as the Baker's Wife, Beverley Klein as the Witch, Pascal Charbonneau and Rebecca de Pont Davies as Jack and his mother, Damian Thantrey as the Wolf/Cinderella's Prince, David Curry as the Wolf/Rapunzel's Prince, Louise Alder as Rapunzel, and Fanny Ardant as the voice of the Giantess. A production by the Oregon Shakespeare Festival, directed by Amanda Dehnert, ran in the festival's outdoor Elizabethan Theatre from June 4 through October 11, 2014. The cast included Anthony Heald as Narrator and Mysterious Man, and Catherine E. Coulson as Stepmother, Milky White and the Giant. In the festival's 2025 revival of the production, Heald reprised his roles and Coulson, who died in 2015, appeared again as the Giant in video projections. The Roundabout Theatre production, directed by Noah Brody and Ben Steinfeld, began performances off-Broadway at the Laura Pels Theatre on December 19, 2014, in previews, opened on January 22, 2015, and closed on April 12, 2015. Like the original Broadway production, this production had a try-out run at the Old Globe Theatre in San Diego, California, from July 12 to August 17, 2014 with the opening night taking place on July 17. This version was minimalistically reimagined by the Fiasco Theater Company, featuring only ten actors playing multiple parts, and one piano accompanist. A national tour of the production began on November 29, 2016.\nThe DreamCatcher Theatre production opened in January 2015 and played at the Adrienne Arsht Center in Miami, Florida. Tituss Burgess starred as the Witch, the first male actor to do so. The cast also included Arielle Jacobs as the Baker's Wife, JJ Caruncho as the Baker, Justin John Moniz as the Wolf/Cinderella's Prince, Wayne LeGette as the Narrator/Mysterious Man, Annemarie Rosano as Cinderella, and Matthew Janisse as Rapunzel's Prince. The musical ran at The Muny in St. Louis, Missouri, from July 21\u201328, 2015. The cast included Heather Headley (Witch), Erin Dilly (Baker's Wife), Rob McClure (Baker), Ken Page (Narrator), Elena Shaddow (Cinderella), Andrew Samonsky (Wolf/Cinderella's Prince), Samantha Massell (Rapunzel), and Michael McCormick (Mysterious Man/Cinderella's father).\nThe Hart House Theatre production in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, from January 15\u201330, 2016, and February 9\u201311, 2023. A production ran at the West Yorkshire Playhouse in Leeds in a collaboration with Opera North from June 2\u201325, 2016. An Israeli production in Hebrew, \"\u05d0\u05dc \u05ea\u05d5\u05da \u05d4\u05d9\u05e2\u05e8 (El Toch Ha-ya-ar)\", opened in Tel Aviv in August 2016, produced by The Tramp Productions and Stuff Like That, starring Roi Dolev as the Witch, the second male actor to do so.\nIn 2017, a Danish language production ran from May 19 to June 24 at Glassalen in Tivoli, Copenhagen, starring Flemming Enevold as the narrator. The production opened again on March 18, 2022, running until April 23, starring Stig Rossen as the Narrator and Ghita N\u00f8rby as the voice of the Giantess. In 2019, there was a production done at the Patchogue Theatre in Long Island, New York, starring Constantine Maroulis as the Wolf/Cinderella's Prince, Melissa Errico as the Baker's Wife, Ali Ewoldt as Cinderella, Alice Ripley as the Witch, Jim Stanek as the Baker, Alan Muraoka as the Narrator/Mysterious Man, and Darren Ritchie as Rapunzel's Prince. Also in 2019, \"Into the Woods\" was mounted by the Barrington Stage Company in Pittsfield, Massachusetts. It starred Mykal Kilgore as the Witch, Mara Davi as the Baker's Wife, Jonathan Raviv as the Baker, Pepe Nufrio as Rapunzel's Prince, Sarah Dacey Charles as Cinderella's Stepmother/Granny/Cinderella's Mother, Dorcas Leung as Little Red, Amanda Robles as Cinderella, Thom Sesma as the Narrator/Mysterious Man, Kevin Toniazzo-Naughton as the Wolf/Cinderella's Prince, Clay Singer as Jack, Zo\u00eb Aarts as Lucinda, Megan Orticelli as Florinda, and Leslie Becker as the Giantess/Jack's Mother.\nA 2022 production staged at Arkansas Repertory Theatre featured the pre-recorded voice of former United States Secretary of State and Presidential nominee Hillary Clinton as the Giantess. A production by Belvoir St Theatre in Sydney, Australia, ran from March 23 to April 30, 2023.\nA production played at the Theatre Royal in Bath, England, for 4 weeks starting on August 17, 2022. It was directed by Terry Gilliam and Leah Hausman. The show was first booked for the Old Vic Theatre in 2020 but was cancelled there due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The cast included Julian Bleach as the Mysterious Man, Nicola Hughes as the Witch, Rhashan Stone as the Baker, Alex Young as the Baker's Wife, Nathanael Campbell as the Wolf and Cinderella's Prince, Audrey Brisson as Cinderella, Barney Wilkinson as Jack, Gillian Bevan as Jack's Mother, Charlotte Jaconelli as Florinda, Maria Conneeley as Rapunzel, and Lauren Conroy as Little Red. The music director was Stephen Higgins; Jon Bausor was in charge of the production design and Anthony McDonald of the costumes. The conceit of the production was that the characters were figures in a young girl's Victorian toy theatre. The show opened to mostly positive reviews, with critics praising this \"hallucinogenic take\", with its \"imaginative imagery\" and \"sheer spectacle\" and Leah Hausman's \"particularly crisp\" choreography, while others regretted a lack of an \"emotional connection between the characters and the audience\". Reviews generally praised the cast, particularly Prendergast.\nA 2025 Philippine production by Theatre Group Asia ran from August 7 to 31, 2025, at the Samsung Performing Arts Theater in Circuit Makati. The cast included Lea Salonga (the Witch), Arielle Jacobs (Cinderella), Eugene Domingo (Jack's Mother), Josh Dela Cruz (Prince Charming/Wolf), Nyoy Volante (the Baker), Mikkie Bradshaw-Volante (the Baker's Wife), Nic Chien (Jack), Joreen Bautista (Rapunzel/Cinderella's Mother/Sleeping Beauty), Mark Bautista (Rapunzel's Prince), Teetin Villanueva (Little Red Riding Hood), Tex Ordo\u00f1ez-de Leon (Cinderella's Stepmother), Carla Guevara Laforteza (the Giant/Granny/Snow White), and Rody Vera (the Narrator/Mysterious Man). Chari Arespacochaga directed, with Clint Ramos as the creative director. It featured Philippine accents in the costumes, set design, and props.\nPrincipal casts.\nThe original principal casts of major-market stage productions of \"Into the Woods\".\nAdaptations.\nHigh School version.\nThe musical has been adapted by Music Theatre International into a teen-friendly version for use by schools and young companies. Little to nothing has been changed in this version, but it can be changed at the director's will depending on their vision.\nJunior version.\nThe musical has been adapted by Music Theatre International into a child-friendly version for use by schools and young companies, with the second act completely removed, as well as a large amount of material from the first. The show is shortened from the original two and a half hours to fit in a 50-minute range, and the music is transposed into keys that more easily fit young voices. It is licensed through Music Theatre International Broadway Junior musicals. The plot differs from the original with the story ending on a \"happy ending\".\nIn 2019, a similar adaptation, \"Into the Woods Sr.\", adapted for performance by senior citizens in community centers and nursing homes, premiered. It is available under license.\nFilm.\nA theatrical film adaptation of the musical was produced by Walt Disney Pictures, directed by Rob Marshall, and starring Meryl Streep as the Witch, Emily Blunt as the Baker's Wife, James Corden as the Baker, Anna Kendrick as Cinderella, Chris Pine as Cinderella's Prince, Daniel Huttlestone as Jack, Lilla Crawford as Little Red Ridinghood, Tracey Ullman as Jack's Mother, Billy Magnussen as Rapunzel's Prince, Christine Baranski as Cinderella's Stepmother, MacKenzie Mauzy as Rapunzel, Tammy Blanchard as Florinda, and Johnny Depp as the Wolf. The film was released on December 25, 2014. It was a critical and commercial hit, grossing over $213 million worldwide. For her performance as the witch, Streep was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress at the 87th Academy Awards. The film also received Academy Award nominations for Best Production Design and Best Costume Design.\nAnalysis of book and music.\nIn most productions of \"Into the Woods\", including the original Broadway production, several parts are doubled. Cinderella's Prince and the Wolf, who both cannot control their appetites, are usually played by the same actor. Similarly, so are the Narrator and the Mysterious Man, who both comment on the story while avoiding any personal involvement or responsibility. Granny and Cinderella's Mother, both matriarchal characters, are also typically played by the same person, who also gives voice to the nurturing but later murderous Giantess.\nThe show covers multiple themes: growing up, parents and children, accepting responsibility, morality, and finally, wish fulfillment and its consequences. \"Time Magazine\"'s reviewers wrote that the play's \"basic insight... is at heart, most fairy tales are about the loving yet embattled relationship between parents and children. Almost everything that goes wrong\u2014which is to say, almost everything that can\u2014arises from a failure of parental or filial duty, despite the best intentions.\" Stephen Holden wrote that the show's themes include parent-child relationships and the individual's responsibility to the community. The Witch isn't just a scowling old hag, but a key symbol of moral ambivalence. Lapine said that the most unpleasant person (the Witch) would have the truest things to say and the \"nicer\" people would be less honest. In the Witch's words: \"I'm not good; I'm not nice; I'm just right.\"\nGiven the show's debut during the 1980s, the height of the U.S. AIDS crisis, the work has been interpreted as a parable about AIDS. In this interpretation, the Giantess is a metaphor for HIV/AIDS, killing good and bad characters indiscriminately and forcing survivors to band together to stop the threat and move on from the devastation, reflecting the devastation AIDS wrought on many communities. When asked about the connection, Sondheim acknowledged that initial audiences interpreted it as an AIDS metaphor, but said that the work was not intended to be specific.\nThe score is also notable in Sondheim's output because of its intricate reworking and development of small musical motifs. In particular, the opening words, \"I wish\", are set to the interval of a rising major second and this small unit is both repeated and developed throughout the show, just as Lapine's book explores the consequences of self-interest and \"wishing\". The dialogue is characterized by the heavy use of syncopated speech. In many instances, the characters' lines are delivered with a fixed beat that follows natural speech rhythms, but is also purposely composed in eighth, sixteenth, and quarter note rhythms as part of a spoken song. Like many Sondheim/Lapine productions, the songs contain thought-process narrative, where characters converse or think aloud.\nSondheim drew on parts of his troubled childhood when writing the show. In 1987, he told \"Time Magazine\" that the \"father uncomfortable with babies [was] his father, and [the] mother who regrets having had children [was] his mother.\" \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15342", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15342", "title": "Isaac Klein", "text": "Conservative rabbi\nIsaac Klein (September 5, 1905 \u2013 January 23, 1979) was a prominent rabbi and halakhic authority within Conservative Judaism.\nPersonal life, education, and career.\nKlein was born in the small village of V\u00e1rpal\u00e1nka, today part of Mukachevo, in what was then Hungary. He emigrated with his family to the United States in 1921. He earned a BA from City College of New York in 1931. Although nearing ordination at the Yeshiva University's Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary, he transferred to the Jewish Theological Seminary of America (JTSA), where he was ordained in 1934 and received the advanced Jewish legal degree of \"Hattarat Hora\u2019ah\" under the great talmudic scholar Rabbi Professor Louis Ginzberg. He was one of only three people, along with Boaz Cohen and Louis Finkelstein, to ever to receive this degree from JTSA. Klein subsequently earned a PhD from Harvard University under the pioneering academic of Judaic studies Harry Wolfson.\nHe married the former Henriette Levine in 1932 and had three daughters, Hannah, Miriam, and Rivke. Devoted to his family, he dedicated his major work, \"A Guide to Jewish Religious Practice\" to his children, sons-in-law and 13 grandchildren listing each by name.\nKlein served as rabbi at Kadimoh Congregation in Springfield, Massachusetts from 1934 to 1953; Temple Emanu-El, Buffalo, New York, 1953\u20131968; Temple Shaarey Zedek, Buffalo, (which was created from the merger of Emanu-El with Temple Beth David in 1968), 1968\u20131972. He and his wife, who was an educator, founded Jewish day schools in both Springfield and Buffalo.\nDespite the difficulties facing a congregational Rabbi raising a family, Klein volunteered for the U.S. Army during World War II as a chaplain. He served over 4 years, rising to the rank of Major and was an advisor to the high commissioner of the Occupation government. He also served on special assignments for Jewish soldiers in the U.S. Army in the 1950s, receiving the simulated rank of Brigadier General for these missions. His experiences in the war are described in his book \"The Anguish and the Ecstasy of a Jewish Chaplain\".\nRole within Conservative Judaism.\nKlein was a leader of the right-wing of the Conservative movement. He was president of the Rabbinical Assembly, 1958\u20131960, and a member of its Committee on Jewish Law and Standards, 1948\u20131979. He was the author of several books, notably, \"A Guide to Jewish Religious Practice\". One of the outstanding halakhists of the movement, he served as a leading member of the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards from 1948 until his death in 1979.\nAs a leading authority on halakha he authored many important teshuvot (responsa), many of which were published in his influential \"Responsa and Halakhic Studies\". From the 1950s to 1970s, he wrote a comprehensive guide to Jewish law that was used to teach halakha at the JTSA. In 1979 he assembled this into \"A Guide to Jewish Religious Practice\", which is used widely by laypeople and rabbis within Conservative Judaism.\nRabbinic thought.\nThe philosophy upon which \"A Guide to Jewish Religious Practice\" is written is stated in the foreword: \"The premise on which Torah is based is that all aspects of life - leisure no less than business, worship or rites of passage (birth, bar mitzvah, marriage, divorce, death) - are part of the covenant and mandate under which every Jew is to serve God in everything he does. In the eyes of Torah there is, strictly speaking, no such thing as the purely private domain, for even in solitude - be it the privacy of the bath or the unconsciousness of sleep - one has the capacity and the duty to serve God.\" This message, of life seen in consonance with the dictates of Judaism, permeates many pages of the book. Rabbi Louis Finkelstein, scholar of the JTSA, wrote: \"There are those who would think that we have but two alternatives, to reject or to accept the law, but in either case to treat it as a dead letter. Both of these alternatives are repugnant to the whole tradition of Judaism. Jewish law must be preserved but it is subject to interpretation by those who have mastered it, and the interpretation placed upon it by duly authorized masters in every generation must be accepted with as much reverence as those which were given in previous generations.\"\nThis understanding of traditional preservation of the law through its continuous interpretation lies at the heart of Klein's extensive study of Jewish law.\nKlein's papers are located at the University Archives, State University of New York at Buffalo (see https://). The archives include fourteen reels of microfilm. The collection consists of extensive writings by Klein on traditional Jewish practice and law. This includes manuscript material for his books \"Guide to Jewish Religious Practice\" (1979), \"The Ten Commandments in a Changing World \" (1963), \"The Anguish and the Ecstasy of a Jewish Chaplain\" (1974), and his translation of \"The Code of Maimonides (Mishneh Torah): Book 7, The Book of Agriculture\" (1979). The collection also contains speeches, sermons, articles, and remarks from the Conservative Jewish viewpoint on subjects such as Jewish medical ethics, dietary laws, adoption, and marriage and divorce. Meeting minutes, annual reports, bulletins, and sermons relating to Klein's rabbinical vocations in Springfield, Massachusetts and Buffalo, New York are also included. The papers contain photographs, wartime letters, and military records of Klein documenting his service in World War II as a director of Jewish religious affairs in Germany.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15343", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15343", "title": "Intron", "text": "Part of a gene that is spliced away\nAn intron is any nucleotide sequence within a gene that is not expressed or operative in the final RNA product. The word \"intron\" is derived from the term \"intragenic region\", i.e., a region inside a gene. The term \"intron\" refers to both the DNA sequence within a gene and the corresponding RNA sequence in RNA transcripts. The non-intron sequences that become joined by this RNA processing to form the mature RNA are called exons.\nIntrons are found in the genes of most eukaryotes and many eukaryotic viruses, and they can be located in both protein-coding genes and genes that function as RNA (noncoding genes). There are four main types of introns: tRNA introns, group I introns, group II introns, and spliceosomal introns (see below). Introns are rare in Bacteria and Archaea (prokaryotes).\nDiscovery and etymology.\nIntrons were first discovered in protein-coding genes of adenovirus, and were subsequently identified in genes encoding transfer RNA and ribosomal RNA genes. Introns are now known to occur within a wide variety of genes throughout organisms, bacteria, and viruses within all of the biological kingdoms.\nThe fact that genes were split or interrupted by introns was discovered independently in a number of labs in 1977 including those run by Phillip Allen Sharp and Richard J. Roberts, for which they shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1993, Other labs that contributed to the discovery were those of Louise Chow and Thomas Broker. Much of the work in the Sharp lab was done by postdoctoral fellow Susan Berget. \nThe term \"intron\" was introduced by American biochemist Walter Gilbert:\n\"The notion of the cistron [i.e., gene] ... must be replaced by that of a transcription unit containing regions which will be lost from the mature messenger \u2013 which I suggest we call introns (for intragenic regions) \u2013 alternating with regions which will be expressed \u2013 exons.\" (Gilbert 1978)\nThe term \"intron\" also refers to \"intracistron\", i.e., an additional piece of DNA that arises within a cistron.\nAlthough introns are sometimes called \"intervening sequences\", the term \"intervening sequence\" can refer to any of several families of internal nucleic acid sequences that are not present in the final gene product, including inteins, untranslated regions (UTR), and nucleotides removed by RNA editing, in addition to introns.\nDistribution.\nThe frequency of introns within different genomes is observed to vary widely across the spectrum of biological organisms. For example, introns are extremely common within the nuclear genome of jawed vertebrates (e.g. humans, mice, and pufferfish (fugu)), where protein-coding genes almost always contain multiple introns, while introns are rare within the nuclear genes of some eukaryotic microorganisms, for example baker's/brewer's yeast (\"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\"). In contrast, the mitochondrial genomes of vertebrates are entirely devoid of introns, while those of eukaryotic microorganisms may contain many introns.\nA particularly extreme case is the \"Drosophila DhDhc7\" gene containing a \u22653.6 megabase (Mb) intron, which takes roughly three days to transcribe. On the other extreme, a 2015 study suggests that the shortest known metazoan intron length is 30 base pairs (bp) belonging to the human \"MST1L\" gene. The shortest known introns belong to the heterotrich ciliates, such as \"Stentor coeruleus\", in which most (&gt; 95%) introns are 15 or 16 bp long.\nClassification.\nSplicing of all intron-containing RNA molecules is superficially similar, as described above. However, different types of introns were identified through the examination of intron structure by DNA sequence analysis, together with genetic and biochemical analysis of RNA splicing reactions. At least four distinct classes of introns have been identified:\nGroup III introns are proposed to be a fifth family, but little is known about the biochemical apparatus that mediates their splicing. They appear to be related to group II introns, and possibly to spliceosomal introns.\nSpliceosomal introns.\nNuclear pre-mRNA introns (spliceosomal introns) are characterized by specific intron sequences located at the boundaries between introns and exons. These sequences are recognized by spliceosomal RNA molecules when the splicing reactions are initiated. In addition, they contain a branch point, a particular nucleotide sequence near the 3' end of the intron that becomes covalently linked to the 5' end of the intron during the splicing process, generating a branched intron. Apart from these three short conserved elements, nuclear pre-mRNA intron sequences are highly variable. Nuclear pre-mRNA introns are often much longer than their surrounding exons.\ntRNA introns.\nTransfer RNA introns that depend upon proteins for removal occur at a specific location within the anticodon loop of unspliced tRNA precursors, and are removed by a tRNA splicing endonuclease. The exons are then linked together by a second protein, the tRNA splicing ligase. Note that self-splicing introns are also sometimes found within tRNA genes.\nGroup I and group II introns.\nGroup I and group II introns are found in genes encoding proteins (messenger RNA), transfer RNA and ribosomal RNA in a very wide range of living organisms. Following transcription into RNA, group I and group II introns also make extensive internal interactions that allow them to fold into a specific, complex three-dimensional architecture. These complex architectures allow some group I and group II introns to be \"self-splicing\", that is, the intron-containing RNA molecule can rearrange its own covalent structure so as to precisely remove the intron and link the exons together in the correct order. In some cases, particular intron-binding proteins are involved in splicing, acting in such a way that they assist the intron in folding into the three-dimensional structure that is necessary for self-splicing activity. Group I and group II introns are distinguished by different sets of internal conserved sequences and folded structures, and by the fact that splicing of RNA molecules containing group II introns generates branched introns (like those of spliceosomal RNAs), while group I introns use a non-encoded guanosine nucleotide (typically GTP) to initiate splicing, adding it on to the 5'-end of the excised intron.\nOn the accuracy of splicing.\nThe spliceosome is a very complex structure containing up to one hundred proteins and five different RNAs. The substrate of the reaction is a long RNA molecule, and the transesterification reactions catalyzed by the spliceosome require the bringing together of sites that may be thousands of nucleotides apart. All biochemical reactions are associated with known error rates \u2013 and the more complicated the reaction, the higher the error rate. Therefore, it is not surprising that the splicing reaction catalyzed by the spliceosome has a significant error rate even though there are spliceosome accessory factors that suppress the accidental cleavage of cryptic splice sites.\nUnder ideal circumstances, the splicing reaction is likely to be 99.999% accurate (error rate of 10\u22125) and the correct exons will be joined and the correct intron will be deleted. However, these ideal conditions require very close matches to the best splice site sequences and the absence of any competing cryptic splice site sequences within the introns, and those conditions are rarely met in large eukaryotic genes that may cover more than 40 kilobase pairs. Recent studies have shown that the actual error rate can be considerably higher than 10\u22125 and may be as high as 2% or 3% errors (error rate of 2 or ) per gene. Additional studies suggest that the error rate is no less than 0.1% per intron. This relatively high level of splicing errors explains why most splice variants are rapidly degraded by nonsense-mediated decay.\nThe presence of sloppy binding sites within genes causes splicing errors and it may seem strange that these sites haven't been eliminated by natural selection. The argument for their persistence is similar to the argument for junk DNA.\nAlthough mutations which create or disrupt binding sites may be slightly deleterious, the large number of possible such mutations makes it inevitable that some will reach fixation in a population. This is particularly relevant in species, such as humans, with relatively small long-term effective population sizes. It is plausible, then, that the human genome carries a substantial load of suboptimal sequences which cause the generation of aberrant transcript isoforms. In this study, we present direct evidence that this is indeed the case.\nWhile the catalytic reaction may be accurate enough for effective processing most of the time, the overall error rate may be partly limited by the fidelity of transcription because transcription errors will introduce mutations that create cryptic splice sites. In addition, the transcription error rate of 10\u22125 \u2013 10\u22126 is high enough that one in every 25,000 transcribed exons will have an incorporation error in one of the splice sites leading to a skipped intron or a skipped exon. Almost all multi-exon genes will produce incorrectly spliced transcripts but the frequency of this background noise will depend on: the size of the genes, the number of introns, and the quality of the splice site sequences.\nIn some cases, splice variants will be produced by mutations in the gene (DNA). These can be SNP polymorphisms that create a cryptic splice site or mutate a functional site. They can also be somatic cell mutations that affect splicing in a particular tissue or a cell line. When the mutant allele is in a heterozygous state, this will result in production of two abundant splice variants: one functional, and one non-functional. In the homozygous state, the mutant alleles may cause a genetic disease, such as the hemophilia found in descendants of Queen Victoria, where a mutation in one of the introns in a blood clotting factor gene creates a cryptic 3' splice site, resulting in aberrant splicing. A significant fraction of human deaths by disease may be caused by mutations that interfere with normal splicing, mostly by creating cryptic splice sites.\nIncorrectly spliced transcripts can easily be detected and their sequences entered into the online databases. They are usually described as \"alternatively spliced\" transcripts, which can be confusing because the term does not distinguish between real, biologically relevant, alternative splicing and processing noise due to splicing errors. One of the central issues in the field of alternative splicing is working out the differences between these two possibilities. Many scientists have argued that the null hypothesis should be splicing noise, putting the burden of proof on those who claim biologically relevant alternative splicing. According to those scientists, the claim of function must be accompanied by convincing evidence that multiple functional products are produced from the same gene.\nBiological functions and evolution.\nWhile introns do not encode protein products, they are integral to gene expression regulation. Some introns themselves encode functional RNAs through further processing after splicing to generate noncoding RNA molecules. Alternative splicing is widely used to generate multiple proteins from a single gene. Furthermore, some introns play essential roles in a wide range of gene expression regulatory functions such as nonsense-mediated decay and mRNA export.\nAfter the initial discovery of introns in protein-coding genes of the eukaryotic nucleus, there was significant debate as to whether introns in modern-day organisms were inherited from a common ancient ancestor (termed the introns-early hypothesis), or whether they appeared in genes rather recently in the evolutionary process (termed the introns-late hypothesis). Another theory is that the spliceosome and the intron-exon structure of genes is a relic of the RNA world (the introns-first hypothesis). There is still considerable debate about the extent to which of these hypotheses is most correct but the popular consensus at the moment is that following the formation of the first eukaryotic cell group II introns from the bacterial endosymbiont invaded the host genome. In the beginning these self-splicing introns excised themselves from the mRNA precursor but over time some of them lost that ability and their excision had to be aided in \"trans\" by other group II introns. Eventually a number of specific trans-acting introns evolved and these became the precursors to the snRNAs of the spliceosome. The efficiency of splicing was improved by association with stabilizing proteins to form the primitive spliceosome.\nEarly studies of genomic DNA sequences from a wide range of organisms show that the intron-exon structure of homologous genes in different organisms can vary widely. More recent studies of entire eukaryotic genomes have now shown that the lengths and density (introns/gene) of introns varies considerably between related species. For example, while the human genome contains an average of 8.4 introns/gene (139,418 in the genome), the unicellular fungus \"Encephalitozoon cuniculi\" contains only 0.0075 introns/gene (15 introns in the genome). Since eukaryotes arose from a common ancestor (common descent), there must have been extensive gain or loss of introns during evolutionary time. This process is thought to be subject to selection, with a tendency towards intron gain in larger species due to their smaller population sizes, and the converse in smaller (particularly unicellular) species. Biological factors also influence which genes in a genome lose or accumulate introns.\nAlternative splicing of exons within a gene after intron excision acts to introduce greater variability of protein sequences translated from a single gene, allowing multiple related proteins to be generated from a single gene and a single precursor mRNA transcript. The control of alternative RNA splicing is performed by a complex network of signaling molecules that respond to a wide range of intracellular and extracellular signals.\nIntrons contain several short sequences that are important for efficient splicing, such as acceptor and donor sites at either end of the intron as well as a branch point site, which are required for proper splicing by the spliceosome. Some introns are known to enhance the expression of the gene that they are contained in by a process known as intron-mediated enhancement (IME).\nActively transcribed regions of DNA frequently form R-loops that are vulnerable to DNA damage. In highly expressed yeast genes, introns inhibit R-loop formation and the occurrence of DNA damage. Genome-wide analysis in both yeast and humans revealed that intron-containing genes have decreased R-loop levels and decreased DNA damage compared to intronless genes of similar expression. Insertion of an intron within an R-loop prone gene can also suppress R-loop formation and recombination. Bonnet et al. (2017) speculated that the function of introns in maintaining genetic stability may explain their evolutionary maintenance at certain locations, particularly in highly expressed genes.\nStarvation adaptation.\nThe physical presence of introns promotes cellular resistance to starvation via intron enhanced repression of ribosomal protein genes of nutrient-sensing pathways.\nAs mobile genetic elements.\nIntrons may be lost or gained over evolutionary time, as shown by many comparative studies of orthologous genes. Subsequent analyses have identified thousands of examples of intron loss and gain events, and it has been proposed that the emergence of eukaryotes, or the initial stages of eukaryotic evolution, involved an intron invasion. Two definitive mechanisms of intron loss, reverse transcriptase-mediated intron loss (RTMIL) and genomic deletions, have been identified, and are known to occur. The definitive mechanisms of intron gain, however, remain elusive and controversial. At least seven mechanisms of intron gain have been reported thus far: intron transposition, transposon insertion, tandem genomic duplication, intron transfer, intron gain during double-strand break repair (DSBR), insertion of a group II intron, and intronization. In theory it should be easiest to deduce the origin of recently gained introns due to the lack of host-induced mutations, yet even introns gained recently did not arise from any of the aforementioned mechanisms. These findings thus raise the question of whether or not the proposed mechanisms of intron gain fail to describe the mechanistic origin of many novel introns because they are not accurate mechanisms of intron gain, or if there are other, yet to be discovered, processes generating novel introns.\nIn intron transposition, the most commonly purported intron gain mechanism, a spliced intron is thought to reverse splice into either its own mRNA or another mRNA at a previously intron-less position. This intron-containing mRNA is then reverse transcribed and the resulting intron-containing cDNA may then cause intron gain via complete or partial recombination with its original genomic locus. \nTransposon insertions have been shown to generate thousands of new introns across diverse eukaryotic species. Transposon insertions sometimes result in the duplication of this sequence on each side of the transposon. Such an insertion could intronize the transposon without disrupting the coding sequence when a transposon inserts into the sequence AGGT or encodes the splice sites within the transposon sequence. Where intron-generating transposons do not create target site duplications, elements include both splice sites GT (5') and AG (3') thereby splicing precisely without affecting the protein-coding sequence. It is not yet understood why these elements are spliced, whether by chance, or by some preferential action by the transposon. \nIn tandem genomic duplication, due to the similarity between consensus donor and acceptor splice sites, which both closely resemble AGGT, the tandem genomic duplication of an exonic segment harboring an AGGT sequence generates two potential splice sites. When recognized by the spliceosome, the sequence between the original and duplicated AGGT will be spliced, resulting in the creation of an intron without alteration of the coding sequence of the gene. Double-stranded break repair via non-homologous end joining was recently identified as a source of intron gain when researchers identified short direct repeats flanking 43% of gained introns in Daphnia. These numbers must be compared to the number of conserved introns flanked by repeats in other organisms, though, for statistical relevance. For group II intron insertion, the retrohoming of a group II intron into a nuclear gene was proposed to cause recent spliceosomal intron gain.\nIntron transfer has been hypothesized to result in intron gain when a paralog or pseudogene gains an intron and then transfers this intron via recombination to an intron-absent location in its sister paralog. Intronization is the process by which mutations create novel introns from formerly exonic sequence. Thus, unlike other proposed mechanisms of intron gain, this mechanism does not require the insertion or generation of DNA to create a novel intron.\nThe only hypothesized mechanism of recent intron gain lacking any direct evidence is that of group II intron insertion, which when demonstrated in vivo, abolishes gene expression. Group II introns are therefore likely the presumed ancestors of spliceosomal introns, acting as site-specific retroelements, and are no longer responsible for intron gain. Tandem genomic duplication is the only proposed mechanism with supporting in vivo experimental evidence: a short intragenic tandem duplication can insert a novel intron into a protein-coding gene, leaving the corresponding peptide sequence unchanged. This mechanism also has extensive indirect evidence lending support to the idea that tandem genomic duplication is a prevalent mechanism for intron gain. The testing of other proposed mechanisms in vivo, particularly intron gain during DSBR, intron transfer, and intronization, is possible, although these mechanisms must be demonstrated in vivo to solidify them as actual mechanisms of intron gain. Further genomic analyses, especially when executed at the population level, may then quantify the relative contribution of each mechanism, possibly identifying species-specific biases that may shed light on varied rates of intron gain amongst different species.\nSee also.\nStructure:\nSplicing:\nFunction\nOthers:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15344", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15344", "title": "Indus civilization", "text": ""}
{"id": "15345", "revid": "1156244785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15345", "title": "IEE", "text": "IEE may stand for:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "15346", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15346", "title": "Institute of National Remembrance", "text": "Polish government-affiliated institute\nThe Institute of National Remembrance \u2013 Commission for the Prosecution of Crimes against the Polish Nation (, abbreviated IPN) is a Polish state research institute in charge of education and archives which also includes two public prosecution service components exercising investigative, prosecution and lustration powers. The IPN was established by the Polish parliament by the Act on the Institute of National Remembrance of 18 December 1998 through reforming and expanding the earlier Main Commission for the \"Investigation\" of Crimes against the Polish Nation of 1991, which itself had replaced the General Commission for Research on Fascist Crimes, a body established in 1945 focused on investigating the crimes of the Nazi administration in Poland during World War II.\nIn 2018, IPN's mission statement was amended by the controversial Amendment to the Act on the Institute of National Remembrance to include \"protecting the reputation of the Republic of Poland and the Polish Nation\". The IPN investigates and prosecutes Nazi and Communist crimes committed between 1917 and 1990, documents its findings, and disseminates them to the public. Some scholars have criticized the IPN for politicization, especially under Law and Justice governments.\nThe IPN began its activities on 1 July 2000. The IPN is a founding member of the Platform of European Memory and Conscience. Since 2020, the IPN headquarters have been located at Post\u0119pu 18 Street in Warsaw. The IPN has eleven branches in other cities and seven delegation offices.\nPurpose.\nThe IPN's main areas of activity, in line with its original mission statement, include researching and documenting the losses which were suffered by the Polish Nation as a result of World War II and during the post-war totalitarian period. The IPN informs about the patriotic traditions of resistance against the occupational forces, and the Polish citizens' fight for sovereignty of the nation, including their efforts in defence of freedom and human dignity in general.\nAccording to the IPN, it is its duty to prosecute crimes against peace and humanity, as much as war crimes. Its mission includes the need to compensate for damages which were suffered by the repressed and harmed people at a time when human rights were disobeyed by the state, and educate the public about recent history of Poland. IPN collects, organises and archives all documents about the Polish Communist security apparatus active from 22 July 1944 to 31 December 1989.\nFollowing the election of the Law and Justice party, the government formulated in 2016 a new IPN law. The 2016 law stipulated that the IPN should oppose publications of false information that dishonors or harms the Polish nation. It also called for popularizing history as part of \"an element of patriotic education\". The new law also removed the influence of academia and the judiciary on the IPN.\nA 2018 amendment to the law, added article 55a that attempts to defend the \"good name\" of Poland. Initially conceived as a criminal offense (3 years of jail) with an exemption for arts and research, following an international outcry, the article was modified to a civil offense that may be tried in civil courts and the exemption was deleted. Defamation charges under the act may be made by the IPN as well as by accredited NGOs such as the Polish League Against Defamation. By the same law, the institution's mission statement was changed to include \"protecting the reputation of the Republic of Poland and the Polish Nation\".\nOrganisation.\nIPN was created by special legislation on 18 December 1998. The IPN is divided into:\nOn 29 April 2010, acting president Bronislaw Komorowski signed into law a parliamentary act that reformed the Institute of National Remembrance.\nDirector.\nIPN is governed by the director, who has a sovereign position that is independent of the Polish state hierarchy. The director may not be dismissed during his term unless he commits a harmful act. Prior to 2016, the election of the director was a complex procedure, which involves the selection of a panel of candidates by the IPN Collegium (members appointed by the Polish Parliament and judiciary). The Polish Parliament (Sejm) then elects one of the candidates, with a required supermajority (60%). The director has a 5-year term of office. Following 2016 legislation in the PiS controlled parliament, the former pluralist Collegium was replaced with a nine-member Collegium composed of PiS supporters, and the Sejm appoints the director after consulting with the College without an election between candidates.\nLeon Kieres.\nThe first director of the IPN was Leon Kieres, elected by the Sejm for five years on 8 June 2000 (term 30 June 2000 \u2013 29 December 2005). The IPN granted some 6,500 people the \"victim of communism\" status and gathered significant archive material. The IPN faced difficulties since it was new and also since the Democratic Left Alliance (containing former communists) attempted to close the IPN. The publication of \"\" by Jan T. Gross, proved to be a lifeline for the IPN as Polish president Aleksander Kwa\u015bniewski intervened to save the IPN since he deemed the IPN's research to be important as part of Jewish-Polish reconciliation and \"apology diplomacy\".\nJanusz Kurtyka.\nThe second director was Janusz Kurtyka, elected on 9 December 2005 with a term that started 29 December 2005 until his death in the Smolensk airplane crash on 10 April 2010. The elections were controversial, as during the elections a leak against Andrzej Przewo\u017anik accusing him of collaboration with S\u0142u\u017cba Bezpiecze\u0144stwa caused him to withdraw his candidacy. Przewo\u017anik was cleared of the accusations only after he had lost the election.\nIn 2006, the IPN opened a \"Lustration Bureau\" that increased the director's power. The bureau was assigned the task of examining the past of all candidates to public office. Kurtyka widened archive access to the public and shifted focus from compensating victims to researching collaboration.\nFranciszek Gryciuk\nIn 1999, historian Franciszek Gryciuk was appointed to the Collegium of the IPN, which he chaired 2003\u20132004. From June 2008 to June 2011, he was vice president of the IPN. He was acting director 2010\u20132011, between the death of the IPN's second president, Janusz Kurtyka, in the 2010 Polish Air Force Tu-154 crash and the election of \u0141ukasz Kami\u0144ski by the Polish Parliament as the third director.\n\u0141ukasz Kami\u0144ski.\n\u0141ukasz Kami\u0144ski, was elected by the Sejm in 2011 following the death of his predecessor. Kami\u0144ski headed the Wroclaw Regional Bureau of Public Education prior to his election. During his term, the IPN faced a wide array of criticism calling for an overhaul or even replacement. Critics founds fault in the IPN being a state institution, the lack of historical knowledge of its prosecutors, a relatively high number of microhistories with a debatable methodology, overuse of the martyrology motif, research methodology, and isolationism from the wider research community. In response, Kami\u0144ski implemented several changes, including organizing public debates with outside historians to counter the charge of isolationism and has suggested refocusing on victims as opposed to agents.\nJaros\u0142aw Szarek.\nOn 22 July 2016 Jaros\u0142aw Szarek was appointed to head IPN. He dismissed Krzysztof Persak, co-author of the 2002 two-volume IPN study on the Jedwabne pogrom. In subsequent months, IPN featured in media headlines for releasing controversial documents, including some relating to Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa, for memory politics conducted in schools, for efforts to change Communist street names, and for legislation efforts. According to historian Idesbald Goddeeris, this marks a return of politics to the IPN.\nKarol Nawrocki.\nOn 23 July 2021 Karol Nawrocki was appointed as the head of IPN. Nawrocki would later become Polish President in 2025.\nPublic prosecutors in the IPN.\nTwo components of the IPN are specialized parts of the Public Prosecution Service of Poland, namely the Main Commission for the Prosecution of Crimes against the Polish Nation and the Lustration Bureau. Each of these two components exercises its activities autonomically from other components of the Institute and is headed by a director who is \"ex officio\" Deputy Public Prosecutor General of Poland, while role of the IPN Director is in their case purely accessory and includes no powers regarding conducted investigations, being limited only to providing supporting apparatus and, when vacated, presenting candidates for the offices of the two directors to the Prosecutor General who as their superior has the discretionary power to appoint or reject them. \nMain Commission for the Prosecution of Crimes against the Polish Nation.\nThe Main Commission for the Prosecution of Crimes against the Polish Nation (\"G\u0142\u00f3wna Komisja \u015acigania Zbrodni Przeciwko Narodowi Polskiemu\") is the oldest component of the IPN tracing its origins to 1945. It investigates and prosecutes crimes committed on Polish soil against Polish citizens as well as people of other citizenships wronged in the country. War crimes which are not affected by statute of limitations according to Polish law include:\nLustration Bureau.\nOn 15 March 2007, an amendment to the Polish law regulating the IPN (enacted on 18 December 2006) came into effect. The change gave the IPN new lustration powers and expanded IPN's file access. The change was enacted by Law and Justice government in a series of legislative amendments during 2006 and the beginning of 2007. However, several articles of the 2006-7 amendments were held unconstitutional by Poland's Constitutional Court on 11 May 2007, though the IPN's lustration power was still wider than under the original 1997 law. These powers include loss of position for those who submitted false lustration declarations as well as a lustration process of candidates for senior office.\nOther activities.\nResearch.\nThe research conducted by IPN from December 2000 falls into four main topic areas:\nEducation.\nThe IPN's Public Education Office (BEP) vaguely defined role in the IPN act is to inform society of Communist and Nazi crimes and institutions. This vaguely defined role allowed Pawe\u0142 Machcewicz, BEP's director in 2000, freedom to create a wide range of activities.\nResearchers at the IPN conduct not only research but are required to take part in public outreach. BEP has published music CDs, DVDs, and serials. It has founded \"historical clubs\" for debates and lectures. It has also organized outdoor historical fairs, picnic, and games.\nThe \"IPN Bulletin\" () is a high circulation popular-scientific journal, intended for lay readers and youth. Some 12,000 of 15,000 copies of the \"Bulletin\" are distributed free of charge to secondary schools in Poland, and the rest are sold in bookstores. The \"Bulletin\" contains: popular-scientific and academic articles, polemics, manifestos, appeals to readers, promotional material on the IPN and BEP, denials and commentary on reports in the news, as well as multimedia supplements.\nThe IPN also publishes the \"Remembrance and Justice\" () scientific journal.\nThe IPN has issued several board games to help educate people about recent Polish history, including:\nNaming of monuments.\nIn 2008, the chairman of the IPN wrote to local administrations, calling for the addition of the word \"German\" before \"Nazi\" to all monuments and tablets commemorating Germany's victims, stating that \"Nazis\" is not always understood to relate specifically to Germans. Several scenes of atrocities conducted by Germany were duly updated with commemorative plaques clearly indicating the nationality of the perpetrators. The IPN also requested better documentation and commemoration of crimes that had been perpetrated by the Soviet Union.\nThe Polish government also asked UNESCO to officially change the name \"Auschwitz Concentration Camp\" to \"Former Nazi German Concentration Camp Auschwitz-Birkenau\", to clarify that the camp had been built and operated by Nazi Germany. In 2007, UNESCO's World Heritage Committee changed the camp's name to \"Auschwitz Birkenau German Nazi Concentration and Extermination Camp (1940\u20131945).\" Previously some German media, including \"Der Spiegel\", had called the camp \"Polish\".\nPublications.\nSince 2019, the Institute publishes the \"Institute of National Remembrance Review\" (), a yearly peer-reviewed academic journal in English, with Anna Karolina Piekarska as editor-in-chief..\nCriticism.\nAccording to Georges Mink, common criticisms of the IPN include its dominance in the Polish research field, which is guaranteed by a budget that far supersedes that of any similar academic institution; the \"thematic monotony ... of micro-historical studies ... of no real scientific interest\" of its research; its focus on \"martyrology\"; and various criticisms of methodology and ethics. Some of these criticisms have been addressed by Director \u0141ukasz Kami\u0144ski during his tenure and who according to Mink \"has made significant changes\"; however, Mink, writing in 2017, was also concerned with the recent administrative and personnel changes in IPN, including the election of Jaros\u0142aw Szarek as director, which he posits are likely to result in further the politicization of the IPN. According to Valentin Behr, IPN research into the Communist era is valuable, positing that \"the resources at its disposal have made it unrivalled as a research centre in the academic world\"; at the same time, he said that the research is mostly focused on the era's negative aspects, and that it \"is far from producing a critical approach to history, one that asks its own questions and is methodologically pluralistic.\" He added that in recent years that problem is being ameliorated as the IPN's work \"has somewhat diversified as its administration has taken note of criticism on the part of academics.\"\nAccording to Robert Traba, \"under the ... IPN, tasks related to the 'national politics of memory' were \u2013 unfortunately \u2013 merged with the mission of independent academic research. In the public mind, there could be only one message flowing from the institute's name: memory and history as a science are one. The problem is that nothing could be further from the truth, and nothing could be more misleading. What the IPN's message presents, in fact, is the danger that Polish history will be grossly over-simplified.\"43 Traba states that \"at the heart of debate today is a confrontation between those who support traditional methods and categories of research, and those who support newly defined methods and categories. ... Broadening the research perspective means the enrichment of the historian's instrumentarium.'\" He puts the IPN research, in a broad sense, in the former; he states that \"[a] solid, workshop-oriented, traditional, and positivist historiography ... which defends itself by the integrity of its analysis and its diversified source base\" but criticizes its approach for leading to a \"falsely conceived mission to find 'objective truth' at the expense of 'serious study of event history', and a 'simplified claim that only 'secret' sources, not accessible to ordinary mortals', can lead to that objective truth.\" Traba quotes historian Wiktoria \u015aliwowska, who wrote: \"The historian must strive not only to reconstruct a given reality, but also to understand the background of events, the circumstances in which people acted. It is easy to condemn, but difficult to understand a complicated past. ... [Meanwhile, in the IPN] thick volumes are being produced, into which are being thrown, with no real consideration, further evidence in criminating various persons now deceased (and therefore not able to defend themselves), and elderly people still alive \u2013 known and unknown.\" Traba posits that \"there is ... a need for genuine debate that does not revolve around [the files] in the IPN archives, 'lustration,' or short-term and politically inspired discussions designed to establish the 'only real' truth\", and suggests that adopting varied perspectives and diverse methodologies might contribute to such debate.67\nDuring PiS's control of the government between 2005 and 2007, the IPN was the focus of heated public controversies, in particular in regard to the pasts of Solidarity leader Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa and PZPR secretary Wojciech Jaruzelski. As a result, the \"IPN\" has been referred to as \"a political institution at the centre of 'memory games'\".\nIn 2008, two IPN employees, S\u0142awomir Cenckiewicz and Piotr Gontarczyk, published a book, \"SB a Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa\" (The Security Service and Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa: A Contribution to a Biography) which caused a major controversy. The book's premise was that in the 1970s the Solidarity leader and later president of Poland Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa was a secret informant of the Polish Communist Security Service.\nIn 2018, the IPN hired Tomasz Greniuch, a historian who in his youth was associated with a far-right group. When he was promoted to a regional director of the Wroc\u0142aw branch in February 2021, his past came to media attention and resulted in criticism of Greniuch and IPN. Greniuch issued an apology for his past behavior and resigned within weeks.\nOrganizational and methodological concerns.\nValentin Behr writes that the IPN is most \"concerned with the production of an official narrative about Poland's recent past\" and therefore lacks innovation in its research, while noting that situation is being remedied under recent leadership. He writes that the IPN \"has mainly taken in historians from the fringes of the academic field\" who were either unable to obtain a prominent academic position or ideologically drawn to the IPN's approach, and that \"in the academic field, being an 'IPN historian' can be a stigma\"; Behr explains this by pointing to a generational divide in Polish academia, visible when comparing IPN to other Polish research outlets, and claims: \"Hiring young historians was done deliberately to give the IPN greater autonomy from the academic world, considered as too leftist to describe the dark sides of the communist regime.\" He says that the IPN has created opportunities for many history specialists who can carry dedicated research there without the need for an appointment at another institution, and for training young historians, noting that \"the IPN is now the leading employer of young PhD students and PhDs in history specialized in contemporary history, ahead of Polish universities\".\nHistorian Dariusz Stola states that the IPN is very bureaucratic in nature, comparing it to a \"regular continental European bureaucracy, with usual deficiencies of its kind\", and posits that in this aspect the IPN resembles the former Communist institutions it is supposed to deal with, equally \"bureaucratic, centralist, heavy, inclined to extensive growth and quantity rather than quality of production\".\nAn incident which caused controversy involved the \"Wildstein list\", a partial list of persons who allegedly worked for the communist-era Polish intelligence service, copied in 2004 from IPN archives (without IPN permission) by journalist Bronis\u0142aw Wildstein and published on the Internet in 2005. The list gained much attention in Polish media and politics, and IPN security procedures and handling of the matter came under criticism.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15347", "revid": "1303770711", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15347", "title": "Intelligence (disambiguation)", "text": "Intelligence is the ability to perceive, collect, or infer information, retain it, and make decisions based on that information.\nIntelligence or intelligent may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "15348", "revid": "3747202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15348", "title": "Intelligent", "text": ""}
{"id": "15349", "revid": "127474", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15349", "title": "Intelligence Test", "text": ""}
{"id": "15350", "revid": "25556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15350", "title": "Intelligence testing", "text": ""}
{"id": "15351", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15351", "title": "IQ test", "text": ""}
{"id": "15352", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15352", "title": "Indistinguishable particles", "text": "Concept in quantum mechanics of perfectly substitutable particles\nIn quantum mechanics, indistinguishable particles (also called identical or indiscernible particles) are particles that cannot be distinguished from one another, even in principle. Species of identical particles include, but are not limited to, elementary particles (such as electrons), composite subatomic particles (such as atomic nuclei), as well as atoms and molecules. Although all known indistinguishable particles only exist at the quantum scale, there is no exhaustive list of all possible sorts of particles nor a clear-cut limit of applicability, as explored in quantum statistics. They were first discussed by Werner Heisenberg and Paul Dirac in 1926.\nThere are two main categories of identical particles: bosons, which can share quantum states, and fermions, which cannot (as described by the Pauli exclusion principle). Examples of bosons are photons, gluons, phonons, helium-4 nuclei and all mesons. Examples of fermions are electrons, neutrinos, quarks, protons, neutrons, and helium-3 nuclei.\nThe fact that particles can be identical has important consequences in statistical mechanics, where calculations rely on probabilistic arguments, which are sensitive to whether or not the objects being studied are identical. As a result, identical particles exhibit markedly different statistical behaviour from distinguishable particles. For example, the indistinguishability of particles has been proposed as a solution to Gibbs' mixing paradox.\nDistinguishing between particles.\nThere are two methods for distinguishing between particles. The first method relies on differences in the intrinsic physical properties of the particles, such as mass, electric charge, and spin. If differences exist, it is possible to distinguish between the particles by measuring the relevant properties. However, as far as can be determined, microscopic particles of the same species have completely equivalent physical properties. For instance, every electron has the same electric charge.\nEven if the particles have equivalent physical properties, there remains a second method for distinguishing between particles, which is to track the trajectory of each particle. As long as the position of each particle can be measured with infinite precision (even when the particles collide), then there would be no ambiguity about which particle is which.\nThe problem with the second approach is that it contradicts the principles of quantum mechanics. According to quantum theory, the particles do not possess definite positions during the periods between measurements. Instead, they are governed by wavefunctions that give the probability of finding a particle at each position. As time passes, the wavefunctions tend to spread out and overlap. Once this happens, it becomes impossible to determine, in a subsequent measurement, which of the particle positions correspond to those measured earlier. The particles are then said to be indistinguishable.\nQuantum mechanical description.\nSymmetrical and antisymmetrical states.\nWhat follows is an example to make the above discussion concrete, using the formalism developed in the article on the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics.\nLet \"n\" denote a complete set of (discrete) quantum numbers for specifying single-particle states (for example, for the particle in a box problem, take \"n\" to be the quantized wave vector of the wavefunction.) For simplicity, consider a system composed of two particles that are not interacting with each other. Suppose that one particle is in the state \"n\"1, and the other is in the state \"n\"2. The quantum state of the system is denoted by the expression\n formula_1\nwhere the order of the tensor product matters ( if formula_2, then the particle 1 occupies the state \"n\"2 while the particle 2 occupies the state \"n\"1). This is the canonical way of constructing a basis for a tensor product space formula_3 of the combined system from the individual spaces. This expression is valid for distinguishable particles, however, it is not appropriate for indistinguishable particles since formula_4 and formula_5 as a result of exchanging the particles are generally different states.\nTwo states are physically equivalent only if they differ at most by a complex phase factor. For two indistinguishable particles, a state before the particle exchange must be physically equivalent to the state after the exchange, so these two states differ at most by a complex phase factor. This fact suggests that a state for two indistinguishable (and non-interacting) particles is given by following two possibilities:\n formula_6\nStates where it is a sum are known as symmetric, while states involving the difference are called antisymmetric. More completely, symmetric states have the form\n formula_7\nwhile antisymmetric states have the form\n formula_8\nNote that if \"n\"1 and \"n\"2 are the same, the antisymmetric expression gives zero, which cannot be a state vector since it cannot be normalized. In other words, more than one identical particle cannot occupy an antisymmetric state (one antisymmetric state can be occupied only by one particle). This is known as the Pauli exclusion principle, and it is the fundamental reason behind the chemical properties of atoms and the stability of matter.\nExchange symmetry.\nThe importance of symmetric and antisymmetric states is ultimately based on empirical evidence. It appears to be a fact of nature that identical particles do not occupy states of a mixed symmetry, such as\n formula_9\nThere is actually an exception to this rule, which will be discussed later. On the other hand, it can be shown that the symmetric and antisymmetric states are in a sense special, by examining a particular symmetry of the multiple-particle states known as exchange symmetry.\nDefine a linear operator \"P\", called the exchange operator. When it acts on a tensor product of two state vectors, it exchanges the values of the state vectors:\n formula_10\n\"P\" is both Hermitian and unitary. Because it is unitary, it can be regarded as a symmetry operator. This symmetry may be described as the symmetry under the exchange of labels attached to the particles (i.e., to the single-particle Hilbert spaces).\nClearly, formula_11 (the identity operator), so the eigenvalues of \"P\" are +1 and \u22121. The corresponding eigenvectors are the symmetric and antisymmetric states:\n formula_12\n formula_13\nIn other words, symmetric and antisymmetric states are essentially unchanged under the exchange of particle labels: they are only multiplied by a factor of +1 or \u22121, rather than being \"rotated\" somewhere else in the Hilbert space. This indicates that the particle labels have no physical meaning, in agreement with the earlier discussion on indistinguishability.\nSince \"P\" is Hermitian, it can be regarded as an observable of the system: a measurement can be performed to find out if a state is symmetric or antisymmetric. Furthermore, the equivalence of the particles indicates that the Hamiltonian can be written in a symmetrical form, such as\n formula_14\nIt is possible to show that such Hamiltonians satisfy the commutation relation\n formula_15\nAccording to the Heisenberg equation, this means that the value of \"P\" is a constant of motion. If the quantum state is initially symmetric (antisymmetric), it will remain symmetric (antisymmetric) as the system evolves. Mathematically, this says that the state vector is confined to one of the two eigenspaces of \"P\", and is not allowed to range over the entire Hilbert space. Thus, that eigenspace might as well be treated as the actual Hilbert space of the system. This is the idea behind the definition of Fock space.\nFermions and bosons.\nThe choice of symmetry or antisymmetry is determined by the species of particle. For example, symmetric states must always be used when describing photons or helium-4 atoms, and antisymmetric states when describing electrons or protons.\nParticles which exhibit symmetric states are called bosons. The nature of symmetric states has important consequences for the statistical properties of systems composed of many identical bosons. These statistical properties are described as Bose\u2013Einstein statistics.\nParticles which exhibit antisymmetric states are called fermions. Antisymmetry gives rise to the Pauli exclusion principle, which forbids identical fermions from sharing the same quantum state. Systems of many identical fermions are described by Fermi\u2013Dirac statistics.\nParastatistics are mathematically possible, but no examples exist in nature.\nIn certain two-dimensional systems, mixed symmetry can occur. These exotic particles are known as anyons, and they obey fractional statistics. Experimental evidence for the existence of anyons exists in the fractional quantum Hall effect, a phenomenon observed in the two-dimensional electron gases that form the inversion layer of MOSFETs. There is another type of statistic, known as braid statistics, which are associated with particles known as plektons.\nThe spin-statistics theorem relates the exchange symmetry of identical particles to their spin. It states that bosons have integer spin, and fermions have half-integer spin. Anyons possess fractional spin.\n\"N\" particles.\nThe above discussion generalizes readily to the case of \"N\" particles. Suppose there are \"N\" particles with quantum numbers \"n\"1, \"n\"2, ..., \"n\"\"N\". If the particles are bosons, they occupy a totally symmetric state, which is symmetric under the exchange of \"any two\" particle labels:\n formula_16\nHere, the sum is taken over all different states under permutations \"p\" acting on \"N\" elements. The square root left to the sum is a normalizing constant. The quantity \"mn\" stands for the number of times each of the single-particle states \"n\" appears in the \"N\"-particle state. Note that \u03a3\"n\" \"m\"\"n\" = \"N\".\nIn the same vein, fermions occupy totally antisymmetric states:\n formula_17\nHere, sgn(\"p\") is the sign of each permutation (i.e. formula_18 if formula_19 is composed of an even number of transpositions, and formula_20 if odd). Note that there is no formula_21 term, because each single-particle state can appear only once in a fermionic state. Otherwise the sum would again be zero due to the antisymmetry, thus representing a physically impossible state. This is the Pauli exclusion principle for many particles.\nThese states have been normalized so that\n formula_22\nMeasurement.\nSuppose there is a system of \"N\" bosons (fermions) in the symmetric (antisymmetric) state\n formula_23\nand a measurement is performed on some other set of discrete observables, \"m\". In general, this yields some result \"m\"1 for one particle, \"m\"2 for another particle, and so forth. If the particles are bosons (fermions), the state after the measurement must remain symmetric (antisymmetric), i.e.\n formula_24\nThe probability of obtaining a particular result for the \"m\" measurement is\n formula_25\nIt can be shown that\n formula_26\nwhich verifies that the total probability is 1. The sum has to be restricted to \"ordered\" values of \"m\"1, ..., \"mN\" to ensure that each multi-particle state is not counted more than once.\nWavefunction representation.\nSo far, the discussion has included only discrete observables. It can be extended to continuous observables, such as the position\u00a0\"x\".\nRecall that an eigenstate of a continuous observable represents an infinitesimal \"range\" of values of the observable, not a single value as with discrete observables. For instance, if a particle is in a state |\"\u03c8\"\u27e9, the probability of finding it in a region of volume \"d\"3\"x\" surrounding some position \"x\" is\n formula_27\nAs a result, the continuous eigenstates |\"x\"\u27e9 are normalized to the delta function instead of unity:\n formula_28\nSymmetric and antisymmetric multi-particle states can be constructed from continuous eigenstates in the same way as before. However, it is customary to use a different normalizing constant:\n formula_29\nA many-body wavefunction can be written,\n formula_30\nwhere the single-particle wavefunctions are defined, as usual, by\n formula_31\nThe most important property of these wavefunctions is that exchanging any two of the coordinate variables changes the wavefunction by only a plus or minus sign. This is the manifestation of symmetry and antisymmetry in the wavefunction representation:\n formula_32\nThe many-body wavefunction has the following significance: if the system is initially in a state with quantum numbers \"n\"1, ..., nN, and a position measurement is performed, the probability of finding particles in infinitesimal volumes near \"x\"1, \"x\"2, ..., \"x\"\"N\" is\n formula_33\nThe factor of \"N\"! comes from our normalizing constant, which has been chosen so that, by analogy with single-particle wavefunctions,\n formula_34\nBecause each integral runs over all possible values of \"x\", each multi-particle state appears \"N\"! times in the integral. In other words, the probability associated with each event is evenly distributed across \"N\"! equivalent points in the integral space. Because it is usually more convenient to work with unrestricted integrals than restricted ones, the normalizing constant has been chosen to reflect this.\nFinally, antisymmetric wavefunction can be written as the determinant of a matrix, known as a Slater determinant:\n formula_35\nOperator approach and parastatistics.\nThe Hilbert space for formula_36 particles is given by the tensor product formula_37. The permutation group of formula_38 acts on this space by permuting the entries. By definition the expectation values for an observable formula_39 of formula_36 indistinguishable particles should be invariant under these permutations. This means that for all formula_41 and formula_42\n formula_43\nor equivalently for each formula_42\n formula_45.\nTwo states are equivalent whenever their expectation values coincide for all observables. If we restrict to observables of formula_46 identical particles, and hence observables satisfying the equation above, we find that the following states (after normalization) are equivalent\n formula_47.\nThe equivalence classes are in bijective relation with irreducible subspaces of formula_37 under formula_38.\nTwo obvious irreducible subspaces are the one dimensional symmetric/bosonic subspace and anti-symmetric/fermionic subspace. There are however more types of irreducible subspaces. States associated with these other irreducible subspaces are called parastatistic states. Young tableaux provide a way to classify all of these irreducible subspaces.\nStatistical properties.\nStatistical effects of indistinguishability.\nThe indistinguishability of particles has a profound effect on their statistical properties. To illustrate this, consider a system of \"N\" distinguishable, non-interacting particles. Once again, let \"n\"\"j\" denote the state (i.e. quantum numbers) of particle \"j\". If the particles have the same physical properties, the \"n\"\"j\"s run over the same range of values. Let \"\u03b5\"(\"n\") denote the energy of a particle in state \"n\". As the particles do not interact, the total energy of the system is the sum of the single-particle energies. The partition function of the system is\n formula_50\nwhere \"k\" is the Boltzmann constant and \"T\" is the temperature. This expression can be factored to obtain\n formula_51\nwhere\n formula_52\nIf the particles are identical, this equation is incorrect. Consider a state of the system, described by the single particle states [\"n\"1, ..., \"n\"\"N\"]. In the equation for \"Z\", every possible permutation of the \"n\"s occurs once in the sum, even though each of these permutations is describing the same multi-particle state. Thus, the number of states has been over-counted.\nIf the possibility of overlapping states is neglected, which is valid if the temperature is high, then the number of times each state is counted is approximately \"N\"!. The correct partition function is\n formula_53\nNote that this \"high temperature\" approximation does not distinguish between fermions and bosons.\nThe discrepancy in the partition functions of distinguishable and indistinguishable particles was known as far back as the 19th century, before the advent of quantum mechanics. It leads to a difficulty known as the Gibbs paradox. Gibbs showed that in the equation \"Z\" = \"\u03be\"\"N\", the entropy of a classical ideal gas is\n formula_54\nwhere \"V\" is the volume of the gas and \"f\" is some function of \"T\" alone. The problem with this result is that \"S\" is not extensive \u2013 if \"N\" and \"V\" are doubled, \"S\" does not double accordingly. Such a system does not obey the postulates of thermodynamics.\nGibbs also showed that using \"Z\" = \"\u03be\"\"N\"/\"N\"! alters the result to\n formula_55\nwhich is perfectly extensive.\nStatistical properties of bosons and fermions.\nThere are important differences between the statistical behavior of bosons and fermions, which are described by Bose\u2013Einstein statistics and Fermi\u2013Dirac statistics respectively. Roughly speaking, bosons have a tendency to clump into the same quantum state, which underlies phenomena such as the laser, Bose\u2013Einstein condensation, and superfluidity. Fermions, on the other hand, are forbidden from sharing quantum states, giving rise to systems such as the Fermi gas. This is known as the Pauli Exclusion Principle, and is responsible for much of chemistry, since the electrons in an atom (fermions) successively fill the many states within shells rather than all lying in the same lowest energy state.\nThe differences between the statistical behavior of fermions, bosons, and distinguishable particles can be illustrated using a system of two particles. The particles are designated A and B. Each particle can exist in two possible states, labelled formula_56 and formula_57, which have the same energy.\nThe composite system can evolve in time, interacting with a noisy environment. Because the formula_56 and formula_57 states are energetically equivalent, neither state is favored, so this process has the effect of randomizing the states. (This is discussed in the article on quantum entanglement.) After some time, the composite system will have an equal probability of occupying each of the states available to it. The particle states are then measured.\nIf A and B are distinguishable particles, then the composite system has four distinct states: formula_60, formula_61, formula_62, and formula_63. The probability of obtaining two particles in the formula_56 state is 0.25; the probability of obtaining two particles in the formula_57 state is 0.25; and the probability of obtaining one particle in the formula_56 state and the other in the formula_57 state is 0.5.\nIf A and B are identical bosons, then the composite system has only three distinct states: formula_60, formula_61, and formula_70. When the experiment is performed, the probability of obtaining two particles in the formula_56 state is now 0.33; the probability of obtaining two particles in the formula_57 state is 0.33; and the probability of obtaining one particle in the formula_56 state and the other in the formula_57 state is 0.33. Note that the probability of finding particles in the same state is relatively larger than in the distinguishable case. This demonstrates the tendency of bosons to \"clump\".\nIf A and B are identical fermions, there is only one state available to the composite system: the totally antisymmetric state formula_75. When the experiment is performed, one particle is always in the formula_56 state and the other is in the formula_57 state.\nThe results are summarized in Table 1:\nAs can be seen, even a system of two particles exhibits different statistical behaviors between distinguishable particles, bosons, and fermions. In the articles on Fermi\u2013Dirac statistics and Bose\u2013Einstein statistics, these principles are extended to large number of particles, with qualitatively similar results.\nHomotopy class.\nTo understand why particle statistics work the way that they do, note first that particles are point-localized excitations and that particles that are spacelike separated do not interact. In a flat d-dimensional space M, at any given time, the configuration of two identical particles can be specified as an element of \"M\" \u00d7 \"M\". If there is no overlap between the particles, so that they do not interact directly, then their locations must belong to the space [\"M\" \u00d7 \"M\"] \\ {coincident points}, the subspace with coincident points removed. The element (\"x\", \"y\") describes the configuration with particle I at x and particle II at y, while (\"y\", \"x\") describes the interchanged configuration. With identical particles, the state described by (\"x\", \"y\") ought to be indistinguishable from the state described by (\"y\", \"x\"). Now consider the homotopy class of continuous paths from (\"x\", \"y\") to (\"y\", \"x\"), within the space [\"M\" \u00d7 \"M\"] \\ {coincident points}. If M is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; where \"d\" \u2265 3, then this homotopy class only has one element. If M is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then this homotopy class has countably many elements (i.e. a counterclockwise interchange by half a turn, a counterclockwise interchange by one and a half turns, two and a half turns, etc., a clockwise interchange by half a turn, etc.). In particular, a counterclockwise interchange by half a turn is \"not\" homotopic to a clockwise interchange by half a turn. Lastly, if M is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then this homotopy class is empty.\nSuppose first that \"d\" \u2265 3. The universal covering space of [\"M\" \u00d7 \"M\"] &amp;setminus; {coincident points}, which is none other than [\"M\" \u00d7 \"M\"] &amp;setminus; {coincident points} itself, only has two points which are physically indistinguishable from (\"x\", \"y\"), namely (\"x\", \"y\") itself and (\"y\", \"x\"). So, the only permissible interchange is to swap both particles. This interchange is an involution, so its only effect is to multiply the phase by a square root of 1. If the root is +1, then the points have Bose statistics, and if the root is \u20131, the points have Fermi statistics.\nIn the case formula_78 the universal covering space of [\"M\" \u00d7 \"M\"] &amp;setminus; {coincident points} has infinitely many points that are physically indistinguishable from (\"x\", \"y\"). This is described by the infinite cyclic group generated by making a counterclockwise half-turn interchange. Unlike the previous case, performing this interchange twice in a row does not recover the original state; so such an interchange can generically result in a multiplication by exp(\"i\u03b8\") for any real \u03b8 (by unitarity, the absolute value of the multiplication must be 1). This is called anyonic statistics. In fact, even with two \"distinguishable\" particles, even though (\"x\", \"y\") is now physically distinguishable from (\"y\", \"x\"), the universal covering space still contains infinitely many points which are physically indistinguishable from the original point, now generated by a counterclockwise rotation by one full turn. This generator, then, results in a multiplication by exp(\"i\u03c6\"). This phase factor here is called the mutual statistics.\nFinally, in the case formula_79 the space [\"M\" \u00d7 \"M\"] &amp;setminus; {coincident points} is not connected, so even if particle I and particle II are identical, they can still be distinguished via labels such as \"the particle on the left\" and \"the particle on the right\". There is no interchange symmetry here.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15354", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15354", "title": "Interstitial cystitis", "text": "Medical condition of the bladder and pelvic floor\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nInterstitial cystitis (IC), a type of bladder pain syndrome (BPS), is chronic pain in the bladder and pelvic floor of unknown cause. Symptoms include feeling the need to urinate right away, needing to urinate often, bladder pain (pain in the organ) and pain with sex. IC/BPS is associated with depression and lower quality of life. Some of those affected also have irritable bowel syndrome and fibromyalgia.\nThe cause of interstitial cystitis is unknown. While it can, it does not typically run in a family. The diagnosis is usually based on the symptoms after ruling out other conditions. Typically the urine culture is negative. Ulceration or inflammation may be seen on cystoscopy. Other conditions which can produce similar symptoms include overactive bladder, urinary tract infection (UTI), sexually transmitted infections, prostatitis, endometriosis in females, and bladder cancer.\nThere is no cure for interstitial cystitis and management of this condition can be challenging. Treatments that may improve symptoms include lifestyle changes, medications, or procedures. Lifestyle changes may include stopping smoking, dietary changes, reducing stress, and receiving psychological support. Medications may include paracetamol with ibuprofen and gastric protection, amitriptyline, pentosan polysulfate, or histamine Procedures may include bladder distention, nerve stimulation, or surgery. Kegel exercises and long term antibiotics are not recommended.\nIn the United States and Europe, it is estimated that around 0.5% of people are affected. Women are affected about five times as often as men. Onset is typically in middle age. The term \"interstitial cystitis\" first came into use in 1887.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe most common symptoms of IC are suprapubic pain, urinary frequency, painful sexual intercourse, and waking up from sleep to urinate.\nIn general, symptoms may include painful urination described as a burning sensation in the urethra during urination, pelvic pain that is worsened with the consumption of certain foods or drinks, urinary urgency, and pressure in the bladder or pelvis. Other described symptoms are urinary hesitancy (needing to wait for the urinary stream to begin, often caused by pelvic floor dysfunction and tension), and pain and difficulty driving, working, exercising, or traveling. Pelvic pain experienced by those with IC typically worsens with filling of the urinary bladder and may improve with urination. Other, more severe symptoms include chronic inflammation, ulcuration (Hunner's leasions), fybrotic scar tissue and stiffness of the bladder. \nDuring cystoscopy, 5\u201310% of people with IC are found to have Hunner's ulcers. A person with IC may have discomfort only in the urethra, while another might struggle with pain in the entire pelvis. Interstitial cystitis symptoms usually fall into one of two patterns: significant suprapubic pain with little frequency or a lesser amount of suprapubic pain but with increased urinary frequency.\nAssociation with other conditions.\nSome people with IC/BPS have been diagnosed with other conditions such as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), fibromyalgia, myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS), allergies, Sj\u00f6gren syndrome, which raises the possibility that interstitial cystitis may be caused by mechanisms that cause these other conditions. There is also some evidence of an association between urologic pain syndromes, such as IC/BPS and CP/CPPS, with non-celiac gluten sensitivity in some people.\nIn addition, men with IC/PBS are frequently diagnosed as having chronic nonbacterial prostatitis, and there is an extensive overlap of symptoms and treatment between the two conditions, leading researchers to posit that the conditions may share the same cause and pathology.\nCauses.\nThe cause of IC/BPS is not known. However, several explanations have been proposed and include the following: autoimmune theory, nerve theory, mast cell theory, leaky lining theory, infection theory, and a theory of production of a toxic substance in the urine. Other suggested etiological causes are neurologic, allergic, genetic, and stress-psychological including exposure to abuse in childhood or adulthood. In addition, recent research shows that those with IC may have a substance in the urine that inhibits the growth of cells in the bladder epithelium. An infection may then predispose those people to develop IC. Evidence from clinical and laboratory studies confirms that mast cells play a central role in IC/BPS possibly due to their ability to release histamine and cause pain, swelling, scarring, and interfere with healing. Research has shown a proliferation of nerve fibers is present in the bladders of people with IC which is absent in the bladders of people who have not been diagnosed with IC.\nRegardless of the origin, most people with IC struggle with a damaged urothelium, or bladder lining. When the surface glycosaminoglycan (GAG) layer is damaged (via a urinary tract infection (UTI), traumatic injury, etc.), urinary chemicals can \"leak\" into surrounding tissues, causing pain, inflammation, and urinary symptoms. Oral medications like pentosan polysulfate and medications placed directly into the bladder via a catheter sometimes work to repair and rebuild this damaged/wounded lining, allowing for a reduction in symptoms. Most literature supports the belief that IC's symptoms are associated with a defect in the bladder epithelium lining, allowing irritating substances in the urine to penetrate into the bladder\u2014a breakdown of the bladder lining (also known as the adherence theory). Deficiency in this glycosaminoglycan layer on the surface of the bladder results in increased permeability of the underlying submucosal tissues.\nGP51 has been identified as a possible urinary biomarker for IC with significant variations in GP51 levels in those with IC when compared to individuals without interstitial cystitis.\nA proposed mechanism for interstitial cystitis is the autoimmune mechanism. Some studies have noted the link between IC, anxiety, stress, hyper-responsiveness, panic, and abuse. Biopsies on the bladder walls of people with IC may contain larger counts of mast cells than healthy bladder walls. Mast cells, which contain histamine granules, respond to allergic stimuli. In this theory, Mast cells are activated in response to antigen detection in the bladder wall. The activation of mast cells triggers the release of histamine, amongst other inflammatory mediators. Additionally, another proposed mechanism is increased activity of unspecified nerves in the bladder wall. An unknown toxin or stimuli may activate nerves within the bladder wall, causing the release of neuropeptides. These neuropeptides can induce a secondary cascade which stimulates pain in the bladder wall.\nGenes.\nSome genetic subtypes, in some people, have been linked to the disorder.\nDiagnosis.\nA diagnosis of IC is one of exclusion, as well as a review of clinical symptoms. The American Urological Association Guidelines recommend starting with a careful history of the person, physical examination and laboratory tests to assess and document symptoms of interstitial cytitis, as well as other potential disorders.\nThe KCl test, also known as the \"potassium sensitivity test\", is no longer recommended. The test uses a mild potassium solution to evaluate the integrity of the bladder wall. Though the latter is not specific for IC/BPS, it has been determined to be helpful in predicting the use of compounds, such as pentosan polysulphate, which are designed to help repair the GAG layer.\nFor complicated cases, the use of hydrodistention with cystoscopy may be helpful. Researchers, however, determined that this visual examination of the bladder wall after stretching the bladder was not specific for IC and that the test, itself, can contribute to the development of small glomerulations (petechial hemorrhages) often found in IC. Thus, a diagnosis of IC is one of exclusion, as well as a review of clinical symptoms.\nIn 2006, the ESSIC society proposed more rigorous and demanding diagnostic methods with specific classification criteria so that it cannot be confused with other, similar conditions. Specifically, they require that a person must have pain associated with the bladder, accompanied by one other urinary symptom. Thus, a person with just frequency or urgency would be excluded from a diagnosis. Secondly, they strongly encourage the exclusion of confusable diseases through an extensive and expensive series of tests including (A) a medical history and physical exam, (B) a dipstick urinalysis, various urine cultures, and a serum PSA in men over 40, (C) flowmetry and post-void residual urine volume by ultrasound scanning and (D) cystoscopy. A diagnosis of IC would be confirmed with a hydrodistention during cystoscopy with biopsy.\nThey also propose a ranking system based upon the physical findings in the bladder. People would receive a numeric and letter based score based upon the severity of their disease as found during the hydrodistention. A score of 1\u20133 would relate to the severity of the disease and a rating of A\u2013C represents biopsy findings. Thus, a person with 1A would have very mild symptoms and disease while a person with 3C would have the worst possible symptoms. Widely recognized scoring systems such as the O'Leary Sant symptom and problem score have emerged to evaluate the severity of IC symptoms such as pain and urinary symptoms.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nThe symptoms of IC/BPS are often misdiagnosed as a urinary tract infection. However, IC/BPS has not been shown to be caused by a bacterial infection and antibiotics are an ineffective treatment. IC/BPS is commonly misdiagnosed as chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome (CP/CPPS) in men, and endometriosis and uterine fibroids (in women).\nTreatment.\nIn 2011, the American Urological Association released consensus-based guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of interstitial cystitis. Further reviews of multiple studies and guidelines have updated these recommendations.\nThey include treatments ranging from conservative to more invasive:\nThe American Urological Association guidelines also listed several discontinued treatments, including long-term oral antibiotics, intravesical bacillus Calmette Guerin, intravesical resiniferatoxin), high-pressure and long-duration hydrodistention, and systemic glucocorticoids.\nBladder distension.\nBladder distension while under general anesthesia, also known as hydrodistention (a procedure which stretches the bladder capacity), has shown some success in reducing urinary frequency and giving short-term pain relief to those with IC. However, it is unknown exactly how this procedure causes pain relief. Recent studies show pressure on pelvic trigger points can relieve symptoms. The relief achieved by bladder distensions is only temporary (weeks or months), so is not viable as a long-term treatment for IC/BPS. The proportion of people with IC/BPS who experience relief from hydrodistention is currently unknown and evidence for this modality is limited by a lack of properly controlled studies. Bladder rupture and sepsis may be associated with prolonged, high-pressure hydrodistention.\nBladder instillations.\nBladder instillation of medication is one of the main forms of treatment of interstitial cystitis, but evidence for its effectiveness is currently limited. Advantages of this treatment approach include direct contact of the medication with the bladder and low systemic side effects due to poor absorption of the medication. Single medications or a mixture of medications are commonly used in bladder instillation preparations. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) is the only approved bladder instillation for IC/BPS yet it is much less frequently used in urology clinics.\nThe disadvantages of installations are severe pain in the urethra, caused by the catheter that is used to administer the instillation, bladder pain and the fact that most installations need to be held in the bladder for at least two hours, whereas some patients have to urinate (far) more frequent than once every two hours. This causes severe pain and/or affects the treatment because the instillation did not sit in the bladder long enough.\nAbout DMSO:\n50% solution of DMSO had the potential to create irreversible muscle contraction. However, a lesser solution of 25% was found to be reversible. Long-term use of DMSO is questionable, as its mechanism of action is not fully understood though DMSO is thought to inhibit mast cells and may have anti-inflammatory, muscle-relaxing, and analgesic effects. Other agents used for bladder instillations to treat interstitial cystitis include: heparin, lidocaine, chondroitin sulfate, hyaluronic acid, pentosan polysulfate, oxybutynin, and botulinum toxin A. Preliminary evidence suggests these agents are efficacious in reducing symptoms of interstitial cystitis, but further study with larger, randomized, controlled clinical trials is needed.\nDiet.\nDiet modification is often recommended as a first-line method of self-treatment for interstitial cystitis, though rigorous controlled studies examining the impact diet has on interstitial cystitis signs and symptoms are currently lacking. An increase in fiber intake may alleviate symptoms. Individuals with interstitial cystitis often experience an increase in symptoms when they consume certain foods and beverages. Avoidance of these potential trigger foods and beverages such as tomatoes, cranberries, caffeine-containing beverages including coffee, tea, and soda, alcoholic beverages, chocolate, citrus fruits, hot peppers, and artificial sweeteners may be helpful in alleviating symptoms. Diet triggers vary between individuals with IC; the best way for a person to discover his or her own triggers is to use an elimination diet. Sensitivity to trigger foods may be reduced if calcium glycerophosphate and/or sodium bicarbonate is consumed. The foundation of therapy is a modification of diet to help people avoid those foods which can further irritate the damaged bladder wall.\nThe mechanism by which dietary modification benefits people with IC is unclear. Integration of neural signals from pelvic organs may mediate the effects of diet on symptoms of IC.\nMedications.\nNonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug and paracetamol and gastric protection combined with other conservative measures can be an effect first-line treatment.\nAs a second-line treatment, amitriptyline has been shown to be effective in reducing symptoms such as chronic pelvic pain and nocturia in many people with IC/BPS with a median dose of 75\u00a0mg daily. Oral pentosan polysulfate is believed to repair the protective glycosaminoglycan coating of the bladder, but studies have encountered mixed results when attempting to determine if the effect is statistically significant compared to placebo. The antihistamine hydroxyzine failed to demonstrate superiority over placebo in treatment of people with IC in a randomized, controlled, clinical trial. However, when hydroxyzine is used in combination with pentosan polysulfate sodium it may be more effective than pentosan polysulfate sodium on its own, but large-scale studies are needed.\nAs a last-line treatment the calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporine A has been studied as a treatment for interstitial cystitis due to its immunosuppressive properties. A prospective randomized study found cyclosporine A to be more effective at treating IC symptoms than pentosan polysulfate, but also had more adverse effects.\nIn one study, the antidepressant duloxetine was found to be ineffective as a treatment, although a patent exists for use of duloxetine in the context of IC, and is known to relieve neuropathic pain.\nPelvic floor treatments.\nUrologic pelvic pain syndromes, such as IC/BPS and CP/CPPS, are characterized by pelvic muscle tenderness, and symptoms may be reduced with pelvic myofascial physical therapy.\nThis may leave the pelvic area in a sensitized condition, resulting in a loop of muscle tension and heightened neurological feedback (neural wind-up), a form of myofascial pain syndrome. Current protocols, such as the Wise\u2013Anderson Protocol, largely focus on stretches to release overtensed muscles in the pelvic or anal area (commonly referred to as trigger points), physical therapy to the area, and progressive relaxation therapy to reduce causative stress.\nPelvic floor dysfunction is a fairly new area of specialty for physical therapists worldwide. The goal of therapy is to relax and lengthen the pelvic floor muscles, rather than to tighten and/or strengthen them as is the goal of therapy for people with urinary incontinence. Thus, traditional exercises such as Kegel exercises, which are used to strengthen pelvic muscles, can provoke pain and additional muscle tension. A specially trained physical therapist can provide direct, hands on evaluation of the muscles, both externally and internally.\nA therapeutic wand can also be used to perform pelvic floor muscle myofascial release to provide relief.\nSurgery.\nSurgery is rarely used for IC/BPS. Surgical intervention is very unpredictable, and is considered a treatment of last resort for severe refractory cases of interstitial cystitis. Some people who opt for surgical intervention continue to experience pain after surgery. Typical surgical interventions for refractory cases of IC/BPS include: bladder augmentation, urinary diversion, transurethral fulguration and resection of ulcers, and bladder removal (cystectomy).\nNeuromodulation can be successful in treating IC/BPS symptoms, including pain. One electronic pain-killing option is TENS. Percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation stimulators have also been used, with varying degrees of success. Percutaneous sacral nerve root stimulation was able to produce statistically significant improvements in several parameters, including pain.\nAlternative medicine.\nThere is little evidence looking at the effects of alternative medicine though their use is common. There is tentative evidence that acupuncture may help pain associated with IC/BPS as part of other treatments. Despite a scarcity of controlled studies on alternative medicine and IC/BPS, \"rather good results have been obtained\" when acupuncture is combined with other treatments.\nBiofeedback, a relaxation technique aimed at helping people control functions of the autonomic nervous system, has shown some benefit in controlling pain associated with IC/BPS as part of a multimodal approach that may also include medication or hydrodistention of the bladder.\nPrognosis.\nIC/BPS has a profound impact on quality of life. A 2007 Finnish epidemiologic study showed that two-thirds of women at moderate to high risk of having interstitial cystitis reported impairment in their quality of life and 35% of people with IC reported an impact on their sexual life. A 2012 survey showed that among a group of adult women with symptoms of interstitial cystitis, 11% reported suicidal thoughts in the past two weeks. Other research has shown that the impact of IC/BPS on quality of life is severe and may be comparable to the quality of life experienced in end-stage kidney disease or rheumatoid arthritis.\nInternational recognition of interstitial cystitis has grown and international urology conferences to address the heterogeneity in diagnostic criteria have recently been held. IC/PBS is now recognized with an official disability code in the United States of America.\nEpidemiology.\nInterstitial cystitis affects men and women of all cultures, socioeconomic backgrounds, and ages. Although the disease was previously believed to be a condition of menopausal women, growing numbers of men and women are being diagnosed in their twenties and younger. While BPS is not a rare condition, severe IC is. Early research suggested that the number of BPS cases ranged from 1 in 100,000 to 5.1 in 1,000 of the general population. In recent years, the scientific community has achieved a much deeper understanding of the epidemiology of interstitial cystitis. Recent studies have revealed that between 2.7 and 6.53 million women in the USA have symptoms of IC and up to 12% of women may have early symptoms of IC/BPS. Further study has estimated that the condition is far more prevalent in men than previously thought ranging from 1.8 to 4.2 million men having symptoms of interstitial cystitis.\nThe condition is officially recognized as a disability in the United States.\nHistory.\nPhiladelphia surgeon Joseph Parrish published the earliest record of interstitial cystitis in 1836 describing three cases of severe lower urinary tract symptoms without the presence of a bladder stone. The term \"interstitial cystitis\" was coined by Dr. Alexander Skene in 1887 to describe the disease. In 2002, the United States amended the Social Security Act to include interstitial cystitis as a disability. The first guideline for diagnosis and treatment of interstitial cystitis is released by a Japanese research team in 2009. The American Urological Association released the first American clinical practice guideline for diagnosing and treating IC/BPS in 2011 and has since (in 2014 and 2022) updated the guideline to maintain standard of care as knowledge of IC/BPS evolves.\nNames.\nOriginally called \"interstitial cystitis\", this disorder was renamed to \"interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome\" (IC/BPS) in the 2002\u20132010 timeframe. In 2007, the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) began using the umbrella term urologic chronic pelvic pain syndrome (UCPPS) to refer to pelvic pain syndromes associated with the bladder (e.g., interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome) and with the prostate gland or pelvis (e.g., chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome). \nIn 2008, terms currently in use in addition to IC/BPS include \"painful bladder syndrome\", \"bladder pain syndrome\" and \"hypersensitive bladder syndrome\", alone and in a variety of combinations. These different terms are being used in different parts of the world. The term \"interstitial cystitis\" is the primary term used in ICD-10 and MeSH. Grover et al. said, \"The International Continence Society named the disease interstitial cystitis/painful bladder syndrome (IC/PBS) in 2002 [Abrams et al. 2002], while the Multinational Interstitial Cystitis Association have labeled it as painful bladder syndrome/interstitial cystitis (PBS/IC) [Hanno et al. 2005]. Recently, the European Society for the study of Interstitial Cystitis (ESSIC) proposed the moniker, 'bladder pain syndrome' (BPS) [van de Merwe et al. 2008].\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15355", "revid": "2902776", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15355", "title": "ICI", "text": "ICI or Ici may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "15356", "revid": "50605640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15356", "title": "Imperial Chemical Industries", "text": "Former British chemicals, paints and pharmaceuticals company\nImperial Chemical Industries (ICI) was a British chemical company. It was, for much of its history, the largest manufacturer in Britain. Its headquarters were at Millbank in London. ICI was listed on the London Stock Exchange and was a constituent of the FT 30 and later the FTSE 100 indices.\nICI was formed in 1926 as a result of the merger of four of Britain's leading chemical companies. From the onset, it was involved in the production of various chemicals, explosives, fertilisers, insecticides, dyestuffs, non-ferrous metals, and paints; the firm soon became involved in plastics and a variety of speciality products, including food ingredients, polymers, electronic materials, fragrances and flavourings. During the Second World War, ICI's subsidiary ICI Nobel produced munitions for Britain's war effort; the wider company was also involved with Britain's nuclear weapons programme codenamed Tube Alloys. Throughout the 1940s and 1950s, ICI greatly expanded its activities in the pharmaceutic sector; cumulating in the formation of a dedicated subsidiary, \"ICI Pharmaceuticals\", in 1957.\nDuring 1960, ICI's first outsider to serve as chairman, Paul Chambers, was appointed. Chambers reorganised the company, but fell out of favour following an unsuccessful takeover bid of rival firm Courtaulds. Between 1968 and 1971, Peter Allen was chairman of ICI, during which time Viyella was purchased, the subsidiary Cleveland Potash Ltd was created, and profits dipped. Major moves in the 1970s included the acquisition of the American competitor Atlas Chemical Industries Inc. and the divestment of Imperial Metal Industries. By the late 1980s, ICI which had continued to acquire entities such as the Beatrice Chemical Division and Glidden Coatings &amp; Resins, increasing competition and rising internal complexity were driving ICI towards major restructuring plans, including a demerger.\nConsiderable changes at ICI came about during the 1990s, particularly in the aftermath of an unsuccessful acquisition attempt in 1991 by Hanson of the firm in what would have been the biggest takeover in British history. That same year, ICI sold its agricultural and merchandising operations of BritAg and Scottish Agricultural Industries to Norsk Hydro; it sold its nylon business to DuPont one year later. In 1993, the firm also de-merged its pharmaceutical bio-science businesses as Zeneca. During 1997, ICI's Australian subsidiary, ICI Australia, was sold in exchange for \u00a31\u00a0billion. During 2008, ICI was acquired by AkzoNobel for \u00a38\u00a0billion; shortly thereafter, portions of ICI were sold off to Henkel while its remaining operations were integrated within AkzoNobel's existing organisation.\nHistory.\nDevelopment of the business (1926\u20131944).\nThe company was founded in December 1926 from the merger of four companies: Brunner Mond, Nobel Explosives, the United Alkali Company, and British Dyestuffs Corporation. ICI established its head office at Millbank in London in 1928. Competing with DuPont and IG Farben, the new company produced chemicals, explosives, fertilisers, insecticides, dyestuffs, non-ferrous metals, and paints. In its first year, turnover was \u00a327\u00a0million.\nDuring the 1920s and 1930s, the company played a key role in the development of new chemical products, including the dyestuff phthalocyanine (1929), the acrylic plastic Perspex (1932), Dulux paints (1932, co-developed with DuPont), polyethylene (1937), and polyethylene terephthalate fibre known as Terylene (1941). In 1940, ICI started British Nylon Spinners as a joint venture with Courtaulds.\nICI also owned the Sunbeam motorcycle business, which had come with Nobel Industries, and continued to build motorcycles until 1937.\nDuring the Second World War, ICI was a major participant in Britain's war economy; its subsidiary ICI Nobel was involved in the production of munitions. The company was involved with the United Kingdom's nuclear weapons programme codenamed Tube Alloys.\nPostwar innovation (1945\u20131990).\nIn the 1940s and 1950s, the company established its pharmaceutical business and developed a number of key products, including Paludrine (1940s, an anti-malarial drug), halothane (1951, an inhalational anaesthetic agent), propofol (1977, an intravenous anaesthetic agent), Inderal (1965, a beta-blocker), tamoxifen (1978, a frequently used drug for breast cancer), and PEEK (1979, a high performance thermoplastic).\nDuring the 1950s, ICI developed a material as Crimplene, a thick polyester yarn that was used to make a fabric of the same name. The resulting cloth is heavy and wrinkle-resistant, and retains its shape well. The California-based fashion designer Edith Flagg was the first to import this fabric from Britain to the United States.\nDuring 1960, Paul Chambers became the first chairman appointed from outside the company.\nChambers employed the consultancy firm McKinsey to help with reorganising the company. Export sales doubled during his eight-year tenure export, however, Chambers' reputation was severely damaged by a failed takeover bid for Courtaulds in 1961\u20131962.\nOn 1 August 1962, ICI's operations in Burma were nationalised following a military coup in the country.\nIn 1964, ICI acquired British Nylon Spinners (BNS), the company it had jointly set up in 1940 with Courtaulds. ICI surrendered its 37.5 per cent holding in Courtaulds and paid Courtaulds \u00a32\u00a0million a year for five years, \"to take account of the future development expenditure of Courtaulds in the nylon field.\" In return, Courtaulds transferred to ICI their 50 per cent holding in BNS.\nEarly pesticide development under ICI Plant Protection Division, with its plant at Yalding, Kent, research station at Jealott's Hill and HQ at Fernhurst Research Station included paraquat (1962, a herbicide), the insecticides pirimiphos-methyl in 1967 and pirimicarb in 1970, brodifacoum (a rodenticide) was developed in 1974; in the late 1970s, ICI was involved in the early development of synthetic pyrethroid insecticides such as lambda-cyhalothrin.\nPeter Allen was appointed chairman between 1968 and 1971. He presided over the purchase of Viyella. Profits shrank under his tenure. During his tenure, ICI created the wholly owned subsidiary Cleveland Potash Ltd, for the construction of Boulby Mine in Redcar and Cleveland, North Yorkshire. The first shaft was dug in 1968, with full production from 1976. ICI jointly owned the mine with Anglo American, and then with De Beers, before complete ownership was transferred to Israel Chemicals Ltd in 2002.\nBetween 1971 and 1975, Jack Callard held the position of chairman at the firm. Amid Callard's tenure, company profits almost doubled between 1972 and 1974 while ICI became Britain's largest exporter. In 1971, the company acquired Atlas Chemical Industries Inc., a major American competitor. In 1977, Imperial Metal Industries was divested as an independent quoted company.\nBetween 1982 and 1987, the company was headed by the charismatic John Harvey-Jones. In 1985, ICI acquired the Beatrice Chemical Division; during the following year, it also bought Glidden Coatings &amp; Resins, a leading paints business.\nReorganisation of the business (1991\u20132007).\nBy the early 1990s, plans were carried out to demerge the company, as a result of increasing competition and internal complexity that caused heavy retrenchment and slowing innovation. In 1991, ICI sold the agricultural and merchandising operations of BritAg and Scottish Agricultural Industries to Norsk Hydro. It also divested its soda ash products arm to Brunner Mond, ending an association with the trade that had existed since the company's inception, one that had been inherited from the original Brunner, Mond &amp; Co. Ltd.\nDuring mid 1991, ICI was subject to an attempted acquisition Hanson; by this point, ICI was commonly being viewed by investors as having been in decline and thus its valuation was depressed, making it more vulnerable to such takeover attempt. Hanson had acquired a 2.8 per cent stake in the company as part of its hostile takeover attempt, which ICI's management team chose to oppose. The envisioned acquisition became hotly contested and controversial, partially as it would have been the biggest takeover in British history at that point. In October 1991, Hanson opted to not proceed with the deal.\nIn 1992, the company sold its nylon business to DuPont. During 1993, the company de-merged its pharmaceutical bio-science businesses: pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, specialities, seeds and biological products were all transferred into a new and independent company called Zeneca. Zeneca subsequently merged with Astra AB to form AstraZeneca.\nIn 1994, Charles Miller Smith was appointed CEO of ICI, one of the few times that an external figure had been appointed to lead the firm, Miller-Smith having previously been a director at Unilever. Shortly afterwards, the company acquired a number of former Unilever businesses in an attempt to move away from its historical reliance on commodity chemicals. During 1995, ICI acquired the American paint companies \"Devoe Paints\", \"Fuller-O'Brien Paints\" and \"Grow Group\". In 1997, ICI acquired National Starch &amp; Chemical, Quest International, Unichema, and Crosfield, the speciality chemicals businesses of Unilever in exchange for $8\u00a0billion. This step was part of a strategy to move away from cyclical bulk chemicals and to progress up the value chain to become a higher growth, higher margin business. Later that same year, it went on to buy Rutz &amp; Huber, a Swiss paints business.\nHaving taken on some \u00a34\u00a0billion of debt to finance these acquisitions, the company was soon compelled to sell off its commodity chemicals businesses:\nHaving sold much of its historically profitable commodities businesses, and many of the new speciality businesses which it had failed to integrate, the company consisted mainly of the Dulux paints business, which found itself the subject of a takeover by AkzoNobel in 2007.\nTakeover by AkzoNobel.\nIn June 2007, the Dutch firm AkzoNobel (owner of Crown Berger paints) bid \u00a37.2\u00a0billion (\u20ac10.66\u00a0billion or $14.5\u00a0billion) for ICI. An area of concern about a potential deal was ICI's British pension fund, which had a deficit of almost \u00a3700 million and future liabilities of more than \u00a39 billion at the time. Regulatory issues in the UK and other markets where Dulux and Crown Paints brands each have significant market share were also a cause for concern for the boards of ICI and AkzoNobel. In the UK, any combined operation without divestments would have seen AkzoNobel have a 54 per cent market share in the paint market. The initial bid was rejected by the ICI board and the majority of shareholders. However, a subsequent bid for \u00a38\u00a0billion (\u20ac11.82\u00a0billion) was accepted by ICI in August 2007, pending approval by regulators.\nOn 2 January 2008, completion of the takeover of ICI plc by AkzoNobel was announced. Shareholders of ICI received either \u00a36.70 in cash or AkzoNobel loan notes to the value of \u00a36.70 per one nominal ICI share. The adhesives business of ICI was transferred to Henkel as a result of the deal, while AkzoNobel agreed to sell its Crown Paints subsidiary to satisfy the concerns of the European Commissioner for Competition. The areas of concern regarding ICI's British pension scheme were addressed by ICI and AkzoNobel.\nOperations.\nICI operated a number of chemical sites around the world.\nIn the UK, the main plants were as follows:\nArgentina.\nAn ICI subsidiary called Duperial operated in Argentine from 1928 to 1995, when it was renamed ICI.\nEstablished in the city of San Lorenzo, Santa Fe,\nit operates an integrated production site with commercial offices in Buenos Aires. Since 2009 it has made sulphuric acid with ISO certification under the company name Akzo Nobel Functional Chemicals S.A.\nIt also had an operation at Palmira, Mendoza, for its Wine Chemicals Division, that manufactured tartaric acid, wine alcohol and grapeseed oil from natural raw material coming from the wine industry in the provinces of Mendoza and San Juan. This operation held 10% world market share for tartaric acid. It was sold in 2008 and currently operates as Derivados V\u00ednicos S.A. (DERVINSA).\nAustralia.\nThe subsidiary ICI Australia Ltd established the Dry Creek Saltfields at Dry Creek north of Adelaide, South Australia, in 1940, with an associated soda ash plant at nearby Osborne. In 1989, these operations were sold to Penrice Soda Products.\nAn ICI plant was built at Botany Bay in New South Wales in the 1940s and was part of the Orica demerger in 1997. This plant once manufactured paints, plastics and industrial chemicals such as solvents. It had been detirmined to be the source of the Botany Bay Groundwater Plume contamination of a local aquifer.\nBangladesh.\nIn 1968 a subsidiary of Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI) was established in then-East Pakistan.\nAfter Bangladesh gained independence in 1971, the company was incorporated on 24 January 1973 as ICI Bangladesh Manufacturers Limited and also as Public Limited Company. The company divested its investment in Bangladesh and was renamed as Advanced Chemical Industries Limited (ACI Limited) on 5 May 1992. The company sold its insect control, air care and toilet care brands to SC Johnson &amp; Son in 2015. Currently Advanced Chemical Industries (ACI) Limited is one of the largest conglomerates in Bangladesh with a multinational heritage operating across the country. The company operates through three reporting divisions: Pharmaceuticals, Consumer Brands and Agribusiness.\nSri Lanka.\nICI maintained offices in Colombo importing and supplying chemicals for manufacturers in Ceylon. In 1964, following import restrictions that allowed only locally owned subsidiaries of multinational companies to gain import licenses, Chemical Industries (Colombo) Limited was formed as an ICI subsidiary with 49% ICI ownership and remaining held public.\nNew Zealand.\nThe subsidiary ICI New Zealand provided substantial quantities of chemical products \u2013 including swimming pool chemicals, commercial healthcare products, herbicides and pesticides for use within New Zealand and the neighbouring Pacific Islands.\nA fire at the ICI New Zealand store in Mount Wellington, Auckland, on 21 December 1984, killed an ICI employee and caused major health concerns. Over 200 firefighters were exposed to toxic smoke and effluents during the firefighting efforts. Six firefighters retired for medical reasons as a result of the fire. This incident was a major event in the history of the New Zealand Fire Service and subject to a formal investigation, led by future Chief Justice Sian Elias. The fire was a trigger for major reforms of the service; direct consequences included improved protective clothing for firefighters, a standard safety protocol for major incidents, the introduction of dedicated fireground safety officers, and changes to occupational health regulations.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15357", "revid": "50444281", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15357", "title": "Imperial Airways", "text": "Defunct long-range airline of the United Kingdom (1924\u20131939)\nImperial Airways was an early British commercial long-range airline, operating from 1924 to 1939 and principally serving the British Empire routes to South Africa, India, Australia and the Far East, including Malaya and Hong Kong. Passengers were typically businessmen or colonial administrators, and most flights carried about 20 passengers or fewer. Accidents were frequent: in the first six years, 32 people died in seven incidents. Imperial Airways never achieved the levels of technological innovation of its competitors and was merged into the British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC) in 1939. BOAC in turn merged with the British European Airways (BEA) in 1974 to form British Airways.\nBackground.\nThe establishment of Imperial Airways occurred in the context of facilitating British colonialism by making travel to and from the colonies quicker than travel by ship. Air travel would speed up both colonial government and trade. The launch of the airline followed a burst of air route surveying in the British Empire after the First World War, and after some experimental (and often dangerous) long-distance flying to the margins of Empire.\nFormation.\nImperial Airways was created against a background of stiff competition from French and German airlines that enjoyed heavy government subsidies and following the advice of the government's Hambling Committee (formally known as the C.A.T Subsidies Committee) under Sir Herbert Hambling. The committee, set up on 2 January 1923, produced a report on 15 February 1923 recommending that four of the largest existing airlines, the Instone Air Line Company, owned by shipping magnate Samuel Instone, Noel Pemberton Billing's British Marine Air Navigation (part of the Supermarine flying-boat company), the Daimler Airway, under the management of George Edward Woods, and Handley Page Transport Co Ltd., should be merged.\nIt was hoped that this would create a company which could compete against French and German competition and would be strong enough to develop Britain's external air services while minimizing government subsidies for duplicated services. With this in view, a \u00a31 million subsidy over ten years was offered to encourage the merger. Agreement was made between the President of the Air Council and the British, Foreign and Colonial Corporation on 3 December 1923 for the company, under the title of the 'Imperial Air Transport Company' to acquire existing air transport services in the UK. The agreement set out the government subsidies for the new company: \u00a3137,000 in the first year diminishing to \u00a332,000 in the tenth year as well as minimum mileages to be achieved and penalties if these weren't met.\nImperial Airways Limited was formed on 31 March 1924 with equipment from each contributing concern: British Marine Air Navigation Company Ltd, the Daimler Airway, Handley Page Transport Ltd and the Instone Air Line Ltd. Sir Eric Geddes was appointed the chairman of the board with one director from each of the merged companies. The government had appointed two directors, Hambling (who was also President of the Institute of Bankers) and Major John Hills, a former Treasury Financial Secretary.\nThe land operations were based at Croydon Airport to the south of London. IAL immediately discontinued its predecessors' service to points north of London, the airline focused on international and imperial service rather than domestic. Thereafter the only IAL aircraft operating 'North of Watford' were charter flights.\nIndustrial troubles with the pilots delayed the start of services until 26 April 1924, when a daily London\u2013Paris route was opened with a de Havilland DH.34. Thereafter the task of expanding the routes between England and the Continent began, with Southampton\u2013Guernsey on 1 May 1924, London-Brussels\u2013Cologne on 3 May, London\u2013Amsterdam on 2 June 1924, and a summer service from London\u2013Paris\u2013Basel\u2013Z\u00fcrich on 17 June 1924. The first new airliner ordered by Imperial Airways, was the Handley Page W8f \"City of Washington\", delivered on 3 November 1924. In the first year of operation the company carried 11,395 passengers and 212,380 letters. In April 1925, the film \"The Lost World\" became the first film to be shown to passengers on a scheduled airliner flight when it was shown on the London-Paris route.\nEmpire services.\nRoute proving.\nBetween 16 November 1925 and 13 March 1926, Alan Cobham made an Imperial Airways' route survey flight from the UK to Cape Town and back in the Armstrong Siddeley Jaguar\u2013powered de Havilland DH.50J floatplane \"G-EBFO\". The outward route was London\u2013Paris\u2013Marseille\u2013Pisa\u2013Taranto\u2013Athens\u2013Sollum\u2013Cairo\u2013Luxor\u2013Aswan\u2013Wadi Halfa\u2013Atbara\u2013Khartoum\u2013Malakal\u2013Mongalla\u2013Jinja\u2013Kisumu\u2013Tabora\u2013Abercorn\u2013Ndola\u2013Broken Hill\u2013Livingstone\u2013Bulawayo\u2013Pretoria\u2013Johannesburg\u2013Kimberley\u2013Bloemfontein\u2013Cape Town. On his return Cobham was awarded the Air Force Cross for his services to aviation.\nOn 30 June 1926, Cobham took off from the River Medway at Rochester in \"G-EBFO\" to make an Imperial Airways route survey for a service to Melbourne, arriving on 15 August 1926. He left Melbourne on 29 August 1926, and, after completing in 320 hours flying time over 78 days, he alighted on the Thames at Westminster on 1 October 1926. Cobham was met by the Secretary of State for Air, Sir Samuel Hoare, and was subsequently knighted by HM King George V.\nOn 27 December 1926, Imperial Airways de Havilland DH.66 Hercules \"G-EBMX City of Delhi\" left Croydon for a survey flight to India. The flight reached Karachi on 6 January 1927 and Delhi on 8 January 1927. The aircraft was named by Lady Irwin, wife of the Viceroy, on 10 January 1927. The return flight left on 1 February 1927 and arrived at Heliopolis, Cairo on 7 February 1927. The flying time from Croydon to Delhi was 62 hours 27 minutes and Delhi to Heliopolis 32 hours 50 minutes.\nThe Eastern route.\nRegular services on the Cairo to Basra route began on 12 January 1927 using DH.66 aircraft, replacing the previous RAF mail flight. Following two years of negotiations with the Persian authorities regarding overflight rights, a London to Karachi service started on 30 March 1929, taking seven days and consisting of a flight from London to Basel, a train to Genoa and a Short S.8 Calcutta flying boats to Alexandria, a train to Cairo and finally a DH.66 flight to Karachi. The route was extended as far as Delhi on 29 December 1929. The route across Europe and the Mediterranean changed many times over the next few years but almost always involved a rail journey.\nIn April 1931 an experimental London-Australia air mail flight took place; the mail was transferred at the Dutch East Indies, after the DH66 City of Cairo crashed landed in Timor, on the 19th April, having run out of fuel, and took 26 days in total to reach Sydney. For the passenger flight leaving London on 1 October 1932, the Eastern route was switched from the Persian to the Arabian side of the Persian Gulf, and Handley Page HP 42 airliners were introduced on the Cairo to Karachi sector. The move saw the establishment of an airport and rest house, Mahatta Fort, in the Trucial State of Sharjah now part of the United Arab Emirates.\nOn 29 May 1933 an England to Australia survey flight took off, operated by Imperial Airways Armstrong Whitworth Atalanta G-ABTL \"Astraea\". Major H. G. Brackley, Imperial Airways' Air Superintendent, was in charge of the flight. \"Astraea\" flew Croydon-Paris-Lyon-Rome-Brindisi-Athens-Alexandria-Cairo where it followed the normal route to Karachi then onwards to Jodhpur-Delhi-Calcutta-Akyab-Rangoon-Bangkok-Prachuab-Alor Setar-Singapore-Palembang-Batavia-Sourabaya-Bima-Koepang-Bathurst Island-Darwin-Newcastle Waters-Camooweal-Cloncurry-Longreach-Roma-Toowoomba reaching Eagle Farm, Brisbane on 23 June. Sydney was visited on 26 June, Canberra on 28 June and Melbourne on 29 June.\nThere followed a rapid eastern extension. The first London to Calcutta service departed on 1 July 1933, the first London to Rangoon service on 23 September 1933, the first London to Singapore service on 9 December 1933, and the first London to Brisbane service on 8 December 1934, with Qantas responsible for the Singapore to Brisbane sector. (The 1934 start was for mail; passenger flights to Brisbane began the following April.) The first mail service to Hong Kong was inaugurated on March 14th, 1936. The mail service, and later the passenger service, from London to Hong Kong connected with the London-Australia branch at Penang. The mail leaving London on 14 March 1936 was connected with the first flight in Penang on March 23, following the establishment of a branch from Penang to Hong Kong.\nThe Africa route.\nOn 28 February 1931 a weekly service began between London and Mwanza on the Southern shore of Lake Victoria in Tanganyika as part of the proposed route to Cape Town. On 9 December 1931 the Imperial Airways' service for Central Africa was extended experimentally to Cape Town for the carriage of Christmas mail. The aircraft used on the last sector, DH66 G-AARY \"City of Karachi\" arrived in Cape Town on 21 December 1931. On 20 January 1932 a mail-only route between London and Cape Town was opened. On 27 April this route was opened to passengers and took 10 days. In early 1933 Atalantas replaced the DH.66s on the sector of the London to Cape Town route that started at Kisumu, Kenya, in Homa Bay on the Northern shore of Lake Victoria. On 9 February 1936 the trans-Africa route was opened by Imperial Airways between Khartoum and Kano in Nigeria. This route was extended to Lagos on 15 October 1936.\nShort Empire flying boats.\nIn 1937 with the introduction of Short Empire flying boats built at Short Brothers, Imperial Airways could offer a through-service from Southampton to the Empire. The journey to the Cape was via Marseille, Rome, Brindisi, Athens, Alexandria, Khartoum, Port Bell, Kisumu and onwards by land-based craft to Nairobi, Mbeya and eventually Cape Town. Survey flights were also made across the Atlantic and to New Zealand. By mid-1937 Imperial had completed its thousandth service to the Empire. Starting in 1938 Empire flying boats also flew between Britain and Australia via the Middle East and India.\nIn March 1939 three Shorts a week left Southampton for Australia, reaching Sydney after ten days of flying and nine overnight stops. Three more left for South Africa, taking six flying days to Durban.\nPassengers.\nImperial's aircraft were small, most seating fewer than twenty passengers; about 50,000 passengers used Imperial Airways in the 1930s. Most passengers on intercontinental routes or on services within and between British colonies were men in colonial administration, business or research. To begin with only the wealthy could afford to fly, but passenger lists gradually diversified. Travel experiences related to flying low and slow, and were reported enthusiastically in newspapers, magazines and books. There was opportunity for sightseeing from the air and at stops. Imperial Airways sought to attracts tourists to Iraq.\nCrews.\nImperial Airways stationed its all-male flight deck crew, cabin crew and ground crew along the length of its routes. Specialist engineers and inspectors \u2013 and ground crew on rotation or leave \u2013 travelled on the airline without generating any seat revenue. Several air crew lost their lives in accidents. At the end of the 1930s crew numbers approximated 3,000. All crew were expected to be ambassadors for Britain and the British Empire.\nAir Mail.\nIn 1934 the government began negotiations with Imperial Airways to establish a service (Empire Air Mail Scheme) to carry mail by air on routes served by the airline. Indirectly these negotiations led to the dismissal in 1936 of Sir Christopher Bullock, the Permanent Under-Secretary at the Air Ministry, who was found by a Board of Inquiry to have abused his position in seeking a position on the board of the company while these negotiations were in train. The government, including the Prime Minister, regretted the decision to dismiss him, later finding that, in fact, no corruption was alleged and sought Bullock's reinstatement which he declined.\nThe Empire Air Mail Programme started in July 1937, delivering anywhere for 1 d./oz. By mid-1938 a hundred tons of mail had been delivered to India and a similar amount to Africa. In the same year, construction was started on the Empire Terminal in Victoria, London, designed by A. Lakeman and with a statue by Eric Broadbent, \"Speed Wings Over the World\" gracing the portal above the main entrance. From the terminal there were train connections to Imperial's flying boats at Southampton and coaches to its landplane base at Croydon Airport. The terminal operated as recently as 1980.\nTo help promote use of the Air Mail service, in June and July 1939, Imperial Airways participated with Pan American Airways in providing a special \"around the world\" service; Imperial carried the souvenir mail from Foynes, Ireland, to Hong Kong, out of the eastbound New York to New York route. Pan American provided service from New York to Foynes (departing 24 June, via the first flight of Northern FAM 18) and Hong Kong to San Francisco (via FAM 14), and United Airlines carried it on the final leg from San Francisco to New York, arriving on 28 July.\nCaptain H. W. C. Alger was the pilot for the inaugural air mail flight carrying mail from England to Australia for the first time on the Short Empire flyingboat \"Castor\" for Imperial Airways' Empires Air Routes, in 1937.\nIn November 2016, 80 years later, the Crete2Cape Vintage Air Rally flew this old route with fifteen vintage aeroplanes \u2013 a celebration of the skill and determination of these early aviators.\nSecond World War.\nBefore the outbreak of war on 1 September 1939, the British government had already implemented the Air Navigation (Restriction in Time of War) Order 1939. That ordered military takeover of most civilian airfields in the UK, cessation of all private flying without individual flight permits, and other emergency measures. It was administered by a statutory department of the Air Ministry titled National Air Communications (NAC). By 1 September 1939, the aircraft and administrations of Imperial Airways and British Airways Ltd were physically transferred to Bristol (Whitchurch) Airport, to be operated jointly by NAC. On 1 April 1940, Imperial Airways Ltd and British Airways Ltd were officially combined into a new company, British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC), that had already been formed on 24 November 1939 with retrospective financial arrangements.\nAircraft.\nImperial Airways operated many types of aircraft from its formation on 1 April 1924 until 1 April 1940 when all aircraft still in service were transferred to BOAC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15358", "revid": "50632180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15358", "title": "Insanity defense", "text": "Legal concept regarding a defendant's state of mind\nThe insanity defense, also known as the mental disorder defense, is an affirmative defense by excuse in a criminal case, arguing that the defendant is not responsible for their actions due to a psychiatric disease at the time of the criminal act. This is contrasted with an excuse of provocation, in which the defendant is responsible, but the responsibility is lessened due to a temporary mental state. It is also contrasted with the justification of self defense or with the mitigation of imperfect self-defense. The insanity defense is also contrasted with a finding that a defendant cannot stand trial in a criminal case because a mental disease prevents them from effectively assisting counsel, from a civil finding in trusts and estates where a will is nullified because it was made when a mental disorder prevented a testator from recognizing the natural objects of their bounty, and from involuntary civil commitment to a mental institution, when anyone is found to be gravely disabled or to be a danger to themself or to others.\nLegal definitions of insanity or mental disorder are varied, and include the M'Naghten Rule, the Durham rule, the 1953 British Royal Commission on Capital Punishment report, the ALI rule (American Legal Institute Model Penal Code rule), and other provisions, often relating to a lack of \"mens rea\" (\"guilty mind\"). In the criminal laws of Australia and Canada, statutory legislation enshrines the \"M'Naghten Rules\", with the terms \"defense of mental disorder\", \"defense of mental illness\", or \"not criminally responsible by reason of mental disorder\" employed. Being incapable of distinguishing right from wrong is one basis for being found to be legally insane as a criminal defense. It originated in the \"M'Naghten Rule\", and has been reinterpreted and modernized through more recent cases, such as \"People v. Serravo\".\nIn the United Kingdom, Ireland, and the United States, use of the defense is rare. Mitigating factors, including things not eligible for the insanity defense such as intoxication and partial defenses such as diminished capacity and provocation, are used more frequently.\nThe defense is based on evaluations by forensic mental health professionals with the appropriate test according to the jurisdiction. Their testimony guides the jury, but they are not allowed to testify to the accused's criminal responsibility, as this is a matter for the jury to decide. Similarly, mental health practitioners are restrained from making a judgment on the \"ultimate issue\"\u2014whether the defendant is insane.\nSome jurisdictions require the evaluation to address the defendant's ability to control their behavior at the time of the offense (the volitional limb). A defendant claiming the defense is pleading \"not guilty by reason of insanity\" (NGRI) or \"guilty but insane or mentally ill\" in some jurisdictions which, if successful, may result in the defendant being committed to a psychiatric facility for an indeterminate period.\nNon compos mentis.\n\"Non compos mentis\" (Latin) is a legal term meaning \"not of sound mind\". \"Non compos mentis\" derives from the Latin \"non\" meaning \"not\", \"compos\" meaning \"control\" or \"command\", and \"mentis\" (genitive singular of \"mens\"), meaning \"of mind\". It is the direct opposite of \"Compos mentis\" (of a sound mind).\nAlthough typically used in law, this term can also be used metaphorically or figuratively; e.g. when one is in a confused state, intoxicated, or not of sound mind. The term may be applied when a determination of competency needs to be made by a physician for purposes of obtaining informed consent for treatments and, if necessary, assigning a surrogate to make health care decisions. While the proper sphere for this determination is in a court of law, this is practically, and most frequently, made by physicians in the clinical setting.\nIn English law, the rule of \"non compos mentis\" was most commonly used when the defendant invoked religious or magical explanations for behaviour. An example of religious circumstances which prevent an individual from being guilty due to mental defect can be found in Catholic Canon Law.\nHistory.\nThe concept of defense by insanity has existed since ancient Greece and Rome. During the Roman and Greek eras, insanity was used as a way to help provide a defense for those with mental disorders. However, in colonial America a delusional Dorothy Talbye was hanged in 1638 for murdering her daughter, as at the time Massachusetts's common law made no distinction between insanity (or mental illness) and criminal behavior. Edward II, under English common law, declared that a person was insane if their mental capacity was no more than that of a \"wild beast\" (in the sense of a dumb animal, rather than being frenzied). The first complete transcript of an insanity trial dates to 1724. It is likely that the insane, like those under 14, were spared trial by ordeal. When that was replaced by trial by jury, members were expected to find the insane guilty but then to refer the case to the king for a royal pardon. From 1500 onwards, juries could acquit the insane, and detention required a separate civil procedure. The Criminal Lunatics Act 1800, passed with retrospective effect following the acquittal of James Hadfield, mandated detention at the regent's pleasure (indefinitely) even for those who, although insane at the time of the offence, were now sane.\nThe M'Naghten Rules of 1843 were not a codification or definition of insanity but rather the responses of a panel of judges to hypothetical questions posed by Parliament in the wake of Daniel M'Naghten's acquittal for the homicide of Edward Drummond, whom he mistook for British Prime Minister Robert Peel. The rules define the defense as \"at the time of committing the act the party accused was labouring under such a defect of reason, from disease of the mind, as not to know the nature and quality of the act he was doing, or as not to know that what he was doing was wrong.\" The key is that the defendant could not appreciate the nature of their actions during the commission of the crime.\nIn \"Ford v. Wainwright\" 477 U.S. 399 (1986), the US Supreme Court upheld the common law rule that the insane cannot be executed. It further stated that a person under the death penalty is entitled to a competency evaluation and to an evidentiary hearing in court on the question of their competency to be executed.\nIn \"Wainwright v. Greenfield\" (1986), the Court ruled that it was fundamentally unfair for the prosecutor to comment during the court proceedings on the petitioner's silence invoked as a result of a Miranda warning. The prosecutor had argued that the respondent's silence after receiving Miranda warnings was evidence of his sanity.\nIn 2006, the US Supreme Court decided \"Clark v. Arizona\", upholding Arizona's restrictions on the insanity defense.\n\"Kahler v. Kansas\", 589 U.S. ___ (2020), is a case in which the US Supreme Court justices ruled that the Eighth and the Fourteenth Amendments of the US Constitution do not require states to adopt the insanity defense in criminal cases that are based on the defendant's ability to recognize right from wrong.\nApplication.\nThe defense of insanity takes different guises in different jurisdictions, and there are differences between legal systems with regard to the availability, definition and burden of proof, as well as the role of judges, juries and medical experts. In jurisdictions where there are jury trials, it is common for the decision about the sanity of an accused to be determined by the jury.\nIncompetency and mental illness.\nAn important distinction to be made is the difference between competency and criminal responsibility.\nCompetency largely deals with the defendant's present condition, while criminal responsibility addresses the condition at the time the crime was committed.\nIn the United States, a trial in which the insanity defense is invoked typically involves the testimony of psychiatrists or psychologists who will, as expert witnesses, present opinions on the defendant's state of mind at the time of the offense.\nTherefore, a person whose mental disorder is not in dispute is determined to be sane if the court decides that despite a \"mental illness\" the defendant was responsible for the acts committed and will be treated in court as a normal defendant. If the person has a mental illness and it is determined that the mental illness interfered with the person's ability to determine right from wrong (and other associated criteria a jurisdiction may have) and if the person is willing to plead guilty or is proven guilty in a court of law, some jurisdictions have an alternative option known as either a Guilty but Mentally Ill (GBMI) or a Guilty but Insane verdict. The GBMI verdict is available as an alternative to, rather than in lieu of, a \"not guilty by reason of insanity\" verdict. Michigan (1975) was the first state to create a GBMI verdict, after two prisoners released after being found NGRI committed violent crimes within a year of release, one raping two women and the other killing his wife.\nTemporary insanity.\nThe notion of temporary insanity argues that a defendant \"was\" insane during the commission of a crime, but they later regained their sanity after the criminal act was carried out. This legal defense developed in the 19th century and became especially associated with the defense of individuals committing crimes of passion. The defense was first successfully used by U.S. Congressman Daniel Sickles of New York in 1859 after he had killed his wife's lover, Philip Barton Key II. The temporary insanity defense was unsuccessfully pleaded by Charles J. Guiteau who assassinated president James A. Garfield in 1881.\nMitigating factors and diminished capacity.\nThe United States Supreme Court (in \"Penry v. Lynaugh\") and the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit (in \"Bigby v. Dretke\") have been clear in their decisions that jury instructions in death penalty cases that do not ask about mitigating factors regarding the defendant's mental health violate the defendant's Eighth Amendment rights, saying that the jury is to be instructed to consider mitigating factors when answering unrelated questions. This ruling suggests specific explanations to the jury are necessary to weigh mitigating factors.\nDiminished responsibility or diminished capacity can be employed as a mitigating factor or partial defense to crimes. In the United States, diminished capacity is applicable to more circumstances than the insanity defense. The Homicide Act 1957 is the statutory basis for the defense of diminished responsibility in England and Wales, whereas in Scotland it is a product of case law. The number of findings of diminished responsibility has been matched by a fall in unfitness to plead and insanity findings. A plea of diminished capacity is different from a plea of insanity in that \"reason of insanity\" is a full defense while \"diminished capacity\" is merely a plea to a lesser crime.\nIntoxication.\nDepending on jurisdiction, circumstances and crime, intoxication may be a defense, a mitigating factor or an aggravating factor. However, most jurisdictions differentiate between voluntary intoxication and involuntary intoxication. In some cases, intoxication (usually involuntary intoxication) may be covered by the insanity defense.\nWithdrawal or refusal of defense.\nSeveral cases have ruled that persons found not guilty by reason of insanity may not withdraw the defense in a habeas petition to pursue an alternative, although there have been exceptions in other rulings. In Colorado v. Connelly, 700 A.2d 694 (Conn. App. Ct. 1997), the petitioner who had originally been found not guilty by reason of insanity and committed for ten years to the jurisdiction of a Psychiatric Security Review Board, filed a pro se writ of \"habeas corpus\" and the court vacated his insanity acquittal. He was granted a new trial and found guilty of the original charges, receiving a prison sentence of 40 years.\nIn the landmark case of \"Frendak v. United States\" in 1979, the court ruled that the insanity defense cannot be imposed upon an unwilling defendant if an intelligent defendant voluntarily wishes to forgo the defense.\nUsage.\nAccording to an eight-state study, the insanity defense is used in less than 1% of all court cases and, when used, has only a 26% success rate. Of those cases that were successful, 90% of the defendants had been previously diagnosed with mental illness.\nA study of racial disparities in the rates of insanity defense found court-appointed mental health professionals are more likely to find that Black criminal defendants are to be determined not criminally responsible as compared to similarly situated white defendants. Another study found sentencing disparities by both race and sex connected to mental disorder diagnoses.\nPsychiatric treatment.\nThose found to have been not guilty by reason of mental disorder or insanity are generally then required to undergo psychiatric treatment in a mental institution, until the person is not a risk to public safety.\nIn England and Wales, under the Criminal Procedure (Insanity and Unfitness to Plead) Act of 1991 (amended by the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act, 2004 to remove the option of a guardianship order), the court can mandate a hospital order, a restriction order (where release from hospital requires the permission of the Home Secretary), a \"supervision and treatment\" order, or an absolute discharge. Unlike defendants who are found guilty of a crime, they are not institutionalized for a fixed period, but rather held in the institution until they are determined not to be a threat. Authorities making this decision tend to be cautious, and as a result, defendants can often be institutionalized for longer than they would have been incarcerated in prison.\nWorldwide.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia there are nine law units, each of which may have different rules governing mental impairment defenses.\nSouth Australia.\nIn South Australia, the Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935 (SA) provides that:\n269C\u2014Mental competence\nA person is mentally incompetent to commit an offence if, at the time of the conduct alleged to give rise to the offence, the person is suffering from a mental impairment and, in consequence of the mental impairment\u2014\n(a) does not know the nature and quality of the conduct; or\n(b) does not know that the conduct is wrong; or\n(c) is unable to control the conduct.\n269H \u2014 Mental unfitness to stand trial\nA person is mentally unfit to stand trial on a charge of an offence if the person's mental processes are so disordered or impaired that the person is \u2014\n(a) unable to understand, or to respond rationally to, the charge or the allegations on which the charge is based; or\n(b) unable to exercise (or to give rational instructions about the exercise of) procedural rights (such as, for example, the right to challenge jurors); or\n(c) unable to understand the nature of the proceedings, or to follow the evidence or the course of the proceedings.\nVictoria.\nIn Victoria the current defence of mental impairment was introduced in the \"Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act\" 1997 which replaced the common law defence of insanity and indefinite detention at the governor's pleasure with the following:\nthe accused was suffering from a mental impairment; and\nthe mental impairment affected the accused so they either did not understand the nature and quality of the conduct, or did not know that it was wrong.\nThese requirements are almost identical to the M'Naghten Rules, substituting \"mental impairment\" for \"disease of the mind\".\nNew South Wales.\nIn New South Wales, the defence has been renamed the 'Defence of Mental Illness' in Part 4 of the \"Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990\". However, definitions of the defence are derived from M'Naghten's case and have not been codified. Whether a particular condition amounts to a disease of the mind is not a medical but a legal question to be decided in accordance with the ordinary rules of interpretation. This defence is an exception to the \"Woolmington v DPP\" (1935) 'golden thread', as the party raising the issue of the defence of mental illness bears the burden of proving this defence on the balance of probabilities. Generally, the defence will raise the issue of insanity. However, the prosecution can raise it in exceptional circumstances: \"R v Ayoub (1984).\"\nAustralian cases have further qualified and explained the \"M'Naghten Rules\". The NSW Supreme Court has held there are two limbs to the \"M'Naghten Rules\", that the accused did not know what he was doing, or that the accused did not appreciate that what he was doing was morally wrong, in both cases the accused must be operating under a 'defect of reason, from a disease of the mind'. The High Court in http:// stated that the condition of the accused's mind is relevant only at the time of the actus reus. In \"Woodbridge v The Queen\" the court stated that a symptom indicating a disease of the mind must be prone to recur and be the result of an underlying pathological infirmity. A 'defect of reason' is the inability to think rationally and pertains to incapacity to reason, rather than having unsound ideas or difficulty with such a task. Examples of disease of the mind include Arteriosclerosis (considered so because the hardening of the arteries affects the mind.\nCanada.\nCriminal Code provisions.\nThe defence of mental disorder is codified in section 16 of the \"Criminal Code\" which states, in part:\n\"16. (1) No person is criminally responsible for an act committed or an omission made while suffering from a mental disorder that rendered the person incapable of appreciating the nature and quality of the act or omission or of knowing that it was wrong.\"\nTo establish a claim of mental disorder the party raising the issue must show on a balance of probabilities first that the person who committed the act was suffering from a \"disease of the mind\", and second, that at the time of the offence they were either 1) unable to appreciate the \"nature and quality\" of the act, or 2) did not know it was \"wrong\".\nThe meaning of the word \"wrong\" was determined in the Supreme Court case of \"R. v. Chaulk\" [1990] 3 S.C.R. which held that \"wrong\" was NOT restricted to \"legally wrong\" but to \"morally wrong\" as well.\nPost-verdict conditions.\nThe current legislative scheme was created by the Parliament of Canada after the previous scheme was found unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of Canada in \"R. v. Swain\". The new provisions also replaced the old insanity defense with the current mental disorder defence.\nOnce a person is found not criminally responsible (\"NCR\"), they will have a hearing by a Review Board within 45 days (90 days if the court extends the delay). A Review Board is established under Part XX.1 of the \"Criminal Code\" and is composed of at least three members, a person who is a judge or eligible to be a judge, a psychiatrist and another expert in a relevant field, such as social work, criminology or psychology. Parties at a Review Board hearing are usually the accused, the Crown and the hospital responsible for the supervision or assessment of the accused. A Review Board is responsible for both accused persons found NCR or accused persons found unfit to stand trial on account of mental disorder. A Review Board dealing with an NCR offender must consider two questions: whether the accused is a \"significant threat to the safety of the public\" and, if so, what the \"least onerous and least restrictive\" restrictions on the liberty of the accused should be in order to mitigate such a threat. Proceedings before a Review Board are inquisitorial rather than adversarial. Often the Review Board will be active in conducting an inquiry. Where the Review Board is unable to conclude that the accused is a significant threat to the safety of the public, the review board must grant the accused an absolute discharge, an order essentially terminating the jurisdiction of the criminal law over the accused. Otherwise, the Review Board must order that the accused be either discharged subject to conditions or detained in a hospital, both subject to conditions. The conditions imposed must be the least onerous and least restrictive necessary to mitigate any danger the accused may pose to others.\nSince the Review Board is empowered under criminal law powers under s. 91(27) of the \"Constitution Act, 1867\" the sole justification for its jurisdiction is public safety. Therefore, the nature of the inquiry is the danger the accused may pose to public safety rather than whether the accused is \"cured\". For instance, many \"sick\" accused persons are discharged absolutely on the basis that they are not a danger to the public while many \"sane\" accused are detained on the basis that they are dangerous. Moreover, the notion of \"significant threat to the safety of the public\" is a \"criminal threat\". This means that the Review Board must find that the threat posed by the accused is of a criminal nature.\nWhile proceedings before a Review Board are less formal than in court, there are many procedural safeguards available to the accused given the potential indefinite nature of Part XX.1. Any party may appeal against the decision of a Review Board.\nIn 1992 when the new mental disorder provisions were enacted, Parliament included \"capping\" provisions which were to be enacted at a later date. These capping provisions limited the jurisdiction of a Review Board over an accused based on the maximum potential sentence had the accused been convicted (e.g. there would be a cap of 5 years if the maximum penalty for the index offence is 5 years). However, these provisions were never proclaimed into force and were subsequently repealed.\nA Review Board must hold a hearing every 12 months (unless extended to 24 months) until the accused is discharged absolutely.\nAccused unfit to stand trial.\nThe issue of mental disorder may also come into play before a trial even begins if the accused's mental state prevents the accused from being able to appreciate the nature of a trial and to conduct a defence.\nAn accused who is found to be unfit to stand trial is subject to the jurisdiction a Review Board. While the considerations are essentially the same, there are a few provisions which apply only to unfit accused. A Review Board must determine whether the accused is fit to stand trial. Regardless of the determination, the Review Board must then determine what conditions should be imposed on the accused, considering both the protection of the public and the maintenance of the fitness of the accused (or conditions which would render the accused fit). Previously an absolute discharge was unavailable to an unfit accused. However, in R. v. Demers, the Supreme Court of Canada struck down the provision restricting the availability of an absolute discharge to an accused person who is deemed both \"permanently unfit\" and not a significant threat to the safety of the public. Presently a Review Board may recommend a judicial stay of proceedings in the event that it finds the accused both \"permanently unfit\" and non-dangerous. The decision is left to the court having jurisdiction over the accused.\nAn additional requirement for an unfit accused is the holding of a \"prima facie case\" hearing every two years. The Crown must demonstrate to the court having jurisdiction over the accused that it still has sufficient evidence to try the accused. If the Crown fails to meet this burden then the accused is discharged and proceedings are terminated. The nature of the hearing is virtually identical to that of a preliminary hearing.\nDenmark.\nIn Denmark a psychotic person who commits a criminal defense is declared guilty but is sentenced to mandatory treatment instead of prison. Section 16 of the penal code states that \"Persons, who, at the time of the act, were irresponsible owing to mental illness or similar conditions or\nto a pronounced mental deficiency, are not punishable\". This means that in Denmark, 'insanity' is a legal term rather than a medical term and that the court retains the authority to decide whether an accused person is irresponsible.\nFinland.\nIn Finland, punishments can only be administered if the accused is \"compos mentis\", of sound mind, but not if the accused is incapable of responsibility (\"syyntakeeton\"). Thus, an insane defendant may be found guilty based on the facts just like a sane defendant, but insanity will preclude punishment. The definition of insanity is similar to the M'Naught criterion above: \"the accused is insane, if during the act, due to a mental illness, profound mental retardation or a severe disruption of mental health or consciousness, he cannot understand the actual nature of his act or its illegality, or that his ability to control his behavior is critically weakened\". If an accused is suspected to be insane, the court must consult the National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), which is obliged to place the accused in involuntary commitment if they are found insane. The offender receives no judicial punishment; they become a patient under the jurisdiction of THL, and must be released immediately once the conditions of involuntary commitment are no longer fulfilled. Diminished responsibility is also available, resulting in lighter sentences.\nGermany.\nAccording to section 20 of the German criminal code, those who commit an illegal act because a mental disorder makes them unable to see the wrong of the act or to act on this insight is considered not guilty. Section 63 stipulates that if the offender is deemed at risk of committing further offences that will harm others or cause grave economic damage, and if they therefore pose a continuing threat to public safety, they shall be committed to a psychiatric hospital in lieu of a custodial or suspended prison sentence.\nJapan.\nIf the ability to recognize the right or wrong of action or the ability to act accordingly is lost due to a mental disorder, then the defendant cannot be pursued under Japanese criminal law so if this is recognized during a trial then an innocent judgment will be given. This is, however, rare, happening in only around 1 in 500,000 cases.\nNetherlands.\nSection 39 of the Dutch criminal code stipulates: \"Not culpable is he who performs an act that he cannot be imputed with due to the deficient development or pathological disorder of his mental faculties\". Obviously critical are the definitions of \"deficient development\" and/or \"pathological [mental] disorder\". These are to be verified by somatomedical and/or psychiatric specialists. An inculpability defense needs to conform to the following criteria:\nIf the inculpability defense succeeds, the defendant cannot be ordered to incarceration proper. If the defendant is deemed to be criminally insane (i.e. deemed to pose a risk to himself or others), the court instead may order involuntary admission to a mental institution for further evaluation and/or treatment. The court can opt for a \"definite period of time\" (when complete or at least sufficient recovery of mental faculties on a relatively short time scale is probable) or an \"indefinite\" period of time (when the defendant's ailment is deemed to be difficult or impossible to treat, or can be supposed to be refractory to treatment).\nIf the inculpability defense succeeds \"only partly\" ([i.e. if the crime cannot be \"completely\" excused because of a \"minor\" degree of deficient development or pathological (mental) disorder), there may still be a legal basis for a \"diminished culpability\" of the defendant; in such case, a diminished prison sentence should be ordered. This can also be combined with the aforementioned involuntary admission to a mental institution, although in these cases the two 'sentences' often run/are served in parallel.\nNorway.\nIn Norway, psychotic perpetrators are declared guilty but not punished and, instead of prison, they are sentenced to mandatory treatment. Section 44 of the penal code states specifically that \"a person who at the time of the crime was insane or unconscious is not punished\".\nPoland.\nInsanity is determined through a judicial decision issued on the basis of expert opinions of psychiatrists and psychologists.\nRussia.\nA forensic psychiatric examination is used to establish insanity. The result of the forensic examination is then subjected to a legal assessment, taking into account other circumstances of the case, from which a conclusion is drawn about the defendant's sanity or insanity. The Criminal Code of Russia establishes that a person who during the commission of an illegal act was in a state of insanity, that is, could not be aware of the actual nature and social danger of their actions or was unable to control them due to a chronic mental disorder, a temporary mental disorder, or dementia is not subject to criminal liability.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, psychotic perpetrators are seen as accountable, but the sanction is, if they are psychotic at the time of the trial, forensic mental care.\nUnited Kingdom.\nAlthough use of the insanity defense is rare, since the Criminal Procedure (Insanity and Unfitness to Plead) Act 1991, insanity pleas have steadily increased in the UK.\nScotland.\nThe Scottish Law Commission, in its Discussion Paper No 122 on Insanity and Diminished Responsibility (2003) confirms that the law has not substantially changed from the position stated in Hume's Commentaries in 1797:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We may next attend to the case of those unfortunate persons, who have plead the miserable defense of idiocy or insanity. Which condition, if it is not an assumed or imperfect, but a genuine and thorough insanity, and is proved by the testimony of intelligent witnesses, makes the act like that of an infant, and equally bestows the privilege of an entire exemption from any manner of pain; \"Cum alterum innocentia concilii tuetur, alterum fati infelicitas excusat\". I say, where the insanity is absolute, and is duly proved: For if reason and humanity enforce the plea in these circumstances, it is no less necessary to observe a caution and reserve in applying the law, as shall hinder it from being understood, that there is any privilege in a case of mere weakness of intellect, or a strange and moody humor, or a crazy and capricious or irritable temper. In none of these situations does or can the law excuse the offender. Because such constitutions are not exclusive of a competent understanding of the true state of the circumstances in which the deed is done, nor of the subsistence of some steady and evil passion, grounded in those circumstances, and directed to a certain object. To serve the purpose of a defense in law, the disorder must therefore amount to an absolute alienation of reason, \"ut continua mentis alienatione, omni intellectu careat\" \u2013 such a disease as deprives the patient of the knowledge of the true aspect and position of things about them - hinders them from distinguishing friend from foe \u2013 and gives them up to the impulse of their own distempered fancy.\nThe phrase \"absolute alienation of reason\" is still regarded as at the core of the defense in the modern law (see \"HM Advocate v Kidd\" (1960) JC 61 and \"Brennan v HM Advocate\" (1977)\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, variances in the insanity defense between states, and in the federal court system, are attributable to differences with respect to three key issues:\nIn \"Foucha v. Louisiana\" (1992) the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that a person could not be held \"indefinitely\" for psychiatric treatment following a finding of not guilty by reason of insanity.\nAvailability.\nIn the United States, a criminal defendant may plead insanity in federal court, and in the state courts of every state except for Idaho, Kansas, Montana, and Utah. However, defendants in states that disallow the insanity defense may still be able to demonstrate that a defendant was not capable of forming intent to commit a crime as a result of mental illness.\nIn \"Kahler v. Kansas\" (2020), the U.S. Supreme Court held, in a 6\u20133 ruling, that a state does not violate the Due Process Clause by abolishing an insanity defense based on a defendant's incapacity to distinguish right from wrong. The Court emphasized that state governments have broad discretion to choose laws defining \"the precise relationship between criminal culpability and mental illness.\"\nDefinition.\nEach state and the federal court system currently uses one of the following \"tests\" to define insanity for purposes of the insanity defense. Over its decades of use the definition of insanity has been modified by statute, with changes to the availability of the insanity defense, what constitutes legal insanity, whether the prosecutor or defendant has the burden of proof, the standard of proof required at trial, trial procedures, and to commitment and release procedures for defendants who have been acquitted based on a finding of insanity.\n\"M'Naghten test\".\nThe guidelines for the \"M'Naghten Rules\", state, among other things, and evaluating the criminal responsibility for defendants claiming to be insane were settled in the British courts in the case of Daniel M'Naghten in 1843. M'Naghten was a Scottish woodcutter who killed the secretary to the prime minister, Edward Drummond, in a botched attempt to assassinate the prime minister himself. M'Naghten apparently believed that the prime minister was the architect of the myriad of personal and financial misfortunes that had befallen him. During his trial, nine witnesses testified to the fact that he was insane, and the jury acquitted him, finding him \"not guilty by reason of insanity\".\nThe House of Lords asked the judges of the common law courts to answer five questions on insanity as a criminal defence, and the formulation that emerged from their review\u2014that a defendant should not be held responsible for their actions only if, as a result of their mental disease or defect, they (i) did not know that their act would be wrong; or (ii) did not understand the nature and quality of their actions\u2014became the basis of the law governing legal responsibility in cases of insanity in England. Under the rules, loss of control because of mental illness was no defense.\nThe M'Naghten rule was embraced with almost no modification by American courts and legislatures for more than 100 years, until the mid-20th century. It was first used as a defense in the United States in the case of \"People v. Freeman\" in 1847, where an Afro-Native man from Auburn, New York was tried for a quadruple murder. William H. Seward represented William Freeman and argued that Freeman was mentally insane after being committed to the Auburn State Prison for a crime Freeman insisted he did not commit. This was a novel defense at the time, and produced much controversy in the town of Auburn, New York, and throughout the United States at large.\n\"Durham/New Hampshire test\".\nThe strict M'Naghten standard for the insanity defense was widely used until the 1950s and the case of \"Durham v. United States\" case. In the \"Durham\" case, the court ruled that a defendant is entitled to acquittal if the crime was the \"product of\" their mental illness (i.e., crime would not have been committed but for the disease). The Durham rule, also called the Product Test, is broader than either the M'Naghten test or the irresistible impulse test. The test has more lenient guidelines for the insanity defense, but it addressed the issue of convicting mentally ill defendants, which was allowed under the M'Naghten Rule. However, the Durham standard drew much criticism because of its expansive definition of legal insanity. It was abandoned in the 1970s, after the case of \"United States v. Brawner\" (1972).\n\"Model Penal Code test\".\nThe Model Penal Code, published by the American Law Institute, provides the ALI rule - a standard for legal insanity that serves as a compromise between the strict M'Naghten Rule, the lenient Durham ruling, and the irresistible impulse test. Under the MPC standard, which represents the modern trend, a defendant is not responsible for criminal conduct \"if at the time of such conduct as a result of mental disease or defect he lacks \"substantial capacity\" either to appreciate the criminality of their conduct or to conform their conduct to the requirements of the law.\" The test thus takes into account both the cognitive and volitional capacity of insanity.\n\"Federal courts\".\nAfter the perpetrator of President Reagan's assassination attempt was found not guilty by reason of insanity, Congress passed the Insanity Defense Reform Act of 1984. Under this act, the burden of proof was shifted from the prosecution to the defense and the standard of evidence in federal trials was increased from a preponderance of evidence to clear and convincing evidence. The ALI test was discarded in favor of a new test that more closely resembled M'Naghten's. Under this new test only perpetrators suffering from severe mental illnesses at the time of the crime could successfully employ the insanity defense. The defendant's ability to control himself or herself was no longer a consideration.\nThe Act also curbed the scope of expert psychiatric testimony and adopted stricter procedures regarding the hospitalization and release of those found not guilty by reason of insanity.\nThose acquitted of a federal offense by reason of insanity have not been able to challenge their psychiatric confinement through a writ of habeas corpus or other remedies. In \"Archuleta v. Hedrick\", 365 F.3d 644 (8th Cir. 2004), the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit the court ruled persons found not guilty by reason of insanity and later want to challenge their confinement may not attack their initial successful insanity defense:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The appellate court affirmed the lower court's judgment: \"Having thus elected to make himself a member of that 'exceptional class' of persons who seek verdicts of not guilty by reason of insanity...he cannot now be heard to complain of the statutory consequences of his election.\" The court held that no direct attack upon the final judgment of acquittal by reason of insanity was possible. It also held that the collateral attack that he was not informed that a possible alternative to his commitment was to ask for a new trial was not a meaningful alternative.\n\"Guilty but mentally ill\".\nAs an alternative to the insanity defense, some jurisdictions permit a defendant to plead guilty but mentally ill. A defendant who is found guilty but mentally ill may be sentenced to mental health treatment, at the conclusion of which the defendant will serve the remainder of their sentence in the same manner as any other defendant.\nBurden of proof.\nIn a majority of states, the burden of proving insanity is placed on the defendant, who must prove insanity by a preponderance of the evidence.\nIn a minority of states, the burden is placed on the prosecution, who must prove sanity beyond reasonable doubt.\nIn federal court the burden is placed on the defendant, who must prove insanity by clear and convincing evidence. See 18 U.S.C.S. Sec. 17(b); see also A.R.S. Sec. 13-502(C).\nControversy.\nThe insanity plea is used in the U.S. Criminal Justice System in less than 1% of all criminal cases. Little is known about the criminal justice system and the mentally ill:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]here is no \"definitive\" study regarding the percentage of people with mental illness who come into contact with police, appear as criminal defendants, are incarcerated, or are under community supervision. Furthermore, the scope of this issue varies across jurisdictions. Accordingly, advocates should rely as much as possible on statistics collected by local and state government agencies.\nSome U.S. states have begun to ban the use of the insanity defense, and in 1994 the Supreme Court denied a petition of certiorari seeking review of a Montana Supreme Court case that upheld Montana's abolition of the defense. Idaho, Kansas, and Utah have also banned the defense. However, a mentally ill defendant/patient can be found unfit to stand trial in these states. In 2001, the Nevada Supreme Court found that their state's abolition of the defense was unconstitutional as a violation of Federal due process. In 2006, the Supreme Court decided \"Clark v. Arizona\" upholding Arizona's limitations on the insanity defense. In that same ruling, the Court noted \"We have never held that the Constitution mandates an insanity defense, nor have we held that the Constitution does not so require.\" In 2020, the Supreme Court decided \"Kahler v. Kansas\" upholding Kansas' abolition of the insanity defense, stating that the Constitution does not require Kansas to adopt an insanity test that turns on a defendant's ability to recognize that their crime was morally wrong.\nThe insanity defense is also complicated because of the underlying differences in philosophy between psychiatrists/psychologists and legal professionals. In the United States, a psychiatrist, psychologist or other mental health professional is often consulted as an expert witness in insanity cases, but the ultimate \"legal\" judgment of the defendant's sanity is determined by a jury, not by a mental health professional. In other words, mental health professionals provide testimony and professional opinion but are not ultimately responsible for answering legal questions.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15359", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15359", "title": "Irish Gaelic", "text": ""}
{"id": "15361", "revid": "2340490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15361", "title": "Ice age", "text": "Period of long-term reduction in temperature of Earth's surface and atmosphere\nAn ice age is a term describing periods of time when the reduction in the temperature of Earth's surface and atmosphere results in the presence or expansion of continental and polar ice sheets and alpine glaciers. The term is applied in several different senses to very long and comparatively short periods of cooling. Colder periods are called glacials or ice ages, and warmer periods are called interglacials.\nEarth's climate alternates between icehouse and greenhouse periods based on whether there are glaciers on the planet, and for most of Earth's history it has been in a greenhouse period with little or no permanent ice. Over the very long term, Earth is currently in an icehouse period called the Late Cenozoic Ice Age, which started 34 million years ago. There have been colder and warmer periods within this ice age, and the term is also applied to the Quaternary glaciation, which started 2.58 million years ago. Within this period, the Last Interglacial ended 115,000 years ago, and was followed by the Last Glacial Period (LGP), which gave way to the current warm Holocene, which started 11,700 years ago. The most severe cold period of the LGP was the Last Glacial Maximum, which reached its maximum between 26,000 and 20,000 years ago. The most recent glaciation was the Younger Dryas between 12,800 and 11,700 years ago\nHistory of research.\nIn 1742, Pierre Martel (1706\u20131767), an engineer and geographer living in Geneva, visited the valley of Chamonix in the Alps of Savoy. Two years later he published an account of his journey. He reported that the inhabitants of that valley attributed the dispersal of erratic boulders to the glaciers, saying that they had once extended much farther. Later similar explanations were reported from other regions of the Alps. In 1815 the carpenter and chamois hunter Jean-Pierre Perraudin (1767\u20131858) explained erratic boulders in the Val de Bagnes in the Swiss canton of Valais as being due to glaciers previously extending further. An unknown woodcutter from Meiringen in the Bernese Oberland advocated a similar idea in a discussion with the Swiss-German geologist Jean de Charpentier (1786\u20131855) in 1834. Comparable explanations are also known from the Val de Ferret in the Valais and the Seeland in western Switzerland and in Goethe's scientific work. Such explanations could also be found in other parts of the world. When the Bavarian naturalist Ernst von Bibra (1806\u20131878) visited the Chilean Andes in 1849\u20131850, the natives attributed fossil moraines to the former action of glaciers.\nMeanwhile, European scholars had begun to wonder what had caused the dispersal of erratic material. From the middle of the 18th century, some discussed ice as a means of transport. The Swedish mining expert Daniel Tilas (1712\u20131772) was, in 1742, the first person to suggest drifting sea ice was a cause of the presence of erratic boulders in the Scandinavian and Baltic regions. In 1795, the Scottish philosopher and gentleman naturalist, James Hutton (1726\u20131797), explained erratic boulders in the Alps by the action of glaciers. Two decades later, in 1818, the Swedish botanist G\u00f6ran Wahlenberg (1780\u20131851) published his theory of a glaciation of the Scandinavian peninsula. He regarded glaciation as a regional phenomenon.\nOnly a few years later, the Danish-Norwegian geologist Jens Esmark (1762\u20131839) argued for a sequence of worldwide ice ages. In a paper published in 1824, Esmark proposed changes in climate as the cause of those glaciations. He attempted to show that they originated from changes in Earth's orbit. Esmark discovered the similarity between moraines near Haukalivatnet lake near sea level in Rogaland and moraines at branches of Jostedalsbreen. Esmark's discovery were later attributed to or appropriated by Theodor Kjerulf and Louis Agassiz.\nDuring the following years, Esmark's ideas were discussed and taken over in parts by Swedish, Scottish and German scientists. At the University of Edinburgh Robert Jameson (1774\u20131854) seemed to be relatively open to Esmark's ideas, as reviewed by Norwegian professor of glaciology Bj\u00f8rn G. Andersen (1992). Jameson's remarks about ancient glaciers in Scotland were most probably prompted by Esmark. In Germany, Albrecht Reinhard Bernhardi (1797\u20131849), a geologist and professor of forestry at an academy in Dreissigacker (since incorporated in the southern Thuringian city of Meiningen), adopted Esmark's theory. In a paper published in 1832, Bernhardi speculated about the polar ice caps once reaching as far as the temperate zones of the globe.\nIn Val de Bagnes, a valley in the Swiss Alps, there was a long-held local belief that the valley had once been covered deep in ice, and in 1815 a local chamois hunter called Jean-Pierre Perraudin attempted to convert the geologist Jean de Charpentier to the idea, pointing to deep striations in the rocks and giant erratic boulders as evidence. Charpentier held the general view that these signs were caused by vast floods, and he rejected Perraudin's theory as absurd. In 1818 the engineer Ignatz Venetz joined Perraudin and Charpentier to examine a proglacial lake above the valley created by an ice dam as a result of the 1815 eruption of Mount Tambora, which threatened to cause a catastrophic flood when the dam broke. Perraudin attempted unsuccessfully to convert his companions to his theory, but when the dam finally broke, there were only minor erratics and no striations, and Venetz concluded that Perraudin was right and that only ice could have caused such major results. In 1821 he read a prize-winning paper on the theory to the Swiss Society, but it was not published until Charpentier, who had also become converted, published it with his own more widely read paper in 1834.\nIn the meantime, the German botanist Karl Friedrich Schimper (1803\u20131867) was studying mosses which were growing on erratic boulders in the alpine upland of Bavaria. He began to wonder where such masses of stone had come from. During the summer of 1835 he made some excursions to the Bavarian Alps. Schimper came to the conclusion that ice must have been the means of transport for the boulders in the alpine upland. In the winter of 1835\u201336 he held some lectures in Munich. Schimper then assumed that there must have been global times of obliteration (\"Ver\u00f6dungszeiten\") with a cold climate and frozen water. Schimper spent the summer months of 1836 at Devens, near Bex, in the Swiss Alps with his former university friend Louis Agassiz (1801\u20131873) and Jean de Charpentier. Schimper, Charpentier and possibly Venetz convinced Agassiz that there had been a time of glaciation. During the winter of 1836\u201337, Agassiz and Schimper developed the theory of a sequence of glaciations. They mainly drew upon the preceding works of Venetz, Charpentier and on their own fieldwork. Agassiz appears to have been already familiar with Bernhardi's paper at that time. At the beginning of 1837, Schimper coined the term \"ice age\" (\"Eiszeit\") for the period of the glaciers. In July 1837 Agassiz presented their synthesis before the annual meeting of the Swiss Society for Natural Research at Neuch\u00e2tel. The audience was very critical, and some were opposed to the new theory because it contradicted the established opinions on climatic history. Most contemporary scientists thought that Earth had been gradually cooling down since its birth as a molten globe.\nIn order to persuade the skeptics, Agassiz embarked on geological fieldwork. He published his book \"Study on Glaciers\" (\"\u00c9tudes sur les glaciers\") in 1840. Charpentier was put out by this, as he had also been preparing a book about the glaciation of the Alps. Charpentier felt that Agassiz should have given him precedence as it was he who had introduced Agassiz to in-depth glacial research. As a result of personal quarrels, Agassiz had also omitted any mention of Schimper in his book.\nIt took several decades before the ice age theory was fully accepted by scientists. This happened on an international scale in the second half of the 1870s, following the work of James Croll, including the publication of \"Climate and Time, in Their Geological Relations\" in 1875, which provided a credible explanation for the causes of ice ages.\nEvidence.\nThere are three main types of evidence for ice ages: geological, chemical, and paleontological.\n\"Geological\" evidence for ice ages comes in various forms, including rock scouring and scratching, glacial moraines, drumlins, valley cutting, and the deposition of till or tillites and glacial erratics. Successive glaciations tend to distort and erase the geological evidence for earlier glaciations, making it difficult to interpret. Furthermore, this evidence was difficult to date exactly; early theories assumed that the glacials were short compared to the long interglacials. The advent of sediment and ice cores revealed the true situation: glacials are long, interglacials short. It took some time for the current theory to be worked out.\nThe \"chemical\" evidence mainly consists of variations in the ratios of isotopes in fossils present in sediments and sedimentary rocks and ocean sediment cores. For the most recent glacial periods, ice cores provide climate proxies, both from the ice itself and from atmospheric samples provided by included bubbles of air. Because water containing lighter isotopes has a lower heat of evaporation, its proportion decreases with warmer conditions. This allows a temperature record to be constructed. This evidence can be confounded, however, by other factors recorded by isotope ratios.\nThe \"paleontological\" evidence consists of changes in the geographical distribution of fossils. During a glacial period, cold-adapted organisms spread into lower latitudes, and organisms that prefer warmer conditions become extinct or retreat into lower latitudes. This evidence is also difficult to interpret because it requires:\nDespite the difficulties, analysis of ice core and ocean sediment cores has provided a credible record of glacials and interglacials over the past few million years. These also confirm the linkage between ice ages and continental crust phenomena such as glacial moraines, drumlins, and glacial erratics. Hence the continental crust phenomena are accepted as good evidence of earlier ice ages when they are found in layers created much earlier than the time range for which ice cores and ocean sediment cores are available.\nMajor ice ages.\nThere have been at least five major ice ages in Earth's history (the Huronian, Cryogenian, Andean-Saharan, late Paleozoic, and the latest Quaternary Ice Age). Outside these ages, Earth was previously thought to have been ice-free even in high latitudes; such periods are known as greenhouse periods. However, other studies dispute this, finding evidence of occasional glaciations at high latitudes even during apparent greenhouse periods.\nRocks from the earliest well-established ice age, called the Huronian, have been dated to around 2.4 to 2.1 billion years ago during the early Proterozoic Eon. Several hundreds of kilometers of the Huronian Supergroup are exposed north of the north shore of Lake Huron, extending from near Sault Ste. Marie to Sudbury, northeast of Lake Huron, with giant layers of now-lithified till beds, dropstones, varves, outwash, and scoured basement rocks. Correlative Huronian deposits have been found near Marquette, Michigan, and correlation has been made with Paleoproterozoic glacial deposits from Western Australia. The Huronian ice age was caused by the elimination of atmospheric methane, a greenhouse gas, during the Great Oxygenation Event.\nThe next well-documented ice age, and probably the most severe of the last billion years, occurred from 720 to 630 million years ago (the Cryogenian period) and may have produced a Snowball Earth in which glacial ice sheets reached the equator, possibly being ended by the accumulation of greenhouse gases such as CO2 produced by volcanoes. \"The presence of ice on the continents and pack ice on the oceans would inhibit both silicate weathering and photosynthesis, which are the two major sinks for CO2 at present.\" It has been suggested that the end of this ice age was responsible for the subsequent Ediacaran and Cambrian explosion, though this model is recent and controversial.\nThe Andean-Saharan occurred from 460 to 420 million years ago, during the Late Ordovician and the Silurian period.\nThe evolution of land plants at the onset of the Devonian period caused a long term increase in planetary oxygen levels and reduction of CO2 levels, which resulted in the late Paleozoic icehouse. Its former name, the Karoo glaciation, was named after the glacial tills found in the Karoo region of South Africa. There were extensive polar ice caps at intervals from 360 to 260 million years ago in South Africa during the Carboniferous and early Permian periods. Correlatives are known from Argentina, also in the center of the ancient supercontinent Gondwanaland.\nAlthough the Mesozoic Era retained a greenhouse climate over its timespan and was previously assumed to have been entirely glaciation-free, more recent studies suggest that brief periods of glaciation occurred in both hemispheres during the Early Cretaceous. Geologic and palaeoclimatological records suggest the existence of glacial periods during the Valanginian, Hauterivian, and Aptian stages of the Early Cretaceous. Ice-rafted glacial dropstones indicate that in the Northern Hemisphere, ice sheets may have extended as far south as the Iberian Peninsula during the Hauterivian and Aptian. Although ice sheets largely disappeared from Earth for the rest of the period (potential reports from the Turonian, otherwise the warmest period of the Phanerozoic, are disputed), ice sheets and associated sea ice appear to have briefly returned to Antarctica near the very end of the Maastrichtian just prior to the Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event.\nThe Quaternary Glaciation / Quaternary Ice Age started about 2.58 million years ago at the beginning of the Quaternary Period when the spread of ice sheets in the Northern Hemisphere began. Since then, the world has seen cycles of glaciation with ice sheets advancing and retreating on 40,000- and 100,000-year time scales called glacial periods, glacials or glacial advances, and interglacial periods, interglacials or glacial retreats. Earth is currently in an interglacial, and the last glacial period ended about 11,700 years ago. All that remains of the continental ice sheets are the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets and smaller glaciers such as on Baffin Island.\nThe definition of the Quaternary as beginning 2.58 Ma is based on the formation of the Arctic ice cap. The Antarctic ice sheet began to form earlier, at about 34 Ma, in the mid-Cenozoic (Eocene-Oligocene Boundary). The term Late Cenozoic Ice Age is used to include this early phase.\nIce ages can be further divided by location and time; for example, the names \"Riss\" (180,000\u2013130,000 years bp) and \"W\u00fcrm\" (70,000\u201310,000 years bp) refer specifically to glaciation in the Alpine region. The maximum extent of the ice is not maintained for the full interval. The scouring action of each glaciation tends to remove most of the evidence of prior ice sheets almost completely, except in regions where the later sheet does not achieve full coverage.\nGlacials and interglacials.\nWithin the current glaciation, more temperate and more severe periods have occurred. The colder periods are called \"glacial periods\", the warmer periods \"interglacials\", such as the Eemian Stage. There is evidence that similar glacial cycles occurred in previous glaciations, including the Andean-Saharan and the late Paleozoic ice house. The glacial cycles of the late Paleozoic ice house are likely responsible for the deposition of cyclothems.\nGlacials are characterized by cooler and drier climates over most of Earth and large land and sea ice masses extending outward from the poles. Mountain glaciers in otherwise unglaciated areas extend to lower elevations due to a lower snow line. Sea levels drop due to the removal of large volumes of water above sea level in the icecaps. There is evidence that ocean circulation patterns are disrupted by glaciations. The glacials and interglacials coincide with changes in orbital forcing of climate due to Milankovitch cycles, which are periodic changes in Earth's orbit and the tilt of Earth's rotational axis.\nEarth has been in an interglacial period known as the Holocene for around 11,700 years, and an article in \"Nature\" in 2004 argues that it might be most analogous to a previous interglacial that lasted 28,000 years. Predicted changes in orbital forcing suggest that the next glacial period would begin at least 50,000 years from now. Moreover, anthropogenic forcing from increased greenhouse gases is estimated to potentially outweigh the orbital forcing of the Milankovitch cycles for hundreds of thousands of years.\nFeedback processes.\nEach glacial period is subject to positive feedback mechanisms, which makes it more severe, and negative feedback which dampens the overall climate response to different types of forcing. In the case of Quaternary ice ages, Earth's high albedo from ice sheets and atmospheric dust as well as low concentrations of atmospheric CO2 contributed to cold glacial climates.\nPositive.\nAn important form of feedback is provided by Earth's albedo, which is how much of the sun's energy is reflected rather than absorbed by Earth. Ice and snow increase Earth's albedo, while forests reduce its albedo. When the air temperature decreases, ice and snow fields grow, and they reduce forest cover. This continues until competition with a negative feedback mechanism forces the system to an equilibrium.\nOne theory is that when glaciers form, two things happen: the ice grinds rocks into dust, and the land becomes dry and arid. This allows winds to transport iron rich dust into the open ocean, where it acts as a fertilizer that causes massive algal blooms that pulls large amounts of CO2 out of the atmosphere. This in turn makes it even colder and causes the glaciers to grow more.\nIn 1956, Ewing and Donn hypothesized that an ice-free Arctic Ocean leads to increased snowfall at high latitudes. When low-temperature ice covers the Arctic Ocean there is little evaporation or sublimation and the polar regions are quite dry in terms of precipitation, comparable to the amount found in mid-latitude deserts. This low precipitation allows high-latitude snowfalls to melt during the summer. An ice-free Arctic Ocean absorbs solar radiation during the long summer days, and evaporates more water into the Arctic atmosphere. With higher precipitation, portions of this snow may not melt during the summer and so glacial ice can form at lower altitudes \"and\" more southerly latitudes, reducing the temperatures over land by increased albedo as noted above. Furthermore, under this hypothesis the lack of oceanic pack ice allows increased exchange of waters between the Arctic and the North Atlantic Oceans, warming the Arctic and cooling the North Atlantic. (Current projected consequences of global warming include a brief ice-free Arctic Ocean period by 2050.) Additional fresh water flowing into the North Atlantic during a warming cycle may also reduce the global ocean water circulation. Such a reduction (by reducing the effects of the Gulf Stream) would have a cooling effect on northern Europe, which in turn would lead to increased low-latitude snow retention during the summer. It has also been suggested that during an extensive glacial, glaciers may move through the Gulf of Saint Lawrence, extending into the North Atlantic Ocean far enough to block the Gulf Stream.\nNegative.\nIce sheets that form during glaciations erode the land beneath them. This can reduce the land area above sea level and thus diminish the amount of space on which ice sheets can form. This mitigates the albedo feedback, as does the rise in sea level that accompanies the reduced area of ice sheets, since open ocean has a lower albedo than land.\nAnother negative feedback mechanism is the increased aridity occurring with glacial maxima, which reduces the precipitation available to maintain glaciation. The glacial retreat induced by this or any other process can be amplified by similar inverse positive feedbacks as for glacial advances.\nAccording to research published in \"Nature Geoscience\", human emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) will defer the next glacial period. Researchers used data on Earth's orbit to find the historical warm interglacial period that looks most like the current one and from this have predicted that the next glacial period would usually begin within 1,500 years. They go on to predict that emissions have been so high that it will not.\nCauses.\nThe causes of ice ages are not fully understood for either the large-scale ice age periods or the smaller ebb and flow of glacial\u2013interglacial periods within an ice age. The consensus is that several factors are important: atmospheric composition, such as the concentrations of carbon dioxide and methane (the specific levels of the previously mentioned gases are now able to be seen with the new ice core samples from the European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA) Dome C in Antarctica over the past 800,000 years); changes in Earth's orbit around the Sun known as Milankovitch cycles; the motion of tectonic plates resulting in changes in the relative location and amount of continental and oceanic crust on Earth's surface, which affect wind and ocean currents; variations in solar output; the orbital dynamics of the Earth\u2013Moon system; the impact of relatively large meteorites and volcanism including eruptions of supervolcanoes.\nSome of these factors influence each other. For example, changes in Earth's atmospheric composition (especially the concentrations of greenhouse gases) may alter the climate, while climate change itself can change the atmospheric composition (for example by changing the rate at which weathering removes CO2).\nMaureen Raymo, William Ruddiman and others propose that the Tibetan and Colorado Plateaus are immense CO2 \"scrubbers\" with a capacity to remove enough CO2 from the global atmosphere to be a significant causal factor of the 40 million year Cenozoic Cooling trend. They further claim that approximately half of their uplift (and CO2 \"scrubbing\" capacity) occurred in the past 10 million years.\nChanges in Earth's atmosphere.\nThere is evidence that greenhouse gas levels fell at the start of ice ages and rose during the retreat of the ice sheets, but it is difficult to establish cause and effect (see the notes above on the role of weathering). Greenhouse gas levels may also have been affected by other factors which have been proposed as causes of ice ages, such as the movement of continents and volcanism.\nThe Snowball Earth hypothesis maintains that the severe freezing in the late Proterozoic was ended by an increase in CO2 levels in the atmosphere, mainly from volcanoes, and some supporters of Snowball Earth argue that it was caused in the first place by a reduction in atmospheric CO2. The hypothesis also warns of future Snowball Earths.\nIn 2009, further evidence was provided that changes in solar insolation provide the initial trigger for Earth to warm after an Ice Age, with secondary factors like increases in greenhouse gases accounting for the magnitude of the change.\nPosition of the continents.\nThe geological record appears to show that ice ages start when the continents are in positions which block or reduce the flow of warm water from the equator to the poles and thus allow ice sheets to form. The ice sheets increase Earth's reflectivity and thus reduce the absorption of solar radiation. With less radiation absorbed the atmosphere cools; the cooling allows the ice sheets to grow, which further increases reflectivity in a positive feedback loop. The ice age continues until the reduction in weathering causes an increase in the greenhouse effect.\nThere are three main contributors from the layout of the continents that obstruct the movement of warm water to the poles:\nSince today's Earth has a continent over the South Pole and an almost land-locked ocean over the North Pole, geologists believe that Earth will continue to experience glacial periods in the geologically near future.\nSome scientists believe that the Himalayas are a major factor in the current ice age, because these mountains have increased Earth's total rainfall and therefore the rate at which carbon dioxide is washed out of the atmosphere, decreasing the greenhouse effect. The Himalayas' formation started about 70 million years ago when the Indo-Australian Plate collided with the Eurasian Plate, and the Himalayas are still rising by about 5\u00a0mm per year because the Indo-Australian plate is still moving at 67\u00a0mm/year. The history of the Himalayas broadly fits the long-term decrease in Earth's average temperature since the mid-Eocene, 40 million years ago.\nFluctuations in ocean currents.\nAnother important contribution to ancient climate regimes is the variation of ocean currents, which are modified by continent position, sea levels and salinity, as well as other factors. They have the ability to cool (e.g. aiding the creation of Antarctic ice) and the ability to warm (e.g. giving the British Isles a temperate as opposed to a boreal climate). The closing of the Isthmus of Panama about 3 million years ago may have ushered in the present period of strong glaciation over North America by ending the exchange of water between the tropical Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.\nAnalyses suggest that ocean current fluctuations can adequately account for recent glacial oscillations. During the last glacial period the sea-level fluctuated as water was sequestered, primarily in the Northern Hemisphere ice sheets. When ice collected and the sea level dropped sufficiently, flow through the Bering Strait (the narrow strait between Siberia and Alaska is about 50 metres \u2013 165 feet \u2013 deep today) was reduced, resulting in increased flow from the North Atlantic. This realigned the thermohaline circulation in the Atlantic, increasing heat transport into the Arctic, which melted the polar ice accumulation and reduced other continental ice sheets. The release of water raised sea levels again, restoring the ingress of colder water from the Pacific with an accompanying shift to northern hemisphere ice accumulation.\nAccording to a study published in \"Nature\" in 2021, all glacial periods of ice ages over the last 1.5 million years were associated with northward shifts of melting Antarctic icebergs which changed ocean circulation patterns, leading to more CO2 being pulled out of the atmosphere. The authors suggest that this process may be disrupted in the future as the Southern Ocean will become too warm for the icebergs to travel far enough to trigger these changes.\nUplift of the Tibetan plateau.\nMatthias Kuhle's geological theory of Ice Age development was suggested by the existence of an ice sheet covering the Tibetan Plateau during the Ice Ages (Last Glacial Maximum?). According to Kuhle, the plate-tectonic uplift of Tibet past the snow-line has led to a surface of c. 2,400,000 square kilometres (930,000 sq mi) changing from bare land to ice with a 70% greater albedo. The reflection of energy into space resulted in a global cooling, triggering the Pleistocene Ice Age. Because this highland is at a subtropical latitude, with four to five times the insolation of high-latitude areas, what would be Earth's strongest heating surface has turned into a cooling surface.\nKuhle explains the interglacial periods by the 100,000-year cycle of radiation changes due to variations in Earth's orbit. This comparatively insignificant warming, when combined with the lowering of the Nordic inland ice areas and Tibet due to the weight of the superimposed ice-load, has led to the repeated complete thawing of the inland ice areas.\nVariations in Earth's orbit.\nThe Milankovitch cycles are a set of cyclic variations in characteristics of Earth's orbit around the Sun. Each cycle has a different length, so at some times their effects reinforce each other and at other times they (partially) cancel each other.\nThere is strong evidence that the Milankovitch cycles affect the occurrence of glacial and interglacial periods within an ice age. The present ice age is the most studied and best understood, particularly the last 400,000 years, since this is the period covered by ice cores that record atmospheric composition and proxies for temperature and ice volume. Within this period, the match of glacial/interglacial frequencies to the Milankovi\u0107 orbital forcing periods is so close that orbital forcing is generally accepted. The combined effects of the changing distance to the Sun, the precession of Earth's axis, and the changing tilt of Earth's axis redistribute the sunlight received by Earth. Of particular importance are changes in the tilt of Earth's axis, which affect the intensity of seasons. For example, the amount of solar influx in July at 65 degrees north latitude varies by as much as 22% (from 450 W/m2 to 550 W/m2). It is widely believed that ice sheets advance when summers become too cool to melt all of the accumulated snowfall from the previous winter. Some believe that the strength of the orbital forcing is too small to trigger glaciations, but feedback mechanisms like CO2 may explain this mismatch.\nWhile Milankovitch forcing predicts that cyclic changes in Earth's orbital elements can be expressed in the glaciation record, additional explanations are necessary to explain which cycles are observed to be most important in the timing of glacial\u2013interglacial periods. In particular, during the last 800,000 years, the dominant period of glacial\u2013interglacial oscillation has been 100,000 years, which corresponds to changes in Earth's orbital eccentricity and orbital inclination. Yet this is by far the weakest of the three frequencies predicted by Milankovitch. During the period 3.0\u20130.8 million years ago, the dominant pattern of glaciation corresponded to the 41,000-year period of changes in Earth's obliquity (tilt of the axis). The reasons for dominance of one frequency versus another are poorly understood and an active area of current research, but the answer probably relates to some form of resonance in Earth's climate system. Recent work suggests that the 100K year cycle dominates due to increased southern-pole sea-ice increasing total solar reflectivity.\nThe \"traditional\" Milankovitch explanation struggles to explain the dominance of the 100,000-year cycle over the last 8 cycles. Richard A. Muller, Gordon J. F. MacDonald, and others have pointed out that those calculations are for a two-dimensional orbit of Earth but the three-dimensional orbit also has a 100,000-year cycle of orbital inclination. They proposed that these variations in orbital inclination lead to variations in insolation, as Earth moves in and out of known dust bands in the Solar System. Although this is a different mechanism to the traditional view, the \"predicted\" periods over the last 400,000 years are nearly the same. The Muller and MacDonald theory, in turn, has been challenged by Jose Antonio Rial.\nWilliam Ruddiman has suggested a model that explains the 100,000-year cycle by the modulating effect of eccentricity (weak 100,000-year cycle) on precession (26,000-year cycle) combined with greenhouse gas feedbacks in the 41,000- and 26,000-year cycles. Yet another theory has been advanced by Peter Huybers who argued that the 41,000-year cycle has always been dominant, but that Earth has entered a mode of climate behavior where only the second or third cycle triggers an ice age. This would imply that the 100,000-year periodicity is really an illusion created by averaging together cycles lasting 80,000 and 120,000 years. This theory is consistent with a simple empirical multi-state model proposed by Didier Paillard. Paillard suggests that the late Pleistocene glacial cycles can be seen as jumps between three quasi-stable climate states. The jumps are induced by the orbital forcing, while in the early Pleistocene the 41,000-year glacial cycles resulted from jumps between only two climate states. A dynamical\nmodel explaining this behavior was proposed by Peter Ditlevsen. This is in support of the suggestion that the late Pleistocene glacial cycles are not due to the weak 100,000-year eccentricity cycle, but a non-linear response to mainly the 41,000-year obliquity cycle.\nVariations in the Sun's energy output.\nThere are at least two types of variation in the Sun's energy output:\nThe long-term increase in the Sun's output cannot be a cause of ice ages.\nVolcanism.\nVolcanic eruptions may have contributed to the inception and/or the end of ice age periods. At times during the paleoclimate, carbon dioxide levels were two or three times greater than today. Volcanoes and movements in continental plates contributed to high amounts of CO2 in the atmosphere. Carbon dioxide from volcanoes probably contributed to periods with highest overall temperatures. One suggested explanation of the Paleocene\u2013Eocene Thermal Maximum is that undersea volcanoes released methane from clathrates and thus caused a large and rapid increase in the greenhouse effect. There appears to be no geological evidence for such eruptions at the right time, but this does not prove they did not happen.\nRecent glacial and interglacial phases.\nThe current geological period, the Quaternary, which began about 2.6 million years ago and extends into the present, is marked by warm and cold episodes, cold phases called glacials (Quaternary ice age) lasting about 100,000 years, and warm phases called interglacials lasting 10,000\u201315,000 years. The last cold episode of the Last Glacial Period ended about 10,000 years ago. Earth is currently in an interglacial period of the Quaternary, called the Holocene.\nGlacial stages in North America.\nThe major glacial stages of the current ice age in North America are the Illinoian, Eemian, and Wisconsin glaciation. The use of the Nebraskan, Afton, Kansan, and Yarmouthian stages to subdivide the ice age in North America has been discontinued by Quaternary geologists and geomorphologists. These stages have all been merged into the Pre-Illinoian in the 1980s.\nDuring the most recent North American glaciation, during the latter part of the Last Glacial Maximum (26,000 to 13,300 years ago), ice sheets extended to about 45th parallel north. These sheets were thick.\nThis Wisconsin glaciation left widespread impacts on the North American landscape. The Great Lakes and the Finger Lakes were carved by ice deepening old valleys. Most of the lakes in Minnesota and Wisconsin were gouged out by glaciers and later filled with glacial meltwaters. The old Teays River drainage system was radically altered and largely reshaped into the Ohio River drainage system. Other rivers were dammed and diverted to new channels, such as Niagara Falls, which formed a dramatic waterfall and gorge, when the waterflow encountered a limestone escarpment. Another similar waterfall, at the present Clark Reservation State Park near Syracuse, New York, is now dry.\nThe area from Long Island to Nantucket, Massachusetts was formed from glacial till, and the plethora of lakes on the Canadian Shield in northern Canada can be almost entirely attributed to the action of the ice. As the ice retreated and the rock dust dried, winds carried the material hundreds of miles, forming beds of loess many dozens of feet thick in the Missouri Valley. Post-glacial rebound continues to reshape the Great Lakes and other areas formerly under the weight of the ice sheets.\nThe Driftless Area, a portion of western and southwestern Wisconsin along with parts of adjacent Minnesota, Iowa, and Illinois, was not covered by glaciers.\nEffects of glaciation.\nAlthough the last glacial period ended more than 8,000 years ago, its effects can still be felt today. For example, the moving ice carved out the landscape in Canada (See Canadian Arctic Archipelago), Greenland, northern Eurasia and Antarctica. The erratic boulders, till, drumlins, eskers, fjords, kettle lakes, moraines, cirques, horns, etc., are typical features left behind by the glaciers. The weight of the ice sheets was so great that they deformed Earth's crust and mantle. After the ice sheets melted, the ice-covered land rebounded. Due to the high viscosity of Earth's mantle, the flow of mantle rocks which controls the rebound process is very slow\u2014at a rate of about 1\u00a0cm/year near the center of rebound area today.\nDuring glaciation, water was taken from the oceans to form the ice at high latitudes, thus global sea level dropped by about 110 meters, exposing the continental shelves and forming land-bridges between land-masses for animals to migrate. During deglaciation, the melted ice-water returned to the oceans, causing sea level to rise. This process can cause sudden shifts in coastlines and hydration systems resulting in newly submerged lands, emerging lands, collapsed ice dams resulting in salination of lakes, new ice dams creating vast areas of freshwater, and a general alteration in regional weather patterns on a large but temporary scale. It can even cause temporary reglaciation. This type of chaotic pattern of rapidly changing land, ice, saltwater and freshwater has been proposed as the likely model for the Baltic and Scandinavian regions, as well as much of central North America at the end of the last glacial maximum, with the present-day coastlines only being achieved in the last few millennia of prehistory. Also, the effect of elevation on Scandinavia submerged a vast continental plain that had existed under much of what is now the North Sea, connecting the British Isles to Continental Europe.\nThe redistribution of ice-water on the surface of Earth and the flow of mantle rocks causes changes in the gravitational field as well as changes to the distribution of the moment of inertia of Earth. These changes to the moment of inertia result in a change in the angular velocity, axis, and wobble of Earth's rotation.\nThe weight of the redistributed surface mass loaded the lithosphere, caused it to flex and also induced stress within Earth. The presence of the glaciers generally suppressed the movement of faults below. During deglaciation, the faults experience accelerated slip triggering earthquakes. Earthquakes triggered near the ice margin may in turn accelerate ice calving and may account for the Heinrich events. As more ice is removed near the ice margin, more intraplate earthquakes are induced and this positive feedback may explain the fast collapse of ice sheets.\nIn Europe, glacial erosion and isostatic sinking from the weight of ice made the Baltic Sea, which before the Ice Age was all land drained by the Eridanos River.\nFuture ice ages.\nBased on past estimates for interglacial durations of about 10,000 years, there was some concern in the 1970s that the next glacial period would be imminent. Human impact is now seen as possibly extending what would already be an unusually long warm period. Ice ages go through cycles of about 100,000 years, but the next one may well be avoided due to human carbon dioxide emissions. According to Stephen Barker of Cardiff University, without human interference, the next glaciation of the Earth would \"occur within the next 11,000 years, and it would end in 66,000 years' time.\"\nA 2015 report by the Past Global Changes Project says simulations show that a new glaciation is unlikely to happen within the next approximately 50,000 years, before the next strong drop in Northern Hemisphere summer insolation occurs \"if either atmospheric CO2 concentration\nremains above 300 ppm or cumulative carbon emissions exceed 1000 Pg C\" (i.e. 1,000 gigatonnes carbon). \"Only for an atmospheric CO2 content below the preindustrial level may a glaciation occur within the next 10 ka. ... Given the continued anthropogenic CO2 emissions, glacial inception is very unlikely to occur in the next 50 ka, because the timescale for CO2 and temperature reduction toward unperturbed values in the absence of active removal is very long [IPCC, 2013], and only weak precessional forcing occurs in the next two precessional cycles.\" (A precessional cycle is around 21,000 years, the time it takes for the perihelion to move all the way around the tropical year.)\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15362", "revid": "39494085", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15362", "title": "Irving Langmuir", "text": "American chemist and physicist (1881\u20131957)\nIrving Langmuir (; January 31, 1881 \u2013 August 16, 1957) was an American chemist, physicist, and metallurgical engineer. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1932 for his work in surface chemistry.\nLangmuir's most famous publication is the 1919 article \"The Arrangement of Electrons in Atoms and Molecules\" in which, building on Gilbert N. Lewis's cubical atom theory and Walther Kossel's chemical bonding theory, he outlined his \"concentric theory of atomic structure\". Langmuir became embroiled in a priority dispute with Lewis over this work; Langmuir's presentation skills were largely responsible for the popularization of the theory, although the credit for the theory itself belongs mostly to Lewis. While at General Electric from 1909 to 1950, Langmuir advanced several fields of physics and chemistry, inventing the gas-filled incandescent lamp and the hydrogen welding technique. The Langmuir Laboratory for Atmospheric Research near Socorro, New Mexico, was named in his honor, as was the American Chemical Society journal for surface science called \"Langmuir\".\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nIrving Langmuir was born in Brooklyn, New York, on January 31, 1881. He was the third of the four children of Charles Langmuir and Sadie, n\u00e9e Comings. During his childhood, Langmuir's parents encouraged him to carefully observe nature and to keep a detailed record of his various observations. When Irving was eleven, it was discovered that he had poor eyesight. When this problem was corrected, details that had previously eluded him were revealed, and his interest in the complications of nature was heightened.\nDuring his childhood, Langmuir was influenced by his older brother, Arthur Langmuir. Arthur was a research chemist who encouraged Irving to be curious about nature and how things work. Arthur helped Irving set up his first chemistry lab in the corner of his bedroom, and he was content to answer the myriad questions that Irving would pose. Langmuir's hobbies included mountaineering, skiing, piloting his own plane, and classical music. In addition to his professional interest in the politics of atomic energy, he was concerned about wilderness conservation.\nEducation.\nLangmuir attended several schools and institutes in America and Paris (1892\u20131895) before graduating high school from Chestnut Hill Academy (1898), an elite private school located in the affluent Chestnut Hill area in Philadelphia. He graduated with a Bachelor of Science degree in metallurgical engineering (Met.E.) from the Columbia University School of Mines in 1903. He earned his PhD in 1906 under Friedrich Dolezalek in G\u00f6ttingen, for research done using the \"Nernst glower\", an electric lamp invented by Nernst. His doctoral thesis was entitled \"On the Partial Recombination of Dissolved Gases During Cooling\" (). He later did postgraduate work in chemistry. Langmuir then taught at Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, New Jersey, until 1909, when he began working at the General Electric research laboratory (Schenectady, New York).\nResearch.\nHis initial contributions to science came from his study of light bulbs (a continuation of his PhD work). His first major development was the improvement of the diffusion pump, which ultimately led to the invention of the high-vacuum rectifier and amplifier tubes. A year later, he and colleague Lewi Tonks discovered that the lifetime of a tungsten filament could be greatly lengthened by filling the bulb with an inert gas, such as argon, the critical factor (overlooked by other researchers) being the need for extreme cleanliness in all stages of the process. He also discovered that twisting the filament into a tight coil improved its efficiency. These were important developments in the history of the incandescent light bulb. His work in surface chemistry began at this point, when he discovered that molecular hydrogen introduced into a tungsten-filament bulb dissociated into atomic hydrogen and formed a layer one atom thick on the surface of the bulb.\nHis assistant in vacuum tube research was his cousin William Comings White.\nAs he continued to study filaments in vacuum and different gas environments, he began to study the emission of charged particles from hot filaments (thermionic emission). He was one of the first scientists to work with plasmas, and he was the first to call these ionized gases by that name because they reminded him of blood plasma. Langmuir and Tonks discovered electron density waves in plasmas that are now known as Langmuir waves.\nHe introduced the concept of electron temperature and in 1924 invented the diagnostic method for measuring both temperature and density with an electrostatic probe, now called a Langmuir probe and commonly used in plasma physics. The current of a biased probe tip is measured as a function of bias voltage to determine the local plasma temperature and density. He also discovered atomic hydrogen, which he put to use by inventing the atomic hydrogen welding process; the first plasma weld ever made. Plasma welding has since been developed into gas tungsten arc welding.\nIn 1917, he published a paper on the chemistry of oil films that later became the basis for the award of the 1932 Nobel Prize in chemistry. Langmuir theorized that oils consisting of an aliphatic chain with a hydrophilic end group (perhaps an alcohol or acid) were oriented as a film one molecule thick upon the surface of water, with the hydrophilic group down in the water and the hydrophobic chains clumped together on the surface. The thickness of the film could be easily determined from the known volume and area of the oil, which allowed investigation of the molecular configuration before spectroscopic techniques were available.\nLater years.\nFollowing World War I Langmuir contributed to atomic theory and the understanding of atomic structure by defining the modern concept of valence shells and isotopes.\nLangmuir was president of the Institute of Radio Engineers in 1923.\nBased on his work at General Electric, John B. Taylor developed a detector ionizing beams of alkali metals, called nowadays the Langmuir-Taylor detector. In 1927, he was one of the participants of the fifth Solvay Conference on Physics that took place at the International Solvay Institute for Physics in Belgium.\nHe joined Katharine B. Blodgett to study thin films and surface adsorption. They introduced the concept of a monolayer (a layer of material one molecule thick) and the two-dimensional physics which describe such a surface. In 1932 he received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry \"for his discoveries and investigations in surface chemistry.\"\nIn 1938, Langmuir's scientific interests began to turn to atmospheric science and meteorology. One of his first ventures, although tangentially related, was a refutation of the claim of entomologist Charles H. T. Townsend that the deer botfly flew at speeds of over 800 miles per hour. Langmuir estimated the fly's speed at 25 miles per hour.\nAfter observing windrows of drifting seaweed in the Sargasso Sea he discovered a wind-driven surface circulation in the sea. It is now called the Langmuir circulation.\nDuring World War II, Langmuir and Research Associate Vincent J Schaefer worked on improving naval sonar for submarine detection, and later to develop protective smoke screens and methods for deicing aircraft wings. This research led him to theorize and then demonstrate in the laboratory and in the atmosphere, that the introduction of ice nuclei dry ice and silver iodide into a sufficiently moist cloud of low temperature (supercooled water) could induce precipitation (cloud seeding); though in frequent practice, particularly in Australia and the People's Republic of China, the efficiency of this technique remains controversial today.\nIn 1953 Langmuir coined the term \"pathological science\", describing research conducted with accordance to the scientific method, but tainted by unconscious bias or subjective effects. This is in contrast to pseudoscience, which has no pretense of following the scientific method. In his original speech, he presented ESP and flying saucers as examples of pathological science; since then, the label has been applied to polywater and cold fusion.\nHis house in Schenectady, was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1976.\nPersonal life.\nLangmuir was married to Marion Mersereau (1883\u20131971) in 1912 with whom he adopted two children: Kenneth and Barbara. After a short illness, he died in Woods Hole, Massachusetts from a heart attack on August 16, 1957. His obituary ran on the front page of \"The New York Times\".\nOn his religious views, Langmuir was an agnostic.\nIn fiction.\nAccording to author Kurt Vonnegut, Langmuir was the inspiration for his fictional scientist Dr. Felix Hoenikker in the novel \"Cat's Cradle\", and the character's invention of ice-nine, a new phase of water ice (similar in name only to Ice IX). Langmuir had worked with Vonnegut's brother, Bernard Vonnegut at General Electric on seeding ice crystals to diminish or increase rain or storms.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15363", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15363", "title": "Iron age", "text": ""}
{"id": "15365", "revid": "48923851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15365", "title": "International Association of Travel Agents Network", "text": "Organization\nThe International Airlines Travel Agent Network (IATAN) is a Miami-based trade association in the United States representing the interests of its member companies (airlines) and the U.S. travel distribution network (travel agencies). It is an independent department of the International Air Transport Association (IATA).\nIn addition, it (along with the IATA) is the body responsible for the standard international codes for airlines, airports, hotels, cities and car rental firms. These codes provide a method to link international travel network with international suppliers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15368", "revid": "1317561865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15368", "title": "Insider trading", "text": "Trading using nonpublic information\nInsider trading is the trading of a public company's stock or other securities (such as bonds or stock options) based on material, nonpublic information about the company. In many countries, some kinds of trading based on insider information are illegal. The rationale for this prohibition of insider trading differs between countries and regions. Some view it as unfair to other investors in the market who do not have access to the information, as the investor with inside information can potentially make larger profits than an investor without such information. However, insider trading is also prohibited to prevent the directors of a company (the insiders) from abusing a company's confidential information for the directors' personal gain.\nThe rules governing insider trading are complex and vary significantly from country to country, as does the extent of enforcement. The definition of 'insider' in one jurisdiction can be broad and may cover not only insiders themselves but also any persons related to them, such as brokers, associates, and even family members. In some jurisdictions, a person who becomes aware of non-public information and then trades on that basis may be guilty of a crime.\nTrading by specific insiders, such as employees, is commonly permitted as long as it does not rely on material information not available to the general public. Many jurisdictions require that such trading be reported so the transactions can be monitored. In the United States and several other jurisdictions, trading conducted by corporate officers, key employees, directors, or significant shareholders must be reported to the regulator or publicly disclosed, usually within a few business days of the trade. In such cases, insiders in the United States are required to file Form\u00a04 with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) when buying or selling shares of their own companies. The authors of one study concluded that illegal insider trading raises the cost of capital for securities issuers, thus decreasing overall economic growth. On the other hand, some economists, such as Henry Manne, have argued that insider trading should be allowed and can, in fact, benefit markets.\nThere has long been \"considerable academic debate\" among business and legal scholars over whether insider trading should be illegal. Several arguments against outlawing insider trading have been identified: for example, although insider trading is illegal, most insider trading is never detected by law enforcement, and thus the illegality of insider trading might give the public the potentially misleading impression that \"stock market trading is an unrigged game that anyone can play.\" Some legal analysis has questioned whether insider trading actually harms anyone in the legal sense, since it can be argued either that insider trading does not cause anyone to suffer an actual \"loss\" or that anyone who suffers a loss is not owed an actual legal duty by the insiders in question. Opponents of political insider trading also point to conflicts of interest and social distrust.\nLegal framework.\nRules prohibiting or criminalizing insider trading on material non-public information exist in most jurisdictions around the world (Bhattacharya and Daouk, 2002), but the details and the efforts to enforce them vary considerably. In the United States, Sections 16(b) and 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 directly and indirectly address insider trading. The U.S. Congress enacted this law after the stock market crash of 1929. While the United States is generally viewed as making the most serious efforts to enforce its insider trading laws, the broader scope of the European model legislation provides a stricter framework against illegal insider trading. In the European Union and the United Kingdom, all trading on non-public information is, under the rubric of market abuse, subject at a minimum to civil penalties and possible criminal penalties as well. UK's Financial Conduct Authority has the responsibility to investigate and prosecute insider dealing, defined by the Criminal Justice Act 1993.\nFinancial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) can apply to domestic politically exposed persons.\nDefinition of \"insider\".\nIn the United States, Canada, Australia, Germany and Romania for mandatory reporting purposes, corporate insiders are defined as a company's officers, directors and any beneficial owners of more than 10% of a class of the company's equity securities. Trades made by these types of insiders in the company's own stock, based on material non-public information, are considered fraudulent since the insiders are violating the fiduciary duty that they owe to the shareholders. The corporate insider, simply by accepting employment, has undertaken a legal obligation to the shareholders to put the shareholders' interests before their own, in matters related to the corporation. When insiders buy or sell based on company-owned information, they are said to be violating their obligation to the shareholders or investors.\nFor example, illegal insider trading would occur if the chief executive officer of Company A learned (prior to a public announcement) that Company A would be taken over and then bought shares in Company A while knowing that the share price would likely rise. In the United States and many other jurisdictions, \"insiders\" are not just limited to corporate officials and major shareholders where illegal insider trading is concerned but can include any individual who trades shares based on material non-public information in violation of some duty of trust. This duty may be imputed; for example, in many jurisdictions, in cases where a corporate insider \"tips\" a friend about non-public information likely to have an effect on the company's share price, the duty the corporate insider owes the company is now imputed to the friend and the friend violates a duty to the company if he trades on the basis of this information.\nLiability.\nLiability for inside trading violations generally cannot be avoided by passing on the information in an \"I scratch your back; you scratch mine\" or \"quid pro quo\" arrangement if the person receiving the information knew or should have known that the information was material non-public information. In the United States, at least one court has indicated that the insider who releases the non-public information must have done so for an improper purpose. In the case of a person who receives the insider information (called the \"tippee\"), the tippee must also have been aware that the insider released the information for an improper purpose.\nOne commentator has argued that if Company A's CEO did not trade on undisclosed takeover news, but instead passed the information on to his brother-in-law who traded on it, illegal insider trading would still have occurred (albeit by proxy, by passing it on to a \"non-insider\" so Company A's CEO would not get his hands dirty).\nMisappropriation theory.\nThe misappropriation theory of insider trading is now accepted in U.S. law. It states that anyone who misappropriates material non-public information and trades on that information in any stock may be guilty of insider trading. This can include elucidating material non-public information from an insider with the intention of trading on it or passing it on to someone who will. \nThis theory constitutes the background for the securities regulation that enforces the insider trading.\nDisgorgement represents ill-gotten gains (or losses avoided) resulting from individuals violating the securities laws. \nIn general in the countries where the insider trading is forbidden, the competent Authority seeks disgorgement to ensure that securities law violators do not profit from their illegal activity. \nWhen appropriate, the disgorged funds are returned to the injured investors. \nDisgorgements can be ordered in either administrative proceedings or civil actions, and the cases can be settled or litigated. Payment of disgorgement can be either completely or partially waived based on the defendant demonstrating an inability to pay. In settled administrative proceedings, Enforcement may recommend, if appropriate, that the disgorgement be waived.\nThere are several approaches in order to quantify the disgorgement; an innovative procedure based on probability theory was defined by Marcello Minenna by directly analyzing the time periods of the involved transactions in the insider trading.\nProof of responsibility.\nProving that someone has been responsible for a trade can be difficult because traders may try to hide behind nominees, offshore companies, and other proxies. The SEC prosecutes over 50 cases each year, with many being settled administratively out of court. The SEC and several stock exchanges actively monitor trading, looking for suspicious activity. The SEC does not have criminal enforcement authority but can refer serious matters to the U.S. Attorney's Office for further investigation and prosecution.\nTrading on information in general.\nIn the United States and most non-European jurisdictions, not all trading on non-public information is illegal insider trading. For example, a person in a restaurant who hears the CEO of Company A at the next table tell the CFO that the company's profits will be higher than expected and then buys the stock is not guilty of insider trading\u2014unless he or she had some closer connection to the company or company officers. However, even where the tippee is not himself an insider, where the tippee knows that the information is non-public and the information is paid for, or the tipper receives a benefit for giving it, then in the broader-scope jurisdictions the subsequent trading is illegal.\nNotwithstanding, information about a tender offer (usually regarding a merger or acquisition) is held to a higher standard. If this type of information is obtained (directly or indirectly) and there is reason to believe it is nonpublic, there is a duty to disclose it or abstain from trading.\nIn the United States in addition to civil penalties, the trader may also be subject to criminal prosecution for fraud or where SEC regulations have been broken, the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) may be called to conduct an independent parallel investigation. If the DOJ finds criminal wrongdoing, the department may file criminal charges.\nCommercialisation.\nThe advent of the Internet has provided a forum for the commercialisation of trading on insider information. In 2016 a number of dark web sites were identified as marketplaces where such non-public information was bought and sold. At least one such site used bitcoin to avoid currency restrictions and to impede tracking. Such sites also provide a place for soliciting for corporate informants, where non-public information may be used for purposes other than stock trading.\nArguments for further prohibition.\nA study of political insider trading found existing regulation including STOCK Act results in conflict of interest and contributes to social distrust. Information asymmetry enjoyed by politicians was found to be high, which does not confirm the predictions of social contract theory. Political insider trading by persons which are not required to report according to STOCK Act was found. Higher insider trading was found when legislature is in session and in periods with higher geopolitical risk.\nLegal.\nLegal trades by insiders are common, as employees of publicly traded corporations often have stock or stock options. These trades are made public in the United States through SEC filings that are also being made available by academic researchers as structured datasets.\nU.S. SEC Rule 10b5-1 clarified that the prohibition against insider trading does not require proof that an insider actually used material nonpublic information when conducting a trade; possession of such information alone is sufficient to violate the provision, and the SEC would infer that an insider in possession of material nonpublic information used this information when conducting a trade. However, SEC Rule 10b5-1 also created for insiders an affirmative defense if the insider can demonstrate that the trades conducted on behalf of the insider were conducted as part of a pre-existing contract or written binding plan for trading in the future.\nFor example, if an insider expects to retire after a specific period of time and, as part of retirement planning, the insider has adopted a written binding plan to sell a specific amount of the company's stock every month for two years, and the insider later comes into possession of material nonpublic information about the company, trades based on the original plan might not constitute prohibited insider trading.\nThere are very limited laws against \"insider trading\" in the commodities markets if, for no other reason than that the concept of an \"insider\" is not immediately analogous to commodities themselves (corn, wheat, steel, etc.). However, analogous activities such as front running are illegal under US commodity and futures trading laws. For example, a commodity broker can be charged with fraud for receiving a large purchase order from a client (one likely to affect the price of that commodity) and then purchasing that commodity before executing the client's order to benefit from the anticipated price increase.\nArguments for legalizing.\nSome economists and legal scholars (such as Henry Manne, Milton Friedman, Thomas Sowell, Daniel Fischel, and Frank H. Easterbrook) have argued that laws against insider trading should be repealed. They claim that insider trading based on material nonpublic information benefits investors, in general, by more quickly introducing new information into the market.\nFriedman, laureate of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics, said: \"You want more insider trading, not less. You want to give the people most likely to have knowledge about deficiencies of the company an incentive to make the public aware of that.\" Friedman did not believe that the trader should be required to make his trade known to the public, because the buying or selling pressure itself is information for the market.\nOthers argue that insider trading is a victimless act: a willing buyer and a willing seller agree to trade property that the seller rightfully owns, with no prior contract (according to this view) having been made between the parties to refrain from trading if there is asymmetric information. \"The Atlantic\" has described the process as \"arguably the closest thing that modern finance has to a victimless crime\".\nLegalization advocates also question why \"trading\" where one party has more information than the other is legal in other markets, such as real estate, but not in the stock market. For example, if a geologist knows there is a high likelihood of the discovery of petroleum under Farmer Smith's land, he may be entitled to make Smith an offer for the land, and buy it, without first telling Farmer Smith of the geological data.\nAdvocates of legalization make free speech arguments. Punishment for communicating about a development pertinent to the next day's stock price might seem an act of censorship.\nSome authors have used these arguments to propose legalizing insider trading on negative information (but not on positive information). Since negative information is often withheld from the market, trading on such information has a higher value for the market than trading on positive information.\nLegal differences among jurisdictions.\nThe US and the UK differ in the way the law is interpreted and applied with regard to insider trading. In the UK, the relevant laws are the Criminal Justice Act 1993, Part V, Schedule 1; the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000, which defines an offence of \"market abuse\"; and the European Union Regulation No 596/2014. The principle is that it is illegal to trade on the basis of market-sensitive information that is not generally known. This is a much broader scope than under U.S. law. The key differences from U.S. law are that no relationship to either the issuer of the security or the tipster is required; all that is required is that the guilty party traded (or caused trading) whilst having inside information, and there is no \"scienter\" requirement under UK law.\nJapan enacted its first law against insider trading in 1988. Roderick Seeman said, \"Even today many Japanese do not understand why this is illegal. Indeed, previously it was regarded as common sense to make a profit from your knowledge.\"\nIn Malta the law follows the European broader scope model. The relevant statute is the Prevention of Financial Markets Abuse Act of 2005, as amended. Earlier acts included the Financial Markets Abuse Act in 2002, and the Insider Dealing and Market Abuse Act of 1994.\nThe International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) paper on the \"Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation\" (updated to 2003) states that the three objectives of good securities market regulation are investor protection, ensuring that markets are fair, efficient and transparent, and reducing systemic risk.\nThe discussion of these \"Core Principles\" state that \"investor protection\" in this context means \"Investors should be protected from misleading, manipulative or fraudulent practices, including insider trading, front running or trading ahead of customers and the misuse of client assets.\" More than 85 percent of the world's securities and commodities market regulators are members of IOSCO and have signed on to these Core Principles.\nThe World Bank and International Monetary Fund now use the IOSCO Core Principles in reviewing the financial health of different country's regulatory systems as part of these organization's financial sector assessment program, so laws against insider trading based on non-public information are now expected by the international community. Enforcement of insider trading laws varies widely from country to country, but the vast majority of jurisdictions now outlaw the practice, at least in principle.\nLarry Harris claims that differences in the effectiveness with which countries restrict insider trading help to explain the differences in executive compensation among those countries. The US, for example, has much higher CEO salaries than have Japan or Germany, where insider trading is less effectively restrained.\nBy nation.\nAustralia.\nThe current Australian legislation arose out of the report of a 1989 parliamentary committee report which recommended removal of the requirement that the trader be 'connected' with the body corporate. This may have weakened the importance of the fiduciary duty rationale and possibly brought new potential offenders within its ambit. In Australia if a person possesses inside information and knows, or ought reasonably to know, that the information is not generally available and is materially price sensitive then the insider must not trade. Nor must she or he procure another to trade and must not tip another. Information will be considered generally available if it consists of readily observable matter or it has been made known to common investors and a reasonable period for it to be disseminated among such investors has elapsed.\nBrazil.\nThe practice of insider trading is an illegal act under Brazilian law, since it constitutes unfair behavior that threatens the security and equality of legal conditions in the market. Since 2001, the practice is also considered a crime. L as amended by Law 10,303/2001, provided for Article 27-D, which typifies the conduct of \u2018Using relevant information not yet disclosed to the market, of which he is aware and from which he must maintain secrecy, capable of providing, for himself or for others, undue advantage, through trading, on his own behalf or on behalf of a third party, with securities: Penalty \u2014 imprisonment, from 1 (one) to 5 (five) years, and a fine of up to 3 (three) times the amount of the illicit advantage obtained as a result of the crime.\u2019\nThe first conviction handed down in Brazil for the practice of the offense of \"misuse of privileged information\" occurred in 2011, by federal judge Marcelo Costenaro Cavali, of the Sixth Criminal Court of S\u00e3o Paulo. It is the case of the Sadia-Perdig\u00e3o merger. The former Director of Finance and Investor Relations, Luiz Gonzaga Murat J\u00fanior, was sentenced to one year and nine months in prison in an open regime, replaceable by community service, and the inability to exercise the position of administrator or fiscal councilor of a publicly traded company for the time he serves his sentence, in addition to a fine of R$349,711.53. The then member of the board of directors Romano Ancelmo Fontana Filho was sentenced to prison for one year and five months in an open regime, also replaceable by community service, in addition to not being able to exercise the position of administrator or fiscal councilor of a publicly held company. He was also fined R$374,940.52.\nCanada.\nIn 2008, police uncovered an insider trading conspiracy involving Bay Street and Wall Street lawyer Gil Cornblum who had worked at Sullivan &amp; Cromwell and was working at Dorsey &amp; Whitney, and a former lawyer, Stan Grmovsek, who were found to have gained over $10\u00a0million in illegal profits over a 14-year span. Cornblum committed suicide by jumping from a bridge as he was under investigation and shortly before he was to be arrested but before criminal charges were laid against him, one day before his alleged co-conspirator Grmovsek pled guilty. Grmovsek pleaded guilty to insider trading and was sentenced to 39 months in prison. This was the longest term ever imposed for insider trading in Canada. These crimes were explored in Mark Coakley's 2011 non-fiction book, \"Tip and Trade\".\nChina.\nThe majority of shares in China before 2005 were non-tradeable shares that were not sold on the stock exchange publicly but privately. To make shares more accessible, the China Securities Regulation Commission (CSRC) required the companies to convert the non-tradeable shares into tradeable shares. There was a deadline for companies to convert their shares and the deadline was short, and due to this there was a large amount of exchanges, and many of these were conducted based on critical inside information. At the time, insider trading did not lead to prison time. Generally, punishment may include monetary fees or temporary relieving from a position in the company, but prison time is rare. However, in 2015, the Chinese fund manager Xu Xiang was arrested for insider trading, and in 2017, he was sentenced to five and a half years in prison and fined 11 billion yuan.\nEuropean Union.\nIn 2014, the European Union (EU) adopted legislation (Criminal Sanctions for Market Abuse Directive) that harmonised criminal sanctions for insider dealing. All EU Member States agreed to introduce maximum prison sentences of at least four years for serious cases of market manipulation and insider dealing, and at least two years for improper disclosure of insider information.\nIndia.\nInsider trading in India is an offense according to Sections 12A and 15G of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992, and the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Prohibition of Insider Trading) Regulations, 2015. Insider trading is when one with access to non-public, price-sensitive information about the securities of the company subscribes, buys, sells, or deals, or agrees to do so or counsels another to do so as principal or agent. Price-sensitive information is information that materially affects the value of the securities. The penalty for insider trading is imprisonment, which may extend to five years, and a minimum of five lakh rupees (500,000) to 25 crore rupees (250\u00a0million) or three times the profit made, whichever is higher.\n\"The Wall Street Journal\", in a 2014 article entitled \"Why It's Hard to Catch India's Insider Trading\", said that despite a widespread belief that insider trading takes place on a regular basis in India, there were few examples of insider traders being prosecuted in India. One former top regulator said that in India insider trading is deeply rooted and especially rampant because regulators do not have the tools to address it. In the few cases where prosecution has taken place, cases have sometimes taken more than a decade to reach trial, and punishments have been light; and despite SEBI by law having the ability to demand penalties of up to $4\u00a0million, the few fines that were levied for insider trading have usually been under $200,000.\nKuwait.\nThe U.S. SEC alleged that in 2009 Kuwaiti trader Hazem Al-Braikan engaged in insider trading after misleading the public about possible takeover bids for two companies. Three days after Al-Braikan was sued by the SEC, he was found dead of a gunshot wound to the head in his home in Kuwait City on July 26, 2009, in what Kuwaiti police called a suicide. The SEC later reached a $6.5\u00a0million settlement of civil insider trading charges, with his estate and others.\nNorway.\nIn 2009, a journalist in Nettavisen (Thomas Gulbrandsen) was sentenced to four months in prison for insider trading.\nThe longest prison sentence in a Norwegian trial where the main charge was insider trading, was for eight years (two suspended) when Alain Angelil was convicted in a district court on December 9, 2011.\nPhilippines.\nUnder Republic Act 8799 or the Securities Regulation Code, insider trading in the Philippines is illegal.\nUnited Kingdom.\nAlthough insider trading in the UK has been illegal since 1980, it proved difficult to successfully prosecute individuals accused of insider trading. There were a number of notorious cases where individuals were able to escape prosecution. Instead the UK regulators relied on a series of fines to punish market abuses.\nThese fines were widely perceived as an ineffective deterrent, and there was a statement of intent by the UK regulator (the Financial Services Authority) to use its powers to enforce the legislation (specifically the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000). Between 2009 and 2012 the FSA secured 14 convictions in relation to insider dealing.\nUnited States.\nUnited States law.\nUntil the 21st century and the European Union's market abuse laws, the United States was the leading country to prohibit insider trading on the basis of material non-public information. Thomas Newkirk and Melissa Robertson of the SEC summarize the development of US insider trading laws. Insider trading has a base offense level of 8, which puts it in Zone\u00a0A under the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines. This means that first-time offenders are eligible to receive probation rather than incarceration.\nStatutory.\nU.S. insider trading prohibitions are based on English and American common law prohibitions against fraud. In 1909, well before the Securities Exchange Act was passed, the United States Supreme Court ruled that a corporate director who bought that company's stock when he knew the stock's price was about to increase committed fraud by buying but not disclosing his inside information.\nSection 15 of the Securities Act of 1933 contained prohibitions of fraud in the sale of securities, which were greatly strengthened by the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.\nSection 16(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 prohibits short-swing profits (from any purchases and sales within any six-month period) made by corporate directors, officers, or stockholders owning more than 10% of a firm's shares. Under Section 10(b) of the 1934 Act, SEC Rule 10b-5, prohibits fraud related to securities trading.\nThe Insider Trading Sanctions Act of 1984 and the Insider Trading and Securities Fraud Enforcement Act of 1988 place penalties for illegal insider trading as high as three times the amount of profit gained or loss avoided through illegal trading.\nSEC regulations.\nSEC regulation FD (\"Fair Disclosure\") requires that if a company intentionally discloses material, non-public information to one person, it must simultaneously disclose that information to the public at large. In the case of unintentional disclosure of material, non-public information to one person, the company must make a public disclosure \"promptly\".\nInsider trading and similar practices are also regulated by the SEC under its rules on takeovers and tender offers under the Williams Act.\nCourt decisions.\nMuch of the development of insider trading law has occurred through or resulted from court decisions.\nIn 1909, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled in \"Strong v. Repide\" that a director who expects to act in a way that affects the value of shares cannot use knowledge of that expectation to acquire shares from those who do not know of the expected action. Even though in general, ordinary relations between directors and shareholders in a business corporation are not of such a fiduciary nature as to make it the duty of a director to disclose to a shareholder general knowledge regarding the value of the shares of the company before he purchases any from a shareholder, some cases involve special facts that impose such duty.\nIn 1968, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals advanced a \"level playing field\" theory of insider trading in \"SEC v. Texas Gulf Sulphur Co.\" The court stated that anyone in possession of inside information must either disclose the information or refrain from trading. Officers of the Texas Gulf Sulphur Company had used inside information about the discovery of the Kidd Mine to make profits by buying shares and call options on company stock.\nIn 1984, the Supreme Court ruled in \"Dirks v. Securities and Exchange Commission\" that tippees (recipients of second-hand information) are liable for insider trading if they had reason to believe that the tipper had breached a fiduciary duty in disclosing confidential information. One such example would be if the tipper received any personal benefit from the disclosure, thereby breaching his or her duty of loyalty to the company. In \"Dirks\", the \"tippee\" had received confidential information from an insider, a former employee of a company. The reason the insider had disclosed the information to the tippee, and the reason the tippee had disclosed the information to third parties, was to blow the whistle on fraud at the company. As a result of the tippee's efforts the fraud was uncovered and the company went into bankruptcy. But, while the tippee had given the \"inside\" information to clients who made profits from the information, the Supreme Court ruled that the tippee could not be held liable under the federal securities laws because the insider from whom he received the information had not released the information for an improper purpose (a personal benefit) but rather for the purpose of exposing the fraud. The court ruled that the tippee could not have been aiding and abetting a securities law violation committed by the insider because no securities law violation had been committed by the insider.\nIn 2019 the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled in \"United States v. Blaszczak\" that the \"personal-benefit\" test announced in \"Dirks\" does not apply to Title 18 fraud statutes, such as 18 USC 1348. In \"Dirks\", the court also defined the concept of \"constructive insiders\" as lawyers, investment bankers, and others who receive confidential information from a corporation while providing services to the corporation. The court held that constructive insiders are also liable for insider trading violations if the corporation expects the information revealed to them to remain confidential, since they acquire the fiduciary duties of a true insider.\nThe next expansion of insider trading liability came in \"SEC vs. Materia\", 745 F.2d 197 (2d Cir. 1984), the case that first introduced the misappropriation theory of liability for insider trading. Materia, a financial printing firm proofreader who clearly was not an insider by any definition, was found to have determined the identity of takeover targets based on proofreading tender offer documents in the course of his employment. After a two-week trial, the district court found him liable for insider trading, and the Second Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed, holding that the theft of information from an employer, and the use of that information to purchase or sell securities in another entity, constituted a fraud in connection with the purchase or sale of a securities. The misappropriation theory of insider trading was born, and liability was thereby further expanded to encompass a larger group of outsiders.\nIn \"United States v. Carpenter\" (1986), the Supreme Court cited an earlier ruling while unanimously upholding mail and wire fraud convictions for a defendant who had received his information from a journalist rather than from the company itself. The journalist R. Foster Winans was also convicted, on the grounds that he had misappropriated information belonging to his employer, \"The Wall Street Journal\". In the widely publicized case, Winans had traded in advance of \"Heard on the Street\" columns appearing in the Journal.\nThe Court stated in \"Carpenter\": \"It is well established, as a general proposition, that a person who acquires special knowledge or information by virtue of a confidential or fiduciary relationship with another is not free to exploit that knowledge or information for his own personal benefit but must account to his principal for any profits derived therefrom.\" However, in upholding the securities fraud (insider trading) convictions the justices were evenly split.\nIn 1997, the U.S. Supreme Court adopted the misappropriation theory of insider trading in \"United States v. O'Hagan\", 521 U.S. 642, 655 (1997). O'Hagan was a partner in a law firm representing Grand Metropolitan while it was considering a tender offer for Pillsbury Company. O'Hagan used this inside information by buying call options on Pillsbury stock, thereby realizing profits of over $4.3\u00a0million. O'Hagan argued that neither he nor his firm had owed a fiduciary duty to Pillsbury, so he had not committed fraud by purchasing Pillsbury options. The Court rejected O'Hagan's arguments and upheld his conviction.\nThe \"misappropriation theory\" holds that a person commits fraud \"in connection with\" a securities transaction, and thereby violates 10(b) and Rule 10b-5, when he misappropriates confidential information for securities trading purposes in breach of a duty owed to the source of the information. Under this theory, a fiduciary's undisclosed, self-serving use of a principal's information to purchase or sell securities, in breach of a duty of loyalty and confidentiality, defrauds the principal of the exclusive use of the information. In lieu of premising liability on a fiduciary relationship between a company insider and the purchaser or seller of the company's stock, the misappropriation theory premises liability on a fiduciary-turned-trader's deception of those who entrusted him with access to confidential information.\nThe Court specifically recognized that a corporation's information is its property: \"A company's confidential information\u00a0... qualifies as property to which the company has a right of exclusive use. The undisclosed misappropriation of such information in violation of a fiduciary duty\u00a0... constitutes fraud akin to embezzlement\u2013 the fraudulent appropriation to one's own use of the money or goods entrusted to one's care by another.\"\nIn 2000, the SEC enacted SEC Rule 10b5-1, which defined trading \"on the basis of\" inside information as trades that occur while the trader is aware of material nonpublic information. It is no longer a defense for one to say that one would have made the trade anyway. However, the rule also codified an affirmative defense for pre-planned trades.\nIn \"Morgan Stanley v. Skowron\", 989 F. Supp. 2d 356 (S.D.N.Y. 2013), applying New York's faithless servant doctrine, the court held that a hedge fund's portfolio manager who had engaged in insider trading in violation of his company's code of conduct, which also required him to report that misconduct, was required to repay his employer the full $31\u00a0million his employer had paid him as compensation during his period of faithlessness. The court called the insider trading the \"ultimate abuse of a portfolio manager's position\". The judge also wrote: \"In addition to exposing Morgan Stanley to government investigations and direct financial losses, Skowron's behavior damaged the firm's reputation, a valuable corporate asset.\"\nIn 2014, in \"United States v. Newman\", the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit cited the Supreme Court's decision in \"Dirks\" and ruled that for a \"tippee\" (a person who used information they received from an insider) to be guilty of insider trading, the tippee must have been aware not only that the information was insider information, but must also that the insider had released the information for an improper purpose (such as a personal benefit). The Court concluded that an insider's breach of a fiduciary duty not to release confidential information, in the absence of an improper purpose on the part of the insider, is not enough to impose criminal liability on either the insider or the tippee.\nIn 2016, in \"Salman v. United States\", the U.S. Supreme Court held that the benefit a tipper must receive as the predicate for an insider-trader prosecution of a tippee need not be pecuniary, and that giving a 'gift' of a tip to a family member is presumptively an act for the personal, albeit intangible, benefit of the tipper.\nBy members of Congress.\nMembers of the US Congress are not exempt from the laws that ban insider trading. Because they generally do not have a confidential relationship with the source of the information they receive, however, they do not meet the usual definition of an \"insider\". House of Representatives rules may, however, provide that congressional insider trading is unethical. A 2004 study found that stock sales and purchases by senators outperformed the market by 12.3% per year. Peter Schweizer points out several examples of insider trading by members of Congress, including action taken by Spencer Bachus following a private, behind-the-doors meeting on the evening of September 18, 2008 wherein Hank Paulson and Ben Bernanke informed members of Congress about the issues due to the 2008 financial crisis; Bachus shorted stocks the next morning and cashed in his profits within a week. Also attending the same meeting were Senator Dick Durbin and House Speaker John Boehner; the same day (effective the following day), Durbin sold mutual-fund shares worth $42,696 and reinvested it all with Warren Buffett. Also the same day (effective the following day), Boehner cashed out of an equity mutual fund.\nIn May 2007, a bill entitled the Stop Trading on Congressional Knowledge Act, or STOCK Act was introduced to hold congressional and federal employees liable for stock trades they made using information they gained through their jobs and also regulate analysts or political intelligence firms that research government activities. The STOCK Act was enacted on April 4, 2012. In the approximately nine month period ending September 2021, Senate and House members disclosed 4,000 trades of stocks and bonds, worth at least $315\u00a0million.\nFurther.\nAnil Kumar, a senior partner at management consulting firm McKinsey &amp; Company, pleaded guilty in 2010 to insider trading in a \"descent from the pinnacle of the business world\".\nChip Skowron, a hedge fund co-portfolio manager of FrontPoint Partners LLC's health care funds, was convicted of insider trading in 2011, for which he served five years in prison. He had been tipped off by a consultant to a company that the company was about to make a negative announcement regarding its clinical trial for a drug. Skowron initially denied the charges against him and his defense attorney said he would plead not guilty, saying \"We look forward to responding to the allegations more fully in court at the appropriate time\". However, after the consultant charged with tipping him off pleaded guilty, he changed his position, and admitted his guilt.\nRajat Gupta, who had been managing partner of McKinsey &amp; Co. and a director at Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and Procter &amp; Gamble Co., was convicted by a federal jury in 2012 and sentence to two years in prison for leaking inside information to hedge fund manager Raj Rajaratnam who was sentenced to 11 years in prison. The case was prosecuted by the office of United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York Preet Bharara.\nMathew Martoma, former hedge fund trader and portfolio manager at S.A.C. Capital Advisors, was accused of generating possibly the largest single insider trading transaction profit in history at a value of $276\u00a0million. He was convicted in February 2014, and is serving a nine-year prison sentence.\nWith the guilty plea by Perkins Hixon in 2014 for insider trading from 2010 to 2013 while at Evercore Partners, Bharara said in a press release that 250 defendants whom his office had charged since August 2009 had now been convicted.\nOn December 10, 2014, a federal appeals court overturned the insider trading convictions of two former hedge fund traders, Todd Newman and Anthony Chiasson, based on \"erroneous\" instructions given to jurors by the trial judge. The decision was expected to affect the appeal of the separate insider-trading conviction of former SAC Capital portfolio manager Michael Steinberg and the U.S. Attorney and the SEC in 2015 did drop their cases against Steinberg and others.\nIn 2016, Sean Stewart, a former managing director at Perella Weinberg Partners LP and vice president at JPMorgan Chase, was convicted on allegations he tipped his father on pending health-care deals. The father, Robert Stewart, previously had pleaded guilty but did not testify during his son's trial. It was argued that by way of compensation for the tip, the father had paid more than $10,000 for Sean's wedding photographer.\nIn 2017, Billy Walters, a Las Vegas sports bettor, was convicted of making $40\u00a0million on private information about Dallas-based dairy processing company Dean Foods, and sentenced to five years in prison. Walters's source, company director Thomas C. Davis, employing a prepaid cell phone and sometimes the code words \"Dallas Cowboys\" for Dean Foods, helping Walters to realize profits and avoid losses in the stock from 2008 to 2014, the federal jury found. Golfer Phil Mickelson \"was also mentioned during the trial as someone who had traded in Dean Foods shares and once owed nearly $2\u00a0million in gambling debts to\" Walters. Mickelson \"made roughly $1\u00a0million trading Dean Foods shares; he agreed to forfeit those profits in a related civil case brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission\". Walters appealed the verdict, but in December 2018 his conviction was upheld by the 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals.\nIn 2018, David Blaszczak, the \"king of political intelligence\"; Theodore Huber and Robert Olan, two partners at hedge fund Deerfield Management; and Christopher Worrall, an employee at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), were convicted for insider trading by the U.S. Attorney's Office in the Southern District of New York. Worrall leaked confidential government information that he stole from CMS to Blaszczak, and Blaszczak passed that information to Huber and Olan, who made $7\u00a0million trading securities. The convictions were upheld in 2019 by the Second Circuit Court of Appeals; that court's opinion was vacated by the Supreme Court in 2021 and the Second Circuit is now reconsidering its decision.\nIn 2023, Terren Peizer was charged with insider trading by the SEC, which alleged that he sold $20\u00a0million of Ontrak Inc. stock while he was in possession of material nonpublic negative information. Peizer was the CEO and chairman of Ontrak. In addition, the U.S. Department of Justice announced criminal charges of securities fraud against Peizer, charging that thereby he had avoided $12\u00a0million in losses; he was arrested. The case was tried in the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California. He was convicted of all three charges in June 2024, and faces up to 65 years in prison.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeneral information\nArticles and opinions\nData on insider trading"}
{"id": "15369", "revid": "50598165", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15369", "title": "International Brigades", "text": "Paramilitary supporting the Republicans in the Spanish Civil War\nMilitary unit\nThe International Brigades () were volunteer soldiers organized by the Communist International to assist the Popular Front government of the Second Spanish Republic during the Spanish Civil War. The International Brigades existed for two years, from 1936 until 1938. It is estimated that during the entire war, there were some 32,000 Brigaders, yet at no single moment were there more than 18,000 actually deployed. Beyond the Spanish Civil War, \"International Brigades\" is also sometimes used interchangeably with the term foreign legion in reference to military units comprising foreigners who volunteer to fight in the military of another state, often in times of war.\nThe headquarters of the brigade was located at the Gran Hotel, Albacete, Castilla-La Mancha. They participated in the battles of Madrid, Jarama, Guadalajara, Brunete, Belchite, Teruel, Aragon, and the Ebro. Most of these ended in defeat. For the last year of its existence, the International Brigades were integrated into the Spanish Republican Army as part of the Spanish Foreign Legion. The organisation was dissolved on 23 September 1938 by Spanish Prime Minister Juan Negr\u00edn in a vain attempt to get more support from the liberal democracies on the Non-Intervention Committee.\nThe International Brigades were strongly supported by the Comintern and represented the Soviet Union's commitment to assisting the Spanish Republic (with arms, logistics, military advisers and the NKVD), just as Portugal, Fascist Italy, and Nazi Germany were assisting the opposing Nationalist insurgency. The largest number of volunteers came from France (where the French Communist Party had many members) and communist exiles from Italy and Germany. Many Jews were part of the brigades, being particularly numerous within the volunteers coming from the United States, Poland, France, Great Britain, and Argentina.\nRepublican volunteers who were opposed to Stalinism did not join the Brigades. Instead, they enlisted in the separate Popular Front, the POUM (formed from Trotskyist, Bukharinist, and other anti-Stalinist groups, which did not separate Spaniards and foreign volunteers), or anarcho-syndicalist groups such as the Durruti Column, the IWA, and the CNT.\nFormation and recruitment.\nUsing foreign communist parties to recruit volunteers for Spain was first proposed in August 1936 by British writer and military theorist Tom Wintringham who had already travelled to Spain, but the idea was not formally raised with the Comintern in the Soviet Union until September 1936\u2014apparently at the suggestion of Maurice Thorez\u2014by Willi M\u00fcnzenberg, chief of Comintern propaganda for Western Europe. One week after the London meeting of the Non-Intervention Committee confirmed that none of the Western democracies would provide military aid to the Spanish Republican side, the Comintern agreed to start recruiting international volunteers. As a security measure, non-communist volunteers would first be interviewed by an NKVD agent.\nBy the end of September, the British, Italian and French Communist Parties had decided to set up a column. Luigi Longo, ex-leader of the Italian Communist Youth, was charged to make the necessary arrangements with the Spanish government. The Soviet Ministry of Defense also helped, since they had experience dealing with the corps of international volunteers during the Russian Civil War. The idea was initially opposed by Francisco Largo Caballero, but after the first setbacks of the war, he changed his mind and finally agreed to the operation on 22 October. However, the Soviet Union did not withdraw from the Non-Intervention Committee, probably to avoid diplomatic conflict with France and the United Kingdom.\nThe main recruitment center was in Paris, under the supervision of Soviet colonel Karol \"Walter\" \u015awierczewski. On 17 October 1936, an open letter by Joseph Stalin to Jos\u00e9 D\u00edaz was published in \"Mundo Obrero\", arguing that victory for the Spanish second republic was a matter not only for Spaniards but also for the whole of \"progressive humanity\"; in short order, communist activists joined with moderate socialist and liberal groups to form anti-fascist \"popular front\" militias in several countries, most of them under the control of or influenced by the Comintern.\nEntry to Spain was arranged for volunteers, for instance, a Yugoslav, Josip Broz, who would become famous as Marshal Tito, was in Paris to provide assistance, money, and passports for volunteers from Eastern Europe (including numerous Yugoslav volunteers in the Spanish Civil War). Volunteers were sent by train or ship from France to Spain, and sent to the base at Albacete. Many of them also went by themselves to Spain. The volunteers were under no contract, nor defined engagement period, which would later prove a problem.\nAlso, many Italians, Germans, and people from other countries joined the movement, with the idea that combat in Spain was the first step to restore democracy or advance a revolutionary cause in their own country. There were also many unemployed workers (especially from France), and adventurers. Finally, some 500 communists who had been exiled to Russia were sent to Spain (among them, experienced military leaders from the First World War like \"Kl\u00e9ber\" Stern, \"Gomez\" Zaisser, \"Lukacs\" Zalka and \"Gal\" Galicz, who would prove invaluable in combat).\nThe operation was met with enthusiasm by communists, but by anarchists with skepticism, at best. At first, the anarchists, who controlled the borders with France, were told to refuse communist volunteers, but reluctantly allowed their passage after protests. Keith Scott Watson, a journalist who fought alongside Esmond Romilly at Cerro de los \u00c1ngeles and who later \"resigned\" from the Th\u00e4lmann Battalion, describes in his memoirs how he was detained and interrogated by Anarchist border guards before eventually being allowed into the country. A group of 500 volunteers (mainly French, with a few exiled Poles and Germans) arrived in Albacete on 14 October 1936. They were met by international volunteers who had already been fighting in Spain: Germans from the Th\u00e4lmann Battalion, Italians from the Centuria Gastone Sozzi and French grouped together with Belgians under the Commune de Paris Battalion. Among them was the poet John Cornford, who had travelled down through France and Spain with a group of fellow intellectuals and artists including Wintringham, John Sommerfield, Bernard Knox, Ralph Bates and Jan Kurzke, all of whom left detailed memoirs of their battle experiences.\nOn 30 May 1937, the Spanish liner \"Ciudad de Barcelona\", carrying 200\u2013250 volunteers from Marseille to Spain, was torpedoed by a Nationalist submarine off the coast of Malgrat de Mar. The ship sank and up to 65 volunteers are estimated to have drowned.\nAlbacete soon became the International Brigades headquarters and its main depot. It was run by a \"troika\" of Comintern heavyweights: Andr\u00e9 Marty was commander; Luigi Longo (\"Gallo\") was Inspector-General; and Giuseppe Di Vittorio (\"Nicoletti\") was chief political commissar.\nThere were many Jewish volunteers amongst the brigadiers \u2013 about 22% of the total. A Jewish company was formed within the Polish battalion that was named after Naftali Botwin, a young Jewish communist killed in Poland in 1925.\nThe French Communist Party provided uniforms for the Brigades. They were organized into mixed brigades, the basic military unit of the Republican People's Army. Discipline was severe. For several weeks, the Brigades were locked in their base while their strict military training was underway.\nService.\nFirst engagements: Siege of Madrid.\nThe Battle of Madrid was a major success for the Republic, and staved off the prospect of a rapid defeat at the hands of Francisco Franco's forces. The role of the International Brigades in this victory was generally recognized but was exaggerated by Comintern propaganda so that the outside world heard only of their victories and not those of Spanish units. So successful was such propaganda that the British Ambassador, Sir Henry Chilton, declared that there were no Spaniards in the army which had defended Madrid. The International Brigade forces that fought in Madrid arrived after another successful Republican fighting. Of the 40,000 Republican troops in the city, the foreign troops numbered less than 3,000.\nEven though the International Brigades did not win the battle by themselves, nor significantly change the situation, they certainly did provide an example by their determined fighting and improved the morale of the population by demonstrating the concern of other nations in the fight. Many of the older members of the International Brigades provided valuable combat experience, having fought during the First World War (Spain remained neutral in 1914\u20131918) and the Irish War of Independence (some had fought in the British Army while others had fought in the Irish Republican Army (IRA)).\nOne of the strategic positions in Madrid was the Casa de Campo. There the Nationalist troops were Moroccans, commanded by General Jos\u00e9 Enrique Varela. They were stopped by III and IV Brigades of the Spanish Republican Army.\nOn 9 November 1936, the XI International Brigade \u2013 comprising 1,900 men from the Edgar Andr\u00e9 Battalion, the Commune de Paris Battalion and the Dabrowski Battalion, together with a British machine-gun company\u00a0\u2014 took up position at the Casa de Campo. In the evening, its commander, General Kl\u00e9ber, launched an assault on the Nationalist positions. This lasted for the whole night and part of the next morning. At the end of the fight, the Nationalist troops had been forced to retreat, abandoning all hopes of a direct assault on Madrid by Casa de Campo, while the XIth Brigade had lost a third of its personnel.\nOn 13 November, the 1,550-man strong XII International Brigade, made up of the Th\u00e4lmann Battalion, the Garibaldi Battalion and the Andr\u00e9 Marty Battalion, deployed. Commanded by General \"Lukacs\", they assaulted Nationalist positions on the high ground of Cerro de Los Angeles. As a result of language and communication problems, command issues, lack of rest, poor coordination with armored units, and insufficient artillery support, the attack failed.\nOn 19 November, the anarchist militias were forced to retreat, and Nationalist troops\u00a0\u2014 Moroccans and Spanish Foreign Legionnaires, covered by the Nazi Condor Legion\u00a0\u2014 captured a foothold in the University City. The 11th Brigade was sent to drive the Nationalists out of the University City. The battle was extremely bloody, a mix of artillery and aerial bombardment, with bayonet and grenade fights, room by room. Anarchist leader Buenaventura Durruti was shot there on 19 November 1936 and died the next day. The battle in the university went on until three-quarters of the University City was under Nationalist control. Both sides then started setting up trenches and fortifications. It was then clear that any assault from either side would be far too costly; the Nationalist leaders had to renounce the idea of a direct assault on Madrid, and prepare for a siege of the capital.\nOn 13 December 1936, 18,000 nationalist troops attempted an attack to close the encirclement of Madrid at Guadarrama\u00a0\u2014 an engagement known as the Battle of the Corunna Road. The Republicans sent in a Soviet armored unit, under General Dmitry Pavlov, and both XI and XII International Brigades. Violent combat followed, and they stopped the Nationalist advance.\nAn attack was then launched by the Republic on the C\u00f3rdoba front. The battle ended in a form of stalemate; a communique was issued, saying: \"During the day the advance continued without the loss of any territory.\" Poets Ralph Winston Fox and John Cornford were killed at the Battle of Lopera, as was Dubliner Tommy Wood, aged 17. Eventually, the Nationalists advanced, taking the hydroelectric station at El Campo. Andr\u00e9 Marty accused the commander of the Marseillaise Battalion, Gaston Delasalle, of espionage and treason and had him executed. (It is doubtful that Delasalle would have been a spy for Francisco Franco; he was denounced by his second-in-command, Andr\u00e9 Heussler, who was subsequently executed for treason during World War II by the French Resistance.)\nFurther Nationalist attempts after Christmas to encircle Madrid met with failure, but not without extremely violent combat. On 6 January 1937, the Th\u00e4lmann Battalion arrived at Las Rozas and held its positions until it was destroyed as a fighting force. On 9 January, only 10\u00a0km had been lost to the Nationalists, when the XIII International Brigade and XIV International Brigade and the 1st British Company, arrived in Madrid. Violent Republican assaults were launched in an attempt to retake the land, with little success. On 15 January, trenches and fortifications were built by both sides, resulting in a stalemate.\nThe Nationalists did not take Madrid until the very end of the war, in March 1939, when they marched in unopposed. There were some pockets of resistance during the subsequent months.\nBattle of Jarama.\nOn 6 February 1937, following the fall of M\u00e1laga, the nationalists launched an attack on the Madrid\u2013Andalusia road, south of Madrid. The Nationalists quickly advanced on the little town of Ciempozuelos, held by the XV International Brigade. was composed of the British Battalion (British Commonwealth and Irish), the Dimitrov Battalion (miscellaneous Balkan nationalities), the Sixth February Battalion (Belgians and French), the Canadian Mackenzie-Papineau Battalion and the Abraham Lincoln Brigade. An independent 80-men-strong (mainly) Irish unit, known afterward as the Connolly Column, also fought. Battalions were rarely composed entirely of one nationality, rather they were, for the most part, a mix of many.\nOn 11 February 1937, a Nationalist brigade launched a surprise attack on the Andr\u00e9 Marty Battalion (XIV International Brigade), killing its sentries silently and crossing the Jarama. The Garibaldi Battalion stopped the advance with heavy fire. At another point, the same tactic allowed the Nationalists to move their troops across the river. On 12 February, the British Battalion, XV International Brigade took the brunt of the attack, remaining under heavy fire for seven hours. The position became known as \"Suicide Hill\". At the end of the day, only 225 of the 600 members of the British battalion remained. One company was captured by ruse, when Nationalists advanced among their ranks singing \"The Internationale\".\nOn 17 February, the Republican Army counterattacked. On 23 and 27 February, the International Brigades were engaged, but with little success. The Lincoln Battalion was put under great pressure, with no artillery support. It suffered 120 killed and 175 wounded. Amongst the dead was the Irish poet Charles Donnelly and Leo Greene.\nThere were heavy casualties on both sides, and although \"both claimed victory ... both suffered defeats\". The battle resulted in a stalemate, with both sides digging in and creating elaborate trench systems. On 22 February 1937, the League of Nations Non-Intervention Committee ban on foreign volunteers went into effect.\nBattle of Guadalajara.\nAfter the failed assault on the Jarama, the Nationalists attempted another assault on Madrid, this time from the northeast. The objective was the town of Guadalajara, 50\u00a0km from Madrid. The whole Italian expeditionary corps\u00a0\u2014 35,000 men, with 80 battle tanks and 200 field artillery\u00a0\u2014 was deployed, as Benito Mussolini wanted the victory to be credited to Italy. On 9 March 1937, the Italians made a breach in the Republican lines but did not properly exploit the advance. However, the rest of the Nationalist army was advancing, and the situation appeared critical for the Republicans. A formation drawn from the best available units of the Republican army, including the XI and XII International Brigades, was quickly assembled.\nAt dawn on 10 March, the Nationalists closed in, and by noon, the Garibaldi Battalion counterattacked. Some confusion arose from the fact that the sides were not aware of each other's movements, and that both sides spoke Italian; this resulted in scouts from both sides exchanging information without realizing they were enemies. The Republican lines advanced and made contact with XI International Brigade. Nationalist tanks were shot at and infantry patrols came into action.\nOn 11 March, the Nationalist army broke the front of the Republican army. The Th\u00e4lmann Battalion suffered heavy losses but succeeded in holding the Trijueque\u2013Torija road. The Garibaldi also held its positions. On 12 March, Republican planes and tanks attacked. The Th\u00e4lmann Battalion attacked Trijuete in a bayonet charge and re-took the town, capturing numerous prisoners.\nOther battles.\nThe International Brigades also saw combat in the Battle of Teruel in January 1938. The 35th International Division suffered heavily in this battle from aerial bombardment as well as shortages of food, winter clothing, and ammunition. The XIV International Brigade fought in the Battle of Ebro in July 1938, the last Republican offensive of the war.\nCasualties.\nExisting primary sources provide conflicting information as to the number of brigadiers killed; a report of the IB Albacete staff from late March 1938 claimed 4,575 KIA, an internal Soviet communication to Moscow by an NKVD major Semyon Gendin from late July 1938 claimed 3,615 KIA, while the prime minister Juan Negr\u00edn in his farewell address in Barcelona of October 28, 1938, mentioned 5,000 fallen.\nAlso, in historiography there is no agreement as to fatal casualties. The highest estimate identified is 15,000 KIA. Many scholars prefer 10,000, also in recently published works. One exact figure offered is 9,934; it was calculated in the mid-1970s and is at times repeated until today. The popular Osprey series claims there were at least 7,800 killed. However, other authors provide estimates that point rather to the range from 6,100 to 6,500; one author claims 6,000. In some non-scholarly publications the number is given as 4,900 and in some older monographic accounts as 4,000. The above figures include brigadiers killed in action, these who died of wounds later or those who were executed as POWs; they include also few hundred volunteers who perished before reaching Spain. They include also brigadiers who were executed by their own side, the figure that some claim might have been 500; they also do include victims of accidents (self-shooting, traffic, drownings etc.) or these who perished due to health problems (illness, frostbite, poisoning etc.).\nThe total number of casualties is given as 48,909, 55,162 or 59,380. It includes killed, missing and wounded, though probably contains numerous duplicated/multiplicated cases, as one individual might have suffered wounds a few times; it also includes Spaniards, who at later stages formed over 50% of the IB personnel. The missing contain the category of POW; their total figure is unknown, yet estimates as to the number of \"interbrigadistas\" held prisoner in the key prison camp for foreign combatants, located in , exceed 700. A work from the mid-1970s claimed that there were 7,686 MIA (incl. POW and deserters), 29,802 lightly wounded, and 7,739 heavily wounded.\nThe ratio of KIA to all IB combatants as calculated by historians might differ even more as it depends not only on estimates as to the number of killed, but also on estimates as to the total number of volunteers. Some sources suggest the figure of 8.3%, some authors claim 15%, others opt for 16.8%, estimate 20% or 21%, prefer 24.7% or endorse the ratio of 28.6%; a single author arrived at 33% and one claims \"a half\". In comparison, in shock units used by the Nationalists, though they were not entirely comparable, the ratio was 11.3% for the Carlist requet\u00e9s and 14.6% for the Moroccan regulares. The overall percentage of killed in action in armies of both sides is estimated at some 7%.\nEstimates of KIA ratio for major national contingents differ enormously and often bear no reasonable relation to the overall KIA ratio, calculated for the Brigades. For volunteers from Latin America (mostly Cubans, Argentinians, and Mexicans) the figures range between 11% and 13%, for the French (including French-speaking Belgians and Swiss) between 12% and 18%; for the Romanians 16-18%, for the Czechs/Slovaks 17%, for the Italians between 18% and 20%; for the British between 16% and 22%; for the Americans between 13% and 32%; for the Yugoslavs between 35% and 50%, for the Canadians between 43% and 57%, for the Germans (including Austrians and German-speaking Swiss) between 22% and 60%; for the Poles (including Ukrainians, Jews, Belarusians) between 30% and 62%. Among smaller contingents, the KIA ratio calculated appears to be 10% for the Cubans, 18% for the Austrians, 21% for the Balts (Estonians, Latvians, Lithuanians), 21-25% for the Swiss, 31% for the Finns, 13%-33% for the Greeks, 23-35% for the Swedes, 40% for the Danes, and 44% for the Norwegians. In case of some minuscule national contingents, e.g. the Australians, the ratio of KIA appears to be some 21-22%.\nDisbandment.\nIn October 1938, at the height of the Battle of the Ebro, the Non-Intervention Committee demanded the withdrawal of the International Brigades. The Republican government of Juan Negr\u00edn announced the decision in the League of Nations on 21 September 1938. The disbandment was part of an ill-advised effort to get the Nationalists' foreign backers to withdraw their troops and to persuade the Western democracies such as France and Britain to end their arms embargo on the Republic.\nBy this time there were about an estimated 10,000 foreign volunteers still serving in Spain for the Republican side, and about 50,000 foreign conscripts for the Nationalists (excluding another 30,000 Moroccans). Perhaps half of the International Brigadistas were exiles or refugees from Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy or other countries, such as Hungary, which had authoritarian right-wing governments at the time. These men could not safely return home, and some were instead given honorary Spanish citizenship and integrated into Spanish units of the Popular Army. The remainder were repatriated to their own countries. The Belgian and Dutch volunteers lost their citizenship because they had served in a foreign army.\nComposition.\nOverview.\nThe first brigades were composed mostly of French, Belgian, Italian, and German volunteers, backed by a sizeable contingent of Polish miners from Northern France and Belgium. The XIth, XIIth and XIIIth were the first brigades formed. Later, the XIVth and XVth Brigades were raised, mixing experienced soldiers with new volunteers. Smaller Brigades\u00a0\u2014 the 86th, 129th and 150th \u2013 were formed in late 1937 and 1938, mostly for temporary tactical reasons.\nAbout 32,000 foreigners volunteered to defend the Spanish Republic, the vast majority of them with the International Brigades. Many were veterans of World War I. Their early engagements in 1936 during the Siege of Madrid amply demonstrated their military and propaganda value.\nThe international volunteers were mainly socialists, communists, or others willing to accept communist authority, and a high proportion were Jewish. Some were involved in the Barcelona May Days fighting against leftist opponents of the Communists: the Workers' Party of Marxist Unification (POUM) (\"Partido Obrero de Unificaci\u00f3n Marxista\", an anti-Stalinist Marxist party) and the anarchist CNT (CNT, Confederaci\u00f3n Nacional del Trabajo) and FAI (FAI, Iberian Anarchist Federation), who had strong support in Catalonia. These libertarian groups attracted fewer foreign volunteers.\nTo simplify communication, the battalions usually concentrated on people of the same nationality or language group. The battalions were often (formally, at least) named after inspirational people or events. From spring 1937 onwards, many battalions contained one Spanish volunteer company of about 150 men.\nLater in the war, military discipline tightened and learning Spanish became mandatory. By decree of 23 September 1937, the International Brigades formally became units of the Spanish Foreign Legion.&lt;ref name=\" Beevor 2006/309\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; This made them subject to the Spanish Code of Military Justice. However, the Spanish Foreign Legion itself sided with the Nationalists throughout the coup and the civil war. The same decree also specified that non-Spanish officers in the Brigades should not exceed Spanish ones by more than 50 percent. Also, the decree ruled that there must be a Spanish battalion in every international brigade, a Spanish company in every battalion, and a Spanish section in every company.\nBrigadistas by country of origin.\nThe below table reflects citizenship rather than the country of recruitment. Probably more than 50% of all volunteers were recruited in France; apart from Frenchmen, they were either economic migrants, political refugees or both. Most volunteers holding citizenship of Germany, Italy, and Eastern European countries (Poland, Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, Hungary) were recruited in Western Europe.\nStatus after the war.\nAfter the Civil War was eventually won by the Nationalists, the brigaders were initially on the \"wrong side\" of history, especially as most of their home countries had right-wing governments (in France, for instance, the Popular Front was not in power anymore). However, since most of these countries soon found themselves at war with the very powers which had been supporting the Nationalists, the brigadistas gained some prestige as the first guard of the democracies, as having foreseen the danger of fascism and gone to fight it. Some glory therefore accrued to the volunteers (a great many of the survivors also fought during World War II), but this soon faded in the fear that it would promote communism by association.\nThe highest-ranking post-war IB combatant was Ko\u010da Popovi\u0107, who briefly served as the vice-president of Yugoslavia (1966\u20131967). Two became prime ministers: Mehmet Shehu (Albania, 1954\u20131981) and Ferenc M\u00fcnnich (Hungary, 1958\u20131961), while Heinrich Rau was the chairman of DWK, sort of government of what would become East Germany (1948\u20131949). There were three deputy prime ministers: Petre Boril\u0103 (Romania, 1954\u20131965), (Poland, 1959\u20131972), and Pietro Nenni (Italy, 1963\u20131968); Rodoljub \u010colakovi\u0107 served as prime minister of Bosnia and Hercegovina, the federative component of Yugoslavia (1945-1948). In communist countries tens of ex-combatants served as ministers (e.g. Karlo Lukanov in Bulgaria, Josef Pavel in Czechoslovakia, Gheorghe Vasilichi in Romania, Ern\u0151 Ger\u0151 in Hungary, Maks Ba\u0107e in Yugoslavia), or held other key state jobs, especially in the army and security (e.g. Erich Mielke in East Germany). In the West the only person holding a ministerial job identified was Nenni, though Lou Lichtveld was minister in the Dutch-dependent Surinam. In the West few became senators, like (Italy, 1948\u20131958) and Raymond Guyeot (France, 1959\u20131977), and a handful served as members of lower houses in their national parliaments, especially in France (e.g. in 1945-1955) and Italy (e.g. in 1948-1958); however, the highest-ranking combatant in national legislative was Ferdinand Kozovski, the longtime chairman of the National Assembly of Bulgaria (1949\u20131965). Beyond the official state structures single individuals grew to high political positions: in the mid-1970s Jack Jones as General Secretary of General Workers Union was considered the most powerful person in Britain.\nCanada.\nSurvivors of the Mackenzie-Papineau Battalion were often investigated by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) and denied employment when they returned to Canada. Many \"Mac-Pap\" veterans volunteered to fight in World War II, but some were rejected as \"politically unreliable\" due to their communist backgrounds.\nIn 1995, a monument to Canadian soldiers in the Spanish Civil War was built near Ontario's provincial parliament. On 12 February 2000, a bronze statue, \"The Spirit of the Republic\" by sculptor Jack Harman, based on a poster from the Spanish Republic, was placed on the grounds of the British Columbia Legislature. In 2001, the few surviving Canadian veterans of the Spanish Civil War dedicated a monument in Ottawa's Green Island Park to their country's International Brigaders.\nEast Germany.\nProbably in no country of the world did the International Brigades combatants enjoy the prestige comparable to that bestowed on them in East Germany. Though after 1945, they were celebrated in all communist states as freedom fighters against fascism, their position was secondary and the official narrative centred upon other threads, e.g. the in Poland, the Slovak National Uprising in Czechoslovakia, or the partisan quasi-state in Yugoslavia. No such narrative was available in the case of East Germany, whose \u201ccommunist government found itself without historical roots beyond the Soviet occupation of Eastern Europe and turned the heroism of the Spanish Civil War fighters into the myth that became a central focus of the German Democratic Republic\u201d. Factional purges of the early 1950s affected German veterans (e.g. the cases of Franz Dahlem or Wilhelm Zaisser) far less than e.g. in Czechoslovakia, though some \u201cBrigaders faced an uncertain existence as they navigated the tortuous political hairpin curves of life under Stalinism and the continual and often critical need for political realignment\u201d. No deviation from official line was allowed; the portrait of IB as in \"For Whom the Bell Tolls\" was considered unacceptable and the novel remained black-listed until the late 1960. \nLike in other communist countries, the IB veterans \u2013 usually referred to as \"Spanienk\u00e4mpfer\" \u2013 were overrepresented in power structures. They took three of the most important military posts: Heinz Hoffmann as commander of Nationale Volksarmee, Erich Mielke as head of Ministry for Security, and Friedrich Dickel as Minister of Interior. Many held other key posts in army and security, e.g. was Deputy Minister of the Interior while Ewald Munschke became chief of administration in NVA. There were 10 former interbrigadistas who entered the Political Bureau of Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschlands, some briefly (e.g. Anton Ackermann, Dahlem or Zaisser) and some for decades (e.g. Paul Verner, Kurt Hager and Alfred Neumann). Numerous ex-combatants assumed high positions in media. The list of veterans who \u201crose to the highest ranks in the East German government runs into hundreds\u201d.\nGerman participation in the International Brigades remained the ideological historiographic backbone of DDR until its collapse. East Germany itself officially acknowledged that \u201cthe German-speaking units of the International Brigades represented the nucleus of the armed forces of the future GDR\u201d. Books by Ludwig Renn became standard works and at times obligatory reading. Numerous streets, schools, bridges, factories and troop units were named after the \"Spanienk\u00e4mpfer\"; in 1968 they were dedicated a monument, unveiled in East Berlin. Attempts to challenge the propagandistic use of German IB history, like the 1979 novel \"Collin\" by Stefan Heym, remained isolated episodes with no major impact. The 1986 fiftieth anniversary of the outbreak of the war saw another outpouring of adulation, even though over time the volunteers \u201cbecame cardboard figures which mirrored the ossification of the State itself\u201d. However, only a few days before the fall of the Berlin Wall, on November 5, 1989, Walter Janka appeared at a public reading of his memoirs to an overflow crowd at the Deutsches Theater. The event was broadcast live on radio and shown later on television.\nCzechoslovakia.\nMost Czechoslovak volunteers remained in France, either in internment camps or where they had been recruited earlier; in 1939-40 many got enlisted in troops, raised by the exile Czechoslovak government. Later their fate differed: some served in Czechoslovak units raised in Britain, some were members of French resistance, some returned home, and some ended up in concentration camps.\nIn re-born Czechoslovakia, the Interbrigadistas, known as \"\u0161pan\u011bl\u00e1ci\", were granted ex-combatant rights. They were overrepresented in KS\u010c-controlled power structures (army, public order, security, intelligence). Some of them \u2013 like Pavel \u2013 were instrumental when carrying out the coup of February 1948. The \"Security Five\", key men controlling security institutions \u2013 was composed of former IB volunteers: Pavel, , Hrom\u00e1dko, Vale\u0161 and . Some rose to deputy ministers (London and in foreign affairs, in information and Kriegel in health).\nAt the turn of the decades a drastic wave of political purges heavily affected the former Interbrigadistas. Almost all lost their posts and many underwent brutal interrogation; died in prison. In the early 1950s there was a show-trial planned, intended to denounce \u201cInternational Brigades as a Trotskyist-Titoist gang\u201d, though eventually most prison sentences were delivered during small-scale trials. In 1952 Otto \u0160ling was executed as an enemy spy.\nFollowing another political change in 1956 those still behind bars were set free and gradually re-admitted to public administration. The 1960s was the golden era for Czechoslovak IB combatants, hailed as the first ones who confronted Fascism. Some (Holdo\u0161, Kriegel, Falbra) took advantage of their linguistic skills and were despatched as advisors to Castro's Cuba. Politically the Czechoslovak Interbrigadistas tended to support the reformist wing of KS\u010c. Few rose to top positions, e.g. in 1968 Kriegel became chairman of the National Front, and Pavel assumed the ministry of interior.\nThe invasion of 1968 marked another downturn; most of these at high positions were dismissed, though there was no wave of heavy repression. Some resigned (Pavel, Holdo\u0161), few left for exile (Hrom\u00e1dko) and some were involved in dissident movement (Kriegel). After 1989 there was some confusion in both Czechia and Slovakia as to how the IB veterans should be approached, though the controversy was not comparable to the similar one in Poland; eventually the image which seems to prevail is this of anti-fascist combatants. In 2016 the Czech minister of defense awarded commemorative medals to last living Interbrigadistas. A 2021 monograph presents the \"\u0161pan\u011bl\u00e1ci\" in balanced, but somewhat sympathetic terms.\nPoland.\nIn line with the 1920 legislation, Polish citizens who volunteered to the IB were automatically stripped of citizenship as individuals who without formal approval served in foreign armed forces. Following republican defeat the combatants recruited in France and Belgium returned there. Among the others some served in pro-Communist partisan units in the German-occupied Poland, while some made it to the USSR and served in the pro-Communist Polish army raised there.\nIn the Communist Poland the IB combatants \u2013 referred to as \"D\u0105browszczacy\" - were granted veteran rights and formed an own ex-combatant organisation, later to be amalgamanted into a general one. There were some 750-800 of them registered. In the early post-war period they enjoyed some official exaltation; the group was supported by Karol \u015awierczewski, in Spain a career Soviet commander who during few strings commanded IB units. Some assumed high positions in administration, but they were heavily overrepresented in power structures (army, security); some departments became their fiefdoms, like counter-intelligence branch of the army. During purges of the early 1950s there were also cases of deposition, arrest and prison on trumped-up charges of political conspiracy; these were released in the mid-1950s.\nThough from the onset Polish engagement in IB was hailed as \"working class taking to arms against Fascism\", the most intense idolization took place between the mid-1950s and the mid-1960s, with a spate of publications, schools and streets named after \"D\u0105browszczacy\". However, an antisemitic turn in the late 1960s again produced de-emphasizing of IB volunteers, many of whom left Poland. Until the end of Communist rule the IB episode was duly acknowledged, but propaganda related was a far cry from veneration reserved for wartime Communist partisans or the USSR-raised Polish army. Despite some efforts on part of IB combatants, no monument has been erected. Unlike in East Germany, except no-one made it to the very top strata of the Communist elite (member of Political Bureau of PZPR, minister). Unlike in Czechoslovakia or Yugoslavia, no IB combatant became a recognizable figure of political opposition, though some deviated somewhat from the official party line and numerous potential dissidents left the country during anti-semitic purges in 1968-1969.\nAfter 1989 it was unclear whether \"D\u0105browszczacy\" were furtherly entitled to veteran privileges; the issue generated political debates until they became pointless, as almost all IB combatants had died. Another question was about homage references, existent in public space. A state-run institution IPN declared Polish IB combatants in service of the Stalinist regime and related homage references subject to de-communisation legislation. However, efficiency of purges of public space differs depending upon local political configuration and occasionally there is heated public debate ensuing; in some cases there was conflict between regional and municipal authorities, one trying to overrule another. Until today the role of Polish IB combatants remains a highly divisive topic; for some they are traitors and for some they are heroes. In post-Communist Poland they gained few scientific articles, yet no larger scientific monograph on \"D\u0105browszczacy\" has been published.\nRomania.\n Petre Boril\u0103, highest-ranking IB combatant\nSome 300 Romanian volunteers, mostly stripped of citizenship, survived the Spanish war, and around 110 made it to the post-1944 Romania. Many were key to stabilisation of the regime. Some (, Boril\u0103, ) manned key positions in Tudor Vladimirescu Division, key to Communist takeover; others (Coloman, , C\u00e2mpeanu) headed 3 regional branches of DGSP, while Roman served as the Chief of Staff. The wave of purges starting the late 1940s was relatively mild; by default interbrigadistas appeared before party investigative commissions; some were posted to second-rate positions, yet cases of arrest were few. The most dramatic was this of Stelian Mircea; until 1954 he spent years in labor camps. Most returned to positions of power, though not at the previous level. At the turn of the 50/60s factionalist struggle in produced new purges (Botnar, Doncea, Tism\u0103neanu). In the mid-1960s most highly-positioned interbrigadistas adopted well to emergence of Ceau\u0219escu, even though some (Boril\u0103) \u2013 were increasingly at odds with his new, \"national\" line, and few remained monitored by Securitate. In the 1970s most IB men retired, and few retained ceremonial positions in the 1980s.\nThe two interbrigadistas who made it to Politbureau were Vasilichi and Boril\u0103, though around 10 more entered the party Central Committee. In the government, Boril\u0103 served as deputy PM and ministerial posts were held by Vasilichi (education, mines and oil), Roman (telecoms), (chemical industry, oil industry), and Doncea (harvest). Roman was Chief of Staff while Burc\u0103 headed key departments in Interior. Stoica served as secretary to praesidium of Great National Assembly and held other apparently technical jobs, yet in the late 40s he was feared as \u201eviceregele Rom\u00e2niei\u201d. Two more individuals were notorious otherwise: Tism\u0103neanu emerged as key ideologue, dubbed \"apostle of Stalin\", while Gheza Vida was famous as a sculptor, author of monumental constructions.\nIB combatants have not been much celebrated in propaganda, though the episode of Romanian volunteers was duly acknowledged, usually in anniversary press articles or when receiving honors and nominations. The veteran\u2019s organisation AFVRdARS published a short-lived bulletin. The collective name \"spanioli\" was barely in circulation and until the end of the Gheorghiu-Dej era no related works have been published. In 1966 a monographic issue of a historiographic periodical went out, 1971 saw appearance of a book with articles and documents and in 1972 Roman was permitted to print his memoirs. Some fallen individuals (C\u0103lin, Ro\u015fu, F\u0103clie) got streets named after them. Almost all interbrigadistas received generous pensions, though few remained beyond the privildged circle.\nAfter 1989 the issue of \"spanioli\" barely generated public interest. If lambasted in the media, it is because of their role after 1944 rather than because of their Spanish engagements, which even in virulenty hostile press articles are referred to as \"fighting Fascism\". Streets have not been re-named. In 2008 the memoirs of Iancu went to print, and the 2011 scientific work on Romania and the Spanish Civil War by Pa\u015fcal\u0103u contained a chapter on the interbrigadistas. In 2013 Mihai Burcea, at the time a PhD researcher, started publishing first articles. His monographic 2017 dissertation was commercially released as a 700-page book in 2024; it is formatted as an academic study and mostly refrains from advancing a partisan perpective. Few other scientific articles have been published.\nYugoslavia.\nThough the law passed in 1937 stripped volunteers of citizenship, some 350 ex-combatants made it to Yugoslavia; most engaged in Communist-led resistance. Unlike in anti-Nazi movements of other East European countries, Yugoslav interbrigadiers played a major role, e.g. in Croatian general staff of the National Liberation Army 3 key positions were held by ex-combatants: commander (Ivan Rukavina), political commissar (Marko Ore\u0161kovi\u0107) and operations officer (). Tito specifically issued orders for so-called \"\u0160panci\" to assume command or otherwise important roles. Three individuals (Peko Dap\u010devi\u0107, Kosta Na\u0111 and Petar Drap\u0161in) were commanding army-size groupings. Around 30 were later promoted to the rank of a general, 59 became People's Heroes, and 130 were killed.\nIn the post-war Yugoslavia IB combatants were overrepresented in power structures; and Maks Ba\u0107e were instrumental in setting up OZNA, while Ko\u010da Popovi\u0107 and Dap\u010devi\u0107 were chiefs of general staff. Like elsewhere in the communist bloc, some fell victim to the Tito-Stalin split, but here it was the Stalinists who were repressed; some 35 got imprisoned, though no-one was executed. Later a few (less than in East Germany, but more than in Poland) entered executive of the state party, and 20 entered the Central Committee. Popovi\u0107 briefly served as vice-president of Yugoslavia (1966-67) and a handful were ministers (Popovi\u0107 at foreign affairs, Ivan Go\u0161njak at defence, Rodoljub \u010colakovi\u0107 in education). The dictator himself was related to the IB, as in 1936-37 Tito was heavily involved in organising recruitment to the Brigades.\nThere were at least 400 members in the Yugoslav IB ex-combatant organization. It remained a highly prestigious group and in 1972 the parliament granted them extra rights. Some scholars claim that the organisation enjoyed limited political power. \"\u0160panci\" remained celebrated, though usually combined with their role in resistance. First numerous biographies have been published and then broader massive works followed. No Spain-dedicated film has been made, but a \"\u0160panac\", battle-hardened combatant in partisan units, was frequent in movies about the resistance. Apart from monuments to partisan commanders with earlier IB record, a monument dedicated specifically to IB combatants was unveiled in 1976 in Rijeka. Numerous schools, streets and institutions were named after \"na\u0161i \u0160panci\". Despite some controversy in 1984, in 1986 massive commemorative events were organized across the country. Few brigadiers became political dissidents, though most remained faithful to the party line.\nIn all successor states the same pattern is at work as to heritage of IB volunteers. The memory debate has largely bypassed them due to the predominance of the Second World War on the mnemonic battlefield. However, for the Left they remain anti-fascist freedom fighters, while the Right relates brigadiers to post-war crimes such as the Bleiburg massacre. The Rijeka monument has been dismantled; monuments to other IB combatants (and resistance figures) suffered different fate, some removed, some re-located to less prestigious spots, and some renovated, yet the purges are interpreted as \"part of the general nationalization of public space in the successor states\" rather than a specific anti-IB or de-communisation project. Author of recent mononograph refers to \"forgotten history of Yugoslav volunteers\"; his perspective is that memory of the combatants is equal to cultivating \"antifascist values necessary to foster an open and tolerant society in the twenty-first century\".\nSwitzerland.\nIn Switzerland, public sympathy was high for the Republican cause, but the federal government banned all fundraising and recruiting activities a month after the start of the war as part of the country's long-standing policy of neutrality. Around 800 Swiss volunteers joined the International Brigades, among them a small number of women. Sixty percent of Swiss volunteers identified as communists, while the others included socialists, anarchists and antifascists.\nSome 170 Swiss volunteers were killed in the war. The survivors were tried by military courts upon their return to Switzerland for violating the criminal prohibition on foreign military service. The courts pronounced 420 sentences which ranged from around 2 weeks to 4 years in prison, and often also stripped the convicts of their political rights for the period of up to 5 years. In the Swiss society, traditionally highly appreciative of civic virtues, this translated to longtime stigmatization also after the penalty period expired. In the judgment of Swiss historian Mauro Cerutti, volunteers were punished more harshly in Switzerland than in any other democratic country.\nMotions to pardon the Swiss brigaders on the account that they fought for a just cause have been repeatedly introduced in the Swiss federal parliament. A first such proposal was defeated in 1939 on neutrality grounds. In 2002, Parliament again rejected a pardon of the Swiss war volunteers, with a majority arguing that they broke a law that remains in effect to this day. In March 2009, Parliament adopted the third bill of pardon, retroactively rehabilitating Swiss brigades, only a handful of whom were still alive.\nIn 2000, there was a monument honoring Swiss IB combatants unveiled in Geneva; there are also numerous plaques mounted elsewhere, e.g., at the Volkshaus in Z\u00fcrich. Since 2003 there is \"Place des Brigades-internationales\" in La Chaux-de-Fonds. No Swiss IB ex-combatants became widely known personalities, though in the late 20th century some acquired certain public recognition; these were the cases of Ernst Stauffer (local civil servant and author of memoirs) and (author and activist for rehabilitation). IG Spanienfreiwillige, an organisation set up to cultivate the memory of Swiss volunteers, built up a database of around 800 individuals, more than a half of them listed with some biographical details.\nUnited Kingdom.\nOn disbandment, 305 British volunteers left Spain to return home. They arrived at Victoria Station in central London on 7 December and were met warmly as returning heroes by a crowd of supporters including Clement Attlee, Stafford Cripps, Willie Gallacher, Ellen Wilkinson and Will Lawther.\nThe last surviving British member of the International Brigades, Geoffrey Servante, died in April 2019 aged 99.\nIBMT.\nThe International Brigade Memorial Trust is a registered charity that handles activities around the memory of volunteers from Britain and Ireland. The group maintains a map of memorials to volunteers in the Spanish Civil War and organises yearly events to commemorate the war.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the returned volunteers were labeled \"premature anti-fascists\" by the FBI, denied promotion during service in the U.S. military during World War II, and pursued by Congressional committees during the Red Scare of 1947\u20131957. However, threats of loss of citizenship were not carried out.\nRecognition.\nJosep Almud\u00e9ver, believed to be the last surviving veteran of the International Brigades, died on 23 May 2021 at the age of 101. Although born into a Spanish family and living in Spain at the outbreak of the conflict, he also held French citizenship and enlisted in the International Brigades to avoid age restrictions in the Spanish Republican army. He served in the CXXIX International Brigade and later fought in the Spanish Maquis, and after the war lived in exile in France.\nSpain.\nOn 26 January 1996, the Spanish government gave Spanish citizenship to the 600 or so remaining Brigadistas, fulfilling a promise made by Prime Minister Juan Negr\u00edn in 1938.\nFrance.\nIn 1996, Jacques Chirac, then French President, granted the former French members of the International Brigades the legal status of former service personnel (\"ancient combatants\") following the request of two French communist Members of Parliament, Lefort and Asensi, both children of volunteers. Before 1996, the same request was turned down several times including by Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, the former Socialist President.\nSymbolism and heraldry.\nThe International Brigades were inheritors of a socialist aesthetic. The flags featured the colors of the Spanish Republic: red, yellow and purple, often along with socialist symbols (red flags, hammer and sickle, fist). The emblem of the brigades themselves was the three-pointed red star, which is often featured.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15370", "revid": "28422", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15370", "title": "International Business Machines Corporation", "text": ""}
{"id": "15371", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15371", "title": "Interpreted Language", "text": ""}
{"id": "15373", "revid": "49487726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15373", "title": "Iron Duke", "text": "Iron Duke may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "15374", "revid": "15951685", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15374", "title": "Food irradiation", "text": "Sterilization of food with ionizing radiations for enhanced preservation and longer shelflife\nFood irradiation (sometimes American English: radurization; British English: radurisation) is the process of exposing food and food packaging to ionizing radiation, such as from gamma rays, x-rays, or electron beams. Food irradiation improves food safety and extends product shelf life (preservation) by effectively destroying organisms responsible for spoilage and foodborne illness, inhibits sprouting or ripening, and is a means of controlling insects and invasive pests.\nIn the United States, consumer perception of foods treated with irradiation is more negative than those processed by other means. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the World Health Organization (WHO), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) have performed studies that confirm irradiation to be safe. In order for a food to be irradiated in the U.S., the FDA will still require that the specific food be thoroughly tested for irradiation safety.\nFood irradiation is permitted in over 60 countries, and about 500,000 metric tons of food are processed annually worldwide. The regulations for how food is to be irradiated, as well as the foods allowed to be irradiated, vary greatly from country to country. In Austria, Germany, and many other countries of the European Union only dried herbs, spices, and seasonings can be processed with irradiation and only at a specific dose, while in Brazil all foods are allowed at any dose.\nUses.\nIrradiation is used to reduce or eliminate pests and the risk of food-borne illnesses as well as prevent or slow spoilage and plant maturation or sprouting. Depending on the dose, some or all of the organisms, microorganisms, bacteria, and viruses present are destroyed, slowed, or rendered incapable of reproduction. When targeting bacteria, most foods are irradiated to significantly reduce the number of active microbes, not to sterilize all microbes in the product. Irradiation cannot return spoiled or over-ripe food to a fresh state. If this food was processed by irradiation, further spoilage would cease and ripening would slow, yet the irradiation would not destroy the toxins or repair the texture, color, or taste of the food.\nIrradiation slows the speed at which enzymes change the food. By reducing or removing spoilage organisms and slowing ripening and sprouting (e.g. potato, onion, and garlic) irradiation is used to reduce the amount of food that goes bad between harvest and final use. Shelf-stable products are created by irradiating foods in sealed packages, as irradiation reduces chance of spoilage, the packaging prevents re-contamination of the final product. Foods that can tolerate the higher doses of radiation required to do so can be sterilized. This is useful for people at high risk of infection in hospitals as well as situations where proper food storage is not feasible, such as rations for astronauts.\nPests such as insects have been transported to new habitats through the trade in fresh produce and significantly affected agricultural production and the environment once they established themselves. To reduce this threat and enable trade across quarantine boundaries, food is irradiated using a technique called phytosanitary irradiation. Phytosanitary irradiation sterilizes the pests preventing breeding by treating the produce with low doses of irradiation (less than 1000 Gy). The higher doses required to destroy pests are not used due to either affecting the look or taste, or cannot be tolerated by fresh produce.\nProcess.\nThe target material is exposed an external source of radiation. The radiation source supplies energetic particles or electromagnetic waves. These particles or waves collide with material in the target. The higher the likelihood of these collisions over a distance are, the lower the penetration depth of the irradiation process is as the energy is more quickly depleted.\nThese collisions break chemical bonds, creating short lived radicals (e.g. the hydroxyl radical, the hydrogen atom and solvated electrons). These radicals cause further chemical changes by bonding with and or stripping particles from nearby molecules. When collisions occur in cells, cell division is often suppressed, halting or slowing the processes that cause the food to mature.\nWhen the process damages DNA or RNA, effective reproduction becomes unlikely halting the population growth of viruses and organisms. The distribution of the dose of radiation varies from the food surface and the interior as it is absorbed as it moves through food and depends on the energy and density of the food and the type of radiation used.\nBetter quality.\nIrradiation leaves a product with qualities (sensory and chemical) that are more similar to unprocessed food than any preservation method that can achieve a similar degree of preservation.\nNot radioactive.\nIrradiated food does not become radioactive; only particle energies that are incapable of causing significant induced radioactivity are used for food irradiation. In the United States this limit is 4 mega electron volts (MEV) for electron beams and x-ray sources\u2014cobalt-60 or caesium-137 sources are never energetic enough to induce radioactivity. Particles below this energy can never be energetic enough to modify the nucleus of the targeted atom in the food, regardless of how many particles hit the target material, and so radioactivity can not be induced.\nDosimetry.\nThe radiation absorbed dose is the amount energy absorbed per unit weight of the target material. Dose is used because, when the same substance is given the same dose, similar changes are observed in the target material(Gy or J/kg). Dosimeters are used to measure dose, and are small components that, when exposed to ionizing radiation, change measurable physical attributes to a degree that can be correlated to the dose received. Measuring dose (dosimetry) involves exposing one or more dosimeters along with the target material.\nFor purposes of legislation doses are divided into low (up to 1 kGy), medium (1 kGy to 10 kGy), and high-dose applications (above 10 kGy). High-dose applications are above those currently permitted in the US for commercial food items by the FDA and other regulators around the world, though these doses are approved for non commercial applications, such as sterilizing frozen meat for NASA astronauts (doses of 44 kGy) and food for hospital patients.\nThe ratio of the maximum dose permitted at the outer edge (Dmax) to the minimum limit to achieve processing conditions (Dmin) determines the uniformity of dose distribution. This ratio determines how uniform the irradiation process is.\nChemical changes.\nAs ionising radiation passes through food, it creates a trail of chemical transformations due to radiolysis effects. Irradiation does not make foods radioactive, change food chemistry, compromise nutrient contents, or change the taste, texture, or appearance of food.\nFood quality.\nDecontamination of food by ionizing radiation is a safe and efficient process for elimination of pathogenic bacteria. Ionizing radiation treatment can be applied to either raw materials or ready to eat foods, with some countries, like the United States, imposing limitations on its use. \nAssessed rigorously over several decades, irradiation in commercial amounts to treat food has no negative impact on the sensory qualities and nutrient content of foods.\nResearch on minimally processed vegetables.\nWatercress (\"Nasturtium officinale\") is a rapidly growing aquatic or semi aquatic perennial plant. Because chemical agents do not provide efficient microbial reductions, watercress has been tested with gamma irradiation treatment in order to improve both safety and the shelf life of the product. It is traditionally used on horticultural products to prevent sprouting and post-packaging contamination, delay post-harvest ripening, maturation and senescence.\nPublic perceptions.\nSome who advocate against food irradiation argue the long-term health effects and safety of irradiated food cannot be scientifically proven, however there have been hundreds of animal feeding studies of irradiated food performed since 1950. Endpoints include subchronic and chronic changes in metabolism, histopathology, function of most organs, reproductive effects, growth, teratogenicity, and mutagenicity.\nIndustrial process.\nUp to the point where the food is processed by irradiation, the food is processed in the same way as all other food.\nPackaging.\nFor some forms of treatment, packaging is used to ensure the food stuffs never come in contact with radioactive substances and prevent re-contamination of the final product. Food processors and manufacturers today struggle with using affordable, efficient packaging materials for irradiation-based processing. The implementation of irradiation on prepackaged foods has been found to impact foods by inducing specific chemical alterations to the food packaging material that migrates into the food. Cross-linking in various plastics can lead to physical and chemical modifications that can increase the overall molecular weight. On the other hand, chain scission is fragmentation of polymer chains that leads to a molecular mass reduction.\nTreatment.\nTo treat the food, it is exposed to a radioactive source for a set period of time to achieve a desired dose. Radiation may be emitted by a radioactive substance, or by X-ray and electron beam accelerators. Special precautions are taken to ensure the food stuffs never come in contact with the radioactive substances and that the personnel and the environment are protected from radiation exposure.\nIrradiation treatments are typically classified by dose (high, medium, and low), but are sometimes classified by the effects of the treatment (radappertisation, radicidation and radurisation). Food irradiation is sometimes referred to as \"cold pasteurisation\" or \"electronic pasteurisation\" because ionising the food does not heat it to high temperatures during the process, and the effect is similar to pasteurisation. The term \"cold pasteurisation\" is controversial because the term may be used to disguise the fact the food has been irradiated and pasteurisation and irradiation are fundamentally different processes.\nGamma irradiation.\nGamma irradiation is produced from the radioisotopes cobalt-60 and caesium-137, which are produced by neutron irradiation of cobalt-59 (the only stable isotope of cobalt) and as a nuclear fission product, respectively. Cobalt-60 is the most common source of gamma rays for food irradiation in commercial scale facilities as it is water-insoluble and hence has little risk of environmental contamination by leakage into the water systems. As for transportation of the radiation source, cobalt-60 is transported in special trucks that prevent release of radiation and meet standards mentioned in the Regulations for Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials of the International Atomic Energy Act. The special trucks must meet high safety standards and pass extensive tests to be approved to ship radiation sources. Conversely, caesium-137 is water-soluble and poses a risk of environmental contamination. Insufficient quantities are available for large-scale commercial use as the vast majority of Caesium-137 produced in nuclear reactors is not extracted from spent nuclear fuel. An incident where water-soluble caesium-137 leaked into the source storage pool requiring NRC intervention has led to near elimination of this radioisotope.\nGamma irradiation is widely used due to its high penetration depth and dose uniformity, allowing for large-scale applications with high throughput. Additionally, gamma irradiation is significantly less expensive than using an X-ray source. In most designs, the radioisotope, contained in stainless steel pencils, is stored in a water-filled storage pool which absorbs the radiation energy when not in use. For treatment, the source is lifted out of the storage tank, and product contained in totes is passed around the pencils to achieve required processing.\nTreatment costs vary as a function of dose and facility usage. A pallet or tote is typically exposed for several minutes to hours depending on dose. Low-dose applications such as disinfestation of fruit range between US$0.01/lb and US$0.08/lb while higher-dose applications can cost as much as US$0.20/lb.\nElectron beam.\nTreatment of electron beams is created as a result of high energy electrons in an accelerator that generates electrons accelerated to 99% the speed of light. This system uses electrical energy and can be powered on and off. The high power correlates with a higher throughput and lower unit cost, but electron beams have low dose uniformity and a penetration depth of centimeters. Therefore, electron beam treatment works for products that have low thickness.\nX-ray.\nX-rays are produced by bombardment of dense target material with high-energy accelerated electrons (this process is known as bremsstrahlung-conversion), giving rise to a continuous energy spectrum. Heavy metals, such as tantalum and tungsten, are used because of their high atomic numbers and high melting temperatures. Tantalum is usually preferred over tungsten for industrial, large-area, high-power targets because it is more workable than the latter and has a higher threshold energy for induced reactions. Like electron beams, X-rays do not require the use of radioactive materials and can be turned off when not in use. X-rays have high penetration depths and high dose uniformity but they are a very expensive source of irradiation as only 8% of the incident energy is converted into X-rays.\nUV-C.\nUV-C does not penetrate as deeply as other methods. As such, its direct antimicrobial effect is limited to the surface only. Its DNA damage effect produces cyclobutane-type pyrimidine dimers. Besides the direct effects, UV-C also induces resistance even against pathogens not yet inoculated. Some of this induced resistance is understood, being the result of temporary inactivation of self-degradation enzymes like polygalacturonase and increased expression of enzymes associated with cell wall repair.\nCost.\nIrradiation is a capital-intensive technology requiring a substantial initial investment, ranging from $1\u00a0million to $5\u00a0million. In the case of large research or contract irradiation facilities, major capital costs include a radiation source, hardware (irradiator, totes and conveyors, control systems, and other auxiliary equipment), land (1 to 1.5\u00a0acres), radiation shield, and warehouse. Operating costs include salaries (for fixed and variable labor), utilities, maintenance, taxes/insurance, cobalt-60 replenishment, general utilities, and miscellaneous operating costs. Perishable food items, like fruits, vegetables and meats would still require to be handled in the cold chain, so all other supply chain costs remain the same. Food manufacturers have not embraced food irradiation because the market does not support the increased price of irradiated foods, and because of potential consumer backlash due to irradiated foods.\nThe cost of food irradiation is influenced by dose requirements, the food's tolerance of radiation, handling conditions, i.e., packaging and stacking requirements, construction costs, financing arrangements, and other variables particular to the situation.\nState of the industry.\nIrradiation has been approved by many countries. For example, in the U.S. and Canada, food irradiation has existed for decades. Food irradiation is used commercially and volumes are in general increasing at a slow rate, even in the European Union where all member countries allow the irradiation of dried herbs spices and vegetable seasonings, but only a few allow other foods to be sold as irradiated.\nAlthough there are some consumers who choose not to purchase irradiated food, a sufficient market has existed for retailers to have continuously stocked irradiated products for years. When labelled irradiated food is offered for retail sale, consumers buy and re-purchase it, indicating a market for irradiated foods, although there is a continuing need for consumer education.\nFood scientists have concluded that any fresh or frozen food undergoing irradiation at specified doses is safe to consume, with some 60 countries using irradiation to maintain quality in their food supply.\nRadurisation risks.\nThe following risks can be mentioned:\nStandards and regulations.\nThe Codex Alimentarius represents the global standard for irradiation of food, in particular under the WTO-agreement. Regardless of treatment source, all processing facilities must adhere to safety standards set by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Codex Code of Practice for the Radiation Processing of Food, Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), and the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). More specifically, ISO 14470 and ISO 9001 provide in-depth information regarding safety in irradiation facilities.\nAll commercial irradiation facilities contain safety systems which are designed to prevent exposure of personnel to radiation. The radiation source is constantly shielded by water, concrete, or metal. Irradiation facilities are designed with overlapping layers of protection, interlocks, and safeguards to prevent accidental radiation exposure. Meltdowns are unlikely to occur due to low heat production from sources used.\nLabeling.\nThe provisions of the Codex Alimentarius are that any \"first generation\" product must be labeled \"irradiated\" as any product derived directly from an irradiated raw material; for ingredients the provision is that even the last molecule of an irradiated ingredient must be listed with the ingredients even in cases where the unirradiated ingredient does not appear on the label. The RADURA-logo is optional; several countries use a graphical version that differs from the Codex-version. The suggested rules for labeling is published at CODEX-STAN\u00a0\u2013 1 (2005), and includes the usage of the Radura symbol for all products that contain irradiated foods. The Radura symbol is not a designator of quality. The amount of pathogens remaining is based upon dose and the original content and the dose applied can vary on a product by product basis.\nThe European Union follows the Codex's provision to label irradiated ingredients down to the last molecule of irradiated food. The European Union does not provide for the use of the Radura logo and relies exclusively on labeling by the appropriate phrases in the respective languages of the Member States. The European Union enforces its irradiation labeling laws by requiring its member countries to perform tests on a cross section of food items in the market-place and to report to the European Commission. The results are published annually on EUR-Lex.\nThe US defines irradiated foods as foods in which the irradiation causes a material change in the food, or a material change in the consequences that may result from the use of the food. Therefore, food that is processed as an ingredient by a restaurant or food processor is exempt from the labeling requirement in the US. All irradiated foods must include a prominent Radura symbol followed in addition to the statement \"treated with irradiation\" or \"treated by irradiation. Bulk foods must be individually labeled with the symbol and statement or, alternatively, the Radura and statement should be located next to the sale container.\nPackaging.\nUnder section 409 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, irradiation of prepackaged foods requires premarket approval for not only the irradiation source for a specific food but also for the food packaging material. Approved packaging materials include various plastic films, yet does not cover a variety of polymers and adhesive based materials that have been found to meet specific standards. The lack of packaging material approval limits manufacturers production and expansion of irradiated prepackaged foods.\nApproved materials by FDA for Irradiation according to 21 CFR 179.45:\nFood safety.\nIn 2003, the Codex Alimentarius removed any upper dose limit for food irradiation as well as clearances for specific foods, declaring that all are safe to irradiate. Countries such as Pakistan and Brazil have adopted the Codex without any reservation or restriction.\nStandards that describe calibration and operation for radiation dosimetry, as well as procedures to relate the measured dose to the effects achieved and to report and document such results, are maintained by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM international) and are also available as ISO/ASTM standards.\nAll of the rules involved in processing food are applied to all foods before they are irradiated.\nUnited States.\nThe U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is the agency responsible for regulation of radiation sources in the United States. Irradiation, as defined by the FDA is a \"food additive\" as opposed to a food process and therefore falls under the food additive regulations. Each food approved for irradiation has specific guidelines in terms of minimum and maximum dosage as determined safe by the FDA. Packaging materials containing the food processed by irradiation must also undergo approval. The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) amends these rules for use with meat, poultry, and fresh fruit.\nThe United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) has approved the use of low-level irradiation as an alternative treatment to pesticides for fruits and vegetables that are considered hosts to a number of insect pests, including fruit flies and seed weevils. Under bilateral agreements that allows less-developed countries to earn income through food exports agreements are made to allow them to irradiate fruits and vegetables at low doses to kill insects, so that the food can avoid quarantine.\nThe U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the U.S. Department of Agriculture have approved irradiation of the following foods and purposes:\nEuropean Union.\nEuropean law stipulates that all member countries must allow the sale of irradiated dried aromatic herbs, spices and vegetable seasonings. However, these Directives allow Member States to maintain previous clearances food categories the EC's Scientific Committee on Food (SCF) had previously approved (the approval body is now the European Food Safety Authority). Presently, Belgium, Czech Republic, France, Italy, Netherlands, and Poland allow the sale of many different types of irradiated foods. Before individual items in an approved class can be added to the approved list, studies into the toxicology of each of such food and for each of the proposed dose ranges are requested. It also states that irradiation shall not be used \"as a substitute for hygiene or health practices or good manufacturing or agricultural practice\". These Directives only control food irradiation for food retail and their conditions and controls are not applicable to the irradiation of food for patients requiring sterile diets. In 2021 the most common food items irradiated were frog legs at 65.1%, poultry 20.6% and dried aromatic herbs, spices and vegetables seasoning.\nDue to the European Single Market, any food, even if irradiated, must be allowed to be marketed in any other member state even if a general ban of food irradiation prevails, under the condition that the food has been irradiated legally in the state of origin.\nFurthermore, imports into the EC are possible from third countries if the irradiation facility had been inspected and approved by the EC and the treatment is legal within the EC or some Member state.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, following cat deaths after irradiated cat food consumption and producer's voluntary recall, cat food irradiation was banned.\nNuclear safety and security.\nInterlocks and safeguards are mandated to minimize this risk. There have been radiation-related accidents, deaths, and injury at such facilities, many of them caused by operators overriding the safety related interlocks. In a radiation processing facility, radiation specific concerns are supervised by special authorities, while \"Ordinary\" occupational safety regulations are handled much like other businesses.\nThe safety of irradiation facilities is regulated by the United Nations International Atomic Energy Agency and monitored by the different national Nuclear Regulatory Commissions. The regulators enforce a safety culture that mandates that all incidents that occur are documented and thoroughly analyzed to determine the cause and improvement potential. Such incidents are studied by personnel at multiple facilities, and improvements are mandated to retrofit existing facilities and future design.\nIn the US the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) regulates the safety of the processing facility, and the United States Department of Transportation (DOT) regulates the safe transport of the radioactive sources.\nOrigin of the word \"Radurisation\".\nThe word \"radurisation\" is derived from radura, combining the initial letters of the word \"radiation\" with the stem of \"durus\", the Latin word for hard, lasting.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15376", "revid": "33343951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15376", "title": "Islas Malvinas", "text": ""}
{"id": "15377", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15377", "title": "Isotopic Tracer", "text": ""}
{"id": "15378", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15378", "title": "Copper IUD", "text": "Birth control and emergency contraceptive device\nA copper intrauterine device (IUD), also known as an intrauterine coil, copper coil, or non-hormonal IUD, is a form of long-acting reversible contraception and one of the most effective forms of birth control available. It can also be used for emergency contraception within five days of unprotected sex. The device is placed in the uterus and lasts up to twelve years, depending on the amount of copper present in the device. It may be used for contraception regardless of age or previous pregnancy, and may be placed immediately after a vaginal delivery, cesarean delivery, or surgical abortion. Following its removal, fertility quickly returns.\nCommon side effects include heavy menstrual periods and increased menstrual cramps (dysmenorrhea). Rarely, the device may come out or perforate the uterine wall.\nThe copper IUD was initially developed in Germany in the early 1900s, but came into widespread medical use in the 1970s. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines.\nMedical uses.\nCopper IUDs are a form of long-acting reversible contraception and are one of the most effective forms of birth control available. The type of frame and amount of copper in the device can affect the effectiveness of different copper IUD models.\nThe copper IUD is effective as contraception as soon as it is inserted, and loses efficacy when removed or if it becomes malpositioned. The effectiveness of the copper IUD (failure rate of 0.8%) is comparable to tubal sterilization (failure rate of 0.5%) for the first year. The failure rates for different models vary between 0.1 and 2.2% after one year of use. The T-shaped models with a surface area of 380\u00a0mm2 of copper have the lowest failure rates. The TCu380A (Paragard) has a one-year failure rate of 0.8% and a cumulative 12-year failure rate of 2.2%. Over 12 years of use, the models with less surface area of copper have higher failure rates. The TCu220A has a 12-year failure rate of 5.8%. The frameless GyneFix has a failure rate of less than 1% per year. A 2008 review of the available T-shaped copper IUDs recommended that the TCu380A and the TCu280S be used as the first choice for copper IUDs because those two models have the lowest failure rates and the longest lifespans. Worldwide, older IUD models with lower effectiveness rates are no longer produced.\nThough only approved by regulatory agencies for a maximum of 12 years, some devices may be effective with continuous use for up to 20 years.\nBecause it does not contain hormones, the copper IUD does not disrupt the timing of an individual's menstrual cycle, nor does it prevent ovulation.\nEmergency contraception.\nIt was first discovered in 1976 that the copper IUD could be used as a form of emergency contraception (EC). The copper IUD is the most effective form of emergency contraception, more effective than oral hormonal emergency contraception, including mifepristone, ulipristal acetate, and levonorgestrel. Efficacy is not affected by user weight. The pregnancy rate among those using the copper IUD for emergency contraception is 0.09%. It can be used for emergency contraception up to five days after unprotected sex, and does not decrease in effectiveness during the five days. An additional advantage of using the copper IUD for emergency contraception is that it can then be used as a form of birth control for 10\u201312 years after insertion.\nRemoval and return to fertility.\nRemoval of the copper IUD should be performed by a qualified medical practitioner. Fertility has been shown to return to previous levels quickly after removal of the device.\nSide effects and complications.\nComplications.\nThe most common complications related to the copper IUD are expulsion, perforation, and infection. Infertility after discontinuation and difficulty breastfeeding during use are not associated with the copper IUD.\nExpulsion rates can range from 2.2% to 11.4% of users from the first year to the 10th year. The TCu380A may have lower rates of expulsion than other models, and the frameless copper IUD has a similar rate of expulsion to models with frames. Expulsion is more likely with immediate or early postpartum or post-abortal placement. In the postpartum period, expulsion is less likely when the device is placed less than tenminutes after the placenta is delivered, or when inserted after a cesarean delivery. Unusual vaginal discharge, cramping or pain, spotting between periods, postcoital (after sex) spotting, pain during intercourse (dyspareunia), or the absence or lengthening of the strings can be signs of a possible expulsion. As with intentional removal, the device is immediately ineffective after expulsion. If an IUD with copper is inserted after an expulsion has occurred, the risk of re-expulsion has been estimated in one study to be approximately one third of cases after one year. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may cause dislocation of a copper IUD, and it is therefore recommended to check the location of the IUD both before and after MRI.\nPerforation of the device through the uterine wall typically occurs at the time of placement, though it may occur spontaneously during the period of use. Estimates of the rate of perforation vary from 1.1 per 1000 to 1 per 3000 copper IUD insertions. Perforation may be slightly more common in people using the copper IUD while breastfeeding.\nDue to its inflammatory mechanism of action, a copper IUD that has completely perforated typically requires surgical removal due to the formation of dense adhesions around the device. A device embedded in the uterine wall may be removed hysteroscopically or surgically.\nThe insertion of a copper IUD poses a transient risk of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) for 21days, though this is almost always in the setting of undiagnosed gonorrhea or chlamydia infection at the time of insertion. This occurs in less than 1 in 100 insertions. Beyond this time frame there is no increased risk of PID associated with copper IUD use. Postpartum insertion of a copper IUD is not associated with increased risk of infection, provided that the delivery was not complicated by an infection such as chorioamnionitis.\nDuring removal, the device may break, which can cause uterine wall perforation and potentially lead to more severe complications, including infertility. In rare cases, the IUD may be unintentionally expelled from the uterus, for example due to physical trauma such as a car accident.\nSide effects.\nThe most common side effects reported with use of the copper IUD are increased menstrual bleeding and menstrual cramps, both of which may remit after 3\u20136 months of use. Less frequently, intermenstrual bleeding may occur, especially in the first 3\u20136 months of use. The increase in menstrual blood volume varies in different studies but is reported to be as low as 20% and as high as 55%; however, there is no evidence for a concomitant change in ferritin, hemoglobin, or hematocrit.\nMenorrhagia (increased menstrual bleeding) and dysmenorrhea (painful menstrual bleeding) are typically treated with NSAID medications including naproxen, ibuprofen, and mefenamic acid.\nContraceptive failure.\nThe absolute risk of ectopic pregnancy with copper IUD use is lower than with no contraception because it works primarily by prevention conception. The copper inhibits sperm migration and viability, which prevents fertilisation. However, when pregnancy does occur with a copper IUD in place, a higher percentage of those pregnancies are ectopic, from 3% to 6%, a two to sixfold increase. This corresponds to an absolute rate of ectopic pregnancy in copper IUD users of 0.2\u20130.4 per 1000 person-years, compared to 3 per 1000 person-years in the population using no contraception.\nIf a pregnancy continues with the IUD in place, there is an increased risk of complications including preterm delivery, chorioamnionitis, and spontaneous abortion. If the IUD is removed, these risks are lower, especially the risks of bleeding and miscarriage; the rate of miscarriage approaches that of the general population depending on study population.\nOverall failure rates with the copper IUD are low, and are mainly dependent on the surface area of copper in the device. After 12 years of continuous use, the TCu380A device has a cumulative pregnancy rate of 1.7%. The TCu 380A is more effective than the MLCu375, MLCu350, TCu220, and TCu200. The TCu 380S is more effective than the TCu 380A. The frameless device has similar failure rates to conventional devices.\nContraindications.\nThe copper IUD is considered safe and effective during lactation and in those who have never been pregnant. In the World Health Organization (WHO) \"Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use\", category 3 contraindications (risk typically outweighs benefit) and category 4 contraindications (unacceptable health risk) are listed for the copper IUD. Category 3 contraindications include untreated HIV/AIDS, recent and recurrent exposure to gonorrhea or chlamydia without adequate treatment, benign gestational trophoblastic disease, and ovarian cancer. Category 4 contraindications besides pregnancy and active genital tract infections (e.g. pelvic tuberculosis, sexually transmitted infections, endometritis) include malignant gestational trophoblastic disease, abnormal uterine bleeding, active cervical cancer, Wilson's disease, and active endometrial cancer. HIV infection is not itself a contraindication, as long as it is treated. There are no known drug interactions between the copper IUD and anti-retroviral medications.\nDevice description.\nThere are various of models of copper IUDs available around the world. Most copper devices consist of a plastic (polyethylene) core that is wrapped in a copper wire. Many of the devices have a T-shape similar to the hormonal IUD. However, there are \"frameless\" copper IUDs available as well, the most popular of which is marketed as GyneFix. Early copper IUDs had copper around only the vertical stem, but more recent models have copper sleeves wrapped around the horizontal arms as well, increasing copper surface area and thereby effectiveness.\nInsertion.\nA copper IUD can be inserted at any phase of the menstrual cycle, as long as pregnancy can be reliably excluded. It may be inserted in the immediate postpartum period (shortly after delivery of the placenta), and after an induced medical, surgical, or spontaneous abortion provided a genital tract infection can be reliably excluded. NSAIDs taken prior to the procedure and use of local anesthesia are recommended to reduce pain at the time of insertion.\nFrameless IUDs.\nThe frameless IUD eliminates the use of the frame that gives conventional IUDs their signature T-shape. This change in design was made to reduce discomfort and expulsion risk associated with prior IUDs; without a solid frame, the frameless IUD should mold to the shape of the uterus. It may reduce expulsion and discontinuation rates compared to framed copper IUDs.\nGynefix is the only frameless IUD brand currently available. It consists of hollow copper tubes on a polypropylene thread. It is inserted through the cervix with a special applicator that anchors the thread to the fundus (top) of the uterus; the thread is then cut with a tail hanging outside of the cervix, similar to framed IUDs, or looped back into the cervical canal for patient comfort. When this tail is pulled, the anchor is released and the device can be removed. This requires more force than removing a T-shaped IUD, but results in comparable discomfort at the time of removal.\nMechanism of action.\nThe copper IUD's primary mechanism of action is to prevent fertilization. Copper causes a localized inflammatory response, which is spermicidal and causes the endometrium to be inhospitable.\nSpermatozoa entering the uterine cavity and cervical mucus are consumed by local phagocytes, and are also directly killed by copper ions and lysosome contents. Presence of copper ions disrupts sperm motility, rendering fertilization improbable.\nAlthough not a primary mechanism of action, copper may disrupt embryonic implantation, especially when used for emergency contraception. However, if implantation occurs, there is no evidence that copper affects subsequent development of a pregnancy or causes embryonic failure. Therefore, the copper IUD is considered to be a true contraceptive and not an abortifacient.\nUsage.\nGlobally, the IUD is the most widely used method of reversible birth control. As of 2020[ [update]], 161million people used IUDs worldwide (including both non-hormonal and hormonal IUDs). As of 2020[ [update]], IUDs were the most popular method of contraception in fourteen countries, mostly in Central and East Asia.\nIn Europe, as of 2006[ [update]], copper IUD prevalence ranged from under 5% in the United Kingdom, Germany, and Austria to over 10% in Denmark and the Baltic States.\nHistory.\nPrecursors to IUDs were first reported in the early 1900s. Developed from stem or wishbone pessaries, which were made of firm rubber or metal and had an anchor in the cervix, the stem on these devices extended into the uterine cavity. They were associated with high rates of genital tract infection, especially gonorrhea, and were not widely adopted.\nThe first intrauterine device to be contained entirely within the uterus was described in a German publication in 1909 by Richard Richter, who reported a ring-shaped device made of silk sutures with two ends protruding from the external os of the cervix for removal. A similar design was reported by Karl Pust, who wound the free ends of the suture tightly and attached them to a glass disc, which covered the external os. Ersatz versions were made using silk suture wrapped into a ring and embedded in a gelatin capsule, which was inserted into the uterus, where the gelatin dissolved.\nIn 1929, Ernst Gr\u00e4fenberg of Germany published a report on an IUD made of silk sutures (Gr\u00e4fenberg's ring), initially with a small amount of silver wire attached for visualization on x-ray, and then completely covered in silver wire. Because the silver was absorbed systemically and deposited in other tissues, causing a discoloration known as argyria, the device was then recreated with an alloy of copper, nickel, and zinc (then called German silver, also known as nickel silver). It was widely used in the UK and the Commonwealth, but discouraged from use in the US and Europe due to the perceived risk of infection, cancer, and inefficacy.\nIn 1934, Japanese physician Tenrei \u014cta developed a variation of Gr\u00e4fenberg's ring that contained a supportive structure in the center. The addition of this central disc lowered the IUD's expulsion rate and increased the surface area. Though his research was hampered by the fascist government's stance against contraception and his need to spend time in hiding, after World War II he returned to the development of IUDs. Gold and silver, which had been used by Gr\u00e4fenberg, were in very short supply in post-war Japan, which led \u014cta to other metals, silk, and nylon. By the end of the 1950s, there were 32 different frame shapes used in Japan, and larger studies showed no connection between these devices and development of endometrial cancer, which had been a theoretical concern due to the inflammatory properties of metals in the uterus. \u014cta's devices were used in Japan until the 1980s.\nThe first plastic device was developed by Lazar Margulies and first trialed in 1959; it was made of a polyethylene ring filled with a radiopaque solution. The appearance gave rise to the colloquial term \"coil\", which persists despite the change in appearance of modern IUDs. Due to its size (6\u00a0mm), the cervix had to be dilated prior to insertion, it was poorly tolerated, and the device was prone to expulsion. Margulies modified it to add a beaded tail in 1962.\nThe Lippes Loop, a slightly smaller plastic device with a monofilament tail, was introduced in 1962 and gained in popularity over the Margulies device.\nStainless steel was introduced as an alternative to the copper-nickel-zinc alloy in the 1960s and 70s, and was subsequently widely used in China because of low manufacturing costs. The Chinese government banned production of steel IUDs in 1993 due to high failure rates (up to 10% per year).\nAmerican obstetrician Howard Tatum conceived the plastic T-shaped IUD in 1967, but its high failure rate (approximately 18%) made it nonviable. Shortly thereafter Jaime Zipper, a Chilean doctor, discovered that the nickel silver alloy had spermicidal properties due to its copper percentage, and added a copper sheath to the plastic T, bringing the failure rate to approximately 1%. It was found that copper-containing devices could be made in smaller sizes without compromising effectiveness, resulting in fewer side effects such as pain and bleeding. T-shaped devices had lower rates of expulsion due to their greater similarity to the shape of the uterus.\nTatum developed many different models of the copper IUD. He created the TCu220C, which had copper collars as opposed to a copper filament, which prevented metal loss and increased the lifespan of the device. Second generation copper-T IUDs were also introduced in the 1970s. These devices had higher surface areas of copper, and for the first time consistently achieved effectiveness rates of greater than 99%. The final model developed by Tatum, the TCu380A, was approved by the US FDA in 1984 and is the most recommended model today.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15379", "revid": "407763", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15379", "title": "Isle Royale National Park", "text": "National park on Isle Royale, Michigan, US\nIsle Royale National Park is a national park of the United States consisting of Isle Royale, along with more than 400 small adjacent islands and the surrounding waters of Lake Superior, in Michigan.\nIsle Royale is long and wide, with an area of , making it the fifth-largest lake island in the world. In addition, it is the largest natural island in Lake Superior, the second-largest island in the Great Lakes (after Manitoulin Island), the third-largest in the contiguous United States (after Long Island and Padre Island), and the 33rd-largest island in the United States.\nIsle Royale National Park was established on April 3, 1940, then additionally protected from development by wilderness area designation in 1976, declared a UNESCO International Biosphere Reserve in 1980, and added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2019 as the Minong Traditional Cultural Property. The park covers , with of land and of surrounding waters.\nThe park's northern boundary lies adjacent to the Canadian Lake Superior National Marine Conservation Area along the international border. With 25,894 visits in 2021, it is the seventh least-visited National Park in the United States.\nGeography.\nIn 1875, Isle Royale was split off from Keweenaw County, as a separate county, Isle Royale County. In 1897, the county was dissolved, and the island was reincorporated into Keweenaw County. The highest point on the island is Mount Desor at , or about above lake level.\nIsle Royale, the largest island in Lake Superior, is over in length and wide at its widest point. The park is made up of Isle Royale itself and approximately 400 smaller islands, along with any submerged lands within of the surrounding islands (https://).\nIsle Royale is within about of the shore of the Canadian province of Ontario (near the city of Thunder Bay) and adjacently, the state of Minnesota (near Grand Portage in Cook County), and is from the Michigan shore, on the Keweenaw Peninsula, itself part of Upper Peninsula. There are no roads on the island, and wheeled vehicles or devices, other than wheelchairs, are not permitted. Rock Harbor has wheeled carts available to move personal belongings from the Rock Harbor marina to the cabins and hotel. Also, the National Park Service employs tractors and utility terrain vehicles to move items around the developed areas at Ozaagaateng, Rock Harbor, and Mott Island.\nTopsoil tends to be thin, which favors trees that have horizontal root patterns such as balsam fir, white spruce, and black spruce.\nInterior lakes.\nSiskiwit Lake is the largest lake on the island. It has cold, clear water which is relatively low in nutrients. Siskiwit Lake contains several islands, including Ryan Island, the largest. Other lakes include:\nClimate.\nAccording to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system, Isle Royale National Park has a mild summer Humid continental climate (\"Dfb\"). According to the United States Department of Agriculture, the Plant Hardiness zone is 4b at 1178\u00a0ft (359 m) elevation with an average annual extreme minimum temperature of -24.2\u00a0\u00b0F (-31.2\u00a0\u00b0C).\nThere is no weather station in the park, but the PRISM Climate Group, a project of Oregon State University, provides interpolated data for the island based on the climates of nearby areas.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe island was a common hunting ground for native people from nearby Minnesota and Ontario. A canoe voyage of thirteen miles is necessary to reach the island's west end from the mainland.\nLarge quantities of copper artifacts found in indian mounds and settlements, some dating back to 3000 B.C., were most likely mined on Isle Royale and the nearby Keweenaw Peninsula. The island has hundreds of pits and trenches up to 65 feet (20 m) deep from these indigenous peoples, with most in the McCargoe Cove area. Carbon-14 testing of wood remains found in sockets of copper artifacts indicates that they are at least 6500 years old.In \"Prehistoric Copper Mining in the Lake Superior Region\", Drier and Du Temple estimated that over 750,000 tons of copper had been mined from the region. However, David Johnson and Susan Martin contend that their estimate was based on exaggerated and inaccurate assumptions. The Jesuit missionary Dablon published an account in 1669\u201370 of \"an island called \"Menong\", celebrated for its copper.\" \"Menong\", or \"Minong\", was the native term for the island, and is the basis for Minong Ridge. Prospecting began in earnest when the Chippewas relinquished their claims to the island in 1843, starting with many of the original native pits. This activity had ended by 1855, when no economic deposits were found. The Minong Mine and Island Mine were the result of renewed but short-lived activity from 1873 to 1881.\nIsle Royale was given to the United States by the 1783 treaty with Great Britain (formerly part of the Indian Reserve disputed by the United States) but the British remained in control until after the War of 1812, and the Ojibwa peoples considered the island to be their territory. \u00a0The Ojibwas ceded the island to the U.S. in the 1842 Treaty of La Pointe, with the Grand Portage Band unaware that neither they nor Isle Royale were in British territory. With the clarification to the Ojibwas of the 1842 Webster\u2013Ashburton Treaty that was signed before the Treaty of La Pointe, the Ojibwas re-affirmed the 1842 Treaty of La Pointe in the 1844 Isle Royale Agreement, with the Grand Portage Band signing the agreement as an addendum to the 1842 treaty.\nIn the mid-1840s, a report by Douglass Houghton, Michigan's first state geologist, set off a copper boom in the state, and the first modern copper mines were opened on the island. Evidence of the earlier mining efforts was everywhere, in the form of many stone hammers, some copper artifacts, and places where copper had been partially worked out of the rock but left in place. The ancient pits and trenches led to the discovery of many of the copper deposits that were mined in the 19th century. The remoteness of the island, combined with the small veins of copper, caused most of the 19th-century mines to fail quickly. Between the miners and commercial loggers, much of the island was deforested during the late 19th century. Once the island became a national park in 1940, logging and other exploitive activities ended, and the forest began to regenerate.\nThe island was once the site of several lake trout and whitefish fisheries, as well as a few resorts. The fishing industry has declined considerably, but continues at Edisen Fishery. Today, it has no permanent inhabitants; the small communities of Scandinavian fishermen were removed by the United States National Park Service after the island became a national park in the 1940s. About 12 families still have lifetime leases for their cabins and claim Isle Royale as their heritage, and several descendant fishermen fish the Isle Royale waters commercially.\nBecause numerous small islands surround Isle Royale, ships were once guided through the area by lighthouses at Passage Island, Rock Harbor, Rock of Ages, and Isle Royale Lighthouse on Menagerie Island. The western tip of the island is home to several shipwrecks that are very popular with scuba divers, including the SS \"America\". The NPS Submerged Resources Center mapped the 10 most famous of the shipwrecks contained within the park, and published \"Shipwrecks of Isle Royale National Park; The Archeological Survey\", which gives an overview of the maritime history of the area. The area's notoriously harsh weather, dramatic underwater topography, the island's central location on historic shipping routes, and the cold, fresh water have resulted in largely intact, well preserved wrecks throughout the park.\nIn January 2019, the entire island chain was added to the National Register of Historic Places by the federal government. On the Register it is called 'the Minong Traditional Cultural Property.'\nAngelique Mott.\nIn 1845, an Ojibwe woman named Angelique and her voyageur husband Charles Mott were left on Isle Royale, as hires for Cyrus Mendenhall and the Lake Superior Copper Company. They were hired and carried to Isle Royale by Mendenhall's schooner, the \"Algonquin\", first to scout for copper. Angelique found a large mass of copper ore. She and her husband were hired to stay and guard it until a barge could come to retrieve it, promised in no more than 3 months' time. They were dropped off in July and were left stranded there until the following spring. They were left with minimal provisions, which consisted of a half-barrel of flour, six pounds of butter, and some beans. A supply boat was promised to arrive after the first few weeks, but it was never sent out.\nThe full events were chronicled in a footnote as told by Angelique, in the first printing of a book called \"The Honorable Peter White\" by Ralph D. Williams in 1907; Angelique's story was pulled from the subsequent printing, thus making it the only written record that survives. Humans have not normally settled year-round on Isle Royale. For about three thousand years, Native Americans used the land for copper and fish. These Native Americans usually limited their visits to the island in the summer. Americans in the nineteenth century did likewise.\nNatural history.\nA number of habitats exist on the island, the primary being boreal forest, similar to neighboring Ontario and Minnesota. Upland areas along some of the ridges are effectively \"balds\" with exposed bedrock and a few scrubby trees, blueberry bushes, and hardy grasses. Occasional marshes exist, which are typically the by-product of beaver activities. There are also several lakes, often with wooded or marshy shores. The climate, especially in lowland areas, is heavily influenced by the cold waters of Lake Superior.\nFlora.\nAccording to the A. W. Kuchler U.S. Potential natural vegetation Types, Isle Royale National Park has a Great Lakes Spruce/Fir (\"93\") potential vegetation type and a Northern Conifer Forest (\"22\") potential vegetation form.\nThe predominant floral habitats of Isle Royale are within the Laurentian Mixed Forest Province. The area is a temperate broadleaf and mixed forests biome transition zone between the true boreal forest to the north and Big Woods to the south, with characteristics of each. It has areas of both broadleaf and conifer forest cover, and bodies of water ranging from conifer bogs to swamps.\nConifers include jack pines (\"Pinus banksiana\"), black and white spruces (\"Picea mariana\" and \"Picea glauca\"), balsam firs (\"Abies balsamea\"), and eastern redcedars (\"Juniperus virginiana\").\nDeciduous trees include quaking aspens (\"Populus tremuloides\"), red oaks (\"Quercus rubra\"), paper birches (\"Betula papyrifera\"), American mountain ash (\"Sorbus americana\"), red maples (\"Acer rubrum\"), sugar maples (\"Acer saccharum\"), and mountain maples (\"Acer spicatum\"). There are over 600 species of flowering plants found in Isle Royale National Park such as wild sarsaparilla, marsh-marigold, wood lily and prickly wild rose.\nFauna.\nIsle Royale National Park is known for its timber wolf and moose populations, which are studied by scientists investigating predator-prey relationships in a closed environment. There is a cyclical relationship between the two animals: as the moose increase in population, so do the wolves. Eventually, the wolves kill too many moose and begin to starve and lower their reproductive rates. This is made easier because Isle Royale has been colonized by roughly just one third of the mainland mammal species, because it is so remote. In addition, the environment is unique in that it is the only known place where wolves and moose coexist without the presence of bears.\nOther common mammals are red foxes, beavers, and red squirrels. Some foxes are accustomed to human contact and can be seen prowling the campgrounds at dawn, looking for stray scraps left by unwary campers. For its part, the wolf is an elusive species which avoids human interaction. Few documented cases of direct wolf/human contact existed for most of the island's history. In the 2024 season dozens of wolf sightings were reported around the Rock Harbor area. Ermine have been periodically sighted around docks. Other mammals that can be seen include mink along the various lake shores and muskrats (occasionally) at beaver ponds. Several species of bat also exist on the island. Reptiles include the eastern garter snake, painted turtle, and northern redbelly snake. Six species of frogs and three species of salamander also live on the island.\nHistorically neither moose nor wolves inhabited Isle Royale. Just prior to becoming a national park the large mammals on Isle Royale were Canada lynx and the boreal woodland caribou. Archeological evidence indicates both of these species were present on Isle Royale for 3,500 years prior to being removed by direct human actions (hunting, trapping, mining, logging, fires, competition for resources from exotic species and possibly disease due to the introduction of invasive species). The last caribou documented on Isle Royale was in 1925. Though lynx were removed by the 1930s, some have periodically crossed the ice bridge from neighboring Ontario, Canada, the most recent being an individual sighting in 1980. Although lynx are no longer present on\nthe island, their primary prey, snowshoe hares, remain. Before the appearance of wolves, coyotes were also predators on the island. Coyotes appeared around 1905 and disappeared shortly after wolves arrived in the 1950s. Four wolves were brought from Minnesota in 2018 after some debate as to whether or not the introduction was an unnatural intervention.\nMoose are believed to have colonized Isle Royale sometime between 1905 and 1912. It was initially believed that a small herd of moose (moose typically do not travel in herds) colonized the islands by crossing the ice from the adjacent mainland; later this theory was modified to a herd of moose swimming 20 miles across Lake Superior from the nearest mainland. The improbability of these theories received little scrutiny until recent years. Although no thorough scientific investigation to determine how moose arrived on Isle Royale has been carried out to date, both cultural and genetic evidence indicates they were likely introduced by humans to create a private hunting preserve in the early 1900s. The cultural evidence that moose were trapped in northwestern Minnesota and transported to Isle Royale seemed unlikely until decades later when genetic evidence revealed the moose on Isle Royale were more closely related to moose in the far northwestern Minnesota/Manitoba border area than the mainland adjacent to Isle Royale in far northeastern Minnesota bordering Ontario. Further evidence has also shown that the Washington Harbor Club, a group of well-to-do businessmen, owned various buildings on Isle Royale in addition to railroads that ran from Baudette to Duluth and Two Harbors and so had the means to transport moose from northwestern Minnesota to Two Harbors.\nThere are usually around 25 wolves and 1000 moose on the island, but the numbers change greatly year to year. In the 2006\u20132007 winter, a survey found 385 moose and 21 wolves in 3 packs. In spring 2008, 23 wolves and approximately 650 moose were counted. However, recent reductions in winter pack ice had ended replenishment of the wolf population from the mainland. Due to genetic inbreeding, the wolf population had declined to two individuals in 2016, causing researchers to expect that the island's wolf population would eventually become extinct. At the same time, the island's moose population had exploded to an estimated 1600. By November 2017, the wolf population was down to one, a female.\nIn December 2016, the National Park Service put forward an initial plan to bring additional wolves to the island in order to prevent the pack from disappearing completely. The decision to relocate 20\u201330 wolves to the island was approved and from September 2018 to September 2019, 19 wolves were relocated to Isle Royale from various locations in Minnesota, Michigan, and Ontario. As of April 14, 2020, there were an estimated 14 wolves remaining on the island.\nGeology.\nThe island is composed largely of ridges, running roughly southwest-to-northeast. The main ridge, Greenstone Ridge, is over in many places. Greenstone belts are exposed, with rounded stones of chlorastrolite, also known as greenstone, near and in the lake.\nThe two main rock assemblages found on the island include the Portage Lake Volcanics and the Copper Harbor Conglomerate, both Precambrian in age. The volcanics are mainly ophitic flood basalts, some 100 individual flows over an accumulated thickness of at least 10,000 feet. The conglomerate outcrops on the southwestern portion of the island and consists of sedimentary rock derived from volcanic rocks in present-day Minnesota. Glacial erosion accentuated the ridge and valley topography from pre-glacial stream erosion. Glacial striations indicate a generally westward movement of the glaciers as do the recessional moraines west of Lake Desor. Drumlins are found west of Siskiwit Lake.\nRecent analyses by the USGS of both unmineralized basalt and copper-mineralized rock show that a small amount of naturally occurring mercury is associated with mineralization.\nNative copper and chlorastrolite, the official state gem of Michigan, are secondary minerals filling pore spaces formed by vesicles and fractures within the volcanic rocks. Prehnite and agate amygdules are also plentiful island gemstones.\nRecreation.\nRecreational activity on Isle Royale includes hiking, backpacking, fishing, boating, canoeing, kayaking, and observing nature. Wheeled vehicles are not permitted on Isle Royale; though, wheelchairs are allowed.\nHiking.\nThe island offers approximately of hiking trails for everything from day hikes to a two-week circumnavigation hike. Some of the hiking trails are quite challenging, with steep grades. The Greenstone Ridge is a high ridge in the center of the island and carries the longest trail in the park, the Greenstone Ridge Trail, which runs from one end of the island to the other. This is generally done as a 4 or 5 day hike. A boat shuttle can carry hikers back to their starting point. The trail leads to the peak of Mount Desor, at , the highest point on the island, and passes through northwoods wilderness, and by inland glacial lakes, swamps, bogs and scenic shorelines.\nIn total there are of hiking trails. There are also canoe/kayak routes, many involving portages, along coastal bays and inland lakes.\nServices.\nThe park has two developed areas:\nOzaagaateng (formerly Windigo), at the southwest end of the island (docking site for the ferries from Minnesota), with a campstore, showers, campsites, rustic camper cabins, and a boat dock.\nRock Harbor on the south side of the northeast end (docking site for the ferries from Michigan), with a campstore, showers, restaurant, lodge, campsites, and a boat dock. Non-camping sleeping accommodations at the park are limited to the lodge at Rock Harbor and the camper cabins at Ozaagaateng.\nCamping.\nThe park has 36 designated wilderness campgrounds. Some campgrounds in the interior are accessible only by trail or by canoe/kayak on the island lakes. Other campgrounds are accessible only by private boat. The campsites vary in capacity but typically include a few three-sided wood shelters (the fourth wall is screened) with floors and roofs, and several individual sites suitable for pitching a small tent. Some tent sites with space for groups of up to 10 are available, and are used for overflow if all the individual sites are filled.\nThe only amenities at the campgrounds are pit toilets, picnic tables, and fire-rings at specific areas. Campfires are not permitted at most campgrounds; gas or alcohol camp stoves are recommended. Drinking and cooking water must be drawn from local water sources (Lake Superior and inland lakes) and filtered, treated, or boiled to avoid parasites. Hunting is not permitted, but fishing is, and edible berries (blueberries, thimbleberries) may be picked from the trail.\nAccess.\nThe park is accessible by ferries, floatplanes, and passenger ships during the summer months\u2014from Houghton and Copper Harbor in Michigan and Grand Portage in Minnesota. Private boats travel to the island from the coasts of Michigan, Minnesota, and Ontario. Isle Royale is quite popular with day-trippers in private boats, and day-trip ferry service is provided from Copper Harbor and Grand Portage to and from the park.\nIsle Royale is the only American national park to entirely close in the winter months, from November 1 through April 15, due to extreme weather conditions and for the safety and protection of visitors. Isle Royale is the least-visited national park in the contiguous United States, due to the winter closing and the distance across Lake Superior to reach the park. The average annual visitation was about 19,000 in the period from 2009 to 2018, with 25,798 visiting in 2018. Only three of the most remote Alaskan national parks\u2014Lake Clark, Kobuk Valley and Gates of the Arctic\u2014receive fewer visitors.\nShips.\nScheduled ferry service operates from Grand Portage, Copper Harbor and Houghton.\nThe Grand Portage ferries reach the island in 1\u00bd hours, and stay 4 hours at the island, allowing time for hiking, a guided hike or program by the park staff, and picnics.\nThe \"Isle Royale Queen\" serves park visitors out of Copper Harbor, on the northern Upper Peninsula coast of Michigan. It arrives at Rock Harbor in the park in 3 to 3\u00bd hours and spends 3\u00bd hours before returning to Copper Harbor.\nThe \"Sea Hunter\" operates round-trips and offers day trips to the Ozaagaateng visitor center through much of the season, and less frequently in early summer and autumn; it will transport kayaks and canoes for visitors wanting to explore the park from the water. It is the fastest ferry serving the island and arrives in 1\u00bd hours, including some sightseeing points along the way out and back. Because of the relatively short boat ride, day visitors are able to get four hours on the island, and get back to the mainland earlier in the afternoon. This gives visitors on a tight schedule time to visit the Grand Portage National Monument or other attractions in the same day.\nThe \"Ranger III\" is a ship that serves park visitors from Houghton, Michigan to Rock Harbor. It is operated by the National Park Service, and is said to be the largest piece of equipment in the National Park system. It carries 125 passengers, along with canoes, kayaks, and even small powerboats. It is a six-hour voyage from Houghton to the park. The ship stays overnight at Rock Harbor before returning the next day, making two round trips each week from June to mid-September. Briefly in the 2008 season, the Ranger III carried visitors to and from Ozaagaateng. This was not continued after four trips, due to low interest and long crossing times. In 2012, Park Superintendent Phyllis Green required the \"Ranger III\" to purify its ballast water.\nThe \"Voyageur II\", out of Grand Portage, crosses up to three times a week, overnighting at Rock Harbor and providing transportation between popular lakeside campgrounds. In the fall season, in addition to carrying campers and hikers, it provides day-trip service to Ozaagaateng on weekends. The Voyageur transports kayaks and canoes for visitors wanting to explore the island from the water. The \"Voyageur II\" and other boat taxi services ferry hikers to points along the island, allowing a one-way hike back to Rock Harbor or Ozaagaateng. Visitors may land at Rock Harbor and depart from Ozaagaateng several days later, or vice versa. Hikers frequently ride it in one direction to do a cross-island hike and then get picked up at the other end.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15380", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15380", "title": "INADS", "text": ""}
{"id": "15381", "revid": "271068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15381", "title": "NATO Integrated Air Defense System", "text": "NATO Air defence radar network\nThe NATO Integrated Air Defense System (short: NATINADS) is a command and control network combining radars and other facilities spread throughout the NATO alliance's air defence forces. It formed in the mid-1950s and became operational in 1962 as NADGE. It has been constantly upgraded since its formation, notably with the integration of Airborne Early Warning aircraft in the 1970s. The United Kingdom maintained its own network, but was fully integrated with the network since the introduction of the Linesman/Mediator network in the 1970s. Similarly, the German network maintained an independent nature through GEADGE.\nDevelopment.\nDevelopment was approved by the NATO Military Committee in December 1955. The system was to be based on four air defense regions (ADRs) coordinated by SACEUR (Supreme Allied Commander Europe). Starting from 1956 early warning coverage was extended across Western Europe using 18 radar stations. This part of the system was completed by 1962. Linked to existing national radar sites, the coordinated system was called the NATO Air Defence Ground Environment (NADGE).\nFrom 1960 NATO countries agreed to place all their air defence forces under the command of SACEUR in the event of war. These forces included command &amp; control (C2) systems, radar installations, and Surface-to-Air (SAM) missile units as well as interceptor aircraft.\nBy 1972 NADGE was converted into NATINADS consisting of 84 radar sites and associated Control Reporting Centers (CRC) and in the 1980s the Airborne Early Warning / Ground Environment Integration Segment (AEGIS) upgraded the NATINADS with the possibility to integrate the AWACS radar picture and all of its information into its visual displays. (NOTE: This AEGIS is not to be confused with the U.S.Navy AEGIS, a shipboard fire control radar and weapons system.) AEGIS processed the information through Hughes H5118ME computers, which replaced the H3118M computers installed at NADGE sites in the late 1960s and early 1970s.\nNATINADS ability to handle data increased with faster clock rates. The H5118M computer had a staggering 1 megabyte of memory and could handle 1.2 million instructions per second while the former model had a memory of only 256 kilobytes and a clock speed of 150,000 instructions per seconds.\nNATINADS/AEGIS were complemented, in West Germany by the German Air Defence Ground Environment (GEADGE), an updated radar network adding the southern part of Germany to the European system and Coastal Radar Integration System (CRIS), adding data links from Danish coastal radars.\nIn order to counter the hardware obsolescence, during the mid-1990s NATO started the AEGIS Site Emulator (ASE) program allowing the NATINADS/AEGIS sites to replace the proprietary hardware (the 5118ME computer and the various operator consoles IDM-2, HMD-22, IDM-80) with commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) servers and workstations.\nIn the first years 2000, the initial ASE capability was expanded with the possibility to run, thanks to the new hardware power, multiple site emulators on the same hardware, so the system was renamed into Multi-AEGIS Site Emulator (MASE). The NATO system designed to replace MASE in the near future is the Air Command and Control System (ACCS).\nBecause of changing politics, NATO expanding and financial crises most European (NATO) countries are trying to cut defence budgets; as a direct result, many obsolete and outdated NATINADS facilities are phased out earlier. As of 2013, operational NATO radar sites in Europe are as follows:\nAllied Air Command.\nAllied Air Command (AIRCOM) is the central command of all NATO air forces on the European continent. The command is based at Ramstein Air Base in Germany and has two subordinate commands in Germany and Spain. The Royal Canadian Air Force and United States Air Force fall under command of the Canadian/American North American Aerospace Defense Command.\nRadar stations.\nAlbania.\nThe Albanian Air Force's Air Surveillance Centre is based in Rinas and the Air Force operates a Lockheed Martin AN/TPS-77 radar on top of Mida mountain near Puk\u00eb.\nBelgium.\nThe Belgian Air Force's Control and Reporting Centre was based at Glons, where also its main radar was located. The radar was deactivated in 2015 and the Centre moved to Beauvechain Air Base in 2020. The Belgian Control and Reporting Centre reports to CAOC Uedem in Germany and is also responsible for guarding the airspace of Luxembourg. At the new location the Control and Reporting Centre uses digital radar data of the civilian radars of Belgocontrol and the Marconi S-723 radar of the Air Force's Air Traffic Control Centre in Semmerzake.\nBulgaria.\nThe Bulgarian Air Force's Air Sovereignty Operations Centre is located in Sofia and reports to CAOC Torrej\u00f3n. The Bulgarian Air Force fields three control and surveillance zones, which operate obsolete Soviet-era radars. The Bulgarian Air Force intends to replace these radars with fewer, but more capable Western 3-D radars as soon as possible. The future locations of the new radars are as of 2018 unknown.\nCanada.\nThe Royal Canadian Air Force's control centres and radar stations are part of the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD).\nCroatia.\nThe Croatian Air Force and Air Defense's Airspace Surveillance Centre is headquartered in Podvornica and reports to CAOC Torrej\u00f3n.\nCzech Republic.\nThe Czech Air Force's Control and Reporting Centre is located in Hlavenec and reports to CAOC Uedem.\nDenmark.\nThe Royal Danish Air Force's Combined Air Operations Centre (CAOC 1) in Finderup was deactivated in 2008 and replaced at the same location by the Combined Air Operations Centre Finderup (CAOC F), which had responsibility for the airspaces of Iceland, Norway, Denmark and the United Kingdom. CAOC F was deactivated in 2013 and its responsibilities were transferred to CAOC Uedem in Germany. The national Danish Control and Reporting Centre is located at Karup Air Base and it reports to CAOC Uedem.\nThe Pituffik Space Base in Greenland is a United States Space Force installation and its radars are part of the North American Aerospace Defense Command and United States Space Command.\nEstonia.\nThe Estonian Air Force's Air Operations Control Centre is located at \u00c4mari Air Base and reports to the Baltic Air Surveillance Network's Regional Airspace Surveillance Coordination Centre (RASCC) in Karm\u0117lava, Lithuania, which in turn reports to CAOC Uedem.\nFinland.\nThe Finnish Air Force's Air Operations Centre is located at Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4 Airport, while the air force's control reporting centres are co-located with the Lapland Air Wing (5th Control and Reporting Centre) at Rovaniemi Airport and the Karelia Air Wing (7th Control and Reporting Centre) at Kuopio Airport. Finland operates five fixed radar sites with Thomson TRS 2215D (KAVA) radars and 13 mobile 13 GM 403 radars (KEVA 2010).\nFrance.\nThe French Air and Space Force's Air Operations Centre is located at Mont Verdun Air Base and reports to CAOC Uedem. Most French radar sites use the PALMIER radar, which is being taken out of service. By 2022 all PALMIER radars were replaced with GM 403 radar.\nAdditionally the French Air and Space Force fields a GM 406 radar at the Cayenne-Rochambeau Air Base in French Guiana to protect the Guiana Space Centre in Kourou.\nGermany.\nThe German Air Force's Combined Air Operations Centre (CAOC 2) in Uedem was deactivated in 2008 and reactivated as CAOC Uedem in 2013. CAOC Uedem is responsible for the NATO airspace North of the Alps. The HADR radars are a variant of the HR-3000 radar, while the RRP-117 radars are a variant of the AN/FPS-117.\nGreece.\n1st Area Control Centre, inside Mount Chortiatis, with Marconi S-743D\n2nd Area Control Centre, inside Mount Parnitha, with Marconi S-743D\n9th Control and Warning Station Squadron, on Mount Pelion, with Marconi S-743D\n10th Control and Warning Station Squadron, on Mount Chortiatis, with Marconi S-743D\nThe Hellenic Air Force's Combined Air Operations Centre (CAOC 7) at Larissa Air Base was deactivated in 2013 and its responsibilities transferred to the CAOC Torrej\u00f3n in Spain. The Hellenic Air Force fields two HR-3000, four AR-327 and six Marconi S-743D radar systems, however as of 2018 the air force is in the process of replacing some of its older systems with three RAT-31DL radars.\nHungary.\nThe Hungarian Air Force's Air Operations Centre is located in Veszpr\u00e9m and reports to CAOC Uedem. There are additional three radar companies with Soviet-era equipment subordinate to the 54th Radar Regiment \"Veszpr\u00e9m\", however it is unclear if they will remain in service once Hungary's newest radar at Medina reaches full operational capability.\nIceland.\nThe Iceland Air Defense System, which is part of the Icelandic Coast Guard, monitors Iceland's airspace. Air Defense is provided by fighter jets from NATO allies, which rotate units for the Icelandic Air Policing mission to Keflavik Air Base.\nThe Iceland Air Defense System's Control and Reporting Centre is at Keflavik Air Base and reports to CAOC Uedem in Germany.\nItaly.\nThe Italian Air Force's Combined Air Operations Centre (CAOC 5) in Poggio Renatico was deactivated in 2013 and replaced with the Mobile Command and Control Regiment (RMCC) at Bari Air Base, while the Centre's responsibilities were transferred to the CAOC Torrej\u00f3n in Spain.\nLatvia.\nThe Latvian Air Force's Air Operations Centre is located at Lielv\u0101rde Air Base and reports to the Baltic Air Surveillance Network's Regional Airspace Surveillance Coordination Centre (RASCC) in Karm\u0117lava, Lithuania, which in turn reports to CAOC Uedem.\nLithuania.\nThe Lithuanian Air Force's Air Operations Control Centre is located in Karm\u0117lava and reports to the Baltic Air Surveillance Network's Regional Airspace Surveillance Coordination Centre (RASCC) co-located in Karm\u0117lava, which in turn reports to CAOC Uedem.\nLuxembourg.\nLuxembourg's airspace is monitored and guarded by the Belgian Air Force's Control and Reporting Centre at Beauvechain Air Base.\nMontenegro.\nThe Armed Forces of Montenegro do not possess a modern air defense radar and the country's airspace is monitored by Italian Air Force radar sites. The Armed Forces Air Surveillance and Reporting Centre is located at Podgorica Airport in Golubovci and reports to CAOC Torrej\u00f3n in Spain.\nNetherlands.\nThe Royal Netherlands Air Force's Air Operations Centre is located at Nieuw-Milligen and reports to CAOC Uedem. The air force's main radars are being replaced with two modern SMART-L GB radars.\nNorway.\nThe Royal Norwegian Air Force's Combined Air Operations Centre (CAOC 3) in Reitan was deactivated in 2008 and its responsibilities were transferred to the Combined Air Operations Centre Finderup (CAOC F). After CAOC F was deactivated in 2013 the responsibility for the air defense of Norway was transferred to CAOC Uedem in Germany and the Royal Norwegian Air Force's Control and Reporting Centre in S\u00f8rreisa reports to it. Until 2016 the Royal Norwegian Air Force's radar installations were distributed between two CRCs. That year the CRC M\u00e5ger\u00f8 was disbanded. In its place a wartime mobilization back-up CRC has been formed with a reduction in personnel from the around active 170 duty to about 50 air force home guardsmen. The SINDRE I radars are a variant of the HR-3000 radar, which is also used in the German HADR radars. The newer RAT-31SL/N radars are sometimes designated SINDRE II.\nPoland.\nThe Polish Armed Forces Operational Command's Air Operations Centre is located in the Warsaw-Pyry neighborhood and reports to CAOC Uedem. The 3rd \"Wroc\u0142aw\" Radiotechnical Brigade is responsible for the operation of the Armed Forces radar equipment. As of 2021, the Polish Air Force possesses three NUR-12M and three RAT-31DL long-range radars making up BACKBONE system, which are listed below.\nPortugal.\nThe Portuguese Air Force's Combined Air Operations Centre (CAOC 10) in Lisbon was deactivated in 2013 and its responsibilities were transferred to CAOC Torrej\u00f3n in Spain.\nRomania.\nThe Romanian Air Force's Air Operations Centre is headquartered in Balote\u0219ti and reports to CAOC Torrej\u00f3n. Additionally, the WSR-98D radar stations in B\u00e2rnova, Medgidia, Bobohalma, Timi\u0219oara, and Oradea are officially designated and operated as a civilian radar stations by the National Meteorological Administration, however their data is fed into the military air surveillance system as well.\nSlovakia.\nThe Slovak Air Force's Air Operations Centre is located at Zvolen and reports to CAOC Uedem.\nSlovenia.\nThe Slovenian Air Force and Air Defense's Airspace Surveillance and Control Centre is headquartered in Brnik and reports to CAOC Torrej\u00f3n.\nThe Italian Air Force's 4th Wing at Grosseto Air Base and 36th Wing at Gioia del Colle Air Base rotate a QRA flight of Eurofighter Typhoons to Istrana Air Base, which are responsible for the air defense of Northern Italy and Slovenia.\nSpain.\nThe Spanish Air Force's Combined Air Operations Centre (CAOC 8) at Torrej\u00f3n Air Base was deactivated in 2013 and replaced at same location by CAOC Torrejon, which took over the functions of CAOC 5, CAOC 7, CAOC 8 and CAOC 10. CAOC Torrej\u00f3n is responsible for the NATO airspace South of the Alps.\nSweden.\nThe Swedish Air Force's Air Operations Centre is located at \u00c4rna Air Base, while the air force's control reporting centres are located in underground bunkers in B\u00e5lsta and H\u00e4stveda. Sweden operates fixed radar sites, which between 2025 and 2028 will be upgraded with Thales SMART-L radars .\nTurkey.\nThe Turkish Air Force's Combined Air Operations Centre (CAOC 6) in Eski\u015fehir was deactivated in 2013 and its responsibilities were transferred to CAOC Torrej\u00f3n in Spain. Turkey's Air Force fields a mix of HR-3000, AN/FPS-117, AN/TPY-2, RAT-31SL, RAT-31DL and local-made Aselsan EIRS radars, however the exact number of each of these radar and their location in the Turkish radar system is unknown.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe Royal Air Force's Air Surveillance and Control System is located at RAF Boulmer, and reports to CAOC Uedem. The RAF operates seven Remote Radar Heads (RRHs) across the UK, which feed back to the Control and Reporting Centre at RAF Boulmer. Under Project Guardian, all of the UK's radar stations and systems are being upgraded and strengthened. The UK is also unique in Europe in possessing a Ballistic Missile Early Warning System (BMEWS) which is based at RAF Fylingdales.\nUnited States.\nThe United States Air Force's control centres and radar stations are part of the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15382", "revid": "41719756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15382", "title": "Invisible balance", "text": "The invisible balance or balance of trade on services is that part of the balance of trade that refers to services and other items that do not result in the transfer of physical objects. Examples include consulting services, shipping services, tourism, and patent license revenues. This figure is usually generated by tertiary industry. The term 'invisible balance' is especially common in the United Kingdom.\nFor countries that rely on service exports or on tourism, the invisible balance is particularly important. For instance the United Kingdom and Saudi Arabia receive significant international income from financial services, while Japan and Germany rely more on exports of manufactured goods.\nTypes of invisibles.\nInvisibles are both international payments for services (as opposed to goods), as well as movements of money without exchange for goods or services. These invisibles are called 'transfer payments' or 'remittances' and may include money sent from one country to another by an individual, business, government or non-governmental organisations (NGO) \u2013 often charities.\nAn individual remittance may include money sent to a relative overseas. Business transfers may include profits sent by a foreign subsidiary to a parent company or money invested by a business in a foreign country. Bank loans to foreign countries are also included in this category, as are license fees paid for the use of patents and trademarks. Government transfers may involve loans made or official aid given to foreign countries, while transfers made by NGO's include money designated for charitable work within foreign countries, respectively.\nBalance of payments and invisibles.\nIn many countries a useful distinction is drawn between the balance of trade and the balance of payments. 'Balance of trade' refers to the trade of both tangible (physical) objects as well as the trade in services \u2013 collectively known as exports and imports (in other words, 'visibles plus services') \u2013 while the 'balance of payments' also includes transfers of Capital in the form of loans, investments in shares or direct investment in projects.\nA nation may have a visibles balance surplus but this can be offset by a larger deficit in the invisibles balance (creating a Balance of Trade deficit overall) \u2013 if, for example, there are large payments made to foreign businesses for invisibles such as shipping or tourism. On the other hand, a Visibles Balance deficit can be offset by a strong surplus on the invisibles balance if, for example, foreign aid is being provided.\nIn a similar way, a nation may also have a surplus 'balance of trade' because it exports more than it imports but a negative (or deficit) 'balance of payments' because, it has a much greater shortfall in transfers of capital. And, just as easily, a deficit in the 'balance of trade' may be offset by a larger surplus in capital transfers from overseas to produce a balance of payments surplus overall.\nBalance of payments problems and the invisible balance.\nProblems with a country's balance of trade (or balance of payments) are often associated with an inappropriate valuation of its currency, its country's foreign exchange rate.\nIf a country's exchange rate is too high, its exports will become uncompetitive as buyers in foreign countries require more of their own currency to pay for them. In the meantime, it also becomes cheaper for the citizens of the country to buy goods from overseas, as opposed to buying locally produced goods), because an overvalued currency makes foreign products less expensive.\nThe simultaneous decline in currency inflows from decreased exports and the rise in outflows, due to increased imports, sends the balance of trade into deficit, which then needs to be paid for by a transfer of funds in some form, either invisible transfers (aid, etc.) or capital flows (loans, etc.). However, relying on funds like that to support a trade deficit, is unsustainable, and the country may eventually require its currency to be devalued.\nIf, on the other hand, a currency is undervalued, its exports will become cheaper and therefore more competitive internationally. At the same time, imports will also become more costly, stimulating the production of domestic substitutes to replace them. That will result in a growth of currency flowing into the country and a decline in currency flowing out of it, resulting in an improvement in the country's balance of trade.\nBecause a nation's exchange rate has a big impact on its 'balance of trade' and its 'balance of payments', many economists favour freely floating exchange rates over the older, fixed (or pegged) rates of foreign currency exchange. Floating exchange rates allow more regular adjustments in exchange rates to occur, allowing the greater opportunity for international payments to maintain equilibrium.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15383", "revid": "668752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15383", "title": "Isotopic tracer", "text": ""}
{"id": "15387", "revid": "41906421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15387", "title": "Irreducible complexity", "text": "Argument by proponents of intelligent design\nIrreducible complexity (IC) is the argument that certain biological systems with multiple interacting parts would not function if one of the parts were removed, so supposedly could not have evolved by successive small modifications from earlier less complex systems through natural selection, which would need all intermediate precursor systems to have been fully functional. This negative argument is then complemented by the claim that the only alternative explanation is a \"purposeful arrangement of parts\" inferring design by an intelligent agent. Irreducible complexity has become central to the creationist concept of intelligent design (ID), but the concept of irreducible complexity has been rejected by the scientific community, which regards intelligent design as pseudoscience. Irreducible complexity and specified complexity are the two main arguments used by intelligent-design proponents to support their version of the theological argument from design.\nThe central concept that complex biological systems which require all their parts to function could not evolve by the incremental changes of natural selection, and so must have been produced by an intelligence, was already featured in creation science. The 1989 school textbook \"Of Pandas and People\" introduced the alternative terminology of \"intelligent design\", a revised section in the 1993 edition of the textbook argued that a blood-clotting system demonstrated this concept.\nThis section was written by Michael Behe, a professor of biochemistry at Lehigh University. He subsequently introduced the expression \"irreducible complexity\" along with a full account of his arguments, in his 1996 book \"Darwin's Black Box\", and said it made evolution through natural selection of random mutations impossible, or extremely improbable. This was based on the mistaken assumption that evolution relies on improvement of existing functions, ignoring how complex adaptations originate from changes in function, and disregarding published research. Evolutionary biologists have published rebuttals showing how systems discussed by Behe can evolve.\nIn the 2005 \"Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District\" trial, Behe gave testimony on the subject of irreducible complexity. The court found that \"Professor Behe's claim for irreducible complexity has been refuted in peer-reviewed research papers and has been rejected by the scientific community at large.\"\nDefinitions.\nMichael Behe defined irreducible complexity in natural selection in terms of well-matched parts in his 1996 book \"Darwin's Black Box\":\n... a single system composed of several well-matched, interacting parts that contribute to the basic function, wherein the removal of any one of the parts causes the system to effectively cease functioning.\nA second definition given by Behe in 2000 (his \"evolutionary definition\") states:\nAn irreducibly complex evolutionary pathway is one that contains one or more unselected steps (that is, one or more necessary-but-unselected mutations). The degree of irreducible complexity is the number of unselected steps in the pathway.\nIntelligent-design advocate William A. Dembski assumed an \"original function\" in his 2002 definition:\nA system performing a given basic function is irreducibly complex if it includes a set of well-matched, mutually interacting, nonarbitrarily individuated parts such that each part in the set is indispensable to maintaining the system's basic, and therefore original, function. The set of these indispensable parts is known as the irreducible core of the system.\nHistory.\nForerunners.\nThe argument from irreducible complexity is a descendant of the teleological argument for God (the argument from design or from complexity). This states that complex functionality in the natural world which looks designed is evidence of an intelligent creator. William Paley famously argued, in his 1802 watchmaker analogy, that complexity in nature implies a God for the same reason that the existence of a watch implies the existence of a watchmaker. This argument has a long history, and one can trace it back at least as far as Cicero's \"De Natura Deorum\" ii.34, written in 45 BC.\nUp to the 18th century.\nGalen (1st and 2nd centuries AD) wrote about the large number of parts of the body and their relationships, which observation was cited as evidence for creation. The idea that the interdependence between parts would have implications for the origins of living things was raised by writers starting with Pierre Gassendi in the mid-17th century and by John Wilkins (1614\u20131672), who wrote (citing Galen), \"Now to imagine, that all these things, according to their several kinds, could be brought into this regular frame and order, to which such an infinite number of Intentions are required, without the contrivance of some wise Agent, must needs be irrational in the highest degree.\" In the late 17th-century, Thomas Burnet referred to \"a multitude of pieces aptly joyn'd\" to argue against the eternity of life. In the early 18th century, Nicolas Malebranche wrote \"An organized body contains an infinity of parts that mutually depend upon one another in relation to particular ends, all of which must be actually formed in order to work as a whole\", arguing in favor of preformation, rather than epigenesis, of the individual; and a similar argument about the origins of the individual was made by other 18th-century students of natural history. In his 1790 book, \"The Critique of Judgment\", Kant is said by Guyer to argue that \"we cannot conceive how a whole that comes into being only gradually from its parts can nevertheless be the cause of the properties of those parts\".\n19th century.\nChapter XV of Paley's \"Natural Theology\" discusses at length what he called \"relations\" of parts of living things as an indication of their design.\nGeorges Cuvier applied his principle of the \"correlation of parts\" to describe an animal from fragmentary remains. For Cuvier, this related to another principle of his, the \"conditions of existence\", which excluded the possibility of transmutation of species.\nWhile he did not originate the term, Charles Darwin identified the argument as a possible way to falsify a prediction of the theory of evolution at the outset. In \"The Origin of Species\" (1859), he wrote, \"If it could be demonstrated that any complex organ existed, which could not possibly have been formed by numerous, successive, slight modifications, my theory would absolutely break down. But I can find out no such case.\" Darwin's theory of evolution challenges the teleological argument by postulating an alternative explanation to that of an intelligent designer\u2014namely, evolution by natural selection. By showing how simple unintelligent forces can ratchet up designs of extraordinary complexity without invoking outside design, Darwin showed that an intelligent designer was not the necessary conclusion to draw from complexity in nature. The argument from irreducible complexity attempts to demonstrate that certain biological features cannot be purely the product of Darwinian evolution.\nIn the late 19th century, in a dispute between supporters of the adequacy of natural selection and those who held for inheritance of acquired characteristics, one of the arguments made repeatedly by Herbert Spencer, and followed by others, depended on what Spencer referred to as \"co-adaptation\" of \"co-operative\" parts, as in: \"We come now to Professor Weismann's endeavour to disprove my second thesis\u2014that it is impossible to explain by natural selection alone the co-adaptation of co-operative parts. It is thirty years since this was set forth in 'The Principles of Biology.' In \u00a7\u00a0166, I instanced the enormous horns of the extinct Irish elk, and contended that in this and in kindred cases, where for the efficient use of some one enlarged part many other parts have to be simultaneously enlarged, it is out of the question to suppose that they can have all spontaneously varied in the required proportions.\" Darwin responded to Spencer's objections in chapter XXV of \"The Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication\" (1868). The history of this concept in the dispute has been characterized: \"An older and more religious tradition of idealist thinkers were committed to the explanation of complex adaptive contrivances by intelligent design. ... Another line of thinkers, unified by the recurrent publications of Herbert Spencer, also saw co-adaptation as a composed, irreducible whole, but sought to explain it by the inheritance of acquired characteristics.\"\nSt. George Jackson Mivart raised the objection to natural selection that \"Complex and simultaneous co-ordinations ... until so far developed as to effect the requisite junctions, are useless\". In the 2012 book \"Evolution and Belief, Confessions of a Religious Paleontologist\", Robert J. Asher said this \"amounts to the concept of 'irreducible complexity' as defined by ... Michael Behe\".\n20th century.\nHermann Muller, in the early 20th century, discussed a concept similar to irreducible complexity. However, far from seeing this as a problem for evolution, he described the \"interlocking\" of biological features as a consequence to be expected of evolution, which would lead to irreversibility of some evolutionary changes. He wrote, \"Being thus finally woven, as it were, into the most intimate fabric of the organism, the once novel character can no longer be withdrawn with impunity, and may have become vitally necessary.\"\nIn 1975 Thomas H. Frazzetta published a book-length study of a concept similar to irreducible complexity, explained by gradual, step-wise, non-teleological evolution. Frazzetta wrote: \"A complex adaptation is one constructed of \"several\" components that must blend together operationally to make the adaptation 'work'. It is analogous to a machine whose performance depends upon careful cooperation among its parts. In the case of the machine, no single part can greatly be altered without changing the performance of the entire machine.\" The machine that he chose as an analog is the Peaucellier\u2013Lipkin linkage, and one biological system given extended description was the jaw apparatus of a python. The conclusion of this investigation, rather than that evolution of a complex adaptation was impossible, \"awed by the adaptations of living things, to be stunned by their complexity and suitability\", was \"to accept the inescapable but not humiliating fact that much of mankind can be seen in a tree or a lizard.\"\nIn 1985 Cairns-Smith wrote of \"interlocking\": \"How can a complex collaboration between components evolve in small steps?\" and used the analogy of the scaffolding called centering\u2014used to build an arch then removed afterwards: \"Surely there was 'scaffolding'. Before the multitudinous components of present biochemistry could come to lean together \"they had to lean on something else.\"\"&lt;ref name=\"Cairns-Smith, A. G. 1985 https://archive.org/details/sevencluestoorig00cair_0/page/39 39, 58\u201364\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; However, neither Muller or Cairns-Smith claimed their ideas as evidence of something supernatural.\nAn early concept of irreducibly complex systems comes from Ludwig von Bertalanffy (1901\u20131972), an Austrian biologist. He believed that complex systems must be examined as complete, irreducible systems in order to fully understand how they work. He extended his work on biological complexity into a general theory of systems in a book titled \"General Systems Theory\".\nAfter James Watson and Francis Crick published the structure of DNA in the early 1950s, General Systems Theory lost many of its adherents in the physical and biological sciences.\nHowever, systems theory remained popular in the social sciences long after its demise in the physical and biological sciences.\nCreationism.\nVersions of the irreducible complexity argument have been common in young Earth creationist (YEC) creation science journals. For example, in the July 1965 issue of Creation Research Society Quarterly Harold W. Clark described the complex interaction in which yucca moths have an \"inherited action pattern\" or instinct to fertilize plants: \"Before the pattern can be inherited, it must be formed. But how could yucca plants mature seeds while waiting for the moths to learn the process and set the pattern? The whole procedure points so strongly to intelligent design that it is difficult to escape the conclusion that the hand of a wise and beneficent Creator has been involved.\" Similarly, honeybees pollinate apple blossom: \"Again we may well ask how such an arrangement could have come about by accident, or how either the flowers or the bees could have survived alone. Intelligent design is again evident.\"\nIn 1974 the YEC Henry M. Morris introduced an irreducible complexity concept in his creation science book \"Scientific Creationism\", in which he wrote; \"The creationist maintains that the degree of complexity and order which science has discovered in the universe could never be generated by chance or accident.\" He continued; \"This issue can actually be attacked quantitatively, using simple principles of mathematical probability. The problem is simply whether a complex system, in which many components function unitedly together, and in which each component is uniquely necessary to the efficient functioning of the whole, could ever arise by random processes.\" In 1975 Duane Gish wrote in \"The Amazing Story of Creation from Science and the Bible\"; \"The creationist maintains that the degree of complexity and order which science has discovered in the universe could never be generated by chance or accident.\"\nA 1980 article in the creation science magazine \"Creation\" by the YEC Ariel A. Roth said \"Creation and various other views can be supported by the scientific data that reveal that the spontaneous origin of the \"complex integrated biochemical systems\" of even the simplest organisms is, at best, a most improbable event\". In 1981, defending the creation science position in the trial \"McLean v. Arkansas\", Roth said of \"complex integrated structures\": \"This system would not be functional until all the parts were there ... How did these parts survive during evolution ...?\"\nIn 1985, countering the creationist claims that all the changes would be needed at once, Cairns-Smith wrote of \"interlocking\": \"How can a complex collaboration between components evolve in small steps?\" and used the analogy of the scaffolding called centering\u2014used to build an arch then removed afterwards: \"Surely there was 'scaffolding'. Before the multitudinous components of present biochemistry could come to lean together \"they had to lean on something else.\"\" Neither Muller or Cairns-Smith said their ideas were evidence of anything supernatural.\nThe bacterial flagellum featured in creation science literature. Morris later claimed that one of their Institute for Creation Research \"scientists (the late Dr. Dick Bliss) was using this example in his talks on creation a generation ago\". In December 1992 the creation science magazine \"Creation\" called bacterial flagella \"rotary engines\", and dismissed the possibility that\u00a0these \"incredibly complicated arrangements of matter\" could have \"evolved by selection of chance mutations. The alternative explanation, that they were created, is much more reasonable.\" An article in the Creation Research Society Magazine for June 1994 called a flagellum a \"bacterial nanomachine\", forming the \"bacterial rotor-flagellar complex\" where \"it is clear from the details of their operation that nothing about them works unless every one of their complexly fashioned and integrated components are in place\", hard to explain by natural selection. The abstract said that in \"terms of biophysical complexity, the bacterial rotor-flagellum is without precedent in the living world. ... To evolutionists, the system presents an enigma; to creationists, if offers clear and compelling evidence of purposeful intelligent design.\"\nIntelligent design.\nThe biology supplementary textbook for schools \"Of Pandas and People\" was drafted presenting creation science arguments, but shortly after the \"Edwards v. Aguillard\" ruling, that it was unconstitutional to teach creationism in public school science classes, the authors changed the wording to \"intelligent design\", introducing the new meaning of this term when the book was published in 1989. In a separate response to the same ruling, law professor Phillip E. Johnson wrote \"Darwin on Trial\", published in 1991, and at a conference in March 1992 brought together key figures in what he later called the 'wedge movement', including biochemistry professor Michael Behe. According to Johnson, around 1992 Behe developed his ideas of what he later called his \"irreducible complexity\" concept, and first presented these ideas in June 1993 when the \"Johnson-Behe cadre of scholars\" met at Pajaro Dunes in California.\nThe second edition of \"Of Pandas and People\", published in 1993, had extensive revisions to Chapter 6 \"Biochemical Similarities\" with new sections on the complex mechanism of blood clotting and on the origin of proteins, written by Behe though he was not initially acknowledged as their author. He argued that \"all of the proteins had to be present simultaneously for the blood clotting system to function\", so it could not have evolved. In later publications, he named the argument \"irreducibly complexity\", but changed his definition of this specific system. In \"Doubts About Darwin: A History of Intelligent Design\" (2003), historian Thomas Woodward wrote that \"Michael Behe assisted in the rewriting of a chapter on biochemistry in a revised edition of Pandas. The book stands as one of the milestones in the infancy of Design.\"\nOn Access Research Network, Behe posted (on 3 February 1999) \"Molecular Machines: Experimental Support for the Design Inference\" with a note that \"This paper was originally presented in the Summer of 1994 at the meeting of the C. S. Lewis Society, Cambridge University.\" An \"Irreducible Complexity\" section quoted Darwin, then discussed \"the humble mousetrap\", and \"Molecular Machines\", going into detail about cilia before saying \"Other examples of irreducible complexity abound, including aspects of protein transport, blood clotting, closed circular DNA, electron transport, the bacterial flagellum, telomeres, photosynthesis, transcription regulation, and much more. Examples of irreducible complexity can be found on virtually every page of a biochemistry textbook.\" Suggesting \"these things cannot be explained by Darwinian evolution,\" he said they had been neglected by the scientific community.\nBehe first published the term \"irreducible complexity\" in his 1996 book \"Darwin's Black Box\", where he set out his ideas about theoretical properties of some complex biochemical cellular systems, now including the bacterial flagellum. He posits that evolutionary mechanisms cannot explain the development of such \"irreducibly complex\" systems. Notably, Behe credits philosopher William Paley for the original concept (alone among the predecessors).\nIntelligent design advocates argue that irreducibly complex systems must have been deliberately engineered by some form of intelligence.\nIn 2001, Behe wrote: \"[T]here is an asymmetry between my current definition of irreducible complexity and the task facing natural selection. I hope to repair this defect in future work.\" Behe specifically explained that the \"current definition puts the focus on removing a part from an already functioning system\", but the \"difficult task facing Darwinian evolution, however, would not be to remove parts from sophisticated pre-existing systems; it would be to bring together components to make a new system in the first place\". In the 2005 \"Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District\" trial, Behe testified under oath that he \"did not judge [the asymmetry] serious enough to [have revised the book] yet.\"\nBehe additionally testified that the presence of irreducible complexity in organisms would not rule out the involvement of evolutionary mechanisms in the development of organic life. He further testified that he knew of no earlier \"peer reviewed articles in scientific journals discussing the intelligent design of the blood clotting cascade,\" but that there were \"probably a large number of peer reviewed articles in science journals that demonstrate that the blood clotting system is indeed a purposeful arrangement of parts of great complexity and sophistication.\" (The judge ruled that \"intelligent design is not science and is essentially religious in nature\".)\nThe scientific theory of evolution incorporates evidence that genetic variations occur, but makes no assumptions of purposeful design or intent. The environment \"selects\" the variants which have the highest fitness for conditions at the time, and these heritable variations are then passed on to the next generation of organisms. Change occurs by the gradual operation of natural forces over time, perhaps slowly, perhaps more quickly (see punctuated equilibrium). This process is able to adapt complex structures from simpler beginnings, or convert complex structures from one function to another (see spandrel). Most intelligent design advocates accept that evolution occurs through mutation and natural selection at the \"micro level\", such as changing the relative frequency of various beak lengths in finches, but assert that it cannot account for irreducible complexity, because none of the parts of an irreducible system would be functional or advantageous until the entire system is in place.\nThe mousetrap example.\nBehe uses the mousetrap as an illustrative example of this concept. A mousetrap consists of five interacting pieces: the base, the catch, the spring, the hammer, and the hold-down bar. All of these must be in place for the mousetrap to work, as the removal of any one piece destroys the function of the mousetrap. Likewise, he asserts that biological systems require multiple parts working together in order to function. Intelligent design advocates claim that natural selection could not create from scratch those systems for which science is currently unable to find a viable evolutionary pathway of successive, slight modifications, because the selectable function is only present when all parts are assembled.\nIn his 2008 book \"Only A Theory\", biologist Kenneth R. Miller challenges Behe's claim that the mousetrap is irreducibly complex. Miller observes that various subsets of the five components can be devised to form cooperative units, ones that have different functions from the mousetrap and so, in biological terms, could form functional spandrels before being adapted to the new function of catching mice. In an example taken from his high school experience, Miller recalls that one of his classmates...struck upon the brilliant idea of using an old, broken mousetrap as a spitball catapult, and it worked brilliantly... It had worked perfectly as something other than a mousetrap... my rowdy friend had pulled a couple of parts\u2014probably the hold-down bar and catch\u2014off the trap to make it easier to conceal and more effective as a catapult... [leaving] the base, the spring, and the hammer. Not much of a mousetrap, but a helluva spitball launcher... I realized why [Behe's] mousetrap analogy had bothered me. It was wrong. The mousetrap is not irreducibly complex after all.\nOther systems identified by Miller that include mousetrap components include the following:\nThe point of the reduction is that\u2014in biology\u2014most or all of the components were already at hand, by the time it became necessary to build a mousetrap. As such, it required far fewer steps to develop a mousetrap than to design all the components from scratch.\nThus, the development of the mousetrap, said to consist of five different parts which had no function on their own, has been reduced to one step: the assembly from parts that are already present, performing other functions.\nConsequences.\nSupporters of intelligent design argue that anything less than the complete form of such a system or organ would not work at all, or would in fact be a \"detriment\" to the organism, and would therefore never survive the process of natural selection. Although they accept that some complex systems and organs \"can\" be explained by evolution, they claim that organs and biological features which are \"irreducibly complex\" cannot be explained by current models, and that an intelligent designer must have created life or guided its evolution. Accordingly, the debate on irreducible complexity concerns two questions: whether irreducible complexity can be found in nature, and what significance it would have if it did exist in nature.\nBehe's original examples of irreducibly complex mechanisms included the bacterial flagellum of \"E. coli\", the blood clotting cascade, cilia, and the adaptive immune system.\nBehe argues that organs and biological features which are irreducibly complex cannot be wholly explained by current models of evolution. In explicating his definition of \"irreducible complexity\" he notes that:\nAn irreducibly complex system cannot be produced directly (that is, by continuously improving the initial function, which continues to work by the same mechanism) by slight, successive modifications of a precursor system, because any precursor to an irreducibly complex system that is missing a part is by definition nonfunctional.\nIrreducible complexity is not an argument that evolution does not occur, but rather an argument that it is \"incomplete\". In the last chapter of \"Darwin's Black Box\", Behe goes on to explain his view that irreducible complexity is evidence for intelligent design. Mainstream critics, however, argue that irreducible complexity, as defined by Behe, can be generated by known evolutionary mechanisms. Behe's claim that no scientific literature adequately modeled the origins of biochemical systems through evolutionary mechanisms has been challenged by TalkOrigins. The judge in the \"Dover\" trial wrote \"By defining irreducible complexity in the way that he has, Professor Behe attempts to exclude the phenomenon of exaptation by definitional fiat, ignoring as he does so abundant evidence which refutes his argument. Notably, the NAS has rejected Professor Behe's claim for irreducible complexity...\"\nClaimed examples.\nBehe and others have suggested a number of biological features that they believed to be irreducibly complex.\nBlood clotting cascade.\nThe process of blood clotting or coagulation cascade in vertebrates is a complex biological pathway which is given as an example of apparent irreducible complexity.\nThe irreducible complexity argument assumes that the necessary parts of a system have always been necessary, and therefore could not have been added sequentially. However, in evolution, something which is at first merely advantageous can later become necessary. Natural selection can lead to complex biochemical systems being built up from simpler systems, or to existing functional systems being recombined as a new system with a different function. For example, one of the clotting factors that Behe listed as a part of the clotting cascade (Factor XII, also called Hageman factor) was later found to be absent in whales, demonstrating that it is not essential for a clotting system. Many purportedly irreducible structures can be found in other organisms as much simpler systems that utilize fewer parts. These systems, in turn, may have had even simpler precursors that are now extinct. Behe has responded to critics of his clotting cascade arguments by suggesting that homology is evidence for evolution, but not for natural selection.\nThe \"improbability argument\" also misrepresents natural selection. It is correct to say that a set of simultaneous mutations that form a complex protein structure is so unlikely as to be unfeasible, but that is not what Darwin advocated. His explanation is based on small accumulated changes that take place without a final goal. Each step must be advantageous in its own right, although biologists may not yet understand the reason behind all of them\u2014for example, jawless fish accomplish blood clotting with just six proteins instead of the full ten.\nEye.\nThe eye is frequently cited by intelligent design and creationism advocates as a purported example of irreducible complexity. Behe used the \"development of the eye problem\" as evidence for intelligent design in \"Darwin's Black Box\". Although Behe acknowledged that the evolution of the larger anatomical features of the eye have been well-explained, he pointed out that the complexity of the minute biochemical reactions required at a molecular level for light sensitivity still defies explanation. Creationist Jonathan Sarfati has described the eye as evolutionary biologists' \"greatest challenge as an example of superb 'irreducible complexity' in God's creation\", specifically pointing to the supposed \"vast complexity\" required for transparency.\nIn an often misquoted passage from \"On the Origin of Species\", Charles Darwin appears to acknowledge the eye's development as a difficulty for his theory. However, the quote in context shows that Darwin actually had a very good understanding of the evolution of the eye (see fallacy of quoting out of context). He notes that \"to suppose that the eye ... could have been formed by natural selection, seems, I freely confess, absurd in the highest possible degree\". Yet this observation was merely a rhetorical device for Darwin. He goes on to explain that if gradual evolution of the eye could be shown to be possible, \"the difficulty of believing that a perfect and complex eye could be formed by natural selection ... can hardly be considered real\". He then proceeded to roughly map out a likely course for evolution using examples of gradually more complex eyes of various species.\nSince Darwin's day, the eye's ancestry has become much better understood. Although learning about the construction of ancient eyes through fossil evidence is problematic due to the soft tissues leaving no imprint or remains, genetic and comparative anatomical evidence has increasingly supported the idea of a common ancestry for all eyes.\nCurrent evidence does suggest possible evolutionary lineages for the origins of the anatomical features of the eye. One likely chain of development is that the eyes originated as simple patches of photoreceptor cells that could detect the presence or absence of light, but not its direction. When, via random mutation across the population, the photosensitive cells happened to have developed on a small depression, it endowed the organism with a better sense of the light's source. This small change gave the organism an advantage over those without the mutation. This genetic trait would then be \"selected for\" as those with the trait would have an increased chance of survival, and therefore progeny, over those without the trait. Individuals with deeper depressions would be able to discern changes in light over a wider field than those individuals with shallower depressions. As ever deeper depressions were advantageous to the organism, gradually, this depression would become a pit into which light would strike certain cells depending on its angle. The organism slowly gained increasingly precise visual information. And again, this gradual process continued as individuals having a slightly shrunken aperture of the eye had an advantage over those without the mutation as an aperture increases how collimated the light is at any one specific group of photoreceptors. As this trait developed, the eye became effectively a pinhole camera which allowed the organism to dimly make out shapes\u2014the nautilus is a modern example of an animal with such an eye. Finally, via this same selection process, a protective layer of transparent cells over the aperture was differentiated into a crude lens, and the interior of the eye was filled with humours to assist in focusing images. In this way, eyes are recognized by modern biologists as actually a relatively unambiguous and simple structure to evolve, and many of the major developments of the eye's evolution are believed to have taken place over only a few million years, during the Cambrian explosion. Behe asserts that this is only an explanation of the gross anatomical steps, however, and not an explanation of the changes in discrete biochemical systems that would have needed to take place.\nBehe maintains that the complexity of light sensitivity at the molecular level and the minute biochemical reactions required for those first \"simple patches of photoreceptor[s]\" still defies explanation, and that the proposed series of infinitesimal steps to get from patches of photoreceptors to a fully functional eye would actually be considered great, complex leaps in evolution if viewed on the molecular scale. Other intelligent design proponents claim that the evolution of the entire visual system would be difficult rather than the eye alone.\nFlagella.\nThe flagella of certain bacteria constitute a molecular motor requiring the interaction of about 40 different protein parts. Behe presents this as a prime example of an irreducibly complex structure defined as \"a single system composed of several well-matched, interacting parts that contribute to the basic function, wherein the removal of any one of the parts causes the system to effectively cease functioning\", and argues that since \"an irreducibly complex system that is missing a part is by definition nonfunctional\", it could not have evolved gradually through natural selection.\nReducible complexity. In contrast to Behe's claims, many proteins can be deleted or mutated and the flagellum still works, even though sometimes at reduced efficiency. In fact, the composition of flagella is surprisingly diverse across bacteria with many proteins only found in some species but not others. Hence the flagellar apparatus is clearly very flexible in evolutionary terms and perfectly able to lose or gain protein components. Further studies have shown that, contrary to claims of \"irreducible complexity\", flagella and the type-III secretion system share several components which provides strong evidence of a shared evolutionary history (see below). In fact, this example shows how a complex system can evolve from simpler components. Multiple processes were involved in the evolution of the flagellum, including horizontal gene transfer.\nEvolution from type three secretion systems. The basal body of the flagella has been found to be similar to the Type III secretion system (TTSS), a needle-like structure that pathogenic germs such as \"Salmonella\" and \"Yersinia pestis\" use to inject toxins into living eukaryote cells. The needle's base has ten elements in common with the flagellum, but it is missing forty of the proteins that make a flagellum work. The TTSS system negates Behe's claim that taking away any one of the flagellum's parts would prevent the system from functioning. On this basis, Kenneth Miller notes that, \"The parts of this supposedly irreducibly complex system actually have functions of their own.\" Studies have also shown that similar parts of the flagellum in different bacterial species can have different functions despite showing evidence of common descent, and that certain parts of the flagellum can be removed without eliminating its functionality. Behe responded to Miller by asking \"why doesn't he just take an appropriate bacterial species, knock out the genes for its flagellum, place the bacterium under selective pressure (for mobility, say), and experimentally produce a flagellum\u2014or any equally complex system\u2014in the laboratory?\" However a laboratory experiment has been performed where \"immotile strains of the bacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens that lack flagella [...] regained flagella within 96 hours via a two-step evolutionary pathway\", concluding that \"natural selection can rapidly rewire regulatory networks in very few, repeatable mutational steps\".\nDembski has argued that phylogenetically, the TTSS is found in a narrow range of bacteria which makes it seem to him to be a late innovation, whereas flagella are widespread throughout many bacterial groups, and he argues that it was an early innovation. Against Dembski's argument, different flagella use completely different mechanisms, and publications show a plausible path in which bacterial flagella could have evolved from a secretion system.\nCilium motion.\nThe cilium construction of axoneme microtubules movement by the sliding of dynein protein was cited by Behe as an example of irreducible complexity. He further said that the advances in knowledge in the subsequent 10 years had shown that the complexity of intraflagellar transport for two hundred components cilium and many other cellular structures is substantially greater than was known earlier.\nResponse of the scientific community.\nLike intelligent design, the concept it seeks to support, irreducible complexity has failed to gain any notable acceptance within the scientific community.\nReducibility of \"irreducible\" systems.\nResearchers have proposed potentially viable evolutionary pathways for allegedly irreducibly complex systems such as blood clotting, the immune system and the flagellum\u2014the three examples Behe proposed. John H. McDonald even showed his example of a mousetrap to be reducible. If irreducible complexity is an insurmountable obstacle to evolution, it should not be possible to conceive of such pathways.\nNiall Shanks and Karl H. Joplin, both of East Tennessee State University, have shown that systems satisfying Behe's characterization of irreducible biochemical complexity can arise naturally and spontaneously as the result of self-organizing chemical processes. They also assert that what evolved biochemical and molecular systems actually exhibit is \"redundant complexity\"\u2014a kind of complexity that is the product of an evolved biochemical process. They claim that Behe overestimated the significance of irreducible complexity because of his simple, linear view of biochemical reactions, resulting in his taking snapshots of selective features of biological systems, structures, and processes, while ignoring the redundant complexity of the context in which those features are naturally embedded. They also criticized his over-reliance on overly simplistic metaphors, such as his mousetrap.\nA computer model of the co-evolution of proteins binding to DNA in the peer-reviewed journal \"Nucleic Acids Research\" consisted of several parts (DNA binders and DNA binding sites) which contribute to the basic function; removal of either one leads immediately to the death of the organism. This model fits the definition of irreducible complexity exactly, yet it evolves. (The program can be run from http://.)\nOne can compare a mousetrap with a cat in this context. Both normally function so as to control the mouse population. The cat has many parts that can be removed leaving it still functional; for example, its tail can be bobbed, or it can lose an ear in a fight. Comparing the cat and the mousetrap, then, one sees that the mousetrap (which is not alive) offers better evidence, in terms of irreducible complexity, for intelligent design than the cat. Even looking at the mousetrap analogy, several critics have described ways in which the parts of the mousetrap could have independent uses or could develop in stages, demonstrating that it is not irreducibly complex.\nMoreover, even cases where removing a certain component in an organic system will cause the system to fail do not demonstrate that the system could not have been formed in a step-by-step, evolutionary process. By analogy, stone arches are irreducibly complex\u2014if you remove any stone the arch will collapse\u2014yet humans build them easily enough, one stone at a time, by building over centering that is removed afterward. Similarly, naturally occurring arches of stone form by the weathering away of bits of stone from a large concretion that has formed previously.\nEvolution can act to simplify as well as to complicate. This raises the possibility that seemingly irreducibly complex biological features may have been achieved with a period of increasing complexity, followed by a period of simplification.\nA team led by Joseph Thornton, assistant professor of biology at the University of Oregon's Center for Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, using techniques for resurrecting ancient genes, reconstructed the evolution of an apparently irreducibly complex molecular system. The April 7, 2006 issue of \"Science\" published this research.\nIrreducible complexity may not actually exist in nature, and the examples given by Behe and others may not in fact represent irreducible complexity, but can be explained in terms of simpler precursors. The theory of facilitated variation challenges irreducible complexity. Marc W. Kirschner, a professor and chair of Department of Systems Biology at Harvard Medical School, and John C. Gerhart, a professor in Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, presented this theory in 2005. They describe how certain mutation and changes can cause apparent irreducible complexity. Thus, seemingly irreducibly complex structures are merely \"very complex\", or they are simply misunderstood or misrepresented.\nGradual adaptation to new functions.\nThe precursors of complex systems, when they are not useful in themselves, may be useful to perform other, unrelated functions. Evolutionary biologists argue that evolution often works in this kind of blind, haphazard manner in which the function of an early form is not necessarily the same as the function of the later form. The term used for this process is exaptation. The mammalian middle ear (derived from a jawbone) and the panda's thumb (derived from a wrist bone spur) provide classic examples. A 2006 article in \"Nature\" demonstrates intermediate states leading toward the development of the ear in a Devonian fish (about 360 million years ago). Furthermore, recent research shows that viruses play a heretofore unexpected role in evolution by mixing and matching genes from various hosts.\nArguments for irreducibility often assume that things started out the same way they ended up\u2014as we see them now. However, that may not necessarily be the case. In the \"Dover\" trial an expert witness for the plaintiffs, Ken Miller, demonstrated this possibility using Behe's mousetrap analogy. By removing several parts, Miller made the object unusable as a mousetrap, but he pointed out that it was now a perfectly functional, if unstylish, tie clip.\nMethods by which irreducible complexity may evolve.\nIrreducible complexity can be seen as equivalent to an \"uncrossable valley\" in a fitness landscape. A number of mathematical models of evolution have explored the circumstances under which such valleys can, nevertheless, be crossed.\nAn example of a structure that is claimed in Dembski's book \"No Free Lunch\" to be irreducibly complex, but evidently has evolved, is the protein T-urf13, which is responsible for the cytoplasmic male sterility of waxy corn and is due to a completely new gene. It arose from the fusion of several non-protein-coding fragments of mitochondrial DNA and the occurrence of several mutations, all of which were necessary. Behe's book \"Darwin Devolves\" claims that things like this would take billions of years and could not arise from random tinkering, but the corn was bred during the 20th century. When presented with T-urf13 as an example for the evolvability of irreducibly complex systems, the Discovery Institute resorted to its flawed probability argument based on false premises, akin to the Texas sharpshooter fallacy.\nFalsifiability and experimental evidence.\nSome critics, such as Jerry Coyne (professor of evolutionary biology at the University of Chicago) and Eugenie Scott (a physical anthropologist and former executive director of the National Center for Science Education) have argued that the concept of irreducible complexity and, more generally, intelligent design is not falsifiable and, therefore, not scientific.\nBehe argues that the theory that irreducibly complex systems could not have evolved can be falsified by an experiment where such systems are evolved. For example, he posits taking bacteria with no flagellum and imposing a selective pressure for mobility. If, after a few thousand generations, the bacteria evolved the bacterial flagellum, then Behe believes that this would refute his theory. This has been done: a laboratory experiment has been performed where \"immotile strains of the bacterium \"Pseudomonas fluorescens\" that lack flagella [...] regained flagella within 96 hours via a two-step evolutionary pathway\", concluding that \"natural selection can rapidly rewire regulatory networks in very few, repeatable mutational steps\".\nOther critics take a different approach, pointing to experimental evidence that they consider falsification of the argument for intelligent design from irreducible complexity. For example, Kenneth Miller describes the lab work of Barry G. Hall on \"E. coli\" as showing that \"Behe is wrong\".\nOther evidence that irreducible complexity is not a problem for evolution comes from the field of computer science, which routinely uses computer analogues of the processes of evolution in order to automatically design complex solutions to problems. The results of such genetic algorithms are frequently irreducibly complex since the process, like evolution, both removes non-essential components over time as well as adding new components. The removal of unused components with no essential function, like the natural process where rock underneath a natural arch is removed, can produce irreducibly complex structures without requiring the intervention of a designer. Researchers applying these algorithms automatically produce human-competitive designs\u2014but no human designer is required.\nArgument from ignorance.\nIntelligent design proponents attribute to an intelligent designer those biological structures they believe are irreducibly complex and therefore they say a natural explanation is insufficient to account for them. However, critics view irreducible complexity as a special case of the \"complexity indicates design\" claim, and thus see it as an argument from ignorance and as a God-of-the-gaps argument.\nEugenie Scott and Glenn Branch of the National Center for Science Education note that intelligent design arguments from irreducible complexity rest on the false assumption that a lack of knowledge of a natural explanation allows intelligent design proponents to assume an intelligent cause, when the proper response of scientists would be to say that we do not know, and further investigation is needed. Other critics describe Behe as saying that evolutionary explanations are not detailed enough to meet his standards, while at the same time presenting intelligent design as exempt from having to provide any positive evidence at all.\nFalse dilemma.\nIrreducible complexity is at its core an argument against evolution. If truly irreducible systems are found, the argument goes, then intelligent design must be the correct explanation for their existence. However, this conclusion is based on the assumption that current evolutionary theory and intelligent design are the only two valid models to explain life, a false dilemma.\nIn the Dover trial.\nAt the 2005 \"Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District\" trial, expert witness testimony defending ID and IC was given by Behe and Scott Minnich, who had been one of the \"Johnson-Behe cadre of scholars\" at Pajaro Dunes in 1993, was prominent in ID, and was now a tenured associate professor in microbiology at the University of Idaho. Behe conceded that there are no peer-reviewed papers supporting his claims that complex molecular systems, like the bacterial flagellum, the blood-clotting cascade, and the immune system, were intelligently designed nor are there any peer-reviewed articles supporting his argument that certain complex molecular structures are \"irreducibly complex.\" There was extensive discussion of IC arguments about the bacterial flagellum, first published in Behe's 1996 book, and when Minnich was asked if similar claims in a 1994 Creation Research Society article presented the same argument, Minnich said he did not have any problem with that statement.\nIn the final ruling of \"Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District\", Judge Jones specifically singled out irreducible complexity:\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15388", "revid": "37575500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15388", "title": "Religion in pre-Islamic Arabia", "text": "In pre-Islamic Arabia, the dominant religious practice was that of Arab polytheism, which was based on the veneration of various deities and spirits, such as the god Hubal and the goddesses al-L\u0101t, al-\u2018Uzz\u0101, and Man\u0101t. Worship was centred on local shrines and temples, most notably including the Kaaba in Mecca. Deities were venerated and invoked through pilgrimages, divination, and ritual sacrifice, among other traditions. Different theories have been proposed regarding the role of \"Allah\" (a word in Arabic that is now chiefly associated with God in Islam) in the Meccan religion. Many of the physical descriptions of the pre-Islamic gods and goddesses are traced to idols, especially near the Kaaba, which is said to have contained up to 360 of them.\nOther religions\u2014namely Christianity, Judaism, and Zoroastrianism\u2014were also represented in the region. The influence of the Roman Empire and the Kingdom of Aksum enabled the nurturing of Christian communities in northwestern, northeastern, and southern Arabia. In the other areas of the Arabian Peninsula, Christianity did not have as much of a presence, though it did secure some converts, and with the exception of Nestorianism in the northeast and around the Persian Gulf, the dominant form of the religion was Miaphysitism. Since the beginning of the Roman era, Jewish migration into Arabia had become increasingly frequent, resulting in the establishment of a prominent Jewish diaspora community, which was supplemented by local converts. Over time, Judaism grew throughout southern Arabia and the northwestern Hejaz.\nAdditionally, the influence of the Sasanian Empire aided the growth of a Zoroastrian population in eastern and southern Arabia, and there is evidence of either Manichaeism or Mazdakism being practiced in Mecca as well. It is speculated that Zoroastrianism may have been practiced by some inhabitants of the Himyarite Kingdom, which was home to a mixed Arab\u2013Persian community called al-Abn\u0101\u02be in Arabic.\nBackground and sources.\nUntil about the fourth century, almost all inhabitants of Arabia practiced polytheistic religions at which point pre-Islamic Arabian monotheism had begun to spread. From the fourth to sixth centuries, Jewish, Christian, and other monotheistic populations developed. Until recent decades, it was believed that polytheism remained the dominant belief system in pre-Islamic Arabia, but recent trends suggest that henotheism or monotheism was dominant from the fourth century onwards.\nThe contemporary sources of information regarding the pre-Islamic Arabian religion and pantheon include a growing number of pre-Islamic Arabian inscriptions, written in scripts like Safaitic, Sabaic, and Paleo-Arabic, pre-Islamic poetry, external sources such as Jewish and Greek accounts, as well as the Muslim tradition, such as the Qur'an and Islamic writings. Nevertheless, information is limited.\nOne early attestation of Arabian polytheism was in Esarhaddon's Annals, mentioning Atarsamain, Nukhay, Ruldaiu, and Atarquruma. Herodotus, writing in his \"Histories\", reported that the Arabs worshipped Orotalt (identified with Dionysus) and Alilat (identified with Aphrodite). Strabo stated the Arabs worshipped Dionysus and Zeus. Origen stated they worshipped Dionysus and Urania.\nMuslim sources regarding Arabian polytheism include the eighth-century \"Book of Idols\" by Hisham ibn al-Kalbi, which F.E. Peters argued to be the most substantial treatment of the religious practices of pre-Islamic Arabia, as well as the writings of the Yemeni historian al-Hasan al-Hamdani on South Arabian religious beliefs.\nAccording to the \"Book of Idols\", descendants of the son of Abraham (Ishmael) who had settled in Mecca migrated to other lands carried holy stones from the Kaaba with them, erected them, and circumambulated them like the Kaaba. This, according to al-Kalbi led to the rise of idol worship. Based on this, it may be probable that Arabs originally venerated stones, later adopting idol-worship under foreign influences. The relationship between a god and a stone as his representation can be seen from the third-century Syriac work called the \"Homily of Pseudo-Meliton\" where he describes the pagan faiths of Syriac-speakers in northern Mesopotamia, who were mostly Arabs. However, mythologies and narratives elucidating the history of these gods, as well as the meaning of their epithets, remain uninformative.\nSupernatural beings.\nPantheons.\nThe pre-Islamic Arabian religions were polytheistic, with many of the deities' names known. Formal pantheons are more noticeable at the level of kingdoms, of variable sizes, ranging from simple city-states to collections of tribes. Tribes, towns, clans, lineages and families had their own cults too. Christian Julien Robin suggests that this structure of the divine world reflected the society of the time. Trade caravans also brought foreign religious and cultural influences. A large number of deities did not have proper names and were referred to by titles indicating a quality, a family relationship, or a locale preceded by \"he who\" or \"she who\" (\"dh\u016b\" or \"dh\u0101t\" respectively).\nThe religious beliefs and practices of the nomadic Bedouin were distinct from those of the settled tribes of towns such as Mecca. Nomadic religious belief systems and practices are believed to have included fetishism, totemism and veneration of the dead but were connected principally with immediate concerns and problems and did not consider larger philosophical questions such as the afterlife. Settled urban Arabs, on the other hand, are thought to have believed in a more complex pantheon of deities. While the Meccans and the other settled inhabitants of the Hejaz worshiped their gods at permanent shrines in towns and oases, the Bedouin practiced their religion on the move.\nMinor spirits.\nIn South Arabia, \"mndh\u2019t\" were anonymous guardian spirits of the community and the ancestor spirits of the family. They were known as 'the sun (\"shms\") of their ancestors'.\nIn North Arabia, were known from Palmyrene inscriptions as \"the good and rewarding gods\" and were probably related to the \"jinn\" of west and central Arabia. Unlike jinn in modern times, could not hurt nor possess humans and were much more similar to the Roman genius. According to common Arabian belief, soothsayers, pre-Islamic philosophers, and poets were inspired by the jinn. However, jinn were also feared and thought to be responsible for causing various diseases and mental illnesses.\nMalevolent beings.\nAside from benevolent gods and spirits, there existed malevolent beings. These beings were not attested in the epigraphic record, but were alluded to in pre-Islamic Arabic poetry, and their legends were collected by later Muslim authors.\nCommonly mentioned are ghouls. Etymologically, the English word \"ghoul\" was derived from the Arabic \"ghul\", from \"ghala\", \"to seize\", related to the Sumerian \"galla\". They are said to have a hideous appearance, with feet like those of an ass. Arabs were said to utter the following couplet if they should encounter one: \"Oh ass-footed one, just bray away, we won't leave the desert plain nor ever go astray.\"\nChristian Julien Robin notes that all the known South Arabian divinities had a positive or protective role and that evil powers were only alluded to but were never personified.\nRoles of deities.\nRole of Allah.\nSome scholars postulate that in pre-Islamic Arabia, including in Mecca, Allah was considered to be a deity, possibly a creator deity or a supreme deity in a polytheistic pantheon. The word \"Allah\" (from the Arabic \"al-ilah\" meaning \"the god\") may have been used as a title rather than a name. The concept of \"Allah\" may have been vague in the Meccan religion. According to Islamic sources, Meccans and their neighbors believed that the goddesses Al-l\u0101t, Al-\u2018Uzz\u00e1, and Man\u0101t were the daughters of Allah.\nRegional variants of the word \"Allah\" occur in both pagan and Christian pre-Islamic inscriptions. References to Allah are found in the poetry of the pre-Islamic Arab poet Zuhayr bin Abi Sulma, who lived a generation before Muhammad, as well as pre-Islamic personal names. Muhammad's father's name was \"\u02bfAbd-All\u0101h\", meaning \"the servant of Allah\".\nCharles Russell Coulter and Patricia Turner considered that Allah's name may be derived from a pre-Islamic god called Ailiah and is similar to El, Il, Ilah, and Jehovah. They also considered some of his characteristics to be seemingly based on lunar deities like Almaqah, Kahl, Shaker, Wadd and Warakh. Alfred Guillaume states that the connection between Ilah that came to form Allah and ancient Babylonian \"Il\" or \"El\" of ancient Israel is not clear. Wellhausen states that Allah was known from Jewish and Christian sources and was known to pagan Arabs as the supreme god. Winfried Corduan doubts the theory of Allah of Islam being linked to a moon god, stating that the term Allah functions as a generic term, like the term El-Elyon used as a title for the god Sin.\nSouth Arabian inscriptions from the fourth century AD refer to a god called Rahman (\"The Merciful One\") who had a monotheistic cult and was referred to as the \"Lord of heaven and Earth\". Aaron W. Hughes states that scholars are unsure whether he developed from the earlier polytheistic systems or developed due to the increasing significance of the Christian and Jewish communities, and that it is difficult to establish whether Allah was linked to Rahman. Maxime Rodinson, however, considers one of Allah's names, \"Ar-Rahman\", to have been used in the form of Rahmanan earlier.\nAl-Lat, al-Uzza and Manat.\nAl-L\u0101t, Al-\u2018Uzz\u00e1 and Man\u0101t were common names used for multiple goddesses across Arabia. G. R. Hawting states that modern scholars have frequently associated the names of Arabian goddesses Al-l\u0101t, Al-\u2018Uzz\u00e1 and Man\u0101t with cults devoted to celestial bodies, particularly Venus, drawing upon evidence external to the Muslim tradition as well as in relation to Syria, Mesopotamia and the Sinai Peninsula.\nAll\u0101t (Arabic: \u0627\u0644\u0644\u0627\u062a) or al-L\u0101t was worshipped throughout the ancient Near East with various associations. Herodotus in the 5th century BC identifies \"Alilat\" (Greek: \u1f08\u03bb\u03b9\u03bb\u03ac\u03c4) as the Arabic name for Aphrodite (and, in another passage, for Urania), which is strong evidence for worship of All\u0101t in Arabia at that early date. Al-\u2018Uzz\u00e1 (Arabic: \u0627\u0644\u0639\u0632\u0649) was a fertility goddess or possibly a goddess of love. Man\u0101t (Arabic: \u0645\u0646\u0627\u0629) was the goddess of destiny.\nAl-L\u0101t's cult was spread in Syria and northern Arabia. From Safaitic and Hismaic inscriptions, it is probable that she was worshiped as Lat (\"lt\"). F. V. Winnet saw al-Lat as a lunar deity due to the association of a crescent with her in 'Ayn esh-Shall\u0101leh and a Lihyanite inscription mentioning the name of Wadd, the Minaean moon god, over the title of \"fkl lt\". Ren\u00e9 Dussaud and Gonzague Ryckmans linked her with Venus while others have thought her to be a solar deity. John F. Healey considers that al-Uzza actually might have been an epithet of al-L\u0101t before becoming a separate deity in the Meccan pantheon. Paola Corrente, writing in \"Redefining Dionysus\", considers she might have been a god of vegetation or a celestial deity of atmospheric phenomena and a sky deity.\nPractices.\nCult images and idols.\nThe worship of sacred stones constituted one of the most important practices of the Semitic speaking peoples, including Arabs. Cult images of a deity were most often an unworked stone block. The most common name for these stone blocks was derived from the Semitic \"nsb\" (\"to be stood upright\"), but other names were used, such as Nabataean (\"place of prostration\") and Arabic (\"object of circumambulation\", this term often occurs in pre-Islamic Arabic poetry). These god-stones were usually a free-standing slab, but Nabataean god-stones are usually carved directly on the rock face. Facial features may be incised on the stone (especially in Nabataea), or astral symbols (especially in South Arabia). Under Greco-Roman influence, an anthropomorphic statue might be used instead.\nThe \"Book of Idols\" describes two types of statues: idols (\"sanam\") and images (\"wathan\"). If a statue were made of wood, gold, or silver, after a human form, it would be an idol, but if the statue were made of stone, it would be an image.\nRepresentation of deities in animal-form was common in South Arabia, such as the god Sayin from Hadhramaut, who was represented as either an eagle fighting a serpent or a bull.\nSacred places.\nSacred places were known as \"hima\", \"haram\" or \"mahram\", and within these places, all living things were considered inviolable and violence was forbidden. In most of Arabia, these places would take the form of open-air sanctuaries, with distinguishing natural features such as springs and forests. Cities would contain temples, enclosing the sacred area with walls, and featuring ornate structures.\nPriesthood and sacred offices.\nSacred areas often had a guardian or a performer of cultic rites. These officials were thought to tend the area, receive offerings, and perform divination. They are known by many names, probably based on cultural-linguistic preference: was used in the Hejaz, \"k\u00e2hin\" was used in the Sinai-Negev-Hisma region, and \"kumr\u00e2\" was used in Aramaic-influenced areas. In South Arabia, \"rs2w\" and \"'fkl\" were used to refer to priests, and other words include \"qyn\" (\"administrator\") and \"mrtd\" (\"consecrated to a particular divinity\"). A more specialized staff is thought to have existed in major sanctuaries.\nPilgrimages.\nPre-Islamic Arabia was a region of many pilgrimage rituals beyond that of Hajj. Many words in Arabian languages were used to describe pilgrimage, including the Semitic \"\u1e25gg\". The most important pilgrimage ritual in South Arabia was the one to the Temple of Awwam, dedicated to the god Almaqah, which was associated with a \"\u1e25aram\" or \"ma\u1e25ram\". A number of other South Arabian deities were also associated with special sanctuaries and pilgrimages, including Dhu Samawi, Qaynan, Siyan, and several more.\nPilgrimages to sacred places would be made at certain times of the year. Pilgrim fairs of central and northern Arabia took place in specific months designated as violence-free, allowing several activities to flourish, such as trade, though in some places only exchange was permitted.\nSouth Arabian pilgrimages.\nThe most important pilgrimage in Saba' was probably the pilgrimage of Almaqah at Ma'rib, performed in the month of dhu-Abhi (roughly in July). Two references attest the pilgrimage of Almaqah dhu-Hirran at 'Amran. The pilgrimage of Ta'lab Riyam took place in Mount Tur'at and the Zabyan temple at Hadaqan, while the pilgrimage of Dhu-Samawi, the god of the Amir tribe, took place in Yathill. Aside from Sabaean pilgrimages, the pilgrimage of Sayin took place at Shabwa.\nMeccan pilgrimage.\nThe pilgrimage of Mecca involved the stations of Mount Arafat, Muzdalifah, Mina and central Mecca that included Safa and Marwa as well as the Kaaba. Pilgrims at the first two stations performed \"wuquf\" or standing in adoration. At Mina, animals were sacrificed. The procession from Arafat to Muzdalifah, and from Mina to Mecca, in a pre-reserved route towards idols or an idol, was termed and , with the latter taking place before sunset. At Jabal Quzah, fires were started during the sacred month.\nNearby the Kaaba was located the betyl which was later called \"Maqam Ibrahim\"; a place called \"al-\u1e24igr\" which Aziz al-Azmeh takes to be reserved for consecrated animals, basing his argument on a Sabaean inscription mentioning a place called \"m\u1e25gr\" which was reserved for animals; and the Well of Zamzam. Both Safa and Marwa were adjacent to two sacrificial hills, one called Mu\u1e6d'im al \u1e6cayr and another Muj\u0101wir al-Ri\u1e25 which was a pathway to Abu Kubais from where the Black Stone is reported to have originated.\nCult associations.\nMeccan pilgrimages differed according to the rites of different cult associations, in which individuals and groups joined for religious purposes. The \"\u1e24illa\" association performed the \"hajj\" in autumn season while the \"\u1e6culs\" and \"\u1e24ums\" performed the \"umrah\" in spring.\nThe \"\u1e24ums\" were the Quraysh, Banu Kinanah, Banu Khuza'a and Banu 'Amir. They did not perform the pilgrimage outside the zone of Mecca's \"haram\", thus excluding Mount Arafat. They also developed certain dietary and cultural restrictions. According to \"Kitab al-Muhabbar\", the \"\u1e24illa\" denoted most of the Banu Tamim, Qays, Rabi`ah, Q\u016b\u1e0da'ah, Ansar, Khath'am, Baj\u012blah, Banu Bakr ibn Abd Manat, Hudhayl, Asad, Tayy and Bariq. The \"\u1e6culs\" comprised the tribes of Yemen and Hadramaut, 'Akk, Ujayb and \u012ay\u0101d. The \"Basl\" recognised at least eight months of the calendar as holy. There was also another group which did not recognize the sanctity of Mecca's \"haram\" or holy months, unlike the other four.\nAstrology and divination.\nThe ancient Arabs that inhabited the Arabian Peninsula before the advent of Islam used to profess a widespread belief in fatalism (\"\u1e33adar\") alongside a fearful consideration for the sky and the stars, which they held to be ultimately responsible for every phenomenon that occurs on Earth and for the destiny of humankind. Accordingly, they shaped their entire lives in accordance with their interpretations of astral configurations and phenomena.\nSince South Arabia, oracles were regarded as \"ms\u2019l\", or \"a place of asking\", and that deities interacted by \"hr\u2019yhw\" (\"making them see\") a vision, a dream, or even direct interaction. Otherwise deities interacted indirectly through a medium.\nThere were three methods of chance-based divination attested in pre-Islamic Arabia; two of these methods, making marks in the sand or on rocks and throwing pebbles are poorly attested. The other method, the practice of randomly selecting an arrow with instructions, was widely attested and was common throughout Arabia. A simple form of this practice was reportedly performed before the image of Dhu'l-Khalasa by a certain man, sometimes said to be the Kindite poet Imru al-Qays according to al-Kalbi. A more elaborate form of the ritual was performed in before the image of Hubal. This form of divination was also attested in Palmyra, evidenced by an honorific inscription in the temple of al-Lat.\nOfferings and ritual sacrifice.\nThe most common offerings were animals, crops, food, liquids, inscribed metal plaques or stone tablets, aromatics, edifices and manufactured objects. Camel-herding Arabs would devote some of their beasts to certain deities. The beasts would have their ears slit and would be left to pasture without a herdsman, allowing them to die a natural death.\nPre-Islamic Arabians, especially pastoralist tribes, sacrificed animals as an offering to a deity. This type of offering was common and involved domestic animals such as camels, sheep and cattle, while game animals and poultry were rarely or never mentioned. Sacrifice rites were not tied to a particular location though they were usually practiced in sacred places. Sacrifice rites could be performed by the devotee, though according to Hoyland, women were probably not allowed. The victim's blood, according to pre-Islamic Arabic poetry and certain South Arabian inscriptions, was also 'poured out' on the altar stone, thus forming a bond between the human and the deity. According to Muslim sources, most sacrifices were concluded with communal feasts.\nIn South Arabia, beginning with the Christian era, or perhaps a short while before, statuettes were presented before the deity, known as (male) or (female).\nHuman sacrifice was sometimes carried out in Arabia. The victims were generally prisoners of war, who represented the god's part of the victory in booty, although other forms might have existed.\nBlood sacrifice was definitely practiced in South Arabia, but few allusions to the practice are known, apart from some Minaean inscriptions.\nMonotheism.\nPre-Islamic Arabia practiced various forms of polytheistic religion until the 4th century, when monotheism was introduced into the region and became largely prevalent by the 6th century, as is attested in texts like the inscriptions from Jabal Dabub, Ri al-Zallalah, and the Abd Shams inscription.\nScriptures.\nWith the rise of Christianity and Judaism, religious scriptures entered into use in pre-Islamic Arabia, although the available evidence is limited. Nevertheless, with the number of Christians and Jews in this period, it is likely that their scriptures were revered to a degree. The presence of scriptures among existing communities of Christians and Jews, known as the Gospel and the Torah, is described by the Quran. In the early sixth century, six Ethiopic inscriptions were composed during the time of Kaleb of Axum. These inscriptions reveal multiple scriptural quotations, including from the Book of Isaiah, the Psalms, the Gospel of Matthew, and with less certainty, the Book of Genesis. They also mention biblical figures like Jesus, Mary, and David. Another explicit example is the inscription DJE 23, discovered 15\u00a0km southeast of the city of Sanaa. This inscription is in Hebrew and was composed during Jewish rule over South Arabia. It is a \"mishmarot\" which lists the priestly divisions based on the list given in 1 Chronicles 24. The priestly divisions refer to the way in which the priests were divided in order to organize their service to the Temple in Jerusalem. Ahmad Al-Jallad has argued that the Jabal Dabub inscription, notable for its pre-Islamic variant of the Basmala, bears influences from the Psalms, particularly Psalm 90 and Psalm 123.\nThe image of a Torah case has been discovered in one of the personal seals (and possibly an inscription) of the Himyarite king Dhu Nuwas. The \"Book of the Himyarites\" records multiple uses of scriptures, including citations of it by the Christian community of Najran and in the letters of Simeon of Beth Arsham. The text reports of several martyrs under Dhu Nuwas quoting scripture, such as one directly quoting 1 John 2:4 to him in accusing him of being a liar, and another declares their going to Christ as they approach death using 2 Corinthians 3:8. In one occasion, Dhu Nuwas also swears by the Torah. Jacob of Serugh, a Syriac poet and homilist of the sixth century, wrote a \"Letter to the Himyarites\" to the Christian community of South Arabia during these same persecutions, a text that involves detailed discussions of Christology and use of scripture.\nOther practices.\nIn the Hejaz, menstruating women were not allowed to be near the cult images. The area where Isaf and Na'ila's images stood was considered out-of-bounds for menstruating women. This was reportedly the same with Manaf. According to the \"Book of Idols\", this rule applied to all the \"idols\". This was also the case in South Arabia, as attested in a South Arabian inscription from al-Jawf.\nSexual intercourse in temples was prohibited, as attested in two South Arabian inscriptions. One legend concerning Isaf and Na'ila, when two lovers made love in the Kaaba and were petrified, joining the idols in the Kaaba, echoes this prohibition.\nBy geography.\nEastern Arabia.\nThe Dilmun civilization, which existed along the Persian Gulf coast and Bahrain until the 6th century BC, worshipped a pair of deities, Inzak and Meskilak. It is not known whether these were the only deities in the pantheon or whether there were others. The discovery of wells at the sites of a Dilmun temple and a shrine suggests that sweet water played an important part in religious practices.\nIn the subsequent Greco-Roman period, there is evidence that the worship of non-indigenous deities was brought to the region by merchants and visitors. These included Bel, a god popular in the Syrian city of Palmyra, the Mesopotamian deities Nabu and Shamash, the Greek deities Poseidon and Artemis and the west Arabian deities Kahl and Manat.\nSouth Arabia.\nThe main sources of religious information in pre-Islamic South Arabia are inscriptions, which number in the thousands, as well as the Quran, complemented by archaeological evidence.\nThe civilizations of South Arabia are considered to have the most developed pantheon in the Arabian peninsula. In South Arabia, the most common god was 'Athtar, who was considered remote. The patron deity (\"shym\") was considered to be of much more immediate significance than 'Athtar. Thus, the kingdom of Saba' had Almaqah, the kingdom of Ma'in had Wadd, the kingdom of Qataban had 'Amm, and the kingdom of Hadhramaut had Sayin. Each people was termed the \"children\" of their respective patron deity. Patron deities played a vital role in sociopolitical terms, their cults serving as the focus of a person's cohesion and loyalty.\nEvidence from surviving inscriptions suggests that each of the southern kingdoms had its own pantheon of three to five deities, the major deity always being a god. For example, the pantheon of Saba comprised Almaqah, the major deity, together with 'Athtar, Haubas, Dhat-Himyam, and Dhat-Badan. The main god in Ma'in and Himyar was 'Athtar, in Qataban it was Amm, and in Hadhramaut it was Sayin. 'Amm was a lunar deity and was associated with the weather, especially lightning. One of the most frequent titles of the god Almaqah was \"Lord of Awwam\".\nAnbay was an oracular god of Qataban and also the spokesman of Amm. His name was invoked in royal regulations regarding water supply. Anbay's name was related to that of the Babylonian deity Nabu. Hawkam was invoked alongside Anbay as god of \"command and decision\" and his name is derived from the root word \"to be wise\".\nEach kingdom's central temple was the focus of worship for the main god and would be the destination for an annual pilgrimage, with regional temples dedicated to a local manifestation of the main god. Other beings worshipped included local deities or deities dedicated to specific functions as well as deified ancestors.\nInfluence of Arab tribes.\nThe encroachment of northern Arab tribes into South Arabia also introduced northern Arab deities into the region. The three goddesses al-Lat, al-Uzza and Manat became known as Lat/Latan, Uzzayan and Manawt. Uzzayan's cult in particular was widespread in South Arabia, and in Qataban she was invoked as a guardian of the final royal palace. Lat/Latan was not significant in South Arabia, but appears to be popular with the Arab tribes bordering Yemen. Other Arab deities include Dhu-Samawi, a god originally worshipped by the Amir tribe, and Kahilan, perhaps related to Kahl of Qaryat al-Faw.\nBordering Yemen, the Azd S\u00e2rat tribe of the Asir region was said to have worshipped Dhu'l-Shara, Dhu'l-Kaffayn, Dhu'l-Khalasa and A'im. According to the \"Book of Idols\", Dhu'l-Kaffayn originated from a clan of the Banu Daws. In addition to being worshipped among the Azd, Dushara is also reported to have a shrine amongst the Daws. Dhu\u2019l-Khalasa was an oracular god and was also worshipped by the Bajila and Khatham tribes.\nInfluence on Aksum.\nBefore conversion to Christianity, the Aksumites followed a polytheistic religion that was similar to that of Southern Arabia. The lunar god Hawbas was worshiped in South Arabia and Aksum. The god Astar, a sky-deity was related to that of 'Attar, was also worshipped in Aksum. The god Almaqah was worshiped at Hawulti-Melazo. The South Arabian gods in Aksum included Dhat-Himyam and Dhat-Ba'adan. A stone later reused for the church of Enda-Cerqos at Melazo mentions these gods. Hawbas is also mentioned on an altar and sphinx in Dibdib. The name of Nrw who is mentioned in Aksum inscriptions is related to that of the South Arabian god Nawraw, a deity of stars.\nTransition to Judaism.\nThe Himyarite kings radically opposed polytheism in favor of Judaism, beginning officially in 380. The last trace of polytheism in South Arabia, an inscription commemorating a construction project with a polytheistic invocation, and another, mentioning the temple of Ta\u2019lab, all date from just after 380 (the former dating to the rule of the king Dhara\u2019amar Ayman, and the latter dating to the year 401\u2013402). The rejection of polytheism from the public sphere did not mean the extinction of it altogether, as polytheism likely continued in the private sphere.\nCentral Arabia.\nThe Kinda tribe's chief god was Kahl, whom their capital Qaryat Dhat Kahl (modern Qaryat al-Faw) was named for. His name appears in the form of many inscriptions and rock engravings on the slopes of the Tuwayq, on the walls of the souk of the village, in the residential houses and on the incense burners. An inscription in Qaryat Dhat Kahl invokes the gods Kahl, Athtar al-Shariq and Lah.\nHejaz.\nAccording to Islamic sources, the Hejaz region was home to three important shrines dedicated to al-Lat, al-\u2019Uzza and Manat. The shrine and idol of al-Lat, according to the \"Book of Idols\", once stood in Ta'if, and was primarily worshipped by the Banu Thaqif tribe. Al-\u2019Uzza's principal shrine was in Nakhla and she was the chief-goddess of the Quraysh tribe. Man\u0101t's idol, reportedly the oldest of the three, was erected on the seashore between Medina and Mecca, and was honored by the Aws and Khazraj tribes. Inhabitants of several areas venerated Man\u0101t, performing sacrifices before her idol, and pilgrimages of some were not considered completed until they visited Man\u0101t and shaved their heads.\nIn the Muzdalifah region near Mecca, the god Quzah, who is a god of rains and storms, was worshipped. In pre-Islamic times pilgrims used to halt at the \"hill of Quzah\" before sunrise. Qusai ibn Kilab is traditionally reported to have introduced the association of fire worship with him on Muzdalifah.\nVarious other deities were venerated in the area by specific tribes, such as the god Suwa' by the Banu Hudhayl tribe and the god Nuhm by the Muzaynah tribe.\nHistoriography.\nThe majority of extant information about Mecca during the rise of Islam and earlier times comes from the text of the Quran itself and later Muslim sources such as the prophetic biography literature dealing with the life of Muhammad and the \"Book of Idols\". Alternative sources are so fragmentary and specialized that writing a convincing history of this period based on them alone is impossible. Several scholars hold that the s\u012bra literature is not independent of the Quran but has been fabricated to explain the verses of the Quran. There is evidence to support the contention that some reports of the s\u012bras are of dubious validity, but there is also evidence to support the contention that the s\u012bra narratives originated independently of the Quran. Compounding the problem is that the earliest extant Muslim historical works, including the s\u012bras, were composed in their definitive form more than a century after the beginning of the Islamic era. Some of these works were based on subsequently lost earlier texts, which in their turn recorded a fluid oral tradition. Scholars do not agree as to the time when such oral accounts began to be systematically collected and written down, and they differ greatly in their assessment of the historical reliability of the available texts.\nRole of Mecca and the Kaaba.\nThe Kaaba, whose environs were regarded as sacred (\"haram\"), became a national shrine under the custodianship of the Quraysh, the chief tribe of Mecca, which made the Hejaz the most important religious area in north Arabia. Its role was solidified by a confrontation with the Christian king Abraha, who controlled much of Arabia from a seat of power in Yemen in the middle of the sixth century. Abraha had recently constructed a splendid church in Sana'a, and he wanted to make that city a major centre of pilgrimage, but Mecca's Kaaba presented a challenge to his plan. Abraha found a pretext for an attack on Mecca, presented by different sources alternatively as pollution of the church by a tribe allied to the Meccans or as an attack on Abraha's grandson in Najran by a Meccan party. The defeat of the army he assembled to conquer Mecca is recounted in detail by the Islamic tradition and is also alluded to in the Quran and pre-Islamic poetry. After the battle, which probably occurred around 565, the Quraysh became a dominant force in western Arabia, receiving the title \"God's people\" (\"ahl Allah\") according to Islamic sources, and formed the cult association of \"\u1e25ums\", which tied members of many tribes in western Arabia to the Kaaba.\nThe Kaaba, Allah, and Hubal.\nAccording to tradition, the Kaaba was a cube-like, originally roofless structure housing a black stone revered as a relic, resembling other Arabian Kaabas reported in tradition, such as the Kaaba of Najran. The sanctuary was dedicated to Hubal (Arabic: \u0647\u0628\u0644), who, according to some sources, was worshiped as the greatest of the 360 idols the Kaaba contained, which probably represented the days of the year. Ibn Ishaq and Ibn Al-Kalbi both report that the human-shaped idol of Hubal made of precious stone (agate, according to the \"Book of Idols\") came into the possession of the Quraysh with its right hand broken off and that the Quraysh made a hand of gold to replace it. A soothsayer performed divination in the shrine by drawing ritual arrows, and vows and sacrifices were made to assure success. Marshall Hodgson argues that relations with deities and fetishes in pre-Islamic Mecca were maintained chiefly on the basis of bargaining, where favors were expected in return for offerings. A deity's or oracle's failure to provide the desired response was sometimes met with anger.\nDifferent theories have been proposed regarding the role of Allah in Meccan religion. According to one hypothesis, which goes back to Julius Wellhausen, Allah (the supreme deity of the tribal federation around Quraysh) was a designation that consecrated the superiority of Hubal (the supreme deity of Quraysh) over the other gods. However, there is also evidence that Allah and Hubal were two distinct deities. According to that hypothesis, the Kaaba was first consecrated to a supreme deity named Allah and then hosted the pantheon of Quraysh after their conquest of Mecca, about a century before the time of Muhammad. Some inscriptions seem to indicate the use of Allah as a name of a polytheist deity centuries earlier, but we know nothing precise about this use. Some scholars have suggested that Allah may have represented a remote creator god who was gradually eclipsed by more particularized local deities. There is disagreement on whether Allah played a major role in the Meccan religious cult. No iconic representation or idol of Allah is known to have existed.\nOther deities.\nThe three chief goddesses of Meccan religion were al-Lat, Al-\u2018Uzz\u00e1, and Man\u0101t, who were called the daughters of Allah. Egerton Sykes meanwhile states that Al-l\u0101t was the female counterpart of Allah while Uzza was a name given by Banu Ghatafan to the planet Venus.\nOther deities of the Quraysh in Mecca included Manaf, Isaf and Na\u2019ila. Although the early Arab historian Al-Tabari calls Manaf (Arabic: \u0645\u0646\u0627\u0641) \"one of the greatest deities of Mecca\", very little information is available about it. Women touched his idol as a token of blessing, and kept away from it during menstruation. Gonzague Ryckmans described this as a practice peculiar to Manaf, but according to the Encyclopedia of Islam, a report from Ibn Al-Kalbi indicates that it was common to all idols. Muhammad's great-great-grandfather's name was Abd Manaf which means \"slave of Manaf\". He is thought by some scholars to be a sun-god. The idols of Is\u0101f and N\u0101'ila were located near the Black Stone with a \"talbiyah\" performed to Is\u0101f during sacrifices. Various legends existed about the idols, including one that they were petrified after they committed adultery in the Kaaba.\nThe pantheon of the Quraysh was not identical with that of the tribes who entered into various cult and commercial associations with them, especially that of the \"hums\". Christian Julien Robin argues that the former was composed principally of idols that were in the sanctuary of Mecca, including Hubal and Manaf, while the pantheon of the associations was superimposed on it, and its principal deities included the three goddesses, who had neither idols nor a shrine in that city.\nPolitical and religious developments.\nThe second half of the sixth century was a period of political disorder in Arabia and communication routes were no longer secure. Religious divisions were an important cause of the crisis. Judaism became the dominant religion in Yemen while Christianity took root in the Persian Gulf area. In line with the broader trends of the ancient world, Arabia yearned for a more spiritual form of religion and began believing in afterlife, while the choice of religion increasingly became a personal rather than communal choice. While many were reluctant to convert to a foreign faith, those faiths provided intellectual and spiritual reference points, and the old pagan vocabulary of Arabic began to be replaced by Jewish and Christian loanwords from Aramaic everywhere, including Mecca. The distribution of pagan temples supports Gerald Hawting's argument that Arabian polytheism was marginalized in the region and already dying in Mecca on the eve of Islam. The practice of polytheistic cults was increasingly limited to the steppe and the desert, and in Yathrib (later known as Medina), which included two tribes with polytheistic majorities, the absence of a public pagan temple in the town or its immediate neighborhood indicates that polytheism was confined to the private sphere. Looking at the text of the Quran itself, Hawting has also argued that the criticism of idolaters and polytheists contained in Quran is in fact a hyperbolic reference to other monotheists, in particular the Arab Jews and Arab Christians, whose religious beliefs were considered imperfect. According to some traditions, the Kaaba contained no statues, but its interior was decorated with images of Mary and Jesus, prophets, angels, and trees.\nTo counter the effects of anarchy, the institution of sacred months, during which every act of violence was prohibited, was reestablished. During those months, it was possible to participate in pilgrimages and fairs without danger. The Quraysh upheld the principle of two annual truces, one of one month and the second of three months, which conferred a sacred character to the Meccan sanctuary. The cult association of \"hums\", in which individuals and groups partook in the same rites, was primarily religious, but it also had important economic consequences. Although, as Patricia Crone has shown, Mecca could not compare with the great centres of caravan trade on the eve of Islam, it was probably one of the most prosperous and secure cities of the peninsula, since, unlike many of them, it did not have surrounding walls. Pilgrimage to Mecca was a popular custom. Some Islamic rituals, including processions around the Kaaba and between the hills of al-Safa and Marwa, as well as the salutation \"we are here, O Allah, we are here\" repeated on approaching the Kaaba are believed to have antedated Islam. Spring water acquired a sacred character in Arabia early on and Islamic sources state that the well of Zamzam became holy long before the Islamic era.\nAdvent of Islam.\nAccording to Ibn Sa'd, the opposition in Mecca started when the prophet of Islam, Muhammad, delivered verses that \"spoke shamefully of the idols they (the Meccans) worshiped other than Himself (God) and mentioned the perdition of their fathers who died in disbelief\". According to William Montgomery Watt, as the ranks of Muhammad's followers swelled, he became a threat to the local tribes and the rulers of the city, whose wealth rested upon the Kaaba, the focal point of Meccan religious life, which Muhammad threatened to overthrow. Muhammad's denunciation of the Meccan traditional religion was especially offensive to his own tribe, the Quraysh, as they were the guardians of the Kaaba.\nThe conquest of Mecca around 629\u2013630 AD led to the destruction of the idols around the Kaaba, including Hubal. Following the conquest, shrines and temples dedicated to deities were destroyed, such as the shrines to al-Lat, al-\u2019Uzza and Manat in Ta\u2019if, Nakhla and al-Qudayd respectively.\nNorth Arabia.\nLess complex societies outside South Arabia often had smaller pantheons, with the patron deity having much prominence. The deities attested in north Arabian inscriptions include Ruda, Nuha, Allah, Dathan, and Kahl. Inscriptions in a North Arabian dialect in the region of Najd referring to Nuha describe emotions as a gift from him. In addition, they also refer to Ruda being responsible for all things good and bad.\nThe Safaitic tribes in particular prominently worshipped the goddess al-Lat as a bringer of prosperity. The Syrian god Baalshamin was also worshipped by Safaitic tribes and is mentioned in Safaitic inscriptions.\nReligious worship amongst the Qedarites, an ancient tribal confederation that was probably subsumed into Nabataea around the 2nd century AD, was centred on a polytheistic system in which women rose to prominence. Divine images of the gods and goddesses worshipped by Qedarite Arabs, as noted in Assyrian inscriptions, included representations of Atarsamain, Nuha, Ruda, Dai, Abirillu and Atarquruma. The female guardian of these idols, usually the reigning queen, served as a priestess (, in Assyrian texts) who communed with the other world. There is also evidence that the Qedar worshipped al-Lat to whom the inscription on a silver bowl from a king of Qedar is dedicated. In the Babylonian Talmud, which was passed down orally for centuries before being transcribed c. 500 AD, in tractate Taanis (folio 5b), it is said that most Qedarites worshiped pagan gods.\nThe Aramaic stele inscription discovered by Charles Hubert in 1880 at Tayma mentions the introduction of a new god called Salm of \"hgm\" into the city's pantheon being permitted by three local gods \u2013 Salm of Mahram who was the chief god, Shingala, and Ashira. The name Salm means \"image\" or \"idol\".\nThe Midianites, a people referred to in the Book of Genesis and located in north-western Arabia, may have worshipped Yahweh. An Egyptian temple of Hathor continued to be used during the Midianite occupation of the site, although images of Hathor were defaced suggesting Midianite opposition. They transformed it into a desert tent-shrine set up with a copper sculpture of a snake.\nThe Lihyanites worshipped the god Dhu-Ghabat and rarely turned to others for their needs. Dhu-Ghabat's name means \"he of the thicket\", based on the etymology of \"gabah\", meaning forest or thicket. The god al-Kutba', a god of writing probably related to a Babylonian deity and perhaps was brought into the region by the Babylonian king Nabonidus, is mentioned in Lihyanite inscriptions as well. The worship of the Hermonian gods Leucothea and Theandrios was spread from Phoenicia to Arabia.\nAccording to the \"Book of Idols\", the Tayy tribe worshipped al-Fals, whose idol stood on Jabal Aja, while the Kalb tribe worshipped Wadd, who had an idol in Dumat al-Jandal.\nNabataeans.\nThe Nabataeans worshipped primarily northern Arabian deities. Under foreign influences, they also incorporated foreign deities and elements into their beliefs.\nThe Nabataeans' chief-god is Dushara. In Petra, the only major goddess is Al-\u2018Uzz\u00e1, assuming the traits of Isis, Tyche and Aphrodite. It is unknown if her worship and identity is related to her cult at Nakhla and others. The Nabatean inscriptions define All\u0101t and Al-Uzza as the \"bride of Dushara\". Al-Uzza may have been an epithet of All\u0101t in the Nabataean religion according to John F. Healey.\nOutside Petra, other deities were worshipped; for example, Hubal and Manat were invoked in the Hejaz, and al-Lat was invoked in the Hauran and the Syrian desert. The Nabataean king Obodas I, who founded Obodat, was deified and worshipped as a god. They also worshipped Shay al-Qawm, al-Kutba', and various Greco-Roman deities such as Nike and Tyche. Maxime Rodinson suggests that Hubal, who was popular in Mecca, had a Nabataean origin.\nThe worship of Pakidas, a Nabataean god, is attested at Gerasa alongside Hera in an inscription dated to the first century A.D. while an Arabian god is also attested by three inscriptions dated to the second century.\nThe Nabataeans were known for their elaborate tombs, but they were not just for show; they were meant to be comfortable places for the dead. Petra has many \"sacred high places\" which include altars that have usually been interpreted as places of human sacrifice, although, since the 1960s, an alternative theory that they are \"exposure platforms\" for placing the corpses of the deceased as part of a funerary ritual has been put forward. However, there is, in fact, little evidence for either proposition.\nReligious beliefs of Arabs outside Arabia.\nPalmyra was a cosmopolitan society, with its population being a mix of Aramaeans and Arabs. The Arabs of Palmyra worshipped al-Lat, Rahim and Shamash. The temple of al-Lat was established by the Bene Ma'zin tribe, who were probably an Arab tribe. The nomads of the countryside worshipped a set of deities, bearing Arab names and attributes, most prominent of them was Abgal, who himself is not attested in Palmyra itself. Ma'n, an Arab god, was worshipped alongside Abgal in a temple dedicated in 195 AD at Khirbet Semrin in the Palmyrene region while an inscription dated 194 AD at Ras esh-Shaar calls him the \"good and bountiful god\". A stele at Ras esh-Shaar shows him riding a horse with a lance while the god Saad is riding a camel. Abgal, Ma'n and Sa'd were known as the \"genii\".\nThe god Ashar was represented on a stele in Dura-Europos alongside another god Sa'd. The former was represented on a horse with Arab dress while the other was shown standing on the ground. Both had Parthian hairstyle, large facial hair and moustaches as well as similar clothing. Ashar's name is found to have been used in a theophoric manner among the Arab-majority areas of the region of the Northwest Semitic languages, like Hatra, where names like \"Refuge of Ashar\", \"Servant of Ashar\" and \"Ashar has given\" are recorded on an inscription.\nIn Edessa, the solar deity was the primary god around the time of the Roman Emperor Julian and this worship was presumably brought in by migrants from Arabia. Julian's oration delivered to the denizens of the city mentioned that they worshipped the Sun surrounded by Azizos and Monimos whom Iamblichus identified with Ares and Hermes respectively. Monimos derived from \"Mu'nim\" or \"the favourable one\", and was another name of Ruda or Ruldaiu as apparent from spellings of his name in Sennacherib's Annals.\nThe idol of the god al-Uqaysir was, according to the \"Book of Idols\", located in Syria, and was worshipped by the tribes of Quda'a, Lakhm, Judham, Amela, and Ghatafan. Adherents would go on a pilgrimage to the idol and shave their heads, then mix their hair with wheat, \"for every single hair a handful of wheat\".\nA shrine to Dushara has been discovered in the harbour of ancient Puteoli in Italy. The city was an important nexus for trade to the Near East, and it is known to have had a Nabataean presence during the mid 1st century BCE. A Minaean altar dedicated to Wadd evidently existed in Delos, containing two inscriptions in Minaean and Greek respectively.\nBedouin religious beliefs.\nThe Bedouin were introduced to Meccan ritualistic practices as they frequented settled towns of the Hejaz during the four months of the \"holy truce\", the first three of which were devoted to religious observance, while the fourth was set aside for trade. Alan Jones infers from Bedouin poetry that the gods, even Allah, were less important to the Bedouins than Fate. They seem to have had little trust in rituals and pilgrimages as means of propitiating Fate, but had recourse to divination and soothsayers (). The Bedouins regarded some trees, wells, caves and stones as sacred objects, either as fetishes or as means of reaching a deity. They created sanctuaries where people could worship fetishes.\nThe Bedouins had a code of honor which Fazlur Rahman Malik states may be regarded as their religious ethics. This code encompassed women, bravery, hospitality, honouring one's promises and pacts, and vengeance. They believed that the ghost of a slain person would cry out from the grave until their thirst for blood was quenched. Practices such as killing of infant girls were often regarded as having religious sanction. Numerous mentions of jinn in the Quran and testimony of both pre-Islamic and Islamic literature indicate that the belief in spirits was prominent in pre-Islamic Bedouin religion.\nHowever, there is evidence that the word jinn is derived from Aramaic, , which was widely attested in Palmyrene inscriptions. The Aramaic word was used by Christians to designate pagan gods reduced to the status of demons, and was introduced into Arabic folklore only late in the pre-Islamic era. Julius Wellhausen has observed that such spirits were thought to inhabit desolate, dingy and dark places and that they were feared. One had to protect oneself from them, but they were not the objects of a true cult.\nBedouin religious experience also included an apparently indigenous cult of ancestors. The dead were not regarded as powerful, but rather as deprived of protection and needing charity of the living as a continuation of social obligations beyond the grave. Only certain ancestors, especially heroes from which the tribe was said to derive its name, seem to have been objects of real veneration.\nOther religions.\nAbrahamic religions.\nJudaism.\nA thriving community of Jewish tribes existed in pre-Islamic Arabia and included both sedentary and nomadic communities. Jews had migrated into Arabia from Roman times onwards. Arabian Jews spoke Arabic as well as Hebrew and Aramaic and had contact with Jewish religious centres in Babylonia and Palestine. The Yemeni Himyarites converted to Judaism in the 4th century, and some of the Kinda were also converted in the 4th/5th century. Jewish tribes existed in all major Arabian towns during Muhammad's time including in Tayma and Khaybar as well as Medina with twenty tribes living in the peninsula. From tomb inscriptions, it is visible that Jews also lived in Mada'in Saleh and Al-'Ula.\nThere is evidence that Jewish converts in the Hejaz were regarded as Jews by other Jews, as well as by non-Jews, and sought advice from Babylonian rabbis on matters of attire and kosher food. In at least one case, it is known that an Arab tribe agreed to adopt Judaism as a condition for settling in a town dominated by Jewish inhabitants. Some Arab women in Yathrib/Medina are said to have vowed to make their child a Jew if the child survived, since they considered the Jews to be people \"of knowledge and the book\" (\"\u02bfilmin wa-kit\u0101bin\"). Philip Hitti infers from proper names and agricultural vocabulary that the Jewish tribes of Yathrib consisted mostly of Judaized clans of Arabian and Aramaean origin.\nThe key role played by Jews in the trade and markets of the Hejaz meant that market day for the week was the day preceding the Jewish Sabbath. This day, which was called \"aruba\" in Arabic, also provided occasion for legal proceedings and entertainment, which in turn may have influenced the choice of Friday as the day of Muslim congregational prayer. Toward the end of the sixth century, the Jewish communities in the Hejaz were in a state of economic and political decline, but they continued to flourish culturally in and beyond the region. They had developed their distinctive beliefs and practices, with a pronounced mystical and eschatological dimension. In the Islamic tradition, based on a phrase in the Quran, Arab Jews are said to have referred to Uzair as the son of Allah, although the historical accuracy of this assertion has been disputed.\nJewish agriculturalists lived in the region of Eastern Arabia. According to Robert Bertram Serjeant, the Baharna may be the Arabized \"descendants of converts from Christians (Arameans), Jews and ancient Persians (Majus) inhabiting the island and cultivated coastal provinces of Eastern Arabia at the time of the Arab conquest\". From the Islamic sources, it seems that Judaism was the religion most followed in Yemen. Ya'qubi claimed all Yemenites to be Jews; Ibn Hazm however states only Himyarites and some Kindites were Jews.\nChristianity.\nThe main areas of Christian influence in Arabia were on the northeastern and northwestern borders and in what was to become Yemen in the south. The north west was under the influence of Christian missionary activity from the Roman Empire where the Ghassanids, a client kingdom of the Romans, were converted to Christianity. In the south, particularly at Najran, a centre of Christianity developed as a result of the influence of the Christian Kingdom of Axum based on the other side of the Red Sea in Ethiopia. Some of the Banu Harith had converted to Christianity. One family of the tribe built a large church at Najran called \"Deir Najran\", also known as the \"Ka'ba of Najran\". Both the Ghassanids and the Christians in the south adopted Monophysitism.\nThe third area of Christian influence was on the north eastern borders where the Lakhmids, a client tribe of the Sassanians, adopted Nestorianism, being the form of Christianity having the most influence in the Sassanian Empire. As the Persian Gulf region of Arabia increasingly fell under the influence of the Sassanians from the early third century, many of the inhabitants were exposed to Christianity following the eastward dispersal of the religion by Mesopotamian Christians. However, it was not until the fourth century that Christianity gained popularity in the region with the establishment of monasteries and a diocesan structure.\nIn pre-Islamic times, the population of Eastern Arabia consisted of Christianized Arabs (including Abd al-Qays) and Aramean Christians among other religions. Syriac functioned as a liturgical language. Serjeant states that the Baharna may be the Arabized descendants of converts from the original population of Christians (Aramaeans), among other religions at the time of Arab conquests. Beth Qatraye, which translates \"region of the Qataris\" in Syriac, was the Christian name used for the region encompassing north-eastern Arabia. It included Bahrain, Tarout Island, Al-Khatt, Al-Hasa, and Qatar. Oman and what is today the United Arab Emirates comprised the diocese known as Beth Mazunaye. The name was derived from 'Mazun', the Persian name for Oman and the United Arab Emirates. Sohar was the central city of the diocese.\nIn Nejd, in the centre of the peninsula, there is evidence of members of two tribes, Kinda and Taghlib, converting to Christianity in the 6th century. However, in the Hejaz in the west, whilst there is evidence of the presence of Christianity, it is not thought to have been significant amongst the indigenous population of the area.\nArabicized Christian names were fairly common among pre-Islamic Arabians, which has been attributed to the influence that Syrianized Christian Arabs had on Bedouins of the peninsula for several centuries before the rise of Islam.\nNeal Robinson, based on verses in the Quran, believes that some Arab Christians may have held unorthodox beliefs such as the worshipping of a divine triad of God the father, Jesus the Son and Mary the Mother. Furthermore, there is evidence that unorthodox groups such as the Collyridians, whose adherents worshipped Mary, were present in Arabia, and it has been proposed that the Quran refers to their beliefs. However, other scholars, notably Mircea Eliade, William Montgomery Watt, G. R. Hawting and Sidney H. Griffith, cast doubt on the historicity or reliability of such references in the Quran. Their views are as follows:\nIranian religions.\nThough they lack any surviving physical evidence, Iranian religions may have existed in pre-Islamic Arabia on account of Sasanian military presence along the Persian Gulf and South Arabia and on account of trade routes between the Hejaz and Iraq. According to Islamic-era sources, Arabs in northeast of the peninsula converted to Zoroastrianism and several Zoroastrian temples were constructed in Najd. There is also evidence of existence of Manichaeism in Arabia as several early sources indicate a presence of \"zandaqas\" in Mecca, although the term could also be interpreted as referring to Mazdakism. However, according to the most recent research by Tardieu, the prevalence of Manichaeism in Mecca during the 6th and 7th centuries, when Islam emerged, can not be proven.\nSimilar reservations regarding the appearance of Manichaeism and Mazdakism in pre-Islamic Mecca are offered by Trompf &amp; Mikkelsen et al. in their latest work (2018). There is evidence for the circulation of Iranian religious ideas in the form of Persian loan words in Quran such as \"firdaws\" (paradise).\nZoroastrianism was also present in Eastern Arabia and Persian-speaking Zoroastrians lived in the region. The religion was introduced in the region including modern-day Bahrain during the rule of Persian empires in the region starting from 250 B.C. It was mainly practiced in Bahrain by Persian settlers. Zoroastrianism was also practiced in the Persian-ruled area of modern-day Oman. The religion also existed in Persian-ruled area of modern Yemen. The descendants of Abna, the Persian conquerors of Yemen, were followers of Zoroastrianism.\nYemen's Zoroastrians who had the jizya imposed on them after being conquered by Muhammad are mentioned by the Islamic historian al-Baladhuri. According to Serjeant, the Baharna people may be the Arabized descendants of converts from the original population of ancient Persians (majus) as well as other religions.\nBuddhism.\nThere are some Islamic documents that, when describing the state of religion in pre-Islamic Arabia, include a presence of Buddhism. One recurring theme in these depictions is that the Buddhist community was able to store some of their idols in the Kaaba. Rashid al-Din Hamadani (d. 1318), in his \"J\u0101mi\u02be al-Taw\u0101r\u012bkh\", says both that Buddhist idols could be found in the Kaaba and that both Arabs and some Persians on the peninsula saw themselves as students of the Buddha. One Islamic miniature from the thirteenth century depicts Muhammad destroying Hindu and Buddhist idols at the Kaaba. Al-Masudi said that Buddhists see the Kaaba as one of their temples. Al-Masudi also depicts the Quraysh tribe of Mecca as having gold-plated deer statues, which were then seen as typical Buddhist symbols. Mostafa Vaziri has speculated about a possible historicity to these descriptions, suggesting that Buddhism reached Arabia through Indian merchants and trade routes. Vaziri also speculates an influence of Buddhist architecture on the design of the Kaaba, such as from the Nawbah\u0101r and other Buddhist stupas.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15391", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15391", "title": "Irish Mythology", "text": ""}
{"id": "15392", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15392", "title": "Imperial Conference", "text": "19th &amp; 20th Century gatherings of British Imperial officials\nImperial Conferences (Colonial Conferences before 1907) were periodic gatherings of government leaders from the self-governing colonies and dominions of the British Empire between 1887 and 1937, before the establishment of regular Meetings of Commonwealth Prime Ministers in 1944. They were held in 1887, 1894, 1897, 1902, 1907, 1911, 1921, 1923, 1926, 1930, 1932 and 1937.\nAll the conferences were held in London, the seat of the Empire, except for the 1894 and 1932 conferences which were held in Ottawa, the capital of the senior Dominion of the Crown. The 1907 conference changed the name of the meetings to Imperial Conferences and agreed that the meetings should henceforth be regular rather than taking place while overseas statesmen were visiting London for royal occasions (e.g. jubilees and coronations).\nNotable meetings.\nOriginally instituted to emphasise imperial unity, as time went on, the conferences became a key forum for dominion governments to assert the desire for removing the remaining vestiges of their colonial status. The conference of 1926 agreed to the Balfour Declaration, which acknowledged that the dominions would henceforth rank as equals to the United Kingdom, as members of the 'British Commonwealth of Nations'.\nThe conference of 1930 decided to abolish the legislative supremacy of the British Parliament as it was expressed through the Colonial Laws Validity Act and other Imperial Acts. The statesmen recommended that a declaratory enactment of Parliament, which became the Statute of Westminster 1931, be passed with the consent of the dominions, but some dominions did not ratify the statute until some years afterwards. The 1930 conference was notable, too, for the attendance of Southern Rhodesia, despite it being a self-governing colony, not a dominion.\nTowards Commonwealth meetings.\nAs World War II drew to a close, Imperial Conferences were replaced by Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conferences, with 17 such meetings occurring from 1944 until 1969, all but one of the meetings occurred in London. The gatherings were renamed Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings (CHOGM) in 1971 and were henceforth held every two years with hosting duties rotating around the Commonwealth.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15394", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15394", "title": "Interpreter", "text": ""}
{"id": "15395", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15395", "title": "International Refugee Organization", "text": "Intergovernmental humanitarian organization (1946\u20131952)\nThe International Refugee Organization (IRO) was an intergovernmental organization founded on 20 April 1946 to deal with the massive refugee problem created by World War II. A Preparatory Commission began operations fourteen months previously. In 1948, the treaty establishing the IRO formally entered into force and the IRO became a United Nations specialized agency. The IRO assumed most of the functions of the earlier United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration. In 1952, operations of the IRO ceased, and it was replaced by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).\nThe Constitution of the International Refugee Organization, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 15 December 1946, is the founding document of the IRO. The constitution specified the organization's field of operations. Controversially, the constitution defined \"persons of German ethnic origin\" who had been expelled, or were to be expelled from their countries of birth into the postwar Germany, as individuals who would \"not be the concern of the Organization.\" This excluded from its purview a group that exceeded in number all the other European displaced persons put together. Also, because of disagreements between the Western allies and the Soviet Union, the IRO only worked in areas controlled by Western armies of occupation.\nTwenty-six states became members of the IRO and it formally came into existence in 1948: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Republic of China, Chile, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, France, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, Italy, Liberia, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Venezuela. The U.S. provided about 40% of the IRO's $155 million annual budget. The total contribution by the members for the five years of operation was around $400 million. It had rehabilitated around 10 million people during this time, out of 15 million people who were stranded in Europe. The IRO's first Director-General was William Hallam Tuck, succeeded by J. Donald Kingsley on 31 July 1949.\nIRO closed its operations on 31 January 1952 and after a liquidation period, went out of existence on 30 September 1953. By that time many of its responsibilities had been assumed by other agencies. Of particular importance was the Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees, established in January 1951 as a part of the United Nations, and the Intergovernmental Committee for European Migration (originally PICMME), set up in December 1951. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15396", "revid": "45792121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15396", "title": "IRO", "text": "IRO, Iro, or iro may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "15397", "revid": "48911350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15397", "title": "IBAN", "text": ""}
{"id": "15399", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15399", "title": "Irrealism in music", "text": ""}
{"id": "15401", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15401", "title": "Isabella d'Este", "text": "Italian noblewoman, patron of the arts and fashion leader (1474\u20131539)\nIsabella d'Este (19 May 1474\u00a0\u2013 13 February 1539) was the Marchioness of Mantua and one of the leading women of the Italian Renaissance as a major cultural and political figure.\nShe was a patron of the arts as well as a leader of fashion and her innovative style of dressing was emulated by many women. The poet Ariosto labeled her as the \"liberal and magnanimous Isabella\", while author Matteo Bandello described her as \"supreme among women\". Diplomat Niccol\u00f2 da Correggio went even further by hailing her as \"The First Lady of the world\".\nShe served as the regent of Mantua during the absence of her husband Francesco II Gonzaga, Marquess of Mantua and during the minority of her son Federico. She was a prolific letter-writer and maintained a lifelong correspondence with her sister-in-law Elisabetta Gonzaga. Isabella grew up in a cultured family in the city-state of Ferrara. She received a fine classical education and she met many famous humanist scholars and artists. Due to the vast amount of extant correspondence between Isabella and her family and friends, her life is extremely well documented.\nBiography.\nIsabella was born on Tuesday, 19 May 1474 at nine o'clock in the evening. Isabella's mother, Eleanor of Naples, wrote a letter to her friend Barbara Gonzaga describing the details of Isabella's birth in Ferrara. Eleanor was the daughter of Ferdinand I, the Aragonese King of Naples, and Isabella of Clermont.\nOne year later, on 29 June 1475, her sister Beatrice was born, and in 1476 and 1477 two brothers, Alfonso and Ferrante, were born. In 1479 and 1480 two more brothers were born; Ippolito and Sigismondo. Of all the children born into the family, Isabella is believed to have been the favourite.\nIn the year of her brother Ferrante's birth, Isabella was among the children of the family who travelled to Naples with her mother. When her mother returned to Ferrara, Isabella accompanied her, while the other two children remained in Naples for many years: Beatrice was adopted by her grandfather, and her little brother Ferrante was left under the tutelage of their uncle Alfonso.\nEducation.\nDue to her outstanding intellect, she often discussed the classics and the affairs of state with ambassadors. In addition, she was personally acquainted with the painters, musicians, writers, and scholars who lived in and around the court. Besides her extensive knowledge of history and languages, she could also recite Virgil and Terence by heart. Isabella was also a talented singer and musician, and was taught to play the lute by Giovanni Angelo Testagrossa. In addition to these accomplishments, she was also an innovator of new dances, having been instructed in the art of dance by Ambrogio, a Jewish dancing master.\nBetrothal and marriage.\nIn 1480, at the age of six, Isabella was betrothed to the eight years older Francesco, the heir to the Marquess of Mantua. The Duke of Milan requested her hand in marriage for his son, Ludovico, two weeks later. Instead, her sister, Beatrice, was betrothed to Ludovico and became the Duchess of Milan. Her dowry amounted to 25,000 ducats. Although he was not handsome, Isabella admired Francesco for his strength and bravery; she also regarded him as a gentleman. After their first few encounters she began to enjoy his company and she spent the next few years getting to know him and preparing to be the Marchioness of Mantua. During their courtship, Isabella treasured the letters, poems, and sonnets he sent her as gifts.\nTen years later, on 11 February 1490, at age 15, she married Francesco by proxy. By then, he had succeeded to the marquisate. Besides being the Marquess, Francesco was captain general of the armies of the Republic of Venice. Isabella became his wife amid a spectacular outpouring of public rejoicing and a grand celebration that took place on 15 February. She brought the sum of 3,000 ducats as her marriage portion, as well as valuable jewelry, dishes, and a silver service. Prior to the magnificent banquet which followed the wedding ceremony, Isabella rode through the main streets of Ferrara astride a horse draped in gems and gold.\nRelations with Milan.\nIn 1491 Isabella went with a small entourage to Brescello and from there to Pavia, to accompany her sister Beatrice who was married to Ludovico il Moro. On this occasion she saw Galeazzo Sanseverino again \u2014 as she had known him as a child in Ferrara \u2014 with whom she began a large, and at times humorous, exchange of letters. However, his identity is not certain and could be the almost homonymous Galeazzo Visconti, Count of Busto Arsizio, a courtier also dear to the dukes. \nBetween the two immediately ignited a dispute, destined to last for months, on who was the best paladin, Orlando or Rinaldo: Galeazzo supported the first, the sisters d'Este the second. Galeazzo, who exercised a strong fascination, soon managed to convert them both to Orlando's faith, but Isabella, once back in Mantua, returned to prefer Rinaldo, so that Galeazzo remembered her as \"I alone was enough to make her change her mind and cry out \"Rolando! Rolando!\"\", invited her to follow her sister's example and swore that he would convert her a second time, as soon as they met again. Isabella jokingly replied that she would then bring a frog to offend him, and the dispute went on for a long time.\nOn 11 February, speaking to her about the amusements he had with Beatrice, he wrote to her: \"I will also strive to improve in order to give greater pleasure to the S. V., when I come for her this summer\", and lamented the lack of \"his sweet company\". Isabella's presence was in fact much desired in Milan, not only by Galeazzo but also by her sister, Ludovico and the other courtiers. and perhaps also out of jealousy of Ludovico. \nDespite the affection, Isabella began to feel envy for her sister Beatrice, first for the very fortunate marriage that had touched her and for the enormous riches, then for the two sons in perfect health who were born to her a short time later, while she seemed unable to have children, and in this aroused the concerns of her mother Eleonora, who continually exhorted her in letters to be as close as possible to her husband. A certain hatred can also be seen in a letter to his mother dating back to his visit to Pavia in August 1492, when, speaking of Beatrice, he wrote: \"she is not a greater than me, but she is much bigger!\"; in a similar way she also expressed herself to her husband, not being able yet to know, perhaps, that the sister's coarseness was due to the incipient pregnancy (she was at the fourth-fifth month). These frictions were perhaps also linked to the fact that Ludovico had initially asked for Isabella's hand, in 1480, and that this had not been possible because, only a few days earlier, Duke Ercole had officially promised it to Francesco Gonzaga.\nDespite everything, in 1492 she was very close to Beatrice in a difficult moment of her pregnancy, that is when she was suddenly struck by an attack of malarial fevers, and in 1495 she went again to Milan to assist her sister in her second birth and also baptized her nephew Francesco.\nIn the summer of 1494, on the occasion of the descent of the French into Italy, Beatrice invited her sister to Milan to kiss Gilbert of Montpensier and others of the royal house, according to the custom French. Secretary Benedetto Capilupi reported:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Duchess says that when the Duke of Orliens came, she had to dress colorfully, dance and be kissed by the Duke, who wanted to kiss all the bridesmaids and women of account. [...] Coming Count Delfino or someone else of royal blood, the Duchess invites the S.V. to take these little kisses\u2014\u200aIn fact, it does not seem that Beatrice had any conflicting feelings towards Isabella, nor that she saw with a bad eye the complicity between the latter and her husband Ludovico. The Moro in fact, who was of generous nature, often gave Isabella even very expensive gifts: once he sent her fifteen arms of a fabric so precious as to cost forty ducats on her arm \u2013 an amazing sum \u2013 saying that he had already made a dress for Beatrice. \nAfter the death of his wife, which took place in 1497, Ludovico came to allude to a secret relationship with Isabella, claiming that it was out of jealousy of his wife that the Marquis Francesco played a double game between him and the Lordship of Venice. The rumor was however promptly denied by his father Ercole.\nOthers instead defined Beatrice's attitude towards her sister as \"complexed second child\" because in the letter of congratulations to Isabella for the birth of little Eleonora - who, being female, incredibly disappointed her mother - she added the greetings of her little son Hercules to \"soa cusina\", despite not having the child yet turned one year of age, something that historians such as Luciano Chiappini interpreted as a sort of mockery, of \"refined malice\", \"a slap given with grace and grace\". In fact, if Isabella was always the daughter most loved by her parents, Beatrice had been ceded to her grandfather, and only with the birth of the firstborn had she obtained her own revenge.\nOther mischief between sisters dates back to the weeks immediately following the battle of Fornovo: Beatrice, who was at the siege of Novara together with the Marquis Francesco, wanted to see the booty stolen from the tent of King Charles VIII during the battle, booty that however Francesco had already sent to his wife in Mantua. He wrote to his wife to give it to his sister-in-law, but Isabella replied that she was not so willing to cede this honor to her sister and, with the excuse that she lacked a mule, begged her husband to invent some expedient. Beatrice replied that it was not her intention to steal the booty from her sister, but that she only wanted to see it all together and then return it to her. Meanwhile, it occurred to her to procure \"a femina de partito\", that is, a high-ranking prostitute, to Francis, saying to do it \"for a good cause and to avoid greater evil\", that is to say to preserve her brother-in-law and sister from the terrible malfrancese, but perhaps also to ingratiate herself with him. In October Francis wrote to his wife sorry that she was not there with them to see the army before it was disbanded, but it does not seem that he had urged her to come, probably because he had at heart his safety (the camps were dangerous places, where violent fights often broke out, and Beatrice herself had been saved on one occasion by Francis, when she risked being raped by a few thousand Alemannic mercenaries).\nMoreover, Isabella had already had a mishap with some Genoese soldiers who, upon entering the city in 1492, surrounded her to appropriate her mount and harness, according to custom. So she later told her husband: \"I was never more afraid; and they tore all the harness to pieces, and took off the bridle before I could dismount, despite the fact that the governor interposed him and that I voluntarily offered it to him. I lost heart, although among so many partisans I was afraid of some misfortune. Finally, helped, I freed myself from their hands \".\nHaving also received different educations, the two sisters were the opposite of each other: Isabella, more like her mother, was sweet, graceful and a lover of tranquility; Beatrice, more like her father, was impetuous, adventurous and aggressive. Beatrice loved to shoot crossbow, Isabella had \"the hand so light that we cannot play well [the clavichord], when we have to strain it for the hardness of the keys\". However, they were united by the desire to excel in everything.\nIn the last two hundred years historians and writers were divided in preference for one or the other: many - such as Francesco Malaguzzi Valeri and Maria Bellonci - regretted that Ludovico had not, only briefly, married Isabella, fantasizing about the splendors that Isabella would be able to bring to Milan, in conditions of greater well-being than to Mantua, and how he could distract the Moro from his perverse policy. These judgments were not separated from a blatant contempt for the second daughter, as in the case of Alessandro Luzio, who writes: \"The luck that made play of this Sforza, making him pass from the brightest heights to the darkest abysses of misery, had in April 1480 exchanged a beneficial star for a sinister meteor\".\nIn truth, other historians, including Rodolfo Renier himself, Luzio's colleague, judged that Beatrice was the most suitable wife for Ludovico, since she knew, with her own audacity, to instill courage in her insecure consort, and acquired political depth already in her early youth, so much so as to be decisive in situations of greatest danger, while Isabella could boast a role in this sense only in the years of maturity. The different fate of the two sisters certainly weighed in these judgments: Isabella lived sixty-five years, Beatrice died at twenty-one. It was from this tragic loss, for which she proved inconsolable, that Isabella undertook to support her brother-in-law's cause with her husband Francesco, who was against him. So he continued to do until the fall of the Sforza, in 1499, when he suddenly changed sides and declared himself to be \"good French\".\nMarriage.\nAs the couple had known and admired one another for many years, their mutual attraction deepened into love. Reportedly, marriage to Francesco caused Isabella to \"bloom\". At the time of her wedding, Isabella was said to have been pretty, slim, graceful, and well-dressed. Her long, fine hair was dyed a fashionable pale blonde and her eyes were described as \"brown as fir cones in autumn, scattered laughter\".\nIsabella's relationship with her husband over the years often proved to be tense, at times very tense, both for the political differences between the two and for the difficulty in procreating a male heir. In truth, Francesco for his part was always very proud of his daughters and never showed himself disappointed, indeed from the beginning he declared himself in love with the firstborn Eleonora, despite the absolute disappointment of Isabella who refused her daughter, who was then very lovingly educated by her sister-in-law Elisabetta, who because of her husband's impotence never had children. When in 1496 the second daughter Margherita was born, Isabella was so angry that she wrote to her husband, who was then fighting the French in Calabria, a letter in which she blamed him, declaring that she did nothing but reap the fruits of his sown. Francis replied that he was instead very happy with the birth of his daughter \u2013 who, however, he did not have time to know, having died in swaddling clothes \u2013 and indeed forbade anyone to show discontent with it.\nOnly in 1500 their son Federico was born.\nIn his capacity of captain general of the Venetian armies, Francesco often was required to go to Venice for conferences that left Isabella in Mantua on her own at \"La Reggia\", the ancient palace that was the family seat of the Gonzagas. She did not lack company, however, as she passed the time with her mother and with her sister, Beatrice. Upon meeting Elisabetta Gonzaga, her 18-year-old sister-in-law, the two women became close friends. They enjoyed reading books, playing cards, and travelling about the countryside together. Once they journeyed as far as Lake Garda during one of Francesco's absences.\nDiplomatic missions.\nIsabella had met the French king in Milan in 1500 on a successful diplomatic mission that she had undertaken to protect Mantua from French invasion. Louis had been impressed by her alluring personality and keen intelligence. It was while she was being entertained by Louis, whose troops occupied Milan, that she offered asylum to Milanese refugees including Cecilia Gallerani, the refined mistress of her sister Beatrice's husband, Ludovico Sforza, Duke of Milan, who had been forced to leave his duchy in the wake of French occupation. Isabella presented Cecilia to King Louis, describing her as a \"lady of rare gifts and charm\".\nLucrezia Borgia.\nA year after her 1502 marriage to Isabella's brother Alfonso, the notorious Lucrezia Borgia became the mistress of Francesco. At about the same time, Isabella had given birth to a daughter, Ippolita, and she continued to bear him children throughout Francesco and Lucrezia's long, passionate affair, which was more sexual than romantic. Lucrezia had previously made overtures of friendship to Isabella which the latter had coldly and disdainfully ignored. From the time Lucrezia had first arrived in Ferrara as Alfonso's intended bride, Isabella, despite having acted as hostess during the wedding festivities, had regarded Lucrezia as a rival, whom she sought to outdo at every opportunity. Francesco's affair with Lucrezia, whose beauty was renowned, caused Isabella much jealous suffering and emotional pain. The liaison ended when he contracted syphilis as a result of encounters with prostitutes.\nRegency.\nIsabella played an important role in Mantua during troubled times for the city. When her husband was captured in 1509 and held hostage in Venice, she took control of Mantua's military forces and held off the invaders until his release in 1512. In the same year, 1512, she was the hostess at the Congress of Mantua, which was held to settle questions concerning Florence and Milan. As a ruler, she appeared to have been much more assertive and competent than her husband. When apprised of this fact upon his return, Francesco was furious and humiliated at being surpassed by his wife's superior political ability. This caused their marriage to break down irrevocably. As a result, Isabella began to travel freely and live independently from her husband until his death on 19 March 1519.\nAfter the death of her husband, Isabella ruled Mantua as regent for her son Federico. She began to play an increasingly important role in Italian politics, steadily advancing Mantua's position. She was instrumental in promoting Mantua to a Duchy, which was obtained by wise diplomatic use of her son's marriage contracts. She also succeeded in obtaining a cardinalate for her son Ercole. She further displayed shrewd political acumen in her negotiations with Cesare Borgia, who had dispossessed Guidobaldo da Montefeltro, duke of Urbino, the husband of her sister-in-law and good friend Elisabetta Gonzaga in 1502.\nWidowhood.\n\"Devoted head of state\".\nAs a widow, Isabella at the age of 45 became a \"devoted head of state\". Her position as a Marquise required her serious attention, therefore she was required to study the problems faced by a ruler of a city-state. To improve the well-being of her subjects she studied architecture, agriculture, and industry, and followed the principles that Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli had set forth for rulers in his book \"The Prince\". In return, the people of Mantua respected and loved her.\nIsabella left Mantua for Rome in 1527. She was present during the catastrophic Sack of Rome, when she converted her house, the \"Palazzo Colonna\", into an asylum for approximately 2,000 people (including clerics, nobles and common citizens) fleeing the Imperial soldiers. Her huge palace was the only place safe from attacks, because her son Ferrante Gonzaga was a general in the invading army and she herself had good relationship with the emperor. When she left Rome, she managed to acquire safe passage for all the refugees who had sought refuge in her home.\nLater years and death.\nOnce Rome became stabilized following the sacking, she left the city and returned to Mantua. She made it a centre of culture, started a school for girls, and turned her ducal apartments into a museum containing the finest art treasures. This was not enough to satisfy Isabella, already in her mid-sixties, so she returned to political life and ruled Solarolo, in Romagna until her death on 13 February 1539. She was buried beside her husband in the Church of Santa Paola in Mantua, but the remains were stolen.\nAppearance.\nIsabella's appearance was frequently written about in her lifetime. Mario Equicola said that \"her eyes were black and sparkling, her hair yellow, and her complexion one of dazzling brilliancy.\" Similarly Gian Giorgio Trissino's \"I Ritratti\" has a fictionalized Pietro Bembo describe Isabella's \"rippling golden hair that flowed in thick masses over her shoulders,\" in a passage that, according to art historian Sally Hickson, identifies Isabella as the \"living paragon of female beauty.\" The real Bembo praised Isabella's \"beautiful and charming hand and pure, sweet voice\" in a letter addressed to her. The alleged beauty of Isabella attracted the attention of the king of France, Charles VIII, who asked the chaplain Bernardino of Urbino about her features and attempted to arrange a meeting with her. However, this meeting never took place as shortly after he returned to France.\nIsabella herself frequently diminished her own appearance; commenting on his portrait she told Francia that he had \"made us far more beautiful by your art than nature ever made us.\" Likewise she told Trissino that \"your praises of us far exceed the truth\", and said of Titian's portrait that \"we doubt that at the age he represents us we were ever of the beauty it contains.\" In 1534, in the same year that Titian's portrait was painted, Titian's friend, Pietro Aretino, mocked her appearance, calling her \"the monstrous Marchioness of Mantua, with ebony teeth and ivory eyelashes, dishonestly ugly and ultra-dishonestly tarted up.\" Despite her displays of modesty, Isabella was also known to lose herself in front of a mirror.\nIsabella was worried about her weight from an early age. As an adult she discussed her weight with those close to her frequently. In 1499 she sent a portrait by Giovanni Santi to her brother Ludovico Sforza, complaining that it did not resemble her very much \"for being a little fatter than me.\" Ludovico replied that he liked the portrait very much of her and that it was very similar to her, although \"somewhat more fat\", unless Isabella had \"grown fatter after we saw her.\" In 1509 she complained to her husband that \"if she had more to do with running the state she would not have grown fat\", while in 1511 her sister Lucrezia complained about an early draft of the Francia portrait that made her look too thin.\nHer face became damaged and prematurely aged by Venetian ceruse.\nLegacy.\nDuring her lifetime and after her death, poets, popes, and statesmen paid tribute to Isabella. Pope Leo X invited her to treat him with \"as much friendliness as you would your brother\". The latter's secretary Pietro Bembo described her as \"one of the wisest and most fortunate of women\". The poet Ariosto deemed her the \"liberal and magnanimous Isabella\". Author Matteo Bandello wrote that she was \"supreme among women\", and the diplomat Niccol\u00f2 da Correggio entitled her \"The First Lady of the world\".\nJudgments less imbued with praise, indeed very harsh, were instead expressed by Pope Julius II in disagreement with Isabella's conduct, even went so far as to call her \"that ribald whore\". A similar judgment had also been expressed by her husband Francesco himself who, now a prisoner of the Venetians, accused his wife of not loving him and of having been the cause of his ruin, referring to her by letter as \"that whore of my wife\".\nCultural pursuits.\nIsabella d'Este is famous as the most important art patron of the Renaissance; her life is documented by her correspondence, which remains archived in Mantua (approximately 28,000 letters received and copies of approximately 12,000 letters written).\nArt patronage.\nIn painting she had numerous famous artists of the time work for her, including Giovanni Bellini, Giorgione, Leonardo da Vinci, Andrea Mantegna (court painter until 1506), Perugino, Raphael, Titian, Antonio da Correggio, Lorenzo Costa (court painter from 1509), Dosso Dossi, Francesco Francia, Giulio Romano, and many others. For instance her 'Studiolo' in the Ducal Palace, Mantua, was decorated with allegories by Mantegna, Perugino, Costa, and Correggio.\nIn parallel she contracted the most important sculptors and medallists of her time, i.e. Michelangelo, Pier Jacopo Alari Bonacolsi (L'Antico), Gian Cristoforo Romano, and Tullio Lombardo. She also collected ancient Roman art.\nFor what concerns writers, she was in contact with Pietro Aretino, Ludovico Ariosto, Pietro Bembo, Baldassare Castiglione, Mario Equicola, Gian Giorgio Trissino, and others.\nIn music Isabella sponsored the composers Bartolomeo Tromboncino and Marco Cara and she played the lute. Unusually, she employed women as professional singers at her court, including Giovanna Moreschi, the wife of Marchetto Cara.\nIn the architecture field, she could not afford new palaces, however she commissioned architects such as Biagio Rossetti and Battista Covo.\nShe was also considered an icon of her time in fashion. Famous is her Balzo as headwear \u2013 documented as her invention in letters circa 1509 and visible several times in portraits of other ladies in the 1520s/30s.\nPortraits.\nDespite her significant art patronage that included a number of portraits, there are very few surviving portraits that may be identified as Isabella, especially when compared to her sister Beatrice. It is known that the elderly Isabella preferred idealized paintings and even waived sitting as a model. However, it may be presumed that she insisted nonetheless on seeing her personal characteristics in the outcome. These few identifications are known as inhomogeneous (i.e. differing eye and hair colours as well as divergent eyebrows in two Titian portraits).\nIn 1495 she refused with absolute rigor to pose for Mantegna in the \"Madonna della Vittoria\" \u2013 where her figure was provided next to that of her husband \u2013 since in the past the painter had portrayed her \"so badly done\" \u2013 in a painting that in fact has not survived \u2013 \"which has none of my similarities\". However, the negative judgment of the Marquise was not due to Mantegna's inability to portray her similar to the truth, as she herself writes, but to the opposite lack: of not knowing how to \"well counterfeit the natural\", that is idealize. Her husband Francesco had to pose alone and Mantegna remedied the disturbance of the symmetry by painting, in place of the Marquise, St. Elizabeth, his eponymous saint.\nIn recent years several museums have withdrawn their few identifications of portraits as Isabella because of concern about possible misidentification.\nThe remaining three colourful portraits are still inhomogeneous (Kunsthistorisches Museum/KHM, Vienna):\n\"La Bella\" (now in Palazzo Pitti, Florence) has been discussed as an alternative to Titian's 1536 portrait in Vienna, because the commission from the 60-year-old patron was for a rejuvenated portrait; if La Bella were Isabella, eye colour, hair colour, eyebrows, and general appearance would homogenize in all known portraits, allowing potential links toward further identifications.\nAs of 2021, the 1495 medal by Gian Cristoforo Romano (several extant copies) is the only reliable identification because of the inscription created during Isabella's lifetime.\nIdealised portraits still show characteristics of the person. The following characteristics can be derived (characteristics of the disputed \"Isabella in Black\" are excluded): \nRelationship with Leonardo and \"Mona Lisa\" theory.\nIn the current catalogue raisonn\u00e9 of Leonardo da Vinci (2019), only Isabella d'Este is documented as a plausible alternative as the subject of Leonardo's \"Mona Lisa\", usually considered a portrait of Lisa del Giocondo. Lisa was the wife of a less known merchant in Florence and Giorgio Vasari wrote of her portrait by Leonardo,\u00a0\u2013 in debate that persists about whether this is the portrait now known as the \"Mona Lisa\". No visual comparisons are known for Lisa del Giocondo's and the format speaks in favour of a wealthy art patron.\nEvidence in favor of Isabella as the subject of the famous work includes Leonardo's drawing 'Isabella d'Este' from 1499 and her letters of 1501\u20131506 requesting the promised painted portrait. Further arguments focus upon the mountains in the background indicating the native origin of the subject, and the armrest in the painting as a Renaissance symbol used to identify a portrait as that of a sovereign. The cleaned Prado copy from the Leonardo workshop also confirms the hairstyle shown on Isabella d'Este's portrait medals: hair tied up and temple curls. The Louvre's reservation was (in 1975) that Isabella would be a \"blonde\", a feature that exists only in the widely circulated but uncertain representation \"Isabella in Black\".\nIssue.\nTogether Isabella and Francesco had eight children:\nHousehold slaves.\nCorrespondence exchanged by Isabella documents the Renaissance European tendency to perceive black African slaves as exotic. Isabella's pursuit of a black child as a servant is extensively documented. On 1 May 1491 Isabella asked Giorgio Brognolo, her agent in Venice, to procure a young black girl ('una moreta') between the ages of one-and-a-half and four, and twice in early June reminded him of the request, emphasizing that the girl should be 'as black as possible'. Isabella's household and financial records reflect that she already had a significantly older black girl in her service when she inquired after a younger black child. Records also reflect that she obtained a little black girl from a Venetian orphanage. She opened negotiations with a Venetian patrician household for the sale of a little black boy and purchased an enslaved little black girl from her sister.\nDepiction in modern media.\nThe artwork \"The Dinner Party\" by Judy Chicago features a place setting for Isabella d'Este.\nIsabella d'Este was portrayed by Belgian actress Alexandra Oppo in the television show \"Borgia\" (2011\u20132014).\nIsabella d'Este was depicted as a vampire in the video game \"Vampire Therapist\" (2024). The game chronicles Isabella's life and the fate of the Gonzaga house.\nIsabella d'Este is the subject of a novel by the historian and bestselling novelist Sarah Dunant, \"The Marchesa\", published by Whitefox in 2025, is based on her archive of letters in Mantua and includes illustrations. While ostensibly fiction, it is historically accurate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15402", "revid": "50982082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15402", "title": "International standard", "text": "Standard developed by international standards organizations\nAn international standard is a technical standard developed by one or more international standards organizations. International standards are available for consideration and use worldwide. The most prominent such organization is the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). Other prominent international standards organizations including the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). Together, these three organizations have formed the World Standards Cooperation alliance.\nPurpose.\nInternational standards can be applied directly or adapted to meet local conditions. When adopted, they lead to the creation of national standards that are either equivalent to or largely align with the international standards in technical content, though they may have: (i) editorial variations, such as differences in appearance, the use of symbols, measurement units, or the choice of a point over a comma as the decimal marker, and (ii) variations arising from conflicts with government regulations or industry-specific requirements, which may be influenced by factors such as climate, geography, technology, infrastructure, or the safety standards deemed necessary by the relevant authorities.\nInternational standards are one way to overcome technical barriers in international commerce caused by differences among technical regulations and standards developed independently and separately by each nation, national standards organization, or business. Technical barriers arise when different groups come together, each with a large user base, doing some well established thing that between them is mutually incompatible. Establishing international standards is one way of preventing or overcoming this problem. To support this, the World Trade Organization (WTO) Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) Committee published the \"Six Principles\" guiding members in the development of international standards.\nHistory.\nStandardization.\nThe implementation of standards in industry and commerce became highly important with the onset of the Industrial Revolution and the need for high-precision machine tools and interchangeable parts. Henry Maudslay developed the first industrially practical screw-cutting lathe in 1800, which allowed for the standardisation of screw thread sizes for the first time.\nMaudslay's work, as well as the contributions of other engineers, accomplished a modest amount of industry standardization; some companies' in-house standards spread a bit within their industries. Joseph Whitworth's screw thread measurements were adopted as the first (unofficial) national standard by companies around the country in &lt;time&gt;1841&lt;/time&gt;. It came to be known as the British Standard Whitworth, and was widely adopted in other countries.\nBy &lt;time&gt;the end of the 19th century&lt;/time&gt; differences in standards between companies were making trade increasingly difficult and strained. The Engineering Standards Committee was established in London in &lt;time&gt;1901&lt;/time&gt; as the world's first national standards body. After the First World War, similar national bodies were established in other countries. The Deutsches Institut f\u00fcr Normung was set up in Germany in &lt;time&gt;1917&lt;/time&gt;, followed by its counterparts, the American National Standard Institute and the French Commission Permanente de Standardisation, both in &lt;time&gt;1918&lt;/time&gt;.\nThere are not many books that cover standards in general, but a book written in &lt;time&gt;2019&lt;/time&gt; by Nicholas Rich and Tegwen Malik gives a very comprehensive overview of the history of standards, how ISO standards are drafted along with key ISO standards such as ISO 9001 and ISO 14001. A paper has been published explaining the differences between international standards and private standards.\nInternational organizations.\nOne of the most well established international standardization organizations is the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), a specialized agency of the United Nations which was founded on 17 May 1865 as the International Telegraph Union. The ITU was initially focused on the standardization of telegraph signals, and later evolved to include telephony, radio and satellite communications, and other information and communication technology.\nBy &lt;time&gt;the mid to late 19th century&lt;/time&gt;, efforts were being made to standardize electrical measurement. An important figure was R. E. B. Crompton, who became concerned by the large range of different standards and systems used by electrical engineering companies and scientists in &lt;time&gt;the early 20th century&lt;/time&gt;. Many companies had entered the market in &lt;time&gt;the 1890s&lt;/time&gt; and all chose their own settings for voltage, frequency, current and even the symbols used on circuit diagrams. Adjacent buildings would have totally incompatible electrical systems simply because they had been fitted out by different companies. Crompton could see the lack of efficiency in this system and began to consider proposals for an international standard for electric engineering.\nIn &lt;time&gt;1904&lt;/time&gt;, Crompton represented Britain at the Louisiana Purchase Exposition in St. Louis as part of a delegation by the Institute of Electrical Engineers. He presented a paper on standardisation, which was so well received that he was asked to look into the formation of a commission to oversee the process. By &lt;time&gt;1906&lt;/time&gt;, his work was complete and he drew up a permanent constitution for the first international standards organization, the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). The body held its first meeting that year in London, with representatives from 14 countries. In honour of his contribution to electrical standardisation, Lord Kelvin was elected as the body's first President.\nThe International Federation of the National Standardizing Associations (ISA) was founded in &lt;time&gt;1926&lt;/time&gt; with a broader remit to enhance international cooperation for all technical standards and specifications. The body was suspended in &lt;time&gt;1942&lt;/time&gt; during World War II.\nAfter the war, ISA was approached by the recently formed United Nations Standards Coordinating Committee (UNSCC) with a proposal to form a new global standards body. In &lt;time&gt;October 1946&lt;/time&gt;, ISA and UNSCC delegates from 25 countries met in London and agreed to join forces to create the International Organization for Standardization (ISO); the organization officially began operations in &lt;time style=\"white-space:nowrap\"&gt;February 1947&lt;/time&gt;.\nGlobal standards.\nGlobal standards are also referred to as industry or private standards, which are designed and developed with the entire world in mind. Unlike international standards, these standards are not developed in international organizations or standards setting organizations (SSO) which follow a consensus process. Instead, these standards are developed by private sector entities, like NGOs and for-profit organizations, often without transparency, openness, or consensus considerations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15403", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15403", "title": "ISO 4217", "text": "Standard defining codes for currencies\nISO\u00a04217 is a standard published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) that defines alpha codes and numeric codes for the representation of currencies and provides information about the relationships between individual currencies and their minor units. This data is published in three tables:\nThe first edition of ISO\u00a04217 was published in 1978. The tables, history and ongoing discussion are maintained by SIX Group on behalf of ISO and the Swiss Association for Standardization.\nThe ISO\u00a04217 code list is used in banking and business globally. In many countries, the ISO\u00a04217 alpha codes for the more common currencies are so well known publicly that exchange rates published in newspapers or posted in banks use only these to delineate the currencies, instead of translated currency names or ambiguous currency symbols. ISO\u00a04217 alpha codes are used on airline tickets and international train tickets to remove any ambiguity about the price.\nHistory.\nIn 1973, the ISO Technical Committee 68 decided to develop codes for the representation of currencies and funds for use in any application of trade, commerce or banking. At the 17th session (February 1978), the related UN/ECE Group of Experts agreed that the three-letter alphabetic codes for International Standard ISO\u00a04217, \"Codes for the representation of currencies and funds\", would be suitable for use in international trade.\nOver time, new currencies are created and old currencies are discontinued. Such changes usually originate from the formation of new countries, treaties between countries on shared currencies or monetary unions, or redenomination from an existing currency due to excessive inflation. As a result, the list of codes must be updated from time to time. The ISO\u00a04217 maintenance agency is responsible for maintaining the list of codes.\nTypes of codes.\nNational currencies.\nIn the case of national currencies, the first two letters of the alpha code are the two letters of the ISO\u00a03166-1 alpha-2 country code and the third is usually the initial of the currency's main unit. So Japan's currency code is JPY: \"JP\" for Japan and \"Y\" for yen. This eliminates the problem caused by the names \"dollar\", \"franc\", \"peso\", and \"pound\" being used in many countries, each having significantly differing values.\nIn some cases, the third letter of the alpha code is not the initial letter of a currency unit name. There may be a number of reasons for this:\nX currencies (funds, precious metals, supranationals, other).\nIn addition to codes for most active national currencies ISO\u00a04217 provides codes for \"supranational\" currencies, procedural purposes, and several things which are \"similar to\" currencies:\nThe use of the initial letter \"X\" for these purposes is facilitated by the ISO\u00a03166 rule that no official country code beginning with X will ever be assigned.\nThe inclusion of the EU (denoting the European Union) in the ISO\u00a03166-1 reserved codes list allows the euro to be coded as EUR rather than assigned a code beginning with X, even though it is a supranational currency.\nNumeric codes.\nISO\u00a04217 also assigns a three-digit numeric code to each currency. This numeric code is usually the same as the numeric code assigned to the corresponding country by ISO\u00a03166-1. For example, USD (United States dollar) has numeric code\u00a0840 which is also the ISO\u00a03166-1 code for \"US\" (United States).\nList of ISO 4217 currency codes.\nActive codes (list one).\nThe following is a list of active codes of official ISO\u00a04217 currency names as of 2025[ [update]]. In the standard the values are called \"alphabetic code\", \"numeric code\", \"minor unit\", and \"entity\".\nAccording to UN/CEFACT recommendation 9, paragraphs\u00a08\u20139 ECE/TRADE/203, 1996:\n 8. In applications where monetary resources associated with a currency (i.e.\u00a0funds) need not be specified and where a field identifier indicating currency is used, the first two (leftmost) characters are sufficient to identify a currency\u2014example: US for United States dollars for general, unspecified purposes where a field identifier indicating currency is present. (A field identifier can be a preprinted field heading in an aligned document or a similarly-agreed application in electronic transmission of data.)\n 9. In applications where there is a need to distinguish between types of currencies, or where funds are required as in the banking environment, or where there is no field identifier, the third (rightmost) character of the alphabetic code is an indicator, preferably mnemonic, derived from the name of the major currency unit or fund\u2014example: USD for general, unspecified purposes; USN for United States dollar next-day funds, and USS for funds which are immediately available for Federal Reserve transfer, withdrawal in cash or transfer in like funds (same-day funds). Since there is no need for such a distinction in international trade applications, the funds codes have not been included in the Annex to the present Recommendation.\nHistorical codes.\nA number of currencies had official ISO\u00a04217 currency codes and currency names until their replacement by another currency. The table below shows the ISO currency codes of former currencies and their common names (which do not always match the ISO\u00a04217 names). That table has been introduced end 1988 by ISO.\nCurrency details.\nMinor unit fractions.\nThe 2008 (7th) edition of ISO\u00a04217 says the following about minor units of currency:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Requirements sometimes arise for values to be expressed in terms of minor units of currency. When this occurs, it is necessary to know the decimal relationship that exists between the currency concerned and its minor unit. This information has therefore been included in this International Standard and is shown in the column headed \"Minor unit\" in Tables A.1 and A.2; \"0\" means that there is no minor unit for that currency, whereas \"1\", \"2\" and \"3\" signify a ratio of 10:1, 100:1 and :1 respectively. The names of the minor units are not given.\nExamples for the ratios of :1 and :1 include the United States dollar and the Bahraini dinar, for which the column headed \"Minor unit\" shows\u00a0\"2\" and \"3\", respectively. As of 2021[ [update]], two currencies have non-decimal ratios, the Mauritanian ouguiya and the Malagasy ariary; in both cases the ratio is 5:1. For these, the \"Minor unit\" column shows the number\u00a0\"2\". Some currencies, such as the Burundian franc, do not in practice have any minor currency unit at all. These show the number\u00a0\"0\", as with currencies whose minor units are unused due to negligible value.\nCode position in amount formatting.\nThe ISO 4217 standard does not regulate either the spacing, prefixing or suffixing in usage of currency codes. The style guide of the European Union's Publication Office declares that, for texts issued by or through the Commission in English, Irish, Latvian, and Maltese, the ISO\u00a04217 code is to be followed by a \"hard space\" (non-breaking space) and the amount:\n\"a sum of EUR\u00a030\"\nand for texts in Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, Estonian, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Lithuanian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Slovene, Spanish, and Swedish the order is reversed; the amount is followed by a non-breaking space and the ISO\u00a04217 code:\n\"une somme de 30\u00a0EUR\"\nAs illustrated, the order is determined not by the currency but by the native language of the document context.\nUSD, USN: two US currency codes.\nThe US dollar has two codes assigned: USD and USN (\"US\u00a0dollar next day\"). The USS (same day) code is not in use any longer, and was removed from the list of active ISO\u00a04217 codes in March 2014.\nNon ISO 4217 currencies.\nCurrencies without ISO\u00a04217 currency codes.\nA number of active currencies do not have an ISO\u00a04217 code, because they may be:\nThese currencies include:\nSee for a list of all currently pegged currencies.\nNon-standard codes.\nDespite having no presence or status in the standard, three letter acronyms that resemble ISO\u00a04217 coding are sometimes used locally or commercially to represent currencies or currency instruments.\nThe following non-ISO codes were used in the past.\nUnofficial codes for minor units of currency.\nMinor units of currency (also known as currency subdivisions or currency subunits) are often used for pricing and trading stocks and other assets, such as energy, but are not assigned codes by ISO\u00a04217. Two conventions for representing minor units are in widespread use:\nA third convention is similar to the second one but uses an upper-case letter, e.g. ZAC for the South African Cent.\nCryptocurrencies.\nCryptocurrencies have \"not\" been assigned an ISO\u00a04217 code. However, some cryptocurrencies and cryptocurrency exchanges use a three-letter acronym that resemble an ISO\u00a04217 code.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15404", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15404", "title": "Intrauterine Device", "text": ""}
{"id": "15405", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15405", "title": "Indo-Germanic", "text": ""}
{"id": "15406", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15406", "title": "Irgun", "text": "Zionist paramilitary organization (1931\u20131948)\nThe Irgun (), officially the National Military Organization in the Land of Israel, often abbreviated as Etzel or IZL (), was a Zionist paramilitary organization that operated in Mandatory Palestine between 1931 and 1948. It was an offshoot of the older and larger Jewish paramilitary organization Haganah.\nThe Irgun policy was based on what was then called Revisionist Zionism founded by Ze'ev Jabotinsky. Two of the most infamous operations for which the Irgun were known; the bombing of the British administrative headquarters for Mandatory Palestine in Jerusalem on 22 July 1946 and the Deir Yassin massacre that killed at least 107 Palestinian Arab villagers, including women and children, carried out with Lehi on 9 April 1948.\nThe organization committed acts of terrorism against Palestinian Arabs, as well as against the British authorities, who were regarded as illegal occupiers. In particular the Irgun was described as a terrorist organization by the United Nations, British, and United States governments; in media such as \"The New York Times\" newspaper; as well as by the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry, the 1946 Zionist Congress and the Jewish Agency. Hannah Arendt and Albert Einstein, in a letter to \"The New York Times\" in 1948, compared Irgun and its successor Herut party to \"Nazi and Fascist parties\" and described it as a \"terrorist, right wing, chauvinist organization\".\nFollowing the establishment of the State of Israel during the 1948 Palestine war, the Irgun began to be absorbed into the newly created Israel Defense Forces. Conflict between the Irgun and the IDF escalated into the 1948 Altalena affair, and the Irgun formally disbanded on January 12, 1949. The Irgun was a political predecessor to Israel's right-wing Herut (or \"Freedom\") party, which led to today's Likud party. Likud has led or been part of most Israeli governments since 1977.\nHistory.\nMembers of the Irgun came mostly from Betar and from the Revisionist Party both in Palestine and abroad. The Revisionist Movement made up a popular backing for the underground organization. Ze'ev Jabotinsky, founder of Revisionist Zionism, commanded the organization until he died in 1940. He formulated the general realm of operation, regarding \"Restraint\" and the end thereof, and was the inspiration for the organization overall. An additional major source of ideological inspiration was the poetry of Uri Zvi Greenberg. The symbol of the organization, with the motto \u05e8\u05e7 \u05db\u05da (only thus), underneath a hand holding a rifle in the foreground of a map showing both Mandatory Palestine and the Emirate of Transjordan (at the time, both were administered under the terms of the British Mandate for Palestine), implied that force was the only way to \"liberate the homeland.\"\nThe number of members of the Irgun varied from a few hundred to a few thousand. Most of its members were people who joined the organization's command, under which they carried out various operations and filled positions, largely in opposition to British law. Most of them were \"ordinary\" people, who held regular jobs, and only a few dozen worked full-time in the Irgun.\nThe Irgun disagreed with the policy of the Yishuv and with the World Zionist Organization, both with regard to strategy and basic ideology and with regard to PR and military tactics, such as use of armed force to accomplish the Zionist ends, operations against the Arabs during the riots, and relations with the British mandatory government. Therefore, the Irgun tended to ignore the decisions made by the Zionist leadership and the Yishuv's institutions. This fact caused the elected bodies not to recognize the independent organization, and during most of the time of its existence the organization was seen as irresponsible, and its actions thus worthy of thwarting. Accordingly, the Irgun accompanied its armed operations with public-relations campaigns aiming to convince the public of the Irgun's way and the problems with the official political leadership of the Yishuv. The Irgun put out numerous advertisements, an underground newspaper and even ran the first independent Hebrew radio station \u2013 Kol Zion HaLochemet.\nStructure of organization.\nAs members of an underground armed organization, Irgun personnel did not normally call Irgun by its name but rather used other names. In the first years of its existence it was known primarily as \"Ha-Haganah Leumit\" (The National Defense), and also by names such as \"Haganah Bet\" (\"Second Defense\"), \"Irgun Bet\" (\"Second Irgun\"), the \"Parallel Organization\" and the \"Rightwing Organization\". Later on it became most widely known as \u05d4\u05de\u05e2\u05de\u05d3 (the Stand). The anthem adopted by the Irgun was \"Anonymous Soldiers\", written by Avraham (Yair) Stern who was at the time a commander in the Irgun. Later on Stern defected from the Irgun and founded Lehi, and the song became the anthem of the Lehi. The Irgun's new anthem then became the third verse of the \"Betar Song\", by Ze'ev Jabotinsky.\nThe Irgun gradually evolved from its humble origins into a serious and well-organized paramilitary organization. The movement developed a hierarchy of ranks and a sophisticated command-structure, and came to demand serious military training and strict discipline from its members. It developed clandestine networks of hidden arms-caches and weapons-production workshops, safe-houses, and training camps, along with a secret printing facility for propaganda posters.\nThe ranks of the Irgun were (in ascending order):\nThe Irgun was led by a High Command, which set policy and gave orders. Directly underneath it was a General Staff, which oversaw the activities of the Irgun. The General Staff was divided into a military and a support staff. The military staff was divided into operational units that oversaw operations and support units in charge of planning, instruction, weapons caches and manufacture, and first aid. The military and support staff never met jointly; they communicated through the High Command. Beneath the General Staff were six district commands: Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, Haifa-Galilee, Southern, Sharon, and Shomron, each led by a district commander. A local Irgun district unit was called a \"Branch\". A \"brigade\" in the Irgun was made up of three sections. A section was made up of two groups, at the head of each was a \"Group Head\", and a deputy. Eventually, various units were established, which answered to a \"Center\" or \"Staff\".\nThe head of the Irgun High Command was the overall commander of the organization, but the designation of his rank varied. During the revolt against the British, Irgun commander Menachem Begin and the entire High Command held the rank of \"Gundar Rishon\". His predecessors, however, had held their own ranks. A rank of Military Commander (Seren) was awarded to the Irgun commander Yaakov Meridor and a rank of High Commander (Aluf) to David Raziel. Until his death in 1940, Jabotinsky was known as the \"Military Commander of the Etzel\" or the \"Ha-Matzbi Ha-Elyon\" (\"Supreme Commander\").\nUnder the command of Menachem Begin, the Irgun was divided into different corps:\nThe Irgun's commanders planned for it to have a regular combat force, a reserve, and shock units, but in practice there were not enough personnel for a reserve or for a shock force.\nThe Irgun emphasized that its fighters be highly disciplined. Strict drill exercises were carried out at ceremonies at different times, and strict attention was given to discipline, formal ceremonies and military relationships between the various ranks. The Irgun put out professional publications on combat doctrine, weaponry, leadership, drill exercises, etc. Among these publications were three books written by David Raziel, who had studied military history, techniques, and strategy:\nA British analysis noted that the Irgun's discipline was \"as strict as any army in the world.\"\nThe Irgun operated a sophisticated recruitment and military-training regime. Those wishing to join had to find and make contact with a member, meaning only those who personally knew a member or were persistent could find their way in. Once contact had been established, a meeting was set up with the three-member selection committee at a safe-house, where the recruit was interviewed in a darkened room, with the committee either positioned behind a screen, or with a flashlight shone into the recruit's eyes. The interviewers asked basic biographical questions, and then asked a series of questions designed to weed out romantics and adventurers and those who had not seriously contemplated the potential sacrifices. Those selected attended a four-month series of indoctrination seminars in groups of five to ten, where they were taught the Irgun's ideology and the code of conduct it expected of its members. These seminars also had another purpose - to weed out the impatient and those of flawed purpose who had gotten past the selection interview. Then, members were introduced to other members, were taught the locations of safe-houses, and given military training. Irgun recruits trained with firearms, hand grenades, and were taught how to conduct combined attacks on targets. Arms handling and tactics courses were given in clandestine training camps, while practice shooting took place in the desert or by the sea. Eventually, separate training camps were established for heavy-weapons training. The most rigorous course was the explosives course for bomb-makers, which lasted a year. The British authorities believed that some Irgun members enlisted in the Jewish section of the Palestine Police Force for a year as part of their training, during which they also passed intelligence. In addition to the Irgun's sophisticated training program, many Irgun members were veterans of the Haganah (including the Palmach), the British Armed Forces, and Jewish partisan groups that had waged guerrilla warfare in Nazi-occupied Europe, thus bringing significant military training and combat experience into the organization. The Irgun also operated a course for its intelligence operatives, in which recruits were taught espionage, cryptography, and analysis techniques.\nOf the Irgun's members, almost all were part-time members. They were expected to maintain their civilian lives and jobs, dividing their time between their civilian lives and underground activities. There were never more than 40 full-time members, who were given a small expense stipend on which to live on. Upon joining, every member received an underground name. The Irgun's members were divided into cells, and worked with the members of their own cells. The identities of Irgun members in other cells were withheld. This ensured that an Irgun member taken prisoner could betray no more than a few comrades.\nIn addition to the Irgun's members in Palestine, underground Irgun cells composed of local Jews were established in Europe following World War II. An Irgun cell was also established in Shanghai, home to many European-Jewish refugees. The Irgun also set up a Swiss bank account. Eli Tavin, the former head of Irgun intelligence, was appointed commander of the Irgun abroad.\nIn November 1947, the Jewish insurgency came to an end as the UN approved of the partition of Palestine, and the British had announced their intention to withdraw the previous month. As the British left and the 1947-48 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine got underway, the Irgun came out of the underground and began to function more as a standing army rather an underground organization. It began openly recruiting, training, and raising funds, and established bases, including training facilities. It also introduced field communications and created a medical unit and supply service.\nUntil World War II the group armed itself with weapons purchased in Europe, primarily Italy and Poland, and smuggled to Palestine. The Irgun also established workshops that manufactured spare parts and attachments for the weapons. Also manufactured were land mines and simple hand grenades. Another way in which the Irgun armed itself was theft of weapons from the British Police and military.\nPrior to World War II.\nFounding.\nThe Irgun's first steps were in the aftermath of the Riots of 1929. In the Jerusalem branch of the Haganah there were feelings of disappointment and internal unrest towards the leadership of the movements and the Histadrut (at that time the organization running the Haganah). These feelings were a result of the view that the Haganah was not adequately defending Jewish interests in the region. Likewise, critics of the leadership spoke out against alleged failures in the number of weapons, readiness of the movement and its policy of restraint and not fighting back. On April 10, 1931, commanders and equipment managers announced that they refused to return weapons to the Haganah that had been issued to them earlier, prior to the Nebi Musa holiday. These weapons were later returned by the commander of the Jerusalem branch, Avraham Tehomi, a.k.a. \"Gideon\". However, the commanders who decided to rebel against the leadership of the Haganah relayed a message regarding their resignations to the Vaad Leumi, and thus this schism created a new independent movement.\nThe leader of the new underground movement was Avraham Tehomi, alongside other founding members who were all senior commanders in the Haganah, members of Hapoel Hatzair and of the Histadrut. Also among them was Eliyahu Ben Horin, an activist in the Revisionist Party. This group was known as the \"Odessan Gang\", because they previously had been members of the \"Haganah Ha'Atzmit\" of Jewish Odessa. The new movement was named \"Irgun Tsvai Leumi\", (\"National Military Organization\") in order to emphasize its active nature in contrast to the Haganah. Moreover, the organization was founded with the desire to become a true military organization and not just a militia as the Haganah was at the time.\nIn the autumn of that year the Jerusalem group merged with other armed groups affiliated with Betar. The Betar groups' center of activity was in Tel Aviv, and they began their activity in 1928 with the establishment of \"Officers and Instructors School of Betar\". Students at this institution had broken away from the Haganah earlier, for political reasons, and the new group called itself the \"National Defense\", \u05d4\u05d2\u05e0\u05d4 \u05d4\u05dc\u05d0\u05d5\u05de\u05d9\u05ea. During the riots of 1929 Betar youth participated in the defense of Tel Aviv neighborhoods under the command of Yermiyahu Halperin, at the behest of the Tel Aviv city hall. After the riots the Tel Avivian group expanded, and was known as \"The Right Wing Organization\".\nAfter the Tel Aviv expansion another branch was established in Haifa. Towards the end of 1932 the Haganah branch of Safed also defected and joined the Irgun, as well as many members of the Maccabi sports association. At that time the movement's underground newsletter, \"Ha'Metsudah\" (the Fortress) also began publication, expressing the active trend of the movement. The Irgun also increased its numbers by expanding draft regiments of Betar \u2013 groups of volunteers, committed to two years of security and pioneer activities. These regiments were based in places that from which stemmed new Irgun strongholds in the many places, including the settlements of Yesod HaMa'ala, Mishmar HaYarden, Rosh Pina, Metula and Nahariya in the north; in the center \u2013 Hadera, Binyamina, Herzliya, Netanya and Kfar Saba, and south of there \u2013 Rishon LeZion, Rehovot and Ness Ziona. Later on regiments were also active in the Old City of Jerusalem (\"the Kotel Brigades\") among others. Primary training centers were based in Ramat Gan, Qastina (by Kiryat Mal'akhi of today) and other places.\nUnder Tehomi's command.\nIn 1933 there were some signs of unrest, seen by the incitement of the local Arab leadership to act against the authorities. The strong British response put down the disturbances quickly. During that time the Irgun operated in a similar manner to the Haganah and was a guarding organization. The two organizations cooperated in ways such as coordination of posts and even intelligence sharing.\nWithin the Irgun, Tehomi was the first to serve as \"Head of the Headquarters\" or \"Chief Commander\". Alongside Tehomi served the senior commanders, or \"Headquarters\" of the movement. As the organization grew, it was divided into district commands.\nIn August 1933 a \"Supervisory Committee\" for the Irgun was established, which included representatives from most of the Zionist political parties. The members of this committee were Meir Grossman (of the Hebrew State Party), Rabbi Meir Bar-Ilan (of the Mizrachi Party), either Immanuel Neumann or Yehoshua Supersky (of the General Zionists) and Ze'ev Jabotinsky or Eliyahu Ben Horin (of Hatzohar).\nIn protest against, and with the aim of ending Jewish immigration to Palestine, the Great Arab Revolt of 1936\u20131939 broke out on April 19, 1936. The riots took the form of attacks by Arab rioters ambushing main roads, bombing of roads and settlements as well as property and agriculture vandalism. In the beginning, the Irgun and the Haganah generally maintained a policy of restraint, apart from a few instances. Some expressed resentment at this policy, leading up internal unrest in the two organizations. The Irgun tended to retaliate more often, and sometimes Irgun members patrolled areas beyond their positions in order to encounter attackers ahead of time. However, there were differences of opinion regarding what to do in the Haganah, as well. Due to the joining of many Betar Youth members, Jabotinsky (founder of Betar) had a great deal of influence over Irgun policy. Nevertheless, Jabotinsky was of the opinion that for moral reasons violent retaliation was not to be undertaken.\nIn November 1936 the Peel Commission was sent to inquire regarding the breakout of the riots and propose a solution to end the Revolt. In early 1937 there were still some in the Yishuv who felt the commission would recommend a partition of Mandatory Palestine (the land west of the Jordan River), thus creating a Jewish state on part of the land. The Irgun leadership, as well as the \"Supervisory Committee\" held similar beliefs, as did some members of the Haganah and the Jewish Agency. This belief strengthened the policy of restraint and led to the position that there was no room for defense institutions in the future Jewish state. Tehomi was quoted as saying: \"We stand before great events: a Jewish state and a Jewish army. There is a need for a single military force\". This position intensified the differences of opinion regarding the policy of restraint, both within the Irgun and within the political camp aligned with the organization. The leadership committee of the Irgun supported a merger with the Haganah. On April 24, 1937, a referendum was held among Irgun members regarding its continued independent existence. David Raziel and Avraham (Yair) Stern came out publicly in support for the continued existence of the Irgun:\nThe Irgun has been placed ... before a decision to make, whether to submit to the authority of the government and the Jewish Agency or to prepare for a double sacrifice and endangerment. Some of our friends do not have appropriate willingness for this difficult position, and have submitted to the Jewish Agency and has left the battle ... all of the attempts ... to unite with the leftist organization have failed, because the Left entered into negotiations not on the basis of unification of forces, but the submission of one such force to the other...\nThe first split.\nIn April 1937 the Irgun split after the referendum. Approximately 1,500\u20132,000 people, about half of the Irgun's membership, including the senior command staff, regional committee members, along with most of the Irgun's weapons, returned to the Haganah, which at that time was under the Jewish Agency's leadership. The Supervisory Committee's control over the Irgun ended, and Jabotinsky assumed command. In their opinion, the removal of the Haganah from the Jewish Agency's leadership to the national institutions necessitated their return. Furthermore, they no longer saw significant ideological differences between the movements. Those who remained in the Irgun were primarily young activists, mostly laypeople, who sided with the independent existence of the Irgun. In fact, most of those who remained were originally Betar people. Moshe Rosenberg estimated that approximately 1,800 members remained. In theory, the Irgun remained an organization not aligned with a political party, but in reality the supervisory committee was disbanded and the Irgun's continued ideological path was outlined according to Ze'ev Jabotinsky's school of thought and his decisions, until the movement eventually became Revisionist Zionism's military arm. One of the major changes in policy by Jabotinsky was the end of the policy of restraint.\nOn April 27, 1937, the Irgun founded a new headquarters, staffed by Moshe Rosenberg at the head, Avraham (Yair) Stern as secretary, David Raziel as head of the Jerusalem branch, Hanoch Kalai as commander of Haifa and Aharon Haichman as commander of Tel Aviv. On 20 Tammuz, (June 29) the day of Theodor Herzl's death, a ceremony was held in honor of the reorganization of the underground movement. For security purposes this ceremony was held at a construction site in Tel Aviv.\nZe'ev Jabotinsky placed Col. Robert Bitker at the head of the Irgun. Bitker had previously served as Betar commissioner in China and had military experience. A few months later, probably due to total incompatibility with the position, Jabotinsky replaced Bitker with Moshe Rosenberg. When the Peel Commission report was published a few months later, the Revisionist camp decided not to accept the commission's recommendations. Moreover, the organizations of Betar, Hatzohar and the Irgun began to increase their efforts to bring Jews to \"Eretz Israel\" (the Land of Israel), illegally. This Aliyah was known as the \u05e2\u05dc\u05d9\u05d9\u05ea \u05d0\u05e3 \u05e2\u05dc \u05e4\u05d9 \"Af Al Pi (Nevertheless) Aliyah\". As opposed to this position, the Jewish Agency began acting on behalf of the Zionist interest on the political front, and continued the policy of restraint. From this point onwards the differences between the Haganah and the Irgun were much more obvious.\nIllegal immigration.\nAccording to Jabotinsky's \"Evacuation Plan\", which called for millions of European Jews to be brought to Palestine at once, the Irgun helped the illegal immigration of European Jews to Palestine. This was named by Jabotinsky the \"National Sport\". The most significant part of this immigration prior to World War II was carried out by the Revisionist camp, largely because the Yishuv institutions and the Jewish Agency shied away from such actions on grounds of cost and their belief that Britain would in the future allow widespread Jewish immigration.\nThe Irgun joined forces with Hatzohar and Betar in September 1937, when it assisted with the landing of a convoy of 54 Betar members at Tantura Beach (near Haifa.) The Irgun was responsible for discreetly bringing the Olim, or Jewish immigrants, to the beaches, and dispersing them among the various Jewish settlements. The Irgun also began participating in the organisation of the immigration enterprise and undertook the process of accompanying the ships. This began with the ship \"Draga\" which arrived at the coast of British Palestine in September 1938. In August of the same year, an agreement was made between Ari Jabotinsky (the son of Ze'ev Jabotinsky), the Betar representative and Hillel Kook, the Irgun representative, to coordinate the immigration (also known as Ha'apala). This agreement was also made in the \"Paris Convention\" in February 1939, at which Ze'ev Jabotinsky and David Raziel were present. Afterwards, the \"Aliyah Center\" was founded, made up of representatives of Hatzohar, Betar, and the Irgun, thereby making the Irgun a full participant in the process.\nThe difficult conditions on the ships demanded a high level of discipline. The people on board the ships were often split into units, led by commanders. In addition to having a daily roll call and the distribution of food and water (usually very little of either), organized talks were held to provide information regarding the actual arrival in Palestine. One of the largest ships was the \"Sakaria\", with 2,300 passengers, which equalled about 0.5% of the Jewish population in Palestine. The first vessel arrived on April 13, 1937, and the last on February 13, 1940. All told, about 18,000 Jews immigrated to Palestine with the help of the Revisionist organizations and private initiatives by other Revisionists. Most were not caught by the British.\nEnd of restraint.\nWhile continuing to defend settlements, Irgun members began attacks on Arab villages around April 1936, thus ending the policy of restraint. These attacks were intended to instill fear in the Arab side, in order to cause the Arabs to wish for peace and quiet. In March 1938, David Raziel wrote in the underground newspaper \"By the Sword\" a constitutive article for the Irgun overall, in which he coined the term \"Active Defense\":\nThe actions of the Haganah alone will never be a true victory. If the goal of the war is to break the will of the enemy \u2013 and this cannot be attained without destroying his spirit \u2013 clearly we cannot be satisfied with solely defensive operations... Such a method of defense, that allows the enemy to attack at will, to reorganize and attack again ... and does not intend to remove the enemy's ability to attack a second time \u2013 is called passive defense, and ends in downfall and destruction ... whoever does not wish to be beaten has no choice but to attack. The fighting side, that does not intend to oppress but to save its liberty and honor, he too has only one way available \u2013 the way of attack. Defensiveness by way of offensiveness, in order to deprive the enemy the option of attacking, is called \"active defense\".\nBy the end of World War II, more than 250 Arabs had been killed. Examples include:\nDuring 1936, Irgun members carried out approximately ten attacks.\nThroughout 1937 the Irgun continued this line of operation.\nA more complete list can be found here.\nAt that time, however, these acts were not yet a part of a formulated policy of the Irgun. Not all of the aforementioned operations received a commander's approval, and Jabotinsky was not in favor of such actions at the time. Jabotinsky still hoped to establish a Jewish force out in the open that would not have to operate underground. However, the failure, in its eyes, of the Peel Commission and the renewal of violence on the part of the Arabs caused the Irgun to rethink its official policy.\nIncrease in operations.\n14 November 1937 was a watershed in Irgun activity. From that date, the Irgun increased its reprisals. Following an increase in the number of attacks aimed at Jews, including the killing of five kibbutz members near Kiryat Anavim (today kibbutz Ma'ale HaHamisha), the Irgun undertook a series of attacks in various places in Jerusalem, killing five Arabs. Operations were also undertaken in Haifa (shooting at the Arab-populated Wadi Nisnas neighborhood) and in Herzliya. The date is known as the day the policy of restraint (Havlagah) ended, or as Black Sunday when operations resulted in the murder of 10 Arabs. This is when the organization fully changed its policy, with the approval of Jabotinsky and Headquarters to the policy of \"active defense\" in respect of Irgun actions.\nThe British responded with the arrest of Betar and Hatzohar members as suspected members of the Irgun. Military courts were allowed to act under \"Time of Emergency Regulations\" and even sentence people to death. In this manner Yehezkel Altman, a guard in a Betar battalion in the Nahalat Yizchak neighborhood of Tel Aviv, shot at an Arab bus, without his commanders' knowledge. Altman was acting in response to a shooting at Jewish vehicles on the Tel Aviv\u2013Jerusalem road the day before. He turned himself in later and was sentenced to death, a sentence which was later commuted to a life sentence.\nDespite the arrests, Irgun members continued fighting. Jabotinsky lent his moral support to these activities. In a letter to Moshe Rosenberg on 18 March 1938 he wrote:\nTell them: from afar I collect and save, as precious treasures, news items about your lives. I know of the obstacles that have not impeded your spirit; and I know of your actions as well. I am overjoyed that I have been blessed with such students.\nAlthough the Irgun continued activities such as these, following Rosenberg's orders, they were greatly curtailed. Furthermore, in fear of the British threat of the death sentence for anyone found carrying a weapon, all operations were suspended for eight months. However, opposition to this policy gradually increased. In April, 1938, responding to the killing of six Jews, Betar members from the Rosh Pina Brigade went on a reprisal mission, without the consent of their commander, as described by historian Avi Shlaim:\nOn 21 April 1938, after several weeks of planning, he and two of his colleagues from the Irgun (Etzel) ambushed an Arab bus at a bend on a mountain road near Safad. They had a hand grenade, a gun and a pistol. Their plan was to destroy the engine so that the bus would fall off the side of the road and all the passengers would be killed. When the bus approached, they fired at it (not in the air, as Mailer has it) but the grenade lobbed by Ben Yosef did not detonate. The bus with its screaming and terrified passengers drove on.\nAlthough the incident ended without casualties, the three were caught, and one of them \u2013 Shlomo Ben-Yosef was sentenced to death. Demonstrations around the country, as well as pressure from institutions and people such as Dr. Chaim Weizmann and the Chief Rabbi of Mandatory Palestine, Yitzhak HaLevi Herzog did not reduce his sentence. In Shlomo Ben-Yosef's writings in Hebrew were later found:\nI am going to die and I am not sorry at all. Why? Because I am going to die for our country. Shlomo Ben-Yosef.\nOn 29 June 1938 he was executed, and was the first of the Olei Hagardom. The Irgun revered him after his death and many regarded him as an example.\nIn light of this, and due to the anger of the Irgun leadership over the decision to adopt a policy of restraint until that point, Jabotinsky relieved Rosenberg of his post and replaced him with David Raziel, who proved to be the most prominent Irgun commander until Menachem Begin. Jabotinsky simultaneously instructed the Irgun to end its policy of restraint, leading to armed offensive operations until the end of the Arab Revolt in 1939. In this time, the Irgun mounted about 40 operations against Arabs and Arab villages, for instance:\nThis action led the British Parliament to discuss the disturbances in Palestine. On 23 February 1939 the Secretary of State for the Colonies, Malcolm MacDonald revealed the British intention to cancel the mandate and establish a state that would preserve Arab rights. This caused a wave of riots and attacks by Arabs against Jews. The Irgun responded four days later with a series of attacks on Arab buses and other sites. The British used military force against the Arab rioters and in the latter stages of the revolt by the Arab community in Palestine, it deteriorated into a series of internal gang wars.\nDuring the same period.\nAt the same time, the Irgun also established itself in Europe. The Irgun built underground cells that participated in organizing migration to Palestine. The cells were made up almost entirely of Betar members, and their primary activity was military training in preparation for emigration to Palestine. Ties formed with the Polish authorities brought about courses in which Irgun commanders were trained by Polish officers in advanced military issues such as guerrilla warfare, tactics and laying land mines. Avraham (Yair) Stern was notable among the cell organizers in Europe. In 1937 the Polish authorities began to deliver large amounts of weapons to the underground. According to Irgun activists Poland supplied the organization with 25,000 rifles, and additional material and weapons, by summer 1939 the Warsaw warehouses of Irgun held 5,000 rifles and 1,000 machine guns. The training and support by Poland would allow the organization to mobilize 30,000\u201340,000 men. The transfer of handguns, rifles, explosives and ammunition stopped with the outbreak of World War II. Another field in which the Irgun operated was the training of pilots, so they could serve in the Air Force in the future war for independence, in the flight school in Lod.\nTowards the end of 1938 there was progress towards aligning the ideologies of the Irgun and the Haganah. Many abandoned the belief that the land would be divided and a Jewish state would soon exist. The Haganah founded \u05e4\u05d5\"\u05de, a special operations unit, (pronounced \"poom\"), which carried out reprisal attacks following Arab violence. These operations continued into 1939. Furthermore, the opposition within the Yishuv to illegal immigration significantly decreased, and the Haganah began to bring Jews to Palestine using rented ships, as the Irgun had in the past.\nFirst operations against the British.\nThe publishing of the MacDonald White Paper of 1939 brought with it new edicts that were intended to lead to a more equitable settlement between Jews and Arabs. However, it was considered by some Jews to have an adverse effect on the continued development of the Jewish community in Palestine. Chief among these was the prohibition on selling land to Jews, and the smaller quotas for Jewish immigration. The entire Yishuv was furious at the contents of the White Paper. There were demonstrations against the \"Treacherous Paper\", as it was considered that it would preclude the establishment of a Jewish homeland in Palestine.\nUnder the temporary command of Hanoch Kalai, the Irgun began sabotaging strategic infrastructure such as electricity facilities, radio and telephone lines. It also started publicizing its activity and its goals. This was done in street announcements, newspapers, as well as the underground radio station Kol Zion HaLochemet. On August 26, 1939, the Irgun killed Ralph Cairns, a British police officer who, as head of the Jewish Department in the Palestine Police, had been closing the net on Avraham Stern. Irgun had accused him of the torture of a number of its members. Cairns and Ronald Barker, another British police officer, were killed by a remotely detonated Irgun landmine.\nThe British increased their efforts against the Irgun. As a result, on August 31 the British police arrested members meeting in the Irgun headquarters. On the next day, September 1, 1939, World War II broke out.\nDuring World War II.\nFollowing the outbreak of war, Ze'ev Jabotinsky and the New Zionist Organization voiced their support for Britain and France. In mid-September 1939 Raziel was moved from his place of detention in Tzrifin. This, among other events, encouraged the Irgun to announce a cessation of its activities against the British so as not to hinder Britain's effort to fight \"the Hebrew's greatest enemy in the world \u2013 German Nazism\". This announcement ended with the hope that after the war a Hebrew state would be founded \"within the historical borders of the liberated homeland\". After this announcement Irgun, Betar and Hatzohar members, including Raziel and the Irgun leadership, were gradually released from detention. The Irgun did not rule out joining the British army and the Jewish Brigade. Irgun members did enlist in various British units. Irgun members also assisted British forces with intelligence in Romania, Bulgaria, Morocco and Tunisia. An Irgun unit also operated in Syria and Lebanon. David Raziel later died during one of these operations.\nDuring the Holocaust, Betar members revolted numerous times against the Nazis in occupied Europe. The largest of these revolts was the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, in which an armed underground organization fought, formed by Betar and Hatzoar and known as the \"\u017bydowski Zwi\u0105zek Wojskowy (\u017bZW)\" (Jewish Military Union). Despite its political origins, the \u017bZW accepted members without regard to political affiliation, and had contacts established before the war with elements of the Polish military. Because of differences over objectives and strategy, the \u017bZW was unable to form a common front with the mainstream ghetto fighters of the \u017bydowska Organizacja Bojowa, and fought independently under the military leadership of Pawe\u0142 Frenkiel and the political leadership of Dawid Wdowi\u0144ski.\nThere were instances of Betar members enlisted in the British military smuggling British weapons to the Irgun.\nFrom 1939 onwards, an Irgun delegation in the United States worked for the creation of a Jewish army made up of Jewish refugees and Jews from Palestine, to fight alongside the Allied Forces. In July 1943 the \"Emergency Committee to Save the Jewish People in Europe\" was formed, and worked until the end of the war to rescue the Jews of Europe from the Nazis and to garner public support for a Jewish state. However, it was not until January 1944 that US President Franklin Roosevelt established the War Refugee Board, which achieved some success in saving European Jews.\nSecond split.\nThroughout this entire period, the British continued enforcing the White Paper's provisions, which included a ban on the sale of land, restrictions on Jewish immigration and increased vigilance against illegal immigration. Part of the reason why the British banned land sales (to anyone) was the confused state of the post Ottoman land registry; it was difficult to determine who actually owned the land that was for sale.\nWithin the ranks of the Irgun this created much disappointment and unrest, at the center of which was disagreement with the leadership of the New Zionist Organization, David Raziel and the Irgun Headquarters. On June 18, 1939, Avraham (Yair) Stern and others of the leadership were released from prison and a rift opened between them the Irgun and Hatzohar leadership. The controversy centred on the issues of the underground movement submitting to public political leadership and fighting the British. On his release from prison Raziel resigned from Headquarters. To his chagrin, independent operations of senior members of the Irgun were carried out and some commanders even doubted Raziel's loyalty.\nIn his place, Stern was elected to the leadership. In the past, Stern had founded secret Irgun cells in Poland without Jabotinsky's knowledge, in opposition to his wishes. Furthermore, Stern was in favor of removing the Irgun from the authority of the New Zionist Organization, whose leadership urged Raziel to return to the command of the Irgun. He finally consented. Jabotinsky wrote to Raziel and to Stern, and these letters were distributed to the branches of the Irgun:\n... I call upon you: Let nothing disturb our unity. Listen to the commissioner (Raziel), whom I trust, and promise me that you and Betar, the greatest of my life's achievements, will stand strong and united and allow me to continue with the hope for victory in the war to realize our old Maccabean dream...\nStern was sent a telegram with an order to obey Raziel, who was reappointed. However, these events did not prevent the splitting of the organization. Suspicion and distrust were rampant among the members. Out of the Irgun a new organization was created on July 17, 1940, which was first named \"The National Military Organization in Israel\" (as opposed to the \"National Military Organization in the Land of Israel\") and later on changed its name to Lehi, an acronym for Lohamei Herut Israel, \"Fighters for the Freedom of Israel\", (\u05dc\u05d7\"\u05d9 \u2013 \u05dc\u05d5\u05d7\u05de\u05d9 \u05d7\u05d9\u05e8\u05d5\u05ea \u05d9\u05e9\u05e8\u05d0\u05dc). Jabotinsky died in New York on August 4, 1940, yet this did not prevent the Lehi split. Following Jabotinsky's death, ties were formed between the Irgun and the New Zionist Organization. These ties would last until 1944, when the Irgun declared a revolt against the British.\nThe primary difference between the Irgun and the newly formed organization was its intention to fight the British in Palestine, regardless of their war against Germany. Later, additional operational and ideological differences developed that contradicted some of the Irgun's guiding principles. For example, the Lehi, unlike the Irgun, supported a population exchange with local Arabs.\nChange of policy.\nThe split damaged the Irgun both organizationally and from a morale point of view. As their spiritual leader, Jabotinsky's death also added to this feeling. Together, these factors brought about a mass abandonment by members. The British took advantage of this weakness to gather intelligence and arrest Irgun activists. The new Irgun leadership, which included Meridor, Yerachmiel Ha'Levi, Rabbi Moshe Zvi Segal and others used the forced hiatus in activity to rebuild the injured organization. This period was also marked by more cooperation between the Irgun and the Jewish Agency, however David Ben-Gurion's uncompromising demand that Irgun accept the Agency's command foiled any further cooperation.\nIn both the Irgun and the Haganah more voices were being heard opposing any cooperation with the British. Nevertheless, an Irgun operation carried out in the service of Britain was aimed at sabotaging pro-Nazi forces in Iraq, including the assassination of Haj Amin al-Husayni. Among others, Raziel and Yaakov Meridor participated. On April 20, 1941, during a Luftwaffe air raid on RAF Habbaniya near Baghdad, David Raziel, commander of the Irgun, was killed during the operation.\nIn late 1943 a joint Haganah \u2013 Irgun initiative was developed, to form a single fighting body, unaligned with any political party, by the name of \u05e2\u05dd \u05dc\u05d5\u05d7\u05dd (\"Fighting Nation\"). The new body's first plan was to kidnap the British High Commissioner of Palestine, Sir Harold MacMichael and take him to Cyprus. However, the Haganah leaked the planned operation and it was thwarted before it got off the ground. Nevertheless, at this stage the Irgun ceased its cooperation with the British. As Eliyahu Lankin tells in his book:\nImmediately following the failure of \"Fighting Nation\" practical discussions began in the Irgun Headquarters regarding a declaration of war.\nRevolt.\nIn 1943 the Polish II Corps, commanded by W\u0142adys\u0142aw Anders, arrived in Palestine from Iraq. The British insisted that no Jewish units of the army be created. Eventually, many of the soldiers of Jewish origin that arrived with the army were released and allowed to stay in Palestine. One of them was Menachem Begin, whose arrival in Palestine created new-found expectations within the Irgun and Betar. Begin had served as head of the Betar movement in Poland, and was a respected leader. Yaakov Meridor, then the commander of the Irgun, raised the idea of appointing Begin to the post. In late 1943, when Begin accepted the position, a new leadership was formed. Meridor became Begin's deputy, and other members of the board were Aryeh Ben Eliezer, Eliyahu Lankin, and Shlomo Lev Ami.\nOn February 1, 1944, the Irgun put up posters all around the country, proclaiming a revolt against the British mandatory government. The posters began by saying that all of the Zionist movements stood by the Allied Forces and over 25,000 Jews had enlisted in the British military. The hope to establish a Jewish army had died. European Jewry was trapped and was being destroyed, yet Britain, for its part, did not allow any rescue missions. This part of the document ends with the following words:\nThe White Paper is still in effect. It is enforced, despite the betrayal of the Arabs and the loyalty of the Jews; despite the mass enlisting to the British Army; despite the ceasefire and the quiet in The Land of Israel; despite the massacre of masses of the Jewish people in Europe...\nThe facts are simple and horrible as one. Over the last four years of the war we have lost millions of the best of our people; millions more are in danger of eradication. And The Land of Israel is closed off and quarantined because the British rule it, realizing the White Paper, and strives for the destruction of our people's last hope.\nThe Irgun then declared that, for its part, the ceasefire was over and they were now at war with the British. It demanded the transfer of rule to a Jewish government, to implement ten policies. Among these were the mass evacuation of Jews from Europe, the signing of treaties with any state that recognized the Jewish state's sovereignty, including Britain, granting social justice to the state's residents, and full equality to the Arab population. The proclamation ended with:\nThe God of Israel, God of Hosts, will be at our side. There is no retreat. Liberty or death... The fighting youth will not recoil in the face of sacrifices and suffering, blood and torment. They will not surrender, so long as our days of old are not renewed, so long as our nation is not ensured a homeland, liberty, honor, bread, justice and law.\nThe Irgun began this campaign rather weakly. At the time of the start of the revolt, it was only about 1,000 strong, including some 200 fighters. It possessed about 4 submachine guns, 40 rifles, 60 pistols, 150 hand grenades, and 2,000 kilograms of explosive material, and its funds were about \u00a3800.\nStruggle against the British.\nThe Irgun began a militant operation against the symbols of government, in an attempt to harm the regime's operation as well as its reputation. The first attack was on February 12, 1944, at the government immigration offices, a symbol of the immigration laws. The attacks went smoothly and ended with no casualties\u00a0\u2013 as they took place on a Saturday night, when the buildings were empty\u00a0\u2013 in the three largest cities: Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, and Haifa. On February 27 the income tax offices were bombed. Parts of the same cities were blown up, also on a Saturday night; prior warnings were put up near the buildings. On March 23 the national headquarters building of the British police in the Russian Compound in Jerusalem was attacked, and part of it was blown up. These attacks in the first few months were sharply condemned by the organized leadership of the Yishuv and by the Jewish Agency, who saw them as dangerous provocations.\nAt the same time the Lehi also renewed its attacks against the British. The Irgun continued to attack police stations and headquarters, and Tegart Fort, a fortified police station (today the location of Latrun). One relatively complex operation was the takeover of the radio station in Ramallah, on May 17, 1944.\nOne symbolic act by the Irgun happened before Yom Kippur of 1944. They plastered notices around town, warning that no British officers should come to the Western Wall on Yom Kippur, and for the first time since the mandate began no British police officers were there to prevent the Jews from the traditional Shofar blowing at the end of the fast. After the fast that year the Irgun attacked four police stations in Arab settlements. In order to obtain weapons, the Irgun carried out \"confiscation\" operations \u2013 they robbed British armouries and smuggled stolen weapons to their own hiding places. During this phase of activity the Irgun also cut all of its official ties with the New Zionist Organization, so as not to tie their fate in the underground organization.\nBegin wrote in his memoirs, \"The Revolt\":\nHistory and experience taught us that if we are able to destroy the prestige of the British in Palestine, the regime will break. Since we found the enslaving government's weak point, we did not let go of it.\nUnderground exiles.\nIn October 1944 the British began expelling hundreds of arrested Irgun and Lehi members to detention camps in Africa. 251 detainees from Latrun were flown on thirteen planes, on October 19 to a camp in Asmara, Eritrea. Eleven additional transports were made. Throughout the period of their detention, the detainees often initiated rebellions and hunger strikes. Many escape attempts were made until July 1948 when the exiles were returned to Israel. While there were numerous successful escapes from the camp itself, only nine men actually made it back all the way. One noted success was that of Yaakov Meridor, who escaped nine times before finally reaching Europe in April 1948. These tribulations were the subject of his book \"Long is the Path to Freedom: Chronicles of one of the Exiles\".\nHunting Season.\nOn November 6, 1944, Lord Moyne, British Deputy Resident Minister of State in Cairo was assassinated by Lehi members Eliyahu Hakim and Eliyahu Bet-Zuri. This act raised concerns within the Yishuv from the British regime's reaction to the underground's violent acts against them. Therefore, the Jewish Agency decided on starting a \"Hunting Season\", known as the \"saison\", (from the French \"la saison de chasse\").\nThe Irgun's recuperation was noticeable when it began to renew its cooperation with the Lehi in May 1945, when it sabotaged oil pipelines, telephone lines and railroad bridges. All in all, over 1,000 members of the Irgun and Lehi were arrested and interned in British camps during the \"Saison\". Eventually the Hunting Season died out, and there was even talk of cooperation with the Haganah leading to the formation of the Jewish Resistance Movement.\nJewish Resistance Movement.\nTowards the end of July 1945 the Labour Party in Britain was elected to power. The Yishuv leadership had high hopes that this would change the anti-Zionist policy that the British maintained at the time. However, these hopes were quickly dashed when the government limited Jewish immigration, with the intention that the population of Mandatory Palestine (the land west of the Jordan River) would not be more than one-third of the total. This, along with the stepping up of arrests and their pursuit of underground members and illegal immigration organizers led to the formation of the Jewish Resistance Movement. This body consolidated the armed resistance to the British of the Irgun, Lehi, and Haganah. For ten months the Irgun and the Lehi cooperated and they carried out nineteen attacks and defense operations. The Haganah and Palmach carried out ten such operations. The Haganah also assisted in landing 13,000 illegal immigrants.\nTension between the underground movements and the British increased with the increase in operations. On April 23, 1946, an operation undertaken by the Irgun to gain weapons from the Tegart fort at Ramat Gan resulted in a firefight with the police in which an Arab constable and two Irgun fighters were killed, including one who jumped on an explosive device to save his comrades. A third fighter, Dov Gruner, was wounded and captured. He stood trial and was sentenced to be death by hanging, refusing to sign a pardon request.\nIn 1946, British relations with the Yishuv worsened, building up to Operation Agatha of June 29. The authorities ignored the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry's recommendation to allow 100,000 Jews into Palestine at once. As a result of the discovery of documents tying the Jewish Agency to the Jewish Resistance Movement, the Irgun was asked to speed up the plans for the King David Hotel bombing of July 22. The hotel was where the documents were located, the base for the British Secretariat, the military command and a branch of the Criminal Investigation Division of the police. The Irgun later claimed to have sent a warning that was ignored. Palestinian and U.S. sources confirm that the Irgun issued numerous warnings for civilians to evacuate the hotel prior to the bombing. 91 people were killed in the attack where a 350\u00a0kg bomb was placed in the basement of the hotel and caused a large section of it to collapse. Only 13 were British soldiers.\nFurther struggle against the British.\nThe King David Hotel bombing and the arrest of Jewish Agency and other Yishuv leaders as part of Operation Agatha caused the Haganah to cease their armed activity against the British. Yishuv and Jewish Agency leaders were released from prison. From then until the end of the British mandate, resistance activities were led by the Irgun and Lehi. In early September 1946 the Irgun renewed its attacks against civil structures, railroads, communication lines and bridges. One operation was the attack on the train station in Jerusalem, in which Meir Feinstein was arrested and later committed suicide awaiting execution. According to the Irgun these sorts of armed attacks were legitimate, since the trains primarily served the British, for redeployment of their forces. The Irgun also publicized leaflets, in three languages, not to use specific trains in danger of being attacked. For a while, the British stopped train traffic at night. The Irgun also carried out repeated attacks against military and police traffic using disguised, electronically detonated roadside mines which could be detonated by an operator hiding nearby as a vehicle passed, carried out arms raids against military bases and police stations (often disguised as British soldiers), launched bombing, shooting, and mortar attacks against military and police installations and checkpoints, and robbed banks to gain funds as a result of losing access to Haganah funding following the collapse of the Jewish Resistance Movement.\nOn October 31, 1946, in response to the British barring entry of Jews from Palestine, the Irgun blew up the British Embassy in Rome, a center of British efforts to monitor and stop Jewish immigration. The Irgun also carried out a few other operations in Europe: a British troop train was derailed and an attempt against another troop train failed. An attack on a British officers club in Vienna took place in 1947, and an attack on another British officer's club in Vienna and a sergeant's club in Germany took place in 1948.\nIn December 1946 a sentence of 18 years and 18 beatings was handed down to a young Irgun member for robbing a bank. The Irgun made good on a threat they made and after the detainee was whipped, Irgun members kidnapped British officers and beat them in public. The operation, known as the \"Night of the Beatings\" brought an end to British punitive beatings. The British, taking these acts seriously, moved many British families in Palestine into the confines of military bases, and some moved home.\nOn February 14, 1947, Ernest Bevin announced that the Jews and Arabs would not be able to agree on any British proposed solution for the land, and therefore the issue must be brought to the United Nations (UN) for a final decision. The Yishuv thought of the idea to transfer the issue to the UN as a British attempt to achieve delay while a UN inquiry commission would be established, and its ideas discussed, and all the while the Yishuv would weaken. Foundation for Immigration B increased the number of ships bringing in Jewish refugees. The British still strictly enforced the policy of limited Jewish immigration and illegal immigrants were placed in detention camps in Cyprus, which increased the anger of the Jewish community towards the mandate government.\nThe Irgun stepped up its activity and from February 19 until March 3 it attacked 18 British military camps, convoy routes, vehicles, and other facilities. The most notable of these attacks was the bombing of a British officer's club located in Goldsmith House in Jerusalem, which was in a heavily guarded security zone. Covered by machine-gun fire, an Irgun assault team in a truck penetrated the security zone and lobbed explosives into the building. Thirteen people, including two officers, were killed. As a result, martial law was imposed over much of the country, enforced by approximately 20,000 British soldiers. Despite this, attacks continued throughout the martial law period. The most notable one was an Irgun attack against the Royal Army Pay Corps base at the Schneller Orphanage, in which a British soldier was killed.\nThroughout its struggle against the British, the Irgun sought to publicize its cause around the world. By humiliating the British, it attempted to focus global attention on Palestine, hoping that any British overreaction would be widely reported, and thus result in more political pressure against the British. Begin described this strategy as turning Palestine into a \"glass house\". The Irgun also re-established many representative offices internationally, and by 1948 operated in 23 states. In these countries, the Irgun sometimes acted against the local British representatives or led public relations campaigns against Britain. According to Bruce Hoffman: \"\"In an era long before the advent of 24/7 global news coverage and instantaneous satellite-transmitted broadcasts, the Irgun deliberately attempted to appeal to a worldwide audience far beyond the immediate confines of its local struggle, and beyond even the ruling regime's own homeland\".\"\nAcre Prison break.\nOn April 16, 1947, Irgun members Dov Gruner, Yehiel Dresner, Eliezer Kashani, and Mordechai Alkahi were hanged in Acre Prison, while singing Hatikvah. On April 21 Meir Feinstein and Lehi member Moshe Barazani blew themselves up, using a smuggled grenade, hours before their scheduled hanging. And on May 4 one of the Irgun's largest operations took place \u2013 the raid on Acre Prison. The operation was carried out by 23 men, commanded by Dov Cohen \u2013 AKA \"Shimshon\", along with the help of the Irgun and Lehi prisoners inside the prison. The Irgun had informed them of the plan in advance and smuggled in explosives. After a hole was blasted in the prison wall, the 41 Irgun and Lehi members who had been chosen to escape then ran to the hole, blasting through inner prison gates with the smuggled explosives. Meanwhile, Irgun teams mined roads and launched a mortar attack on a nearby British Army camp to delay the arrival of responding British forces. Although the 41 escapees managed to get out of the prison and board the escape trucks, some were rapidly recaptured and nine of the escapees and attackers were killed. Five Irgun men in the attacking party were also captured. Overall, 27 of the 41 designated escapees managed to escape. Along with the underground movement members, other criminals \u2013 including 214 Arabs \u2013 also escaped. Of the five attackers who were caught, three of them \u2013 Avshalom Haviv, Meir Nakar, and Yaakov Weiss, were sentenced to death.\nThe Sergeants affair.\nAfter the death sentences of the three were confirmed, the Irgun tried to save them by kidnapping hostages\u00a0\u2013 British sergeants Clifford Martin and Mervyn Paice\u00a0\u2013 in the streets of Netanya. British forces closed off and combed the area in search of the two, but did not find them. On July 29, 1947, in the afternoon, Meir Nakar, Avshalom Haviv, and Yaakov Weiss were executed. Approximately thirteen hours later the hostages were hanged in retaliation by the Irgun and their bodies, booby-trapped with an explosive, afterwards strung up from trees in woodlands south of Netanya. This action caused an outcry in Britain and was condemned both there and by Jewish leaders in Palestine.\nThis episode has been given as a major influence on the British decision to terminate the Mandate and leave Palestine. The United Nations Special Committee on Palestine (UNSCOP) was also influenced by this and other actions. At the same time another incident was developing \u2013 the events of the ship \"Exodus 1947\". The 4,500 Holocaust survivors on board were not allowed to enter Palestine. UNSCOP also covered the events. Some of its members were even present at Haifa port when the putative immigrants were forcefully removed from their ship (later found to have been rigged with an IED by some of its passengers) onto the deportation ships, and later commented that this strong image helped them press for an immediate solution for Jewish immigration and the question of Palestine.\nTwo weeks later, the House of Commons convened for a special debate on events in Palestine, and concluded that their soldiers should be withdrawn as soon as possible.\n1948 Palestine War.\nUNSCOP's conclusion was a unanimous decision to end the British mandate, and a majority decision to divide Mandatory Palestine (the land west of the Jordan River) between a Jewish state and an Arab state. During the UN's deliberations regarding the committee's recommendations the Irgun avoided initiating any attacks, so as not to influence the UN negatively on the idea of a Jewish state. On November 29 the UN General Assembly voted in favor of ending the mandate and establishing two states on the land. That very same day the Irgun and the Lehi renewed their attacks on British targets. The next day the local Arabs began attacking the Jewish community, thus beginning the first stage of the 1948 Palestine War. The first attacks on Jews were in Jewish neighborhoods of Jerusalem, in and around Jaffa, and in Bat Yam, Holon, and the Ha'Tikvah neighborhood in Tel Aviv.\nIn the autumn of 1947, the Irgun had approximately 4,000 members. The goal of the organization at that point was the conquest of the land between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea for the future Jewish state and preventing Arab forces from driving out the Jewish community. The Irgun became almost an overt organization, establishing military bases in Ramat Gan and Petah Tikva. It began recruiting openly, thus significantly increasing in size. During the war the Irgun fought alongside the Lehi and the Haganah in the front against the Arab attacks. At first the Haganah maintained a defensive policy, as it had until then, but after the Convoy of 35 incident it completely abandoned its policy of restraint: \"Distinguishing between individuals is no longer possible, for now \u2013 it is a war, and even the innocent shall not be absolved.\"\nThe Irgun also began carrying out reprisal missions, as it had under David Raziel's command. At the same time though, it published announcements calling on the Arabs to lay down their weapons and maintain a ceasefire:\nThe National Military Organization has warned you, if the murderous attacks on Jewish civilians shall continue, its soldiers will penetrate your centers of activity and plague you. You have not heeded the warning. You continued to harm our brothers and murder them in wild cruelty. Therefore soldiers of the National Military Organization will go on the attack, as we have warned you.\n... However even in these frenzied times, when Arab and Jewish blood is spilled at the British enslaver, we hereby call upon you ... to stop the attacks and create peace between us. We do not want a war with you. We are certain that neither do you want a war with us...\nHowever, the mutual attacks continued. The Irgun attacked the Arab villages of Tira near Haifa, Yehudiya ('Abassiya) in the center, and Shuafat by Jerusalem. The Irgun also attacked in the Wadi Rushmiya neighborhood in Haifa and Abu Kabir in Jaffa. On December 29 Irgun units arrived by boat to the Jaffa shore and a gunfight between them and Arab gangs ensued. The following day a bomb was thrown from a speeding Irgun car at a group of Arab men waiting to be hired for the day at the Haifa oil refinery, resulting in seven Arabs killed, and dozens injured. In response, some Arab workers attacked Jews in the area, killing 41. This sparked a Haganah response in Balad al-Sheykh, which resulted in the deaths of 60 civilians. The Irgun's goal in the fighting was to move the battles from Jewish populated areas to Arab populated areas. On January 1, 1948, the Irgun attacked again in Jaffa, its men wearing British uniforms; later in the month it attacked in Beit Nabala, a base for many Arab fighters. On 5 January 1948 the Irgun detonated a lorry bomb outside Jaffa's Ottoman built Town Hall, killing 14 and injuring 19. In Jerusalem, two days later, Irgun members in a stolen police van rolled a barrel bomb into a large group of civilians who were waiting for a bus by the Jaffa Gate, killing around sixteen. In the pursuit that followed three of the attackers were killed and two taken prisoner.\nOn 6 April 1948, the Irgun raided the British Army camp at Pardes Hanna killing six British soldiers and their commanding officer.\nThe Deir Yassin massacre was carried out in a village west of Jerusalem that had signed a non-belligerency pact with its Jewish neighbors and the Haganah, and repeatedly had barred entry to foreign irregulars. On 9 April approximately 120 Irgun and Lehi members began an operation to capture the village. During the operation, the villagers fiercely resisted the attack, and a battle broke out. In the end, the Irgun and Lehi forces advanced gradually through house-to-house fighting. The village was only taken after the Irgun began systematically dynamiting houses, and after a Palmach unit intervened and employed mortar fire to silence the villagers' sniper positions. The operation resulted in five Jewish fighters dead and 40 injured. Some 100 to 120 villagers were also killed.\nThere are allegations that Irgun and Lehi forces committed war crimes during and after the capture of the village. These allegations include reports that fleeing individuals and families were fired at, and prisoners of war were killed after their capture. A Haganah report writes:\n\"The conquest of the village was carried out with great cruelty. Whole families \u2013 women, old people, children \u2013 were killed. ... Some of the prisoners moved to places of detention, including women and children, were murdered viciously by their captors.\"\nSome say that this incident was an event that accelerated the Arab exodus from Palestine.\nThe Irgun cooperated with the Haganah in the conquest of Haifa. At the regional commander's request, on April 21 the Irgun took over an Arab post above Hadar Ha'Carmel as well as the Arab neighborhood of Wadi Nisnas, adjacent to the Lower City.\nThe Irgun acted independently in the conquest of Jaffa (part of the proposed Arab State according to the UN Partition Plan). On April 25 Irgun units, about 600 strong, left the Irgun base in Ramat Gan towards Arab Jaffa. Difficult battles ensued, and the Irgun faced resistance from the Arabs as well as the British. Under the command of Amichai \"Gidi\" Paglin, the Irgun's chief operations officer, the Irgun captured the neighborhood of Manshiya, which threatened the city of Tel Aviv. Afterwards the force continued to the sea, towards the area of the port, and using mortars, shelled the southern neighborhoods.\n In his report concerning the fall of Jaffa the local Arab military commander, Michel Issa, wrote: \"Continuous shelling with mortars of the city by Jews for four days, beginning 25 April, [...] caused inhabitants of city, unaccustomed to such bombardment, to panic and flee.\" According to Morris the shelling was done by the Irgun. Their objective was \"to prevent constant military traffic in the city, to break the spirit of the enemy troops [and] to cause chaos among the civilian population in order to create a mass flight.\" High Commissioner Cunningham wrote a few days later \"It should be made clear that IZL attack with mortars was indiscriminate and designed to create panic among the civilian inhabitants.\" The British demanded the evacuation of the newly conquered city, and militarily intervened, ending the Irgun offensive. Heavy British shelling against Irgun positions in Jaffa failed to dislodge them, and when British armor pushed into the city, the Irgun resisted; a bazooka team managed to knock out one tank, buildings were blown up and collapsed onto the streets as the armor advanced, and Irgun men crawled up and tossed live dynamite sticks onto the tanks. The British withdrew, and opened negotiations with the Jewish authorities. An agreement was worked out, under which Operation Hametz would be stopped and the Haganah would not attack Jaffa until the end of the Mandate. The Irgun would evacuate Manshiya, with Haganah fighters replacing them. British troops would patrol its southern end and occupy the police fort. The Irgun had previously agreed with the Haganah that British pressure would not lead to withdrawal from Jaffa and that custody of captured areas would be turned over to the Haganah. The city ultimately fell on May 13 after Haganah forces entered the city and took control of the rest of the city, from the south \u2013 part of the \"Hametz Operation\" which included the conquest of a number of villages in the area. The battles in Jaffa were a great victory for the Irgun. This operation was the largest in the history of the organization, which took place in a highly built up area that had many militants in shooting positions. During the battles explosives were used in order to break into homes and continue forging a way through them. Furthermore, this was the first occasion in which the Irgun had directly fought British forces, reinforced with armor and heavy weaponry. The city began these battles with an Arab population estimated at 70,000, which shrank to some 4,100 Arab residents by the end of major hostilities. Since the Irgun captured the neighborhood of Manshiya on its own, causing the flight of many of Jaffa's residents, the Irgun took credit for the conquest of Jaffa. It had lost 42 dead and about 400 wounded during the battle.\nIntegration with the IDF and the Altalena Affair.\nOn May 14, 1948 the establishment of the State of Israel was proclaimed. The declaration of independence was followed by the establishment of the Israel Defense Forces (IDF), and the process of absorbing all military organizations into the IDF started. On June 1, an agreement had been signed between Menachem Begin and Yisrael Galili for the absorption of the Irgun into the IDF. One of the clauses stated that the Irgun had to stop smuggling arms. Meanwhile, in France, Irgun representatives purchased a ship, renamed \"Altalena\" (a pseudonym of Ze'ev Jabotinsky), and weapons. The ship sailed on June 11 and arrived at the Israeli coast on June 20, during the first truce of the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War. Despite United Nations Security Council Resolution 50 declaring an arms embargo in the region, neither side respected it.\nWhen the ship arrived the Israeli government, headed by Ben-Gurion, was adamant in its demand that the Irgun surrender and hand over all of the weapons. Ben-Gurion said: \"We must decide whether to hand over power to Begin or to order him to cease his activities. If he does not do so, we will open fire! Otherwise, we must decide to disperse our own army.\"\nThere were two confrontations between the newly formed IDF and the Irgun: when \"Altalena\" reached Kfar Vitkin in the late afternoon of Sunday, June 20 many Irgun militants, including Begin, waited on the shore. A clash with the Alexandroni Brigade, commanded by Dan Even (Epstein), occurred. Fighting ensued and there were a number of casualties on both sides. The clash ended in a ceasefire and the transfer of the weapons on shore to the local IDF commander, and with the ship, now reinforced with local Irgun members, including Begin, sailing to Tel Aviv, where the Irgun had more supporters.\nMany Irgun members, who joined the IDF earlier that month, left their bases and concentrated on the Tel Aviv beach. A confrontation between them and the IDF units started. In response, Ben-Gurion ordered Yigael Yadin (acting Chief of Staff) to concentrate large forces on the Tel Aviv beach and to take the ship by force. Heavy guns were transferred to the area and at four in the afternoon, Ben-Gurion ordered the shelling of the \"Altalena\". One of the shells hit the ship, which began to burn.\nSixteen Irgun fighters were killed in the confrontation with the army; six were killed in the Kfar Vitkin area and ten on Tel Aviv beach. Three IDF soldiers were killed: two at Kfar Vitkin and one in Tel Aviv.\nAfter the shelling of the \"Altalena\", more than 200 Irgun fighters were arrested. Most of them were freed several weeks later. The Irgun militants were then fully integrated with the IDF and not kept in separate units.\nThe initial agreement for the integration of the Irgun into the IDF did not include Jerusalem, where a small remnant of the Irgun called the \"Jerusalem Battalion\", numbering around 400 fighters, and Lehi, continued to operate independently of the government. Following the assassination of UN Envoy for Peace Folke Bernadotte by Lehi in September 1948, the Israeli government determined to immediately dismantle the underground organizations. An ultimatum was issued to the Irgun to liquidate as an independent organization and integrate into the IDF or be destroyed, and Israeli troops surrounded the Irgun camp in the Katamon Quarter of Jerusalem. The Irgun accepted the ultimatum on September 22, 1948, and shortly afterward the remaining Irgun fighters in Jerusalem began enlisting in the IDF and turning over their arms. At Begin's orders, the Irgun in the diaspora formally disbanded on January 12, 1949, with the Irgun's former Paris headquarters becoming the European bureau of the Herut movement.\nPropaganda.\nIn order to increase the popularity of the Irgun organization and ideology, Irgun employed propaganda. This propaganda was mainly aimed at the British, and included the idea of Eretz Israel. According to Irgun , the Jewish state was not only to encompass all of Mandatory Palestine, but also The Emirate of Transjordan.\nWhen the Labour Party came into power in Britain in July 1945, Irgun published an announcement entitled, \"We shall give the Labour Government a Chance to Keep Its Word.\" In this publication, Irgun stated, \"Before it came to power, this Party undertook to return the Land of Israel to the people of Israel as a free state... Men and parties in opposition or in their struggle with their rivals, have, for twenty-five years, made us many promises and undertaken clear obligations; but, on coming to power, they have gone back on their words.\" Another publication, which followed a British counter-offensive against Jewish organizations in Palestine, Irgun released a document titled, \"Mobilize the Nation!\" Irgun used this publication to paint the British regime as hostile to the Jewish people, even comparing the British to the Nazis. In response to what was seen as British aggression, Irgun called for a Hebrew Provisional Government, and a Hebrew Liberation Army.\nCriticism.\nDescription as a terrorist organization.\nReferences to the Irgun as a terrorist organization came from sources including the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry, newspapers and a number of prominent world and Jewish figures.\nLeaders within the mainstream Jewish organizations, the Jewish Agency, Haganah and Histadrut, as well as the British authorities, routinely condemned Irgun operations as terrorism and branded it an illegal organization as a result of the group's attacks on civilian targets. However, privately at least the Haganah kept a dialogue with the dissident groups.\nIronically, in early 1947, \"the British army in Mandate Palestine banned the use of the term 'terrorist' to refer to the Irgun zvai Leumi ... because it implied that British forces had reason to be terrified.\"\nIrgun attacks prompted a formal declaration from the World Zionist Congress in 1946, which strongly condemned \"the shedding of innocent blood as a means of political warfare.\"\nThe Israeli government, in September 1948, acting in response to the assassination of Count Folke Bernadotte, outlawed the Irgun and Lehi groups, declaring them terrorist organizations under the Prevention of Terrorism Ordinance.\nIn 1948, \"The New York Times\" published a letter signed by a number of prominent Jewish figures including Hannah Arendt, Albert Einstein, Sidney Hook, and Rabbi Jessurun Cardozo, which described Irgun as \"a terrorist, right-wing, chauvinist organization in Palestine\". The letter went on to state that Irgun and the Stern gang \"inaugurated a reign of terror in the Palestine Jewish community. Teachers were beaten up for speaking against them, adults were shot for not letting their children join them. By gangster methods, beatings, window-smashing, and widespread robberies, the terrorists intimidated the population and exacted a heavy tribute.\"\nSoon after World War II, Winston Churchill said \"we should never have stopped immigration before the war\", but that the Irgun were \"the vilest gangsters\" and that he would \"never forgive the Irgun terrorists.\"\nIn 2006, Simon McDonald, the British ambassador in Tel Aviv, and John Jenkins, the Consul-General in Jerusalem, wrote in response to a pro-Irgun commemoration of the King David Hotel bombing: \"We do not think that it is right for an act of terrorism, which led to the loss of many lives, to be commemorated.\" They also called for the removal of plaques at the site which presented as a fact that the deaths were due to the British ignoring warning calls. The plaques, in their original version, read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Warning phone calls had been made urging the hotel's occupants to leave immediately. For reasons known only to the British the hotel was not evacuated and after 25 minutes the bombs exploded, and to the Irgun's regret and dismay 91 persons were killed.\nMcDonald and Jenkins said that no such warning calls were made, adding that even if they had, \"this does not absolve those who planted the bomb from responsibility for the deaths.\"\nBruce Hoffman states: \"Unlike many terrorist groups today, the Irgun's strategy was not deliberately to target or wantonly harm civilians.\" Max Abrahms writes that the Irgun \"pioneered the practice of issuing pre-attack warnings to spare civilians\", which was later emulated by the African National Congress (ANC) and other groups and proved \"effective but not foolproof\". In addition, Begin ordered attacks to take place at night and even during Shabbat to reduce the likelihood of civilian casualties. U.S. military intelligence found that \"the Irgun Zvai Leumi is waging a general war against the government and at all times took special care not to cause damage or injury to persons\". Although the King David Hotel bombing is widely considered a \"prima facie\" case of Irgun terrorism, Abrahms comments: \"But this hotel wasn't a normal hotel. It served as the headquarters for the British Armed Forces in Palestine. By all accounts, the intent wasn't to harm civilians.\"\nAccusations of fascism.\n\"Ha'aretz\" columnist and Israeli historian Tom Segev wrote of the Irgun: \"In the second half of 1940, a few members of the Irgun Zvai Leumi (National Military Organization) \u2013 the anti-British terrorist group sponsored by the Revisionists and known by its acronym Etzel, and to the British simply as the Irgun \u2013 made contact with representatives of Fascist Italy, offering to cooperate against the British.\"\nClare Hollingworth, the \"Daily Telegraph\" and \"The Scotsman\" correspondent in Jerusalem during 1948 wrote several outspoken reports after spending several weeks in West Jerusalem:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Irgun is in fact rapidly becoming the 'SS' of the new state. There is also a strong 'Gestapo' \u2013 but no-one knows who is in it.\n'The shopkeepers are afraid not so much of shells as of raids by Irgun Zvai Leumi and the Stern Gang. These young toughs, who are beyond whatever law there is have cleaned out most private houses of the richer classes &amp; started to prey upon the shopkeepers.'\u2014\u200a\nOther.\nA US military intelligence report, dated January 1948, described Irgun recruiting tactics amongst Displaced Persons (DP) in the camps across Germany:\nIrgun ... seems to be concentrating on the DP police force. This is an old technique in Eastern Europe and in all police states. By controlling the police, a small, unscrupulous group of determined people can impose its will on a peaceful and inarticulate majority; it is done by threats, intimidation, by violence and if need be bloodshed ... they have embarked upon a course of violence within the camps.'\nAlan Dershowitz wrote in his book \"The Case for Israel\" that unlike the Haganah, the policy of the Irgun had been to encourage the flight of local Arabs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15408", "revid": "45364314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15408", "title": "Isoroku Yamamoto", "text": "Japanese admiral (1884\u20131943)\n was an admiral of the Imperial Japanese Navy (IJN) and the commander of the Combined Fleet during World War II. He commanded the fleet from 1939 until his death in 1943, overseeing the start of the Pacific War in 1941 and Japan's initial successes and defeats before his plane was shot down by U.S. fighter aircraft over New Guinea.\nYamamoto graduated from the Imperial Naval Academy in 1904 and served in the Russo-Japanese War, where he lost two fingers at the Battle of Tsushima. He later studied at Harvard University in the United States and was appointed naval attach\u00e9 to the Japanese embassy in Washington. His experiences convinced him that naval power depended on access to oil and industrial capacity, and that Japan thus had little hope to defeat the U.S. in a war. He was one of the first naval leaders to conclude that naval aviation and aircraft carriers would play a decisive role in any future conflict. \nIn 1936, Yamamoto was appointed navy vice minister, and opposed Japan's alliance with Germany and Italy in the Tripartite Pact of 1940. In 1939, he was appointed commander-in-chief of the Combined Fleet, and was tasked with creating a strategy for war with the United States; Yamamoto favored a surprise attack, which was carried out at the start of the war with an attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941.\nIn the early months of the war, the Japanese fleet scored a series of decisive naval victories. These gains were halted at the Battle of Midway in June 1942, in which four Japanese carriers were sunk. Yamamoto committed to the defense of the Solomon Islands in the Guadalcanal campaign, but was unable to prevent their capture. In April 1943, Yamamoto was killed after American code breakers intercepted his flight plans, enabling the United States Army Air Forces to shoot down his aircraft.\nFamily background.\nYamamoto was born as in Nagaoka, Niigata. His father, Sadayoshi Takano (\u9ad8\u91ce \u8c9e\u5409), had been an intermediate-rank \"samurai\" of the Nagaoka Domain. \"Isoroku\" is a Japanese term meaning \"56\"; the name referred to his father's age at Isoroku's birth.\nIn 1916, Isoroku was adopted into the Yamamoto family (another family of former Nagaoka samurai) and took the Yamamoto name. It was a common practice for samurai families lacking sons to adopt suitable young men in this fashion to carry on the family name, the rank and the income that went with it. Isoroku married Reiko Mihashi in 1918; they had two sons and two daughters.\nEarly career.\nYamamoto graduated from the Imperial Japanese Naval Academy in 1904, ranking 11th in his class. He then subsequently served on the armored cruiser during the Russo-Japanese War. He was wounded at the Battle of Tsushima, losing his index and middle fingers on his left hand, as the cruiser was hit repeatedly by the Russian battle line. He returned to the Naval Staff College in 1914, emerging as a lieutenant commander in 1916. In December 1919, he was promoted to commander.\n1920s and 1930s.\nYamamoto was part of the Japanese Navy establishment, who were rivals of the more aggressive Army establishment, especially the officers of the Kwantung Army. He promoted a policy of a strong fleet to project force through gunboat diplomacy, rather than a fleet used primarily for the transport of invasion land forces, as some of his political opponents in the Army wanted. This stance led him to oppose the invasion of China. He also opposed war against the United States, partly because of his studies at Harvard University (1919\u20131921) and his two postings as a naval attach\u00e9 in Washington, D.C., where he learned to speak fluent English. Yamamoto traveled extensively in the United States during his tour of duty there, where he studied American customs and business practices.\nHe was promoted to captain in 1923. On February 13, 1924, Captain Yamamoto was part of the Japanese delegation visiting the United States Naval War College. Later that year, he changed his specialty from gunnery to naval aviation. His first command was the cruiser in 1928, followed by the aircraft carrier .\nHe participated in the London Naval Conference 1930 as a rear admiral and the London Naval Conference 1935 as a vice admiral, as the growing military influence on the government at the time deemed that a career military specialist needed to accompany the diplomats to the arms limitations talks. Yamamoto was a strong proponent of naval aviation and served as head of the Aeronautics Department, before accepting a post as commander of the First Carrier Division. Yamamoto opposed the Japanese invasion of northeast China in 1931, the subsequent full-scale land war with China in 1937, and the Tripartite Pact with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy in 1940. As Deputy Navy Minister, he apologized to United States Ambassador Joseph C. Grew for the bombing of the gunboat USS \"Panay\" in December 1937. These issues made him a target of assassination threats by pro-war militarists.\nThroughout 1938, many young army and naval officers began to speak publicly against Yamamoto and certain other Japanese admirals, such as Mitsumasa Yonai and Shigeyoshi Inoue, for their strong opposition to a tripartite pact with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy, which the admirals saw as inimical to \"Japan's natural interests\". Yamamoto received a steady stream of hate mail and death threats from Japanese nationalists. His reaction to the prospect of death by assassination was passive and accepting. The admiral wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTo die for Emperor and Nation is the highest hope of a military man. After a brave hard fight the blossoms are scattered on the fighting field. But if a person wants to take a life instead, still the fighting man will go to eternity for Emperor and country. One man's life or death is a matter of no importance. All that matters is the Empire. As Confucius said, \"They may crush cinnabar, yet they do not take away its color; one may burn a fragrant herb, yet it will not destroy the scent.\" They may destroy my body, yet they will not take away my will.\nThe Japanese Army, annoyed at Yamamoto's unflinching opposition to a Rome-Berlin-Tokyo treaty, dispatched military police to \"guard\" him, a ruse by the Army to keep an eye on him. He was later reassigned from the naval ministry to sea as the commander-in-chief of the Combined Fleet on August 30, 1939. This was done as one of the last acts of acting Navy Minister Mitsumasa Yonai, under Baron Hiranuma Kiichir\u014d's short-lived administration. It was done partly to make it harder for assassins to target Yamamoto. Yonai was certain that if Yamamoto remained ashore, he would be killed before the year [1939] ended.\n1940\u20131941.\nYamamoto was promoted to admiral on November 15, 1940. That was in spite of the fact that when Hideki Tojo was appointed prime minister on October 18, 1941, many political observers thought that Yamamoto's career was essentially over. Tojo had been Yamamoto's opponent from the time when the latter served as Japan's deputy naval minister and Tojo was the prime mover behind Japan's takeover of Manchuria. \nIt was believed that Yamamoto would be appointed to command the Yokosuka Naval Base, \"a nice safe demotion with a big house and no power at all\". However, after a brief stint in the post, a new Japanese cabinet was announced, and Yamamoto found himself returned to his position of power despite his open conflict with Tojo and other members of the Army's oligarchy, who favored war with the European powers and the United States.\nTwo of the main reasons for Yamamoto's political survival were his immense popularity within the fleet, where he commanded the respect of his men and officers, and his close relations with the imperial family. He also had the acceptance of Japan's naval hierarchy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThere was no officer more competent to lead the Combined Fleet to victory than Admiral Yamamoto. His daring plan for the Pearl Harbor attack had passed through the crucible of the Japanese naval establishment, and after many expressed misgivings, his fellow admirals had realized that Yamamoto spoke no more than the truth when he said that Japan's hope for victory in this [upcoming] war was limited by time and oil. Every sensible officer of the navy was well aware of the perennial oil problems. Also, it had to be recognized that if the enemy could seriously disturb Japanese merchant shipping, then the fleet would be endangered even more.\nConsequently, Yamamoto stayed in his post. With Tojo now in charge of Japan's highest political office, it became clear the Army would lead the Navy into a war about which Yamamoto had serious reservations. He wrote to an ultranationalist:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis quote was spread by the militarists, minus the last sentence, so it was interpreted in America as a boast that Japan would conquer the entire continental United States. The omitted sentence showed Yamamoto's counsel of caution about a war that could cost Japan dearly. Nevertheless, Yamamoto accepted the reality of impending war and planned for a quick victory by destroying the United States Pacific Fleet at Pearl Harbor in a preventive strike, while simultaneously thrusting into the oil- and rubber-rich areas of Southeast Asia, especially the Dutch East Indies, Borneo, and Malaya. In naval matters, Yamamoto opposed the building of the battleships and as an unwise investment of resources.\nYamamoto was responsible for a number of innovations in Japanese naval aviation. Although remembered for his association with aircraft carriers, Yamamoto did more to influence the development of land-based naval aviation, particularly the Mitsubishi G3M and G4M medium bombers. His demand for great range and the ability to carry a torpedo was intended to conform to Japanese conceptions of bleeding the American fleet as it advanced across the Pacific. The planes did achieve considerable range, but long-range fighter escorts were not available. The planes were lightly constructed and, when fully fueled, were vulnerable to enemy fire. That earned the G4M the sardonic nickname the \"flying cigarette lighter\". Yamamoto eventually died in one of those aircraft.\nThe range of the G3M and G4M contributed to a demand for great range in a fighter aircraft. That partly drove the requirements for the A6M Zero, which was as noteworthy for its range as for its maneuverability. Again, both attributes were achieved only with light construction and flammability, that later contributed to the A6M's high casualty rates as the war progressed.\nAs Japan moved toward a wider war during 1940, Yamamoto began to consider strategic as well as tactical innovation, again with mixed results. Prompted by talented young officers such as Lieutenant Commander Minoru Genda, Yamamoto approved the reorganization of Japanese carrier forces into the First Air Fleet, a consolidated striking force that gathered Japan's six largest carriers into one unit. That innovation provided great striking capacity, but also concentrated the vulnerable carriers into a compact target. Yamamoto also oversaw the organization of a similar large land-based organization in the 11th Air Fleet, which later used the G3M and G4M to neutralize American air forces in the Philippines and sink the British Force Z\nIn January 1941, Yamamoto went even further and proposed a radical revision of Japanese naval strategy. For two decades, in keeping with the doctrine of Captain Alfred T. Mahan, the Naval General Staff had planned in terms of Japanese light surface forces, submarines, and land-based air units whittling down the American fleet as it advanced across the Pacific until the Japanese Navy engaged it in a climactic \"Kantai Kessen\" (\"decisive battle\") in the northern Philippine Sea (between the Ryukyu Islands and the Marianas), with battleships fighting in traditional battle lines.\nCorrectly pointing out this plan had never worked even in Japanese war games, and painfully aware of American strategic advantages in military production capacity, Yamamoto proposed instead to seek parity with the Americans by first reducing their forces with a preventive strike, then following up with a \"decisive battle\" fought offensively, rather than defensively. Yamamoto hoped, but probably did not believe, that if the Americans could be dealt terrific blows early in the war, they might be willing to negotiate an end to the conflict. The Naval General Staff proved reluctant to go along, and Yamamoto was eventually driven to capitalize on his popularity in the fleet by threatening to resign to get his way. Admiral Osami Nagano and the Naval General Staff eventually caved in to this pressure, but only insofar as approving the attack on Pearl Harbor.\nIn January 1941 Yamamoto began developing a plan to attack the American base in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, which the Japanese continued to refine during the next months. \nOn November 5, 1941, Yamamoto in his \"Top Secret Operation Order no. 1\" issued to the Combined Fleet, the Empire of Japan must drive out Britain and America from Greater East Asia and hasten the settlement of China, whereas, in the event that Britain and America were driven out from the Philippines and Dutch East Indies, an independent, self-supporting economic entity will be firmly established\u2014mirroring the principle of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere in another personification.\nTwo days later, he set the date for the intended surprise attack in Pearl Harbor and that would be on December 7 for one simple reason: it was a Sunday, the day that American military personnel would be least alert to an attack.\nThe First Air Fleet commenced preparations for the Pearl Harbor raid, solving a number of technical problems along the way, including how to launch torpedoes in the shallow waters of Pearl Harbor and how to craft armor-piercing bombs by machining down battleship gun projectiles.\nAttack on Pearl Harbor.\nThe United States and Japan were officially at peace when the First Air Fleet of six carriers attacked on December 7, 1941.\nThree hundred and fifty three aircraft were launched against Pearl Harbor and other locations within Honolulu in two waves. The attack was a success according to the parameters of the mission, which sought to sink at least four American battleships and prevent the United States from interfering in Japan's southward advance for at least six months. Three American aircraft carriers were also considered a choice target, but these were at sea at the time.\nIn the end, four American battleships were sunk, four were damaged, and eleven other cruisers, destroyers, and auxiliaries were sunk or seriously damaged, 188 American aircraft were destroyed and 159 others damaged, and 2,403 people were killed and 1,178 others wounded. The Japanese lost 64 servicemen and only 29 aircraft, with 74 others damaged by anti-aircraft fire from the ground. The damaged aircraft were disproportionately dive and torpedo bombers, seriously reducing the ability to exploit the first two waves' success, so the commander of the First Air Fleet, Naval Vice Admiral Chuichi Nagumo, withdrew. Yamamoto later lamented Nagumo's failure to seize the initiative to seek out and destroy the American carriers or further bombard various strategically important facilities on Oahu, such as Pearl Harbor's oil tanks.\nNagumo had absolutely no idea where the American carriers were, and remaining on station while his forces looked for them ran the risk of his own forces being found first and attacked while his aircraft were absent searching. In any case, insufficient daylight remained after recovering the aircraft from the first two waves for the carriers to launch and recover a third before dark, and Nagumo's escorting destroyers lacked the fuel capacity to loiter long. Much has been made of Yamamoto's hindsight, but in keeping with Japanese military tradition to not criticize the commander on the spot, he did not punish Nagumo for his withdrawal.\nOn the strategic, moral, and political level, the attack was a disaster for Japan, rousing Americans' thirst for revenge due to what is famously called a \"sneak attack\". The shock of the attack, coming in an unexpected place with devastating results and without a declaration of war, galvanized the American public's determination to avenge the attack. When asked by Prime Minister Fumimaro Konoe in mid-1941 about the outcome of a possible war with the United States, Yamamoto made a well-known and prophetic statement: If ordered to fight, he said, \"I shall run wild considerably for the first six months or a year, but I have utterly no confidence for the second and third years.\" His prediction would be validated, because Japan easily conquered territories and islands in Asia and the Pacific during the first six months of the war, before suffering a major defeat at the Battle of Midway on June 4\u20137, 1942, which ultimately tilted the balance of power in the Pacific toward the United States.\nDecember 1941 \u2013 May 1942.\nWith the American fleet largely neutralized at Pearl Harbor, Yamamoto's Combined Fleet turned to the task of executing the larger Japanese war plan devised by the Imperial Japanese Army and Navy General Staff. The First Air Fleet made a circuit of the Pacific, striking American, Australian, Dutch, and British installations from Wake Island to Australia to Ceylon in the Indian Ocean. The 11th Air Fleet caught the United States Fifth Air Force on the ground in the Philippines hours after Pearl Harbor, and then sank the British Force Z's battleship and battlecruiser at sea.\nUnder Yamamoto's able subordinates, Vice Admirals Jisabur\u014d Ozawa, Nobutake Kond\u014d, and Ib\u014d Takahashi, the Japanese swept the inadequate remaining American, British, Dutch and Australian naval assets from the Dutch East Indies in a series of amphibious landings and surface naval battles culminating in the Battle of the Java Sea on February 27, 1942. Along with the occupation of the Dutch East Indies came the fall of Singapore on February 15, and the eventual reduction of the remaining American-Filipino defensive positions in the Philippines on the Bataan peninsula on April 9 and Corregidor Island on May 6. The Japanese had secured their oil- and rubber-rich \"southern resources area\".\nBy late March, having achieved their initial aims with surprising speed and little loss, albeit against enemies ill-prepared to resist them, the Japanese paused to consider their next moves. Yamamoto and a few Japanese military leaders and officials waited, hoping that the United States or Great Britain would negotiate an armistice or a peace treaty to end the war. But when the British, as well as the Americans, expressed no interest in negotiating, Japanese thoughts turned to securing their newly seized territory and acquiring more with an eye to driving one or more of their enemies out of the war.\nCompeting plans were developed at this stage, including thrusts to the west against British India, south against Australia, and east against the United States. Yamamoto was involved in this debate, supporting different plans at different times with varying degrees of enthusiasm and for varying purposes, including horse-trading for support of his own objectives.\nPlans included ideas as ambitious as invading India or Australia, or seizing Hawaii. These grandiose ventures were inevitably set aside, as the Army could not spare enough troops from China for the first two, which would require a minimum of 250,000 men, nor shipping to support the latter two (transports were allocated separately to the Navy and Army, and jealously guarded). Instead, the Imperial General Staff supported an army thrust into Burma in hopes of linking up with Indian nationalists revolting against British rule, and attacks in New Guinea and the Solomon Islands designed to imperil Australia's lines of communication with the United States. Yamamoto argued for a decisive offensive strike in the east to finish off the American fleet, but the more conservative Naval General Staff officers were unwilling to risk it.\nOn April 18, in the midst of these debates, the Doolittle Raid struck Tokyo and surrounding areas, demonstrating the threat posed by American aircraft carriers, and giving Yamamoto an event he could exploit to get his way, and further debate over military strategy came to a quick end. The Naval General Staff agreed to Yamamoto's Midway Island (MI) Operation, subsequent to the first phase of the operations against Australia's link with America, and concurrent with its plan to invade the Aleutian Islands.\nYamamoto rushed planning for the Midway and Aleutians missions, while dispatching a force under Vice Admiral Takeo Takagi, including the Fifth Carrier Division (the large new carriers and ), to support the effort to seize the islands of Tulagi and Guadalcanal for seaplane and airplane bases, and the town of Port Moresby on Papua New Guinea's south coast facing Australia.\nThe Port Moresby (MO) Operation proved an unwelcome setback. Although Tulagi and Guadalcanal were taken, the Port Moresby invasion fleet was compelled to turn back when Takagi clashed with an American carrier task force in the Battle of the Coral Sea in early May. Although the Japanese sank the carrier and damaged the , the Americans damaged the carrier \"Sh\u014dkaku\" so badly that she required dockyard repairs, and the Japanese lost the light carrier . Just as importantly, Japanese operational mishaps and American fighters and anti-aircraft fire devastated the dive bomber and torpedo plane formations of both \"Sh\u014dkaku\"'s and \"Zuikaku\"'s air groups. These losses sidelined \"Zuikaku\" while she awaited replacement aircraft and aircrews, and saw to tactical integration and training. These two ships would be sorely missed a month later at Midway.\nBattle of Midway, June 1942.\nYamamoto's plan for Midway Island was an extension of his efforts to knock the American Pacific Fleet out of action long enough for Japan to fortify its defensive perimeter in the Pacific island chains. Yamamoto felt it necessary to seek an early, decisive offensive battle.\nThis plan was long believed to have been to draw American attention\u2014and possibly carrier forces\u2014north from Pearl Harbor by sending his Fifth Fleet (one carrier, one light carrier, four battleships, eight cruisers, 25 destroyers, and four transports) against the Aleutians, raiding Dutch Harbor on Unalaska Island and invading the more distant islands of Kiska and Attu.\nWhile Fifth Fleet attacked the Aleutians, First Mobile Force (four carriers, two battleships, three cruisers, and 12 destroyers) would attack Midway and destroy its air force. Once this was neutralized, Second Fleet (one light carrier, two battleships, 10 cruisers, 21 destroyers, and 11 transports) would land 5,000 troops to seize the atoll from the United States Marines.\nThe seizure of Midway was expected to draw the American carriers west into a trap where the First Mobile Force would engage and destroy them. Afterwards, First Fleet (one light carrier, three battleships, one light cruiser and nine destroyers), in conjunction with elements of Second Fleet, would mop up remaining US surface forces and complete the destruction of the American Pacific Fleet.\nTo guard against failure, Yamamoto initiated two security measures. The first was an aerial reconnaissance mission (Operation K) over Pearl Harbor to ascertain if the American carriers were there. The second was a picket line of submarines to detect the movement of enemy carriers toward Midway in time for First Mobile Force, First Fleet, and Second Fleet to combine against it. In the event, the first measure was aborted and the second delayed until after the American carriers had already sortied.\nThe plan was a compromise and hastily prepared, apparently so it could be launched in time for the anniversary of the Battle of Tsushima, but appeared well thought out, well organized, and finely timed, from a Japanese viewpoint. Against four fleet carriers, two light carriers, seven battleships, 14 cruisers and 42 destroyers likely to be in the area of the main battle, the United States could field only three carriers, eight cruisers, and 15 destroyers. The disparity appeared crushing. Only in numbers of carrier decks, available aircraft, and submarines was there near parity between the two sides. Despite various mishaps developed in the execution, it appeared that\u2014barring something unforeseen\u2014Yamamoto held all the cards.\nUnknown to Yamamoto, the Americans had learned of Japanese plans thanks to the code breaking of Japanese naval code D (known to the US as JN-25). As a result, Admiral Chester Nimitz, the Pacific Fleet commander, was able to place his outnumbered forces in a position to conduct their own ambush. By Nimitz's calculation, his three available carrier decks, plus Midway, gave him rough parity with Nagumo's First Mobile Force.\nFollowing a nuisance raid by Japanese flying boats in May, Nimitz dispatched a minesweeper to guard the intended refueling point for Operation K near French Frigate Shoals, causing the reconnaissance mission to be aborted and leaving Yamamoto ignorant of whether the Pacific Fleet carriers were still at Pearl Harbor. It remains unclear why Yamamoto permitted the earlier attack, and why his submarines did not sortie sooner, as reconnaissance was essential to success at Midway. Nimitz also dispatched his carriers toward Midway early, and they passed the Japanese submarines \"en route\" to their picket line positions. Nimitz's carriers positioned themselves to ambush the \"Kid\u014d Butai\" (striking force) when it struck Midway. A token cruiser and destroyer force was sent toward the Aleutians, but otherwise Nimitz ignored them. On June 4, 1942, days before Yamamoto expected them to interfere in the Midway operation, American carrier-based aircraft destroyed the four carriers of the \"Kid\u014d Butai\", catching the Japanese carriers at especially vulnerable times.\nWith his air power destroyed and his forces not yet concentrated for a fleet battle, Yamamoto maneuvered his remaining forces, still strong on paper, to trap the American forces. He was unable to do so because his initial dispositions had placed his surface combatants too far from Midway, and because Admiral Raymond Spruance prudently withdrew to the east to further defend Midway Island, believing (based on a mistaken submarine report) the Japanese still intended to invade. Not knowing several battleships, including the powerful , were in the Japanese order of battle, he did not comprehend the severe risk of a night surface battle, in which his carriers and cruisers would be at a disadvantage. However, his move to the east avoided that possibility. Correctly perceiving he had lost and could not bring surface forces into action, Yamamoto withdrew. The defeat marked the high tide of Japanese expansion.\nYamamoto's plan has been the subject of much criticism. Some historians state it violated the principle of concentration of force and was overly complex. Others point to similarly complex Allied operations, such as Operation MB8, that were successful, and note the extent to which the American intelligence \"coup\" derailed the operation before it began. Had Yamamoto's dispositions not denied Nagumo adequate pre-attack reconnaissance assets, both the American cryptanalytic success and the unexpected appearance of the American carriers could have been irrelevant.\nActions after Midway.\nThe Battle of Midway checked Japanese momentum, but the Japanese Navy was still a powerful force, capable of regaining the initiative. It planned to resume the thrust with Operation FS, aimed at eventually taking Fiji and Samoa to cut the American lifeline to Australia.\nYamamoto remained as commander-in-chief, retained at least partly to avoid diminishing the morale of the Combined Fleet. However, he had lost face as a result of the Midway defeat, and the Naval General Staff were disinclined to indulge in further gambles. This reduced Yamamoto to pursuing the classic defensive \"decisive battle strategy\" he had attempted to avoid.\nYamamoto committed Combined Fleet units to a series of small attrition actions across the south and central Pacific that stung the Americans, but in return suffered losses he could ill afford. Three major efforts to beat the Americans moving on Guadalcanal precipitated a pair of carrier battles that Yamamoto commanded personally: the Battles of the Eastern Solomons and Santa Cruz Islands in September and October, respectively, and finally a pair of wild surface engagements in November, all timed to coincide with Japanese Army pushes. The effort was wasted when the Army could not hold up its end of the operation. Yamamoto's naval forces won a few victories and inflicted considerable losses and damage to the American fleet in several battles around Guadalcanal which included the Battles of Savo Island, Cape Esperance, and Tassafaronga, but he could never draw the United States into a decisive fleet action. As a result, Japanese naval strength declined.\nDeath.\nTo boost morale following the defeat at Guadalcanal, Yamamoto decided to make an inspection tour throughout the South Pacific. It was during this tour that U.S. officials commenced an operation to kill him. On April 14, 1943, the United States naval intelligence effort, codenamed \"Magic\", intercepted and decrypted a message containing specifics of Yamamoto's tour, including arrival and departure times and locations, as well as the number and types of aircraft that would transport and accompany him on the journey. Yamamoto, the itinerary revealed, would be flying from Rabaul to Balalae Airfield, on an island near Bougainville in the Solomon Islands, on the morning of April 18, 1943.\nPresident Franklin D. Roosevelt may have authorized Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox to \"get Yamamoto\", but no official record of such an order exists, and sources disagree whether he did so. Knox essentially let Admiral Chester W. Nimitz make the decision. Nimitz first consulted Admiral William Halsey Jr., Commander, South Pacific, and then authorized the mission on April 17 to intercept and shoot down Yamamoto's flight \"en route\". A squadron of United States Army Air Forces Lockheed P-38 Lightning aircraft were assigned the task as only they possessed sufficient range. Select pilots from three units were informed that they were intercepting an \"important high officer\", with no specific name given.\nOn the morning of April 18, despite urging by local commanders to cancel the trip for fear of ambush, Yamamoto's two Mitsubishi G4M bombers, used as fast transport aircraft without bombs, left Rabaul as scheduled for the trip. Sixteen P-38s intercepted the flight over Bougainville, and a dogfight ensued between them and the six escorting Mitsubishi A6M Zeroes. First Lieutenant Rex T. Barber engaged the first of the two Japanese transports, which turned out to be T1-323, the one Yamamoto was travelling in. He fired on the aircraft until it began to spew smoke from its left engine. Barber turned away to attack the other transport as Yamamoto's aircraft crashed into the jungle.\nYamamoto's body, along with the crash site, was found the next day in the jungle of the island of Bougainville by a Japanese search-and-rescue party, led by army engineer Lieutenant Tsuyoshi Hamasuna. According to Hamasuna, Yamamoto had been thrown clear of the plane's wreckage, his white-gloved hand grasping the hilt of his katana, still upright in his seat under a tree. Hamasuna said Yamamoto was instantly recognizable, head dipped down as if deep in thought. A post-mortem disclosed that Yamamoto had received two .50-caliber bullet wounds, one to the back of his left shoulder and another to the left side of his lower jaw that exited above his right eye. The Japanese navy doctor examining the body determined that the head wound had killed Yamamoto. The more violent details of Yamamoto's death were hidden from the Japanese public. The medical report was changed \"on orders from above\", according to biographer Hiroyuki Agawa.\nYamamoto's death was a major blow to Japanese military morale. His staff cremated his remains at Buin, Papua New Guinea, and his ashes were returned to Tokyo aboard the battleship , his last flagship. He was given a full state funeral on June 5, 1943, where he received, posthumously, the title of Marshal Admiral and was awarded the Order of the Chrysanthemum (1st Class). He was also awarded Nazi Germany's Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords. Some of his ashes were buried in the public Tama Cemetery, Tokyo (\u591a\u6469\u970a\u5712) and the remainder at his ancestral burial grounds at the temple of Chuko-ji in Nagaoka City. He was succeeded as commander-in-chief of the Combined Fleet by Admiral Mineichi Koga.\nPersonal life.\nYamamoto practiced calligraphy. He and his wife, Reiko, had four children: two sons and two daughters. Yamamoto was an avid gambler, enjoying \"Go\", \"shogi\", billiards, bridge, mahjong, poker, and other games that tested his wits and sharpened his mind. He frequently made jokes about moving to Monaco and starting his own casino.\nHe enjoyed the company of \"geisha\", and his wife Reiko revealed to the Japanese public in 1954 that Yamamoto was closer to his favorite \"geisha\" Kawai Chiyoko than to her, which stirred some controversy. His funeral procession passed by Kawai's quarters on the way to the cemetery. Yamamoto was close friends with Teikichi Hori, a Navy admiral and Yamamoto's classmate from the Imperial Japanese Naval Academy who was purged from the Navy for supporting the Washington Naval Treaty. Before and during the war Yamamoto frequently corresponded with Hori, these personal letters would become the subject of the NHK documentary \"The Truth of Yamamoto\".\nThe claim that Yamamoto was a Catholic is likely due to confusion with retired Admiral Shinjiro Stefano Yamamoto, who was a decade older than Isoroku, and died in 1942.\nIn film and fiction.\nYamamoto was portrayed by Denjir\u014d \u014ck\u014dchi in Toho's 1953 film \"Eagle of the Pacific\".\nThe 1960 film \"The Gallant Hours\" depicts the battle of wits between Vice-Admiral William Halsey, Jr. and Yamamoto from the start of the Guadalcanal campaign in August 1942 to Yamamoto's death in April 1943. The film, however, portrays Yamamoto's death as occurring in November 1942, the day after the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal, and the P-38 aircraft that killed him as coming from Guadalcanal.\nIn 1960's \"Storm Over the Pacific\" from Toho Studios, Yamamoto is portrayed by Susumu Fujita. \nIn Daiei Studios's 1969 film \"Aa, kaigun\" (later released in the United States as \"Gateway to Glory\"), Yamamoto was portrayed by Sh\u014dgo Shimada.\nYamamoto is portrayed by Japanese actor S\u014d Yamamura in the 1970 movie \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\"; he states after the attack on Pearl Harbor:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I fear that all we have done is to awaken a sleeping giant and fill him with a terrible resolve.\u2014\u200a\nProfessional wrestler Harold Watanabe adopted the villainous Japanese gimmick of Tojo Yamamoto in reference to both Yamamoto and Hideki Tojo.\nAward-winning Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune (star of \"The Seven Samurai\") portrayed Yamamoto in three films:\nA fictionalized version of Yamamoto's death was portrayed in the \"Baa Baa Black Sheep\" episode \"The Hawk Flies on Sunday\", though only photos of Yamamoto were shown. In this episode, set much later in the war than in real life, the Black Sheep, a Marine Corsair squadron, joins an army squadron of P-51 Mustangs. The Marines intercepted fighter cover while the army shot down Yamamoto.\nIn Sh\u016be Matsubayashi's 1981 film \"\" (lit. \"Combined Fleet\", later released in the United States as \"The Imperial Navy\"), Yamamoto was portrayed by Keiju Kobayashi.\nIn the 1993 OVA series \"Konpeki no Kantai\" (lit. \"Deep Blue Fleet\"), right after his plane is shot down, Yamamoto suddenly wakes up as his younger self, Isoroku Takano, after the Battle of Tsushima in 1905. His memory from the original timeline intact, Yamamoto uses his knowledge of the future to help Japan become a stronger military power, eventually launching a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" against Hideki T\u014dj\u014d's government. In the subsequent Pacific War, Japan's technologically advanced navy decisively defeats the United States, and grants all of the former European and American colonies in Asia full independence. Yamamoto convinces Japan to join forces with the United States and Britain to defeat Nazi Germany. The series was criticized outside Japan as a whitewash of Imperial Japan's intentions towards its neighbors, and distancing itself from the wartime alliance with Nazi Germany.\nIn Neal Stephenson's 1999 book \"Cryptonomicon\", Yamamoto's final moments are depicted, with him realizing that Japan's naval codes have been broken and that he must inform headquarters.\nIn the 2001 film \"Pearl Harbor\", Yamamoto was portrayed by Japanese-born American actor Mako Iwamatsu. Like \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\", Yamamoto also says the sleeping giant quote.\nIn the 2004 anime series \"Zipang\", Yamamoto, voiced by , works to develop the uneasy partnership with the crew of the JMSDF \"Mirai\", which has been transported back through time to 1942.\nIn the Axis of Time trilogy by author John Birmingham, after a naval task force from the year 2021 is accidentally transported back through time to 1942, Yamamoto assumes a leadership role in the dramatic alteration of Japan's war strategy.\nIn \"The West Wing\" episode \"We Killed Yamamoto\", the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff uses the killing of Yamamoto to advocate for a peacetime assassination.\nIn Douglas Niles' 2007 book \"MacArthur's War: A Novel of the Invasion of Japan\" (written with Michael Dobson), which focuses on General Douglas MacArthur and an alternate history of the Pacific War (following a considerably different outcome of the Battle of Midway), Yamamoto is portrayed sympathetically, with much of the action in the Japanese government seen through his eyes, though he could not change the major decisions of Japan in World War II.\nIn Toei's 2011 war film \"\" (Blu-Ray titles:- English \"The Admiral\"; German \"Der Admiral\"), Yamamoto was portrayed by K\u014dji Yakusho. The film portrays his career from Pearl Harbor to his death in Operation Vengeance.\nIn Robert Conroy's 2011 book \"Rising Sun\", Yamamoto directs the IJN to launch a series of attacks on the American West Coast, in the hope the United States can be convinced to sue for peace and securing Japan's place as a world power; but cannot escape his lingering fear the war will ultimately doom Japan.\nIn the 2019 motion picture \"Midway\", Yamamoto is portrayed by Etsushi Toyokawa. As with \"Tora! Tora! Tora!\" and \"Pearl Harbor\", the sleeping giant quote is included once again.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15411", "revid": "4928500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15411", "title": "Iranaeus", "text": ""}
{"id": "15412", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15412", "title": "Infrared spectroscopy", "text": "Measurement of infrared radiation's interaction with matter\nInfrared spectroscopy (IR spectroscopy or vibrational spectroscopy) is the measurement of the interaction of infrared radiation with matter by absorption, emission, or reflection. It is used to study and identify chemical substances or functional groups in solid, liquid, or gaseous forms. It can be used to characterize new materials or identify and verify known and unknown samples. The method or technique of infrared spectroscopy is conducted with an instrument called an infrared spectrometer (or spectrophotometer) which produces an infrared spectrum. An IR spectrum can be visualized in a graph of infrared light absorbance (or transmittance) on the vertical axis vs. frequency, wavenumber or wavelength on the horizontal axis. Typical units of wavenumber used in IR spectra are reciprocal centimeters, with the symbol cm\u22121. Units of IR wavelength are commonly given in micrometers (formerly called \"microns\"), symbol \u03bcm, which are related to the wavenumber in a reciprocal way. A common laboratory instrument that uses this technique is a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer. Two-dimensional IR is also possible as discussed below.\nThe infrared portion of the electromagnetic spectrum is usually divided into three regions; the near-, mid- and far- infrared, named for their relation to the visible spectrum. The higher-energy near-IR, approximately 14,000\u20134,000\u00a0cm\u22121 (0.7\u20132.5\u00a0\u03bcm wavelength) can excite overtone or combination modes of molecular vibrations. The mid-infrared, approximately 4,000\u2013400\u00a0cm\u22121 (2.5\u201325\u00a0\u03bcm) is generally used to study the fundamental vibrations and associated rotational\u2013vibrational structure. The far-infrared, approximately 400\u201310\u00a0cm\u22121 (25\u20131,000\u00a0\u03bcm) has low energy and may be used for rotational spectroscopy and low frequency vibrations. The region from 2\u2013130\u00a0cm\u22121, bordering the microwave region, is considered the terahertz region and may probe intermolecular vibrations. The names and classifications of these subregions are conventions, and are only loosely based on the relative molecular or electromagnetic properties.\nUses and applications.\nInfrared spectroscopy is a simple and reliable technique widely used in both organic and inorganic chemistry, in research and industry. It is used in quality control, dynamic measurement, and monitoring applications such as the long-term unattended measurement of CO2 concentrations in greenhouses and growth chambers by infrared gas analyzers.\nIt is also used in forensic analysis in both criminal and civil cases, for example in identifying polymer degradation. It can be used in determining the blood alcohol content of a suspected drunk driver.\nIR spectroscopy has been used in identification of pigments in paintings and other art objects such as illuminated manuscripts.\nInfrared spectroscopy is also useful in measuring the degree of polymerization in polymer manufacture. Changes in the character or quantity of a particular bond are assessed by measuring at a specific frequency over time. Instruments can routinely record many spectra per second in situ, providing insights into reaction mechanism (e.g., detection of intermediates) and reaction progress.\nInfrared spectroscopy is utilized in the field of semiconductor microelectronics: for example, infrared spectroscopy can be applied to semiconductors like silicon, gallium arsenide, gallium nitride, zinc selenide, amorphous silicon, silicon nitride, etc.\nAnother important application of infrared spectroscopy is in the food industry to measure the concentration of various compounds in different food products.\nInfrared spectroscopy is also used in gas leak detection devices such as the DP-IR and EyeCGAs. These devices detect hydrocarbon gas leaks in the transportation of natural gas and crude oil.\nInfrared spectroscopy is an important analysis method in the recycling process of household waste plastics, and a convenient stand-off method to sort plastic of different polymers (PET, HDPE, ...).\nOther developments include a miniature IR-spectrometer that's linked to a cloud based database and suitable for personal everyday use, and NIR-spectroscopic chips that can be embedded in smartphones and various gadgets.\nIn catalysis research it is a very useful tool to characterize the catalyst, as well as to detect intermediates\nInfrared spectroscopy coupled with machine learning and artificial intelligence also has potential for rapid, accurate and non-invasive sensing of bacteria. The complex chemical composition of bacteria, including nucleic acids, proteins, carbohydrates and fatty acids, results in high-dimensional datasets where the essential features are effectively hidden under the total spectrum. Extraction of the essential features therefore requires advanced statistical methods such as machine learning and deep-neural networks. The potential of this technique for bacteria classification have been demonstrated for differentiation at the genus, species and serotype taxonomic levels, and it has also been shown promising for antimicrobial susceptibility testing, which is important for many clinical settings where faster susceptibility testing would decrease unnecessary blind-treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics. The main limitation of this technique for clinical applications is the high sensitivity to technical equipment and sample preparation techniques, which makes it difficult to construct large-scale databases. Attempts in this direction have however been made by Bruker with the IR Biotyper for food microbiology.\nTheory.\nInfrared spectroscopy exploits the fact that molecules absorb frequencies that are characteristic of their structure. These absorptions occur at resonant frequencies, i.e. the frequency of the absorbed radiation matches the vibrational frequency. The energies are affected by the shape of the molecular potential energy surfaces, the masses of the atoms, and the associated vibronic coupling.\n In particular, in the Born\u2013Oppenheimer and harmonic approximations (i.e. when the molecular Hamiltonian corresponding to the electronic ground state can be approximated by a harmonic oscillator in the neighbourhood of the equilibrium molecular geometry), the resonant frequencies are associated with the normal modes of vibration corresponding to the molecular electronic ground state potential energy surface. Thus, it depends on both the nature of the bonds and the mass of the atoms that are involved. Using the Schr\u00f6dinger equation leads to the selection rule for the vibrational quantum number in the system undergoing vibrational changes:\nformula_1\nThe compression and extension of a bond may be likened to the behaviour of a spring, but real molecules are hardly perfectly elastic in nature. If a bond between atoms is stretched, for instance, there comes a point at which the bond breaks and the molecule dissociates into atoms. Thus real molecules deviate from perfect harmonic motion and their molecular vibrational motion is anharmonic. An empirical expression that fits the energy curve of a diatomic molecule undergoing anharmonic extension and compression to a good approximation was derived by P.M. Morse, and is called the Morse function. Using the Schr\u00f6dinger equation leads to the selection rule for the system undergoing vibrational changes :\nformula_2\nNumber of vibrational modes.\nIn order for a vibrational mode in a sample to be \"IR active\", it must be associated with changes in the molecular dipole moment. A permanent dipole is not necessary, as the rule requires only a \"change\" in dipole moment.\nA molecule can vibrate in many ways, and each way is called a vibrational mode. For molecules with N number of atoms, geometrically linear molecules have 3\"N\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a05 degrees of vibrational modes, whereas nonlinear molecules have 3\"N\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a06 degrees of vibrational modes (also called vibrational degrees of freedom). As examples linear carbon dioxide (CO2) has 3\u00a0\u00d7\u00a03\u00a0\u2013\u00a05\u00a0=\u00a04, while non-linear water (H2O), has only 3\u00a0\u00d7\u00a03\u00a0\u2013\u00a06\u00a0=\u00a03.\nSimple diatomic molecules have only one bond and only one vibrational band. If the molecule is symmetrical, e.g. N2, the band is not observed in the IR spectrum, but only in the Raman spectrum. Asymmetrical diatomic molecules, e.g. carbon monoxide (CO), absorb in the IR spectrum. More complex molecules have many bonds, and their vibrational spectra are correspondingly more complex, i.e. big molecules have many peaks in their IR spectra.\nThe atoms in a CH2X2 group, commonly found in organic compounds and where X can represent any other atom, can vibrate in nine different ways. Six of these vibrations involve only the CH2 portion: two stretching modes (\u03bd): symmetric (\u03bds) and antisymmetric (\u03bdas); and four bending modes: scissoring (\u03b4), rocking (\u03c1), wagging (\u03c9) and twisting (\u03c4), as shown below. Structures that do not have the two additional X groups attached have fewer modes because some modes are defined by specific relationships to those other attached groups. For example, in water, the rocking, wagging, and twisting modes do not exist because these types of motions of the H atoms represent simple rotation of the whole molecule rather than vibrations within it. In case of more complex molecules, out-of-plane (\u03b3) vibrational modes can be also present.\nThese figures do not represent the \"recoil\" of the C atoms, which, though necessarily present to balance the overall movements of the molecule, are much smaller than the movements of the lighter H atoms.\nThe simplest and most important or \"fundamental\" IR bands arise from the excitations of normal modes, the simplest distortions of the molecule, from the ground state with vibrational quantum number \"v\" = 0 to the first excited state with vibrational quantum number \"v\" = 1. In some cases, overtone bands are observed. An overtone band arises from the absorption of a photon leading to a direct transition from the ground state to the second excited vibrational state (\"v\" = 2). Such a band appears at approximately twice the energy of the fundamental band for the same normal mode. Some excitations, so-called \"combination modes\", involve simultaneous excitation of more than one normal mode. The phenomenon of Fermi resonance can arise when two modes are similar in energy; Fermi resonance results in an unexpected shift in energy and intensity of the bands etc.\nPractical IR spectroscopy.\nThe infrared spectrum of a sample is recorded by passing a beam of infrared light through the sample. When the frequency of the IR matches the vibrational frequency of a bond or collection of bonds, absorption occurs. Examination of the transmitted light reveals how much energy was absorbed at each frequency (or wavelength). This measurement can be achieved by scanning the wavelength range using a monochromator. Alternatively, the entire wavelength range is measured using a Fourier transform instrument and then a transmittance or absorbance spectrum is extracted.\nThis technique is commonly used for analyzing samples with covalent bonds. The number of bands roughly correlates with symmetry and molecular complexity.\nA variety of devices are used to hold the sample in the path of the IR beam These devices are selected on the basis of their transparency in the region of interest and their resilience toward the sample. \nSample preparation.\nGas samples.\nGaseous samples require a sample cell with a long pathlength to compensate for the diluteness. The pathlength of the sample cell depends on the concentration of the compound of interest. A simple glass tube with length of 5 to 10\u00a0cm equipped with infrared-transparent windows at both ends of the tube can be used for concentrations down to several hundred ppm. Sample gas concentrations well below ppm can be measured with a White's cell in which the infrared light is guided with mirrors to travel through the gas. White's cells are available with optical pathlength starting from 0.5 m up to hundred meters.\nLiquid samples.\nLiquid samples can be sandwiched between two plates of a salt (commonly sodium chloride, or common salt, although a number of other salts such as potassium bromide or calcium fluoride are also used).\nThe plates are transparent to the infrared light and do not introduce any lines onto the spectra. With increasing technology in computer filtering and manipulation of the results, samples in solution can now be measured accurately (water produces a broad absorbance across the range of interest, and thus renders the spectra unreadable without this computer treatment).\nSolid samples.\nSolid samples can be prepared in a variety of ways. One common method is to crush the sample with an oily mulling agent (usually mineral oil Nujol). A thin film of the mull is applied onto salt plates and measured. The second method is to grind a quantity of the sample with a specially purified salt (usually potassium bromide) finely (to remove scattering effects from large crystals). This powder mixture is then pressed in a mechanical press to form a translucent pellet through which the beam of the spectrometer can pass. A third technique is the \"cast film\" technique, which is used mainly for polymeric materials. The sample is first dissolved in a suitable, non-hygroscopic solvent. A drop of this solution is deposited on the surface of a KBr or NaCl cell. The solution is then evaporated to dryness and the film formed on the cell is analysed directly. Care is important to ensure that the film is not too thick otherwise light cannot pass through. This technique is suitable for qualitative analysis. The final method is to use microtomy to cut a thin (20\u2013100\u00a0\u03bcm) film from a solid sample. This is one of the most important ways of analysing failed plastic products for example because the integrity of the solid is preserved.\nIn photoacoustic spectroscopy the need for sample treatment is minimal. The sample, liquid or solid, is placed into the sample cup which is inserted into the photoacoustic cell which is then sealed for the measurement. The sample may be one solid piece, powder or basically in any form for the measurement. For example, a piece of rock can be inserted into the sample cup and the spectrum measured from it.\nA useful way of analyzing solid samples without the need for cutting samples uses ATR or attenuated total reflectance spectroscopy. Using this approach, samples are pressed against the face of a single crystal. The infrared radiation passes through the crystal and only interacts with the sample at the interface between the two materials.\nComparing to a reference.\nIt is typical to record spectrum of both the sample and a \"reference\". This step controls for a number of variables, e.g. infrared detector, which may affect the spectrum. The reference measurement makes it possible to eliminate the instrument influence.\nThe appropriate \"reference\" depends on the measurement and its goal. The simplest reference measurement is to simply remove the sample (replacing it by air). However, sometimes a different reference is more useful. For example, if the sample is a dilute solute dissolved in water in a beaker, then a good reference measurement might be to measure pure water in the same beaker. Then the reference measurement would cancel out not only all the instrumental properties (like what light source is used), but also the light-absorbing and light-reflecting properties of the water and beaker, and the final result would just show the properties of the solute (at least approximately).\nA common way to compare to a reference is sequentially: first measure the reference, then replace the reference by the sample and measure the sample. This technique is not perfectly reliable; if the infrared lamp is a bit brighter during the reference measurement, then a bit dimmer during the sample measurement, the measurement will be distorted. More elaborate methods, such as a \"two-beam\" setup (see figure), can correct for these types of effects to give very accurate results. The Standard addition method can be used to statistically cancel these errors.\nNevertheless, among different absorption-based techniques which are used for gaseous species detection, Cavity ring-down spectroscopy (CRDS) can be used as a calibration-free method. The fact that CRDS is based on the measurements of photon life-times (and not the laser intensity) makes it needless for any calibration and comparison with a reference \nSome instruments also automatically identify the substance being measured from a store of thousands of reference spectra held in storage.\nFTIR.\nFourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy is a measurement technique that allows one to record infrared spectra. Infrared light is guided through an interferometer and then through the sample (or vice versa). A moving mirror inside the apparatus alters the distribution of infrared light that passes through the interferometer. The signal directly recorded, called an \"interferogram\", represents light output as a function of mirror position. A data-processing technique called Fourier transform turns this raw data into the desired result (the sample's spectrum): light output as a function of infrared wavelength (or equivalently, wavenumber). As described above, the sample's spectrum is always compared to a reference.\nAn alternate method for acquiring spectra is the \"dispersive\" or \"scanning monochromator\" method. In this approach, the sample is irradiated sequentially with various single wavelengths. The dispersive method is more common in UV-Vis spectroscopy, but is less practical in the infrared than the FTIR method. One reason that FTIR is favored is called \"Fellgett's advantage\" or the \"multiplex advantage\": The information at all frequencies is collected simultaneously, improving both speed and signal-to-noise ratio. Another is called \"Jacquinot's Throughput Advantage\": A dispersive measurement requires detecting much lower light levels than an FTIR measurement. There are other advantages, as well as some disadvantages, but virtually all modern infrared spectrometers are FTIR instruments.\nInfrared microscopy.\nVarious forms of infrared microscopy exist. These include IR versions of sub-diffraction microscopy such as IR NSOM, photothermal microspectroscopy, Nano-FTIR and atomic force microscope based infrared spectroscopy (AFM-IR).\nOther methods in molecular vibrational spectroscopy.\nInfrared spectroscopy is not the only method of studying molecular vibrational spectra. Raman spectroscopy involves an inelastic scattering process in which only part of the energy of an incident photon is absorbed by the molecule, and the remaining part is scattered and detected. The energy difference corresponds to absorbed vibrational energy.\nThe selection rules for infrared and for Raman spectroscopy are different at least for some molecular symmetries, so that the two methods are complementary in that they observe vibrations of different symmetries.\nAnother method is electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), in which the energy absorbed is provided by an inelastically scattered electron rather than a photon. This method is useful for studying vibrations of molecules adsorbed on a solid surface.\nRecently, high-resolution EELS (HREELS) has emerged as a technique for performing vibrational spectroscopy in a transmission electron microscope (TEM). In combination with the high spatial resolution of the TEM, unprecedented experiments have been performed, such as nano-scale temperature measurements, mapping of isotopically labeled molecules, mapping of phonon modes in position- and momentum-space, vibrational surface and bulk mode mapping on nanocubes, and investigations of polariton modes in van der Waals crystals.\nAnalysis of vibrational modes that are IR-inactive but appear in inelastic neutron scattering is also possible at high spatial resolution using EELS. In 2025, vibrational EELS was further extended to probe magnetic excitations (magnons) inside antiferromagnetic nanocrystals, achieving both nanometer spatial and millielectronvolt energy resolution. Although the spatial resolution of HREELs is very high, the bands are extremely broad compared to other techniques.\nAnother emerging method is optical force spectroscopy (OFS), which enables indirect mid-infrared vibrational spectroscopy by detecting the resonant optical forces acting on micro- and nanoparticles. Instead of recording absorption or scattering directly, OFS reconstructs vibrational spectra from force changes measured under a tunable mid-IR laser. Applications include label-free separation of particles based on vibrational signatures, reconstruction of mid-IR spectra at the single-particle level, and optical force chromatography of micro- nanospheres with specific functional groups.\nComputational infrared microscopy.\nBy using computer simulations and normal mode analysis it is possible to calculate theoretical frequencies of molecules.\nAbsorption bands.\nIR spectroscopy is often used to identify structures because functional groups give rise to characteristic bands both in terms of intensity and position (frequency). The positions of these bands are summarized in correlation tables as shown below.\nRegions.\nA spectrograph is often interpreted as having two regions.\nIn the functional region there are one to a few troughs per functional group.\nIn the fingerprint region there are many troughs which form an intricate pattern which can be used like a fingerprint to determine the compound.\nBadger's rule.\nFor many kinds of samples, the assignments are known, i.e. which bond deformation(s) are associated with which frequency. In such cases further information can be gleaned about the strength on a bond, relying on the empirical guideline called Badger's rule. Originally published by Richard McLean Badger in 1934, this rule states that the strength of a bond (in terms of force constant) correlates with the bond length. That is, increase in bond strength leads to corresponding bond shortening and vice versa.\nIsotope effects.\nThe different isotopes in a particular species may exhibit different fine details in infrared spectroscopy. For example, the O\u2013O stretching frequency (in reciprocal centimeters) of oxyhemocyanin is experimentally determined to be 832 and 788\u00a0cm\u22121 for \u03bd(16O\u201316O) and \u03bd(18O\u201318O), respectively.\nBy considering the O\u2013O bond as a spring, the frequency of absorbance can be calculated as a wavenumber [= frequency/(speed of light)]\nformula_5\nwhere \"k\" is the spring constant for the bond, \"c\" is the speed of light, and \"\u03bc\" is the reduced mass of the A\u2013B system:\nformula_6\n(formula_7 is the mass of atom formula_8).\nThe reduced masses for 16O\u201316O and 18O\u201318O can be approximated as 8 and 9 respectively. Thus\nformula_9\nThe effect of isotopes, both on the vibration and the decay dynamics, has been found to be stronger than previously thought. In some systems, such as silicon and germanium, the decay of the anti-symmetric stretch mode of interstitial oxygen involves the symmetric stretch mode with a strong isotope dependence. For example, it was shown that for a natural silicon sample, the lifetime of the anti-symmetric vibration is 11.4 ps. When the isotope of one of the silicon atoms is increased to 29Si, the lifetime increases to 19 ps. In similar manner, when the silicon atom is changed to 30Si, the lifetime becomes 27 ps.\nTwo-dimensional IR.\nTwo-dimensional infrared correlation spectroscopy analysis combines multiple samples of infrared spectra to reveal more complex properties. By extending the spectral information of a perturbed sample, spectral analysis is simplified and resolution is enhanced. The 2D synchronous and 2D asynchronous spectra represent a graphical overview of the spectral changes due to a perturbation (such as a changing concentration or changing temperature) as well as the relationship between the spectral changes at two different wavenumbers.\nNonlinear two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy is the infrared version of correlation spectroscopy. Nonlinear two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy is a technique that has become available with the development of femtosecond infrared laser pulses. In this experiment, first a set of pump pulses is applied to the sample. This is followed by a waiting time during which the system is allowed to relax. The typical waiting time lasts from zero to several picoseconds, and the duration can be controlled with a resolution of tens of femtoseconds. A probe pulse is then applied, resulting in the emission of a signal from the sample. The nonlinear two-dimensional infrared spectrum is a two-dimensional correlation plot of the frequency \u03c91 that was excited by the initial pump pulses and the frequency \u03c93 excited by the probe pulse after the waiting time. This allows the observation of coupling between different vibrational modes; because of its extremely fine time resolution, it can be used to monitor molecular dynamics on a picosecond timescale. It is still a largely unexplored technique and is becoming increasingly popular for fundamental research.\nAs with two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (2DNMR) spectroscopy, this technique spreads the spectrum in two dimensions and allows for the observation of cross peaks that contain information on the coupling between different modes. In contrast to 2DNMR, nonlinear two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy also involves the excitation to overtones. These excitations result in excited state absorption peaks located below the diagonal and cross peaks. In 2DNMR, two distinct techniques, COSY and NOESY, are frequently used. The cross peaks in the first are related to the scalar coupling, while in the latter they are related to the spin transfer between different nuclei. In nonlinear two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy, analogs have been drawn to these 2DNMR techniques. Nonlinear two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy with zero waiting time corresponds to COSY, and nonlinear two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy with finite waiting time allowing vibrational population transfer corresponds to NOESY. The COSY variant of nonlinear two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy has been used for determination of the secondary structure content of proteins.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15414", "revid": "48998989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15414", "title": "Irenaeus", "text": "2nd-century Greek bishop and Church Father\nIrenaeus ( or ; ; c.\u2009125\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009202 AD) was a Greek bishop noted for his role in guiding and expanding Christian communities in the southern regions of present-day France and, more widely, for the development of Christian theology by opposing Gnostic interpretations of Christian Scripture and defending orthodoxy. Originating from Smyrna, he had seen and heard the preaching of Polycarp, who in turn was said to have heard John the Evangelist. \nChosen as Bishop of Lugdunum, now Lyon, Irenaeus wrote his best-known work \"Against Heresies\" around 180 as a refutation of gnosticism, in particular that of Valentinus. To counter the doctrines of the gnostic sects claiming secret wisdom, he offered three pillars of orthodoxy: the scriptures, the tradition said to be handed down from the apostles, and the teaching of the apostles' successors. He is the earliest surviving witness to regard all four of the now-canonical gospels as essential.\nIrenaeus is venerated as a saint in the Catholic Church, Anglican Church, Lutheran Churches, the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Oriental Orthodox Churches, and the Assyrian Church of the East. He was declared a Doctor of the Church in the Catholic Church by Pope Francis in 2022.\nBiography.\nIrenaeus was a Greek from Polycarp's hometown of Smyrna in Anatolia, now \u0130zmir, Turkey, born during the first half of the 2nd century. The exact date is thought to be between the years 120 and 130. Unlike many of his contemporaries, he was brought up in a Christian family rather than converting as an adult.\nDuring a local persecution of Christians around Lyon during the reign of Marcus Aurelius, the Roman emperor from 161 to 180, Irenaeus was a priest of the Church of Lyon. The clergy of that city, many of whom were suffering imprisonment for the faith, sent him to Rome in 177 with a letter to Pope Eleutherius concerning the heresy of Montanism, and that occasion bore emphatic testimony to his merits. While Irenaeus was in Rome, the Lyon persecution took place. Returning to Gaul, Irenaeus succeeded the martyr Saint Pothinus and became the second bishop of Lyon.\nDuring the religious peace which followed the Lyon persecution, the new bishop divided his activities between the duties of a pastor and of a missionary (as to which we have but brief data, late and not very certain). Almost all his writings were directed against Gnosticism. The most famous of these writings is \"On the Detection and Overthrow of the So-Called Gnosis\", usually known by the abbreviated title \"Against Heresies\" (\"Adversus haereses\"). Irenaeus alludes to coming across Gnostic writings, and holding conversations with Gnostics, and this may have taken place in Anatolia or in Rome. However, it also appears that Gnosticism was present near Lyon: he writes that there were followers of 'Marcus the Magician' living and teaching in the Rhone valley.\nLittle is known about the career of Irenaeus after he became bishop. The last action reported of him (by Eusebius, 150 years later) is that in 190 or 191, he exerted influence on Pope Victor I not to excommunicate the Christian communities of Anatolia which persevered in the practice of the Quartodeciman celebration of Easter.\nNothing is known of the date of his death, which must have occurred at the end of the second or the beginning of the third century. He is regarded as a martyr by the Catholic Church and by some within the Orthodox Church. He was buried under the Church of Saint John in Lyon, which was later renamed St Irenaeus in his honour. The church was devastated in 1562 by the Huguenots. Several relics supposedly of Irenaeus are held in various churches in Lyon. Two crania from different churches were dated by carbon-14 to the Middle Ages, but a piece of heelbone kept in the Lyon Cathedral is from the right time period.\nVeneration.\nThe Latin Catholic Church celebrates Irenaeus' memorial on 28 June. Pope Francis declared Irenaeus the 37th Doctor of the Church on 21 January 2022. Francis also conferred upon Irenaeus the supplementary title \"Doctor unitatis\" (\"Doctor of Unity\").\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church celebrates Irenaeus, the feast being on 23 August.\nLutheran Churches honor Irenaeus on their calendar of saints on 28 June.\nIrenaeus is honored in the Church of England and in the Episcopal Church on 28 June.\nWritings.\nIrenaeus wrote a number of books, but the most important that survives is the \"Against Heresies\" (or, in its Latin title, \"Adversus haereses\"), written around 180. In Book I, Irenaeus talks about the Valentinian Gnostics and their predecessors, who he says go as far back as the magician Simon Magus. In Book II he attempts to provide proof that Valentinianism contains no merit in terms of its doctrines. In Book III, Irenaeus attempts to show that these doctrines are false, by providing counter-evidence gleaned from the Gospels. Book IV consists of Jesus's sayings, and here Irenaeus also stresses the unity of the Old Testament and the Gospel. In the final volume, Book V, Irenaeus focuses on more sayings of Jesus plus the letters of Paul the Apostle.\nIrenaeus wrote: \"One should not seek among others the truth that can be easily gotten from the Church. For in her, as in a rich treasury, the apostles have placed all that pertains to truth, so that everyone can drink this beverage of life. She is the door of life.\" But he also said, \"Christ came not only for those who believed from the time of Tiberius Caesar, nor did the Father provide only for those who are now, but for absolutely all men from the beginning, who, according to their ability, feared and loved God and lived justly. . . and desired to see Christ and to hear His voice.\"\nThe purpose of \"Against Heresies\" was to refute the teachings of various Gnostic groups; apparently, several Greek merchants had begun an oratorial campaign in Irenaeus's bishopric, teaching that the material world was the accidental creation of an evil god, from which we are to escape by the pursuit of \"gnosis\". Irenaeus argued that the true gnosis is in fact knowledge of Christ, which redeems rather than escapes from bodily existence.\nUntil the discovery of the Library of Nag Hammadi in 1945, \"Against Heresies\" was the best-surviving description of Gnosticism. Some religious scholars have argued the findings at Nag Hammadi have shown Irenaeus's description of Gnosticism to be inaccurate and polemic in nature. However, the general consensus among modern scholars is that Irenaeus was fairly accurate in his transmission of gnostic beliefs, and that the Nag Hammadi texts have raised no substantial challenges to the overall accuracy of Irenaeus's information. Religious historian Elaine Pagels criticizes Irenaeus for describing Gnostic groups as sexual libertines, for example, when some of their own writings advocated chastity more strongly than did orthodox texts. However, the Nag Hammadi texts do not present a single, coherent picture of any unified gnostic system of belief, but rather divergent beliefs of multiple Gnostic sects. Some of these sects were indeed libertine because they considered bodily existence meaningless; others praised chastity, and strongly prohibited any sexual activity, even within marriage.\nIrenaeus also wrote \"https://\" (also known as \"Proof of the Apostolic Preaching\"), an Armenian copy of which was discovered in 1904. This work seems to have been an instruction for recent Christian converts.\nEusebius attests to other works by Irenaeus, today lost, including \"On the Ogdoad,\" an untitled letter to Blastus regarding schism, \"On the Subject of Knowledge\", \"On the Monarchy\" or \"How God is not the Cause of Evil\", \"On Easter\".\nIrenaeus exercised wide influence on the generation which followed. Both Hippolytus and Tertullian freely drew on his writings. However, none of his works aside from \"Against Heresies\" and \"The Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching\" survive today, perhaps because his literal hope of an earthly millennium may have made him uncongenial reading in the Greek East. Even though no complete version of \"Against Heresies\" in its original Greek exists, we possess the full ancient Latin version, probably of the third century, as well as thirty-three fragments of a Syrian version and a complete Armenian version of books 4 and 5.\nEvelyn Underhill in her book Mysticism credited Irenaeus as being one of those to whom we owe \"the preservation of that mighty system of scaffolding which enabled the Catholic mystics to build up the towers and bulwarks of the City of God.\"\nIrenaeus's works were first translated into English by John Keble and published in 1872 as part of the Library of the Fathers series.\nScripture.\nIrenaeus pointed to the public rule of faith, authoritatively articulated by the preaching of bishops and inculcated in Church practice, especially worship, as an authentic apostolic tradition by which to read Scripture truly against heresies. He classified as Scripture not only the Old Testament but most of the books now known as the New Testament, while excluding many works, a large number by Gnostics, that flourished in the 2nd century and claimed scriptural authority. Oftentimes, Irenaeus, as a student of Polycarp, who he claimed was a student of John, believed that he was interpreting scriptures in the same hermeneutic as the Apostles. This connection to Jesus was important to Irenaeus because both he and the Gnostics based their arguments on Scripture. Irenaeus argued that since he could trace his authority to Jesus and the Gnostics could not, his interpretation of Scripture was correct. He also used \"the Rule of Faith\", a \"proto-creed\" with similarities to the Apostles' Creed, as a hermeneutical key to argue that his interpretation of Scripture was correct.\nBefore Irenaeus, Christians differed as to which gospel they preferred. The Christians of Anatolia preferred the Gospel of John. The Gospel of Matthew was the most popular overall. Irenaeus asserted that all four of the Gospels, John, Luke, Matthew, and Mark (which is the order presented in his four pillar narrative in \"Adversus haereses\" (\"Against Heresies\") III 11,8), were canonical scripture. Thus Irenaeus provides the earliest witness to the assertion of the four canonical Gospels, possibly in reaction to Marcion's edited version of the Gospel of Luke, which Marcion asserted was the one and only true gospel.\nBased on the arguments Irenaeus made in support of only four authentic gospels, some interpreters deduce that the \"fourfold Gospel\" must have still been a novelty in Irenaeus's time. \"Against Heresies\" 3.11.7 acknowledges that many heterodox Christians use only one gospel while 3.11.9 acknowledges that some use more than four. The success of Tatian's Diatessaron, a harmonization of the four gospels (c.\u2009160\u2013175), is \"... a powerful indication that the fourfold Gospel contemporaneously sponsored by Irenaeus was not broadly, let alone universally, recognized.\"\nIrenaeus is also the earliest to say that the Gospel of John was written by John the Apostle, and that the Gospel of Luke was written by Luke, the companion of Paul.\nScholars contend that Irenaeus quotes from 21 of the 27 New Testament books.\nHe may refer to Hebrews and James, but does not cite Philemon.\nIrenaeus cited the New Testament approximately 1,000 times. About one third of his citations are made to Paul's letters. Irenaeus considered all 13 letters belonging to the Pauline corpus to have been written by Paul himself.\nApostolic authority.\nIn his writing against the Gnostics, who claimed to possess a secret oral tradition from Jesus himself, Irenaeus claimed that the bishops in different cities are known as far back as the Apostles and that the oral tradition he lists from the Apostles is a safe guide to the interpretation of Scripture. In a passage that became a \"locus classicus\" of Catholic-Protestant polemics, he cited the Roman church as an example of the unbroken chain of authority, which text Catholic polemics would use to assert the primacy of Rome over Eastern churches by virtue of its preeminent authority. The succession of bishops and presbyters was important to establish a chain of custody for orthodoxy.\nIrenaeus's point when refuting the Gnostics was that all of the Apostolic churches had preserved the same traditions and teachings in many independent streams. It was the unanimous agreement between these many independent streams of transmission that proved the orthodox faith, current in those churches, to be true.\nTheology and contrast with Gnosticism.\nThe central point of Irenaeus's theology is the unity and the goodness of God, in opposition to the Gnostics' theory of God; a number of divine emanations (Aeons) along with a distinction between the Monad and the Demiurge. Irenaeus uses the Logos theology, common in 2nd Century Christian theology. Irenaeus was a student of Polycarp, who was said to have been tutored by John the Apostle. Irenaeus often spoke of the Son and the Spirit as the \"hands of God,\" though he also spoke of the Son as the \"Logos.\"\nUnity of salvation history.\nIrenaeus's emphasis on the unity of God is reflected in his corresponding emphasis on the unity of salvation history. Irenaeus repeatedly insists that God began the world and has been overseeing it ever since this creative act; everything that has happened is part of his plan for humanity. The essence of this plan is a process of maturation: Irenaeus believes that humanity was created immature, and God intended his creatures to take a long time to grow into or assume the divine likeness.\nEverything that has happened since has therefore been planned by God to help humanity overcome this initial mishap and achieve spiritual maturity. The world has been intentionally designed by God as a difficult place, where human beings are forced to make moral decisions, as only in this way can they mature as moral agents. Irenaeus likens death to the big fish that swallowed Jonah: it was only in the depths of the whale's belly that Jonah could turn to God and act according to the divine will. Similarly, death and suffering appear as evils, but without them we could never come to know God.\nAccording to Irenaeus, the high point in salvation history is the advent of Jesus. For Irenaeus, the Incarnation of Christ was intended by God before he determined that humanity would be created. Irenaeus develops this idea based on https://, saying \"Forinasmuch as He had a pre-existence as a saving Being, it was necessary that what might be saved should also be called into existence, in order that the Being who saves should not exist in vain.\" Some theologians maintain that Irenaeus believed that Incarnation would have occurred even if humanity had never sinned; but the fact that they did sin determined his role as the savior.\nIrenaeus sees Christ as the new Adam, who systematically \"undoes\" what Adam did: thus, where Adam was disobedient concerning God's edict concerning the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, Christ was obedient even to death on the wood of a tree. Irenaeus is the first to draw comparisons between Eve and Mary, contrasting the faithlessness of the former with the faithfulness of the latter. In addition to reversing the wrongs done by Adam, Irenaeus thinks of Christ as \"recapitulating\" or \"summing up\" human life.\nIrenaeus conceives of our salvation as essentially coming about through the incarnation of God as a man. He characterizes the penalty for sin as death and corruption. God, however, is immortal and incorruptible, and simply by becoming united to human nature in Christ he conveys those qualities to us: they spread, as it were, like a benign infection. Irenaeus emphasizes that salvation occurs through Christ's Incarnation, which bestows incorruptibility on humanity, rather than emphasizing His Redemptive death in the crucifixion, although the latter event is an integral part of the former.\nChrist's life.\nPart of the process of recapitulation is for Christ to go through every stage of human life, from infancy to old age, and simply by living it, sanctify it with his divinity. Irenaeus believed Christ did not die until he was older than is conventionally portrayed.\nIn the passage of \"Adversus Haereses\" under consideration, Irenaeus claims that after receiving baptism at the age of thirty, citing Luke 3:23, Gnostics then falsely assert that \"He [Jesus] preached only one year reckoning from His baptism,\" and also, \"On completing His thirtieth year He [Jesus] suffered, being in fact still a young man, and who had by no means attained to advanced age.\" Irenaeus argues against the Gnostics by using scripture to add several years after his baptism by referencing 3 distinctly separate visits to Jerusalem. The first is when Jesus makes wine out of water, he goes up to the Paschal feast-day, after which he withdraws and is found in Samaria. The second is when Jesus goes up to Jerusalem for Passover and cures the paralytic, after which he withdraws over the sea of Tiberias. The third mention is when he travels to Jerusalem, eats the Passover, and suffers on the following day.\nIrenaeus quotes scripture (John 8:57), to suggest that Jesus ministers while in his 40s. In this passage, Jesus's opponents want to argue that Jesus has not seen Abraham, because Jesus is too young. Jesus's opponents argue that Jesus was not yet 50 years old. Irenaeus argues that if Jesus were in his thirties, his opponents would have argued that he was not yet 40 years old, since that would make him even younger. Irenaeus's argument is that they would not weaken their own argument by adding years to Jesus's age. Irenaeus also writes: \"The Elders witness to this, who in Asia conferred with John the Lord's disciple, to the effect that John had delivered these things unto them: for he abode with them until the times of Trajan. And some of them saw not only John, but others also of the Apostles, and had this same account from them, and witness to the aforesaid relation.\"\nIn Demonstration (74) Irenaeus notes \"For Pontius Pilate was governor of Jud\u00e6a, and he had at that time resentful enmity against Herod the king of the Jews. But then, when Christ was brought to him bound, Pilate sent Him to Herod, giving command to enquire of him, that he might know of a certainty what he should desire concerning Him; making Christ a convenient occasion of reconciliation with the king.\" Pilate was the prefect of the Roman province of Judaea from AD 26\u201336. He served under Emperor Tiberius. Herod Antipas was tetrarch of Galilee and Perea, a client state of the Roman Empire. He ruled from 4 BC to 39\u00a0AD. In refuting Gnostic claims that Jesus preached for only one year after his baptism, Irenaeus used the \"recapitulation\" approach to demonstrate that by living beyond the age of thirty Christ sanctified even old age.\nUse of Paul's Epistles.\nMany aspects of Irenaeus's presentation of salvation history depend on Paul's Epistles.\nIrenaeus's conception of salvation relies heavily on the understanding found in Paul's letters. Irenaeus first brings up the theme of victory over sin and evil that is afforded by Jesus's death. God's intervention has saved humanity from the Fall of Adam and the wickedness of Satan. Human nature has become joined with God's in the person of Jesus, thus allowing human nature to have victory over sin. Paul writes on the same theme, that Christ has come so that a new order is formed, and being under the Law, is being under the sin of Adam.\nReconciliation is also a theme of Paul's that Irenaeus stresses in his teachings on Salvation. Irenaeus believes Jesus coming in flesh and blood sanctified humanity so that it might again reflect the perfection associated with the likeness of the Divine. This perfection leads to a new life, in the lineage of God, which is forever striving for eternal life and unity with the Father. This is a carryover from Paul, who attributes this reconciliation to the actions of Christ: \"For since death came through a human being, the resurrection of the dead has also come through a human being; for as all die in Adam, so all will be made alive in Christ\".\nA third theme in both Paul's and Irenaeus's conceptions of salvation is the sacrifice of Christ being necessary for the new life given to humanity in the triumph over evil. It is in this obedient sacrifice that Jesus is victor and reconciler, thus erasing the marks that Adam left on human nature. To argue against the Gnostics on this point, Irenaeus uses Colossians in showing that the debt which came by a tree has been paid for us in another tree. Furthermore, the first chapter of Ephesians is picked up in Irenaeus's discussion of the topic when he asserts, \"By His own blood He redeemed us, as also His apostle declares, 'In whom we have redemption through His blood, even the remission of sins.'\"\nThe frequencies of quotations and allusions to the Pauline Epistles in \"Against Heresies\" are:\nChrist as the New Adam.\nTo counter his Gnostic opponents, Irenaeus significantly develops Paul's presentation of Christ as the Last Adam.\nIrenaeus's presentation of Christ as the New Adam is based on Paul's Christ-Adam parallel in , but also derives significantly from the Johannine presentation of the Adam-Christ typology. Irenaeus uses this parallel to demonstrate that Christ truly took human flesh. Irenaeus considered it important to emphasize this point because he understands the failure to recognize Christ's full humanity links the various strains of Gnosticism together, as seen in his statement that \"according to the opinion of no one of the heretics was the Word of God made flesh.\" Irenaeus believes that unless the Word became flesh, humans were not fully redeemed. He explains that by becoming man, Christ restored humanity to being in the image and likeness of God, which they had lost in the Fall of man. Just as Adam was the original head of humanity through whom all sinned, Christ is the new head of humanity who fulfills Adam's role in the Economy of Salvation. Irenaeus calls this process of restoring humanity recapitulation.\nFor Irenaeus, Paul's presentation of the Old Law (the Mosaic covenant) in this passage indicates that the Old Law revealed humanity's sinfulness but could not save them. He explains that \"For as the law was spiritual, it merely made sin to stand out in relief, but did not destroy it. For sin had no dominion over the spirit, but over man.\" Since humans have a physical nature, they cannot be saved by a spiritual law. Instead, they need a human Savior. This is why it was necessary for Christ to take human flesh. Irenaeus summarizes how Christ's taking human flesh saves humanity with a statement that closely resembles , \"For as by the disobedience of the one man who was originally moulded from virgin soil, the many were made sinners, and forfeited life; so was it necessary that, by the obedience of one man, who was originally born from a virgin, many should be justified and receive salvation.\" The physical creation of Adam and Christ is emphasized by Irenaeus to demonstrate how the Incarnation saves humanity's physical nature.\nIrenaeus emphasizes the importance of Christ's reversal of Adam's action. Through His obedience, Christ undoes Adam's disobedience. Irenaeus presents the Passion as the climax of Christ's obedience, emphasizing how this obedience on the tree of the Cross undoes the disobedience that occurred through a tree.\nIrenaeus's interpretation of Paul's discussion of Christ as the New Adam is significant because it helped develop the recapitulation theory of atonement. Irenaeus emphasizes that it is through Christ's reversal of Adam's action that humanity is saved, rather than considering the Redemption to occur in a cultic or juridical way.\nThe biblical passage, \"Death has been swallowed up in victory\", implied for Irenaeus that the Lord will surely resurrect the first human, i.e. Adam, as one of the saved. According to Irenaeus, those who deny Adam's salvation are \u201cshutting themselves out from life for ever\u201d and the first one who did so was Tatian. The notion that the Second Adam saved the first Adam was advocated not only by Irenaeus, but also by Gregory Thaumaturgus, which suggests that it was popular in the Early Church.\nValentinian Gnosticism.\nValentinian Gnosticism was one of the major forms of Gnosticism that Irenaeus opposed.\nAccording to the Gnostic view of Salvation, creation was perfect to begin with; it did not need time to grow and mature. For the Valentinians, the material world is the result of the loss of perfection which resulted from Sophia's desire to understand the Forefather. Therefore, one is ultimately redeemed, through secret knowledge, to enter the pleroma of which the Achamoth originally fell.\nAccording to the Valentinian Gnostics, there are three classes of human beings. They are the material, who cannot attain salvation; the psychic, who are strengthened by works and faith (they are part of the church); and the spiritual, who cannot decay or be harmed by material actions.\nEssentially, ordinary humans\u2014those who have faith but do not possess the special knowledge\u2014will not attain salvation. Spirituals, on the other hand\u2014those who obtain this great gift\u2014are the only class that will eventually attain salvation.\nIn his article entitled \"The Demiurge\", J.P. Arendzen sums up the Valentinian view of the salvation of man. He writes, \"The first, or carnal men, will return to the grossness of matter and finally be consumed by fire; the second, or psychic men, together with the Demiurge as their master, will enter a middle state, neither heaven (pleroma) nor hell (hyle); the purely spiritual men will be completely freed from the influence of the Demiurge and together with the Saviour and Achamoth, his spouse, will enter the pleroma divested of body (hyle) and soul (psyche).\"\nIn this understanding of salvation, the purpose of the Incarnation was to redeem the Spirituals from their material bodies. By taking a material body, the Son becomes the Savior and facilitates this entrance into the pleroma by making it possible for the Spirituals to receive his spiritual body. However, in becoming a body and soul, the Son Himself becomes one of those needing redemption. Therefore, the Word descends onto the Savior at His Baptism in the Jordan, which liberates the Son from his corruptible body and soul. His redemption from the body and soul is then applied to the Spirituals. In response to this Gnostic view of Christ, Irenaeus emphasized that the Word became flesh and developed a soteriology that emphasized the significance of Christ's material Body in saving humanity, as discussed in the sections above.\nIn his criticism of Gnosticism, Irenaeus made reference to a Gnostic gospel which portrayed Judas in a positive light, as having acted in accordance with Jesus's instructions. The recently discovered Gospel of Judas dates close to the period when Irenaeus lived (late 2nd century), and scholars typically regard this work as one of many Gnostic texts, showing one of many varieties of Gnostic beliefs of the period.\nQuartodeciman Controversy.\nIrenaeus took part in the Quartodeciman Controversy. When Victor I of Rome tried to force a universal practice of fasting until Easter to supersede the Jewish practice and prevent Christians from partaking of the Passover, Polycrates who led the Churches of Anatolia continued to hold old traditions of the paschal feast. For this reason Victor I wanted to excommunicate Polycrates and his supporters, but this was a step too far for Irenaeus and other bishops.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15416", "revid": "50681669", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15416", "title": "Involuntary commitment", "text": "Compulsory hospitalization\nInvoluntary commitment, civil commitment, or involuntary hospitalization/hospitalisation, or informally in Britain sectioning, being sectioned, commitment, or being committed, is a legal process through which an individual who is deemed by a qualified person to have symptoms of severe mental disorder is detained in a psychiatric hospital (inpatient) where they can be treated involuntarily. This treatment may involve the administration of psychoactive drugs, including involuntary administration. In many jurisdictions, people diagnosed with mental health disorders can also be forced to undergo treatment while in the community; this is sometimes referred to as outpatient commitment and shares legal processes with commitment. Importantly, the term \"involuntary commitment\" in the United States does not always refer to a legal intervention, but rather refers to an ethical lens from the perspective of individual autonomy. Users of the term are therefore recommended to define precisely what they mean by \"involuntary commitment,\" such as by clarifying the extent they refer to external pressure, civil rights, individual agency, competence and capacity, and ethics.\nCriteria for civil commitment are established by laws which vary between nations. Commitment proceedings often follow a period of emergency hospitalization, during which an individual with acute psychiatric symptoms is confined for a relatively short duration (e.g. 72 hours) in a treatment facility for evaluation and stabilization by mental health professionals who may then determine whether further civil commitment is appropriate or necessary. Civil commitment procedures may take place in a court or only involve physicians. If commitment does not involve a court there is normally an appeal process that does involve the judiciary in some capacity, though potentially through a specialist court.\nPurpose.\nFor most jurisdictions, involuntary commitment is applied to individuals believed to be experiencing a mental illness that impairs their ability to reason to such an extent that the agents of the law, state, or courts determine that decisions will be made for the individual under a legal framework. In some jurisdictions, this is a proceeding distinct from being found incompetent. Involuntary commitment is used in some degree for each of the following although different jurisdictions have different criteria. Some jurisdictions limit involuntary treatment to individuals who meet statutory criteria for presenting a danger to self or others. Other jurisdictions have broader criteria. The legal process by which commitment takes place varies between jurisdictions. Some jurisdictions have a formal court hearing where testimony and other evidence may also be submitted and the subject of the hearing is typically entitled to legal counsel and may challenge a commitment order through habeas corpus. Other jurisdictions have delegated these power to physicians, though may provide an appeal process that involves the judiciary but may also involve physicians. For example, in the UK a mental health tribunal consists of a judge, a medical member, and a lay representative.\nFirst aid.\nTraining is gradually becoming available in mental health first aid to equip community members such as teachers, school administrators, police officers, and medical workers with training in recognizing, and authority in managing, situations where involuntary evaluations of behavior are applicable under law. The extension of first aid training to cover mental health problems and crises is a quite recent development. A mental health first aid training course was developed in Australia in 2001 and has been found to improve assistance provided to persons with an alleged mental illness or mental health crisis. This form of training has now spread to a number of other countries (Canada, Finland, Hong Kong, Ireland, Singapore, Scotland, England, Wales, and the United States). Mental health triage may be used in an emergency room to make a determination about potential risk and apply treatment protocols.\nObservation.\nObservation is sometimes used to determine whether a person warrants involuntary commitment. It is not always clear on a relatively brief examination whether a person should be committed.\nContainment of danger.\nAustria, Belgium, Germany, Israel, the Netherlands, Northern Ireland, the Republic of Ireland, Russia, Taiwan, Ontario (Canada), and the United States have adopted commitment criteria based on the presumed danger of the defendant to self or to others.\nPeople with suicidal thoughts may act on these impulses and harm or kill themselves.\nPeople with psychosis are occasionally driven by their delusions or hallucinations to harm themselves or others. Research has found that those with schizophrenia are between 3.4 and 7.4 times more likely to engage in violent behaviour than members of the general public. However, because other confounding factors such as childhood adversity and poverty are correlated with both schizophrenia and violence it can be difficult to determine whether this effect is due to schizophrenia or other factors. In an attempt to avoid these confounding factors, researchers have tried comparing the rates of violence amongst people diagnosed with schizophrenia to their siblings in a similar manner to twin studies. In these studies people with schizophrenia are found to be between 1.3 and 1.8 times more likely to engage in violent behaviour.\nPeople with certain types of personality disorders can occasionally present a danger to themselves or others.\nThis concern has found expression in the standards for involuntary commitment in every US state and in other countries as the danger to self or others standard, sometimes supplemented by the requirement that the danger be imminent. In some jurisdictions, the danger to self or others standard has been broadened in recent years to include need-for-treatment criteria such as \"gravely disabled\".\nCriticism.\nThe potential dangers of institutions have been noted and criticized by reformers/activists almost since their foundation. Charles Dickens was an outspoken and high-profile early critic, and several of his novels, in particular \"Oliver Twist\" and \"Hard Times\" demonstrate his insight into the damage that institutions can do to human beings.\nDeinstitutionalization.\nEnoch Powell, when Minister for Health in the early 1960s, was a later opponent who was appalled by what he witnessed on his visits to the asylums. In a speech in 1961 he called for the integration of the asylums into general hospitals:\nStarting in the 1960s, there has been a worldwide trend toward moving psychiatric patients from hospital settings to less restricting settings in the community, a shift known as \"deinstitutionalization\". Because the shift was typically not accompanied by a commensurate development of community-based services, critics say that deinstitutionalization has led to large numbers of people who would once have been inpatients as instead being incarcerated or becoming homeless. In some jurisdictions, laws authorizing court-ordered outpatient treatment have been passed in an effort to compel individuals with chronic, untreated severe mental illness to take psychiatric medication while living outside the hospital (e.g. Laura's Law, Kendra's Law).\nIn a study of 269 patients from Vermont State Hospital done by Courtenay M. Harding and associates, about two-thirds of the ex-patients did well after deinstitutionalization.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"There they stand, isolated, majestic, imperious, brooded over by the gigantic water-tower and chimney combined, rising unmistakable and daunting out of the countryside \u2013 the asylums which our forefathers built with such immense solidity to express the notions of their day. Do not for a moment underestimate their powers of resistance to our assault.\"\nNumerous scandals followed, with many high-profile public inquiries. These involved the exposure of abuses such as unscientific surgical techniques such as lobotomy and the widespread neglect and abuse of vulnerable patients in the US and Europe. The growing anti-psychiatry movement in the 1960s and 1970s led in Italy to the first successful legislative challenge to the authority of the mental institutions, culminating in their closure. Nonetheless, the involuntary commitment has never ceased to be in force in Italy, despite the evidence of the positive results of its elimination. A prominent example is the work carried out by Giorgio Antonucci at the Osservanza and Luigi Lolli psychiatric hospitals in Imola, northern Italy, where any form of coercion had been eliminated by Antonucci, who applied a non-psychiatric approach to human suffering.\nDuring the 1970s and 1990s the hospital population started to fall rapidly, mainly because of the deaths of long-term inmates. Significant efforts were made to re-house large numbers of former residents in a variety of suitable or otherwise alternative accommodation. The first 1,000+ bed hospital to close was Darenth Park Hospital in Kent, swiftly followed by many more across the UK. The haste of these closures under Conservative governments led by Margaret Thatcher and John Major, resulted in considerable criticism in the press.\nWrongful involuntary commitment.\nThere are instances in which mental health professionals have wrongfully deemed individuals to have been displaying the symptoms of a mental disorder, and committed the individual for treatment in a psychiatric hospital upon such grounds. Claims of wrongful commitment are a common theme in the anti-psychiatry movement.\nIn 1860, the case of Elizabeth Packard, who was wrongfully committed that year and filed a lawsuit and won thereafter, highlighted the issue of wrongful involuntary commitment. In 1887, investigative journalist Nellie Bly went undercover at an asylum in New York City to expose the terrible conditions that mental patients at the time had to deal with. She published her findings and experiences as articles in \"New York World\", and later made the articles into one book called \"Ten Days in a Mad-House\".\nIn the first half of the twentieth century there were a few high-profile cases of wrongful commitment based on racism or punishment for political dissenters. In the former Soviet Union, psychiatric hospitals were used as prisons to isolate political prisoners from the rest of society. British playwright Tom Stoppard wrote \"Every Good Boy Deserves Favour\" about the relationship between a patient and his doctor in one of these hospitals. Stoppard was inspired by a meeting with a Russian exile. In 1927, after the execution of Sacco and Vanzetti in the United States, demonstrator Aurora D'Angelo was sent to a mental health facility for psychiatric evaluation after she participated in a rally in support of the anarchists. \nThroughout the 1940s and 1950s in Canada, 20,000 Canadian children, called the Duplessis orphans, were wrongfully certified as being mentally ill and as a result were committed to psychiatric institutions where they were allegedly forced to take psychiatric medication that they did not need and were abused. They were named after Maurice Duplessis, the premier of Quebec at the time, who deliberately committed these children to misappropriate additional subsidies from the federal government. Decades later in the 1990s, several of the orphans sued Quebec and the Catholic Church for the abuse and wrongdoing. In 1958, black pastor and activist Clennon Washington King Jr. tried enrolling at the University of Mississippi, which at the time was white, for summer classes; the local police secretly arrested and involuntarily committed him to a mental hospital for 12 days.\nPatients are able to sue if they believe that they have been wrongfully committed. In one instance, Junius Wilson, an African American man, was committed to Cherry Hospital in Goldsboro, North Carolina in 1925 for an alleged crime without a trial or conviction. He was castrated. He continued to be held at Cherry Hospital for the next 67 years of his life. It turned out he was deaf rather than mentally ill.\nIn many U.S. states, sex offenders who have completed a period of incarceration can be civilly committed to a mental institution based on a finding of dangerousness due to a mental disorder. Although the United States Supreme Court determined that this practice does not constitute double jeopardy, organizations such as the American Psychiatric Association (APA) strongly oppose the practice. The Task Force on Sexually Dangerous Offenders, a component of APA's Council on Psychiatry and Law, reported that \"in the opinion of the task force, sexual predator commitment laws represent a serious assault on the integrity of psychiatry, particularly with regard to defining mental illness and the clinical conditions for compulsory treatment. Moreover, by bending civil commitment to serve essentially non-medical purposes, statutes threaten to undermine the legitimacy of the medical model of commitment.\"\nRecidivism.\nA large fraction of discharged patients were found to commit violent crimes after release. Longer commitments were observed to decrease the rate of violent crime and rehospitalisation.\nBy country.\nFrance.\nIn 1838, France enacted a law to regulate both the admissions into asylums and asylum services across the country. \u00c9douard S\u00e9guin developed a systematic approach for training individuals with mental deficiencies, and, in 1839, he opened the first school for intellectually disabled people. His method of treatment was based on the idea that intellectually disabled people did not suffer from disease.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, provision for the care of the mentally ill began in the early 19th century with a state-led effort. Public mental asylums were established in Britain after the passing of the 1808 County Asylums Act. This empowered magistrates to build rate-supported asylums in every county to house the many \"pauper lunatics\". Nine counties first applied, and the first public asylum opened in 1812 in Nottinghamshire. Parliamentary Committees were established to investigate abuses at private madhouses like Bethlem Hospital \u2013 its officers were eventually dismissed and national attention was focused on the routine use of bars, chains and handcuffs and the filthy conditions in which the inmates lived. However, it was not until 1828 that the newly appointed Commissioners in Lunacy were empowered to license and supervise private asylums.\nThe Lunacy Act 1845 was a landmark in the treatment of the mentally ill, as it explicitly changed the status of mentally ill people to patients who required treatment. The Act created the Lunacy Commission, headed by Lord Shaftesbury, focusing on reform of the legislation concerning lunacy. The commission consisted of eleven Metropolitan Commissioners who were required to carry out the provisions of the Act; the compulsory construction of asylums in every county, with regular inspections on behalf of the Home Secretary. All asylums were required to have written regulations and to have a resident qualified physician. A national body for asylum superintendents \u2013 the \"Medico-Psychological Association\" \u2013 was established in 1866 under the Presidency of William A. F. Browne, although the body appeared in an earlier form in 1841.\nBy the late 1800s, there were almost 300 public and private asylums in Britain and Ireland. By the late 1890s and early 1900s, those so detained had risen to the hundreds of thousands. However, the idea that mental illness could be ameliorated through institutionalization was soon disappointed. Psychiatrists were pressured by an ever-increasing patient population. The average number of patients in asylums kept increasing. Asylums were quickly becoming almost indistinguishable from custodial institutions, and the reputation of psychiatry in the medical world had was at an extreme low.\nIn modern times involuntary detention and treatment without agreement as regulated under one of various sections of the Mental Health Act 1983 is informally known as \"sectioning\". Sectioning is now regulated by the Mental Health Act 2007 in England and Wales, the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 in Scotland and other legislation in Northern Ireland.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the erection of state asylums began with the first law for the creation of one in New York, passed in 1842. The Utica State Hospital was opened approximately in 1850. The creation of this hospital, as of many others, was largely the work of Dorothea Lynde Dix, whose philanthropic efforts extended over many states, and in Europe as far as Constantinople. Many state hospitals in the United States were built in the 1850s and 1860s on the Kirkbride Plan, an architectural style meant to have curative effect.\nIn the United States and most other developed societies, severe restrictions have been placed on the circumstances under which a person may be committed or treated against their will as such actions have been ruled by the United States Supreme Court and other national legislative bodies as a violation of civil rights and/or human rights. The Supreme Court case \"O'Connor v. Donaldson\" established that the mere presence of mental illness and the necessity for treatment are not sufficient by themselves to justify involuntary commitment, if the patient is capable of surviving in freedom and does not present a danger of harm to themselves or others. Criteria for involuntary commitment are generally set by the individual states, and often have both short- and long-term types of commitment. For example, Kentucky and Ohio have enacted Casey's Law, which permits family members to petition for the involuntary commitment of individuals with substance use disorder through a civil court process. Short-term commitment tends to be a few days or less, requiring an examination by a medical professional, while longer-term commitment typically requires a court hearing, or sentencing as part of a criminal trial. Indefinite commitment is rare and is usually reserved for individuals who are violent or present an ongoing danger to themselves and others.\nNew York City officials under several administrations have implemented programs involving the involuntary hospitalization of people with mental illnesses in the city. Some of these policies have involved reinterpreting the standard of \"harm to themselves or others\" to include neglecting their own well-being or posing a harm to themselves or others in the future. In 1987\u201388, a homeless woman named Joyce Brown worked with the New York Civil Liberties Union to challenge her forced hospitalization under new Mayor Ed Koch's administration program. The trial, which attracted significant media attention, ended in her favor, and while the city won on appeal she was ultimately released after a subsequent case determined she could not be forcibly medicated. In 2022, Mayor Eric Adams announced a similar compulsory hospitalization program, relying on similar legal interpretations.\nHistorically, until the mid-1960s in most jurisdictions in the United States, all committals to public psychiatric facilities and most committals to private ones were involuntary. Since then, there have been alternating trends towards the abolition or substantial reduction of involuntary commitment, a trend known as \"deinstitutionalisation\". In many currents, individuals can voluntarily admit themselves to a mental health hospital and may have more rights than those who are involuntarily committed. This practice is referred to as voluntary commitment.\nIn the United States, Kansas v. Hendricks established the procedures for a long-term or indefinite form of commitment applicable to people convicted of some sexual offences.\nUnited Nations.\nUnited Nations General Assembly Resolution 46/119, \"Principles for the Protection of Persons with Mental Illness and the Improvement of Mental Health Care\", is a non-binding resolution advocating certain broadly drawn procedures for the carrying out of involuntary commitment. These principles have been used in many countries where local laws have been revised or new ones implemented. The UN runs programs in some countries to assist in this process.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15417", "revid": "44660098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15417", "title": "Intermolecular force", "text": "Force of attraction or repulsion between molecules and neighboring particles\nAn intermolecular force (IMF; also secondary force) is the force that mediates interaction between molecules, including the electromagnetic forces of attraction\nor repulsion which act between atoms and other types of neighbouring particles (e.g. atoms or ions). Intermolecular forces are weak relative to intramolecular forces \u2013 the forces which hold a molecule together. For example, the covalent bond, involving sharing electron pairs between atoms, is much stronger than the forces present between neighboring molecules. Both sets of forces are essential parts of force fields frequently used in molecular mechanics.\nThe first reference to the nature of microscopic forces is found in Alexis Clairaut's work \"Th\u00e9orie de la figure de la Terre,\" published in Paris in 1743. Other scientists who have contributed to the investigation of microscopic forces include: Laplace, Gauss, Maxwell, Boltzmann and Pauling.\nAttractive intermolecular forces are categorized into the following types:\nInformation on intermolecular forces is obtained by macroscopic measurements of properties like viscosity, pressure, volume, temperature (PVT) data. The link to microscopic aspects is given by virial coefficients and intermolecular pair potentials, such as the Mie potential, Buckingham potential or Lennard-Jones potential.\nIn the broadest sense, it can be understood as such interactions between any particles (molecules, atoms, ions and molecular ions) in which the formation of chemical (that is, ionic, covalent or metallic) bonds does not occur. In other words, these interactions are significantly weaker than covalent ones and do not lead to a significant restructuring of the electronic structure of the interacting particles. (This is only partially true. For example, all enzymatic and catalytic reactions begin with a weak intermolecular interaction between a substrate and an enzyme or a molecule with a , but several such weak interactions with the required spatial configuration of the active center of the enzyme lead to significant restructuring in the energy states of molecules or substrates, all of which ultimately leads to the breaking of some and the formation of other covalent chemical bonds. Strictly speaking, all enzymatic reactions begin with intermolecular interactions between the substrate and the enzyme, therefore the importance of these interactions is especially great in biochemistry and molecular biology, and is the basis of enzymology).\nHydrogen bonding.\nA \"hydrogen bond\" refers to the attraction between a hydrogen atom that is covalently bonded to an element with high electronegativity, usually nitrogen, oxygen, or fluorine, and another highly electronegative atom. The hydrogen bond is often described as a strong electrostatic interaction. However, it also has some features of covalent bonding: it is directional, stronger than a van der Waals force interaction, produces interatomic distances shorter than the sum of their van der Waals radii, and usually involves a limited number of interaction partners, which can be interpreted as a kind of valence. The number of hydrogen bonds formed between molecules is equal to the number of active pairs. The molecule which donates its hydrogen is termed the donor molecule, while the molecule containing lone pair participating in H bonding is termed the acceptor molecule. The number of active pairs is equal to the common number between number of hydrogens the donor has and the number of lone pairs the acceptor has.\nThough both are not depicted in the diagram, water molecules have four active bonds. The oxygen atom\u2019s two lone pairs interact with a hydrogen each, forming two additional hydrogen bonds, and the second hydrogen atom also interacts with a neighbouring oxygen. Intermolecular hydrogen bonding is responsible for the high boiling point of water (100\u00a0\u00b0C) compared to the other group 16 hydrides, which have little capability to hydrogen bond. Intramolecular hydrogen bonding is partly responsible for the secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structures of proteins and nucleic acids. It also plays an important role in the structure of polymers, both synthetic and natural.\nSalt bridge.\nThe attraction between cationic and anionic sites is a noncovalent, or intermolecular interaction which is usually referred to as ion pairing or salt bridge.\nIt is essentially due to electrostatic forces, although in aqueous medium the association is driven by entropy and often even endothermic. Most salts form crystals with characteristic distances between the ions; in contrast to many other noncovalent interactions, salt bridges are not directional and show in the solid state usually contact determined only by the van der Waals radii of the ions.\nInorganic as well as organic ions display in water at moderate ionic strength I similar salt bridge as association \u0394G values around 5 to 6 kJ/mol for a 1:1 combination of anion and cation, almost independent of the nature (size, polarizability, etc.) of the ions. The \u0394G values are additive and approximately a linear function of the charges, the interaction of e.g. a doubly charged phosphate anion with a single charged ammonium cation accounts for about 2x5 = 10 kJ/mol. The \u0394G values depend on the ionic strength I of the solution, as described by the Debye-H\u00fcckel equation, at zero ionic strength one observes \u0394G = 8 kJ/mol.\nDipole\u2013dipole and similar interactions.\nDipole\u2013dipole interactions (or Keesom interactions) are electrostatic interactions between molecules which have permanent dipoles. This interaction is stronger than the London forces but is weaker than ion-ion interaction because only partial charges are involved. These interactions tend to align the molecules to increase attraction (reducing potential energy). An example of a dipole\u2013dipole interaction can be seen in hydrogen chloride (HCl): the positive end of a polar molecule will attract the negative end of the other molecule and influence its position. Polar molecules have a net attraction between them. Examples of polar molecules include hydrogen chloride (HCl) and chloroform (CHCl3).\nformula_1\nOften molecules contain dipolar groups of atoms, but have no overall dipole moment on the molecule as a whole. This occurs if there is symmetry within the molecule that causes the dipoles to cancel each other out. This occurs in molecules such as tetrachloromethane and carbon dioxide. The dipole\u2013dipole interaction between two individual atoms is usually zero, since atoms rarely carry a permanent dipole.\nThe Keesom interaction is a van der Waals force. It is discussed further in the section \"Van der Waals forces\".\nIon\u2013dipole and ion\u2013induced dipole forces.\nIon\u2013dipole and ion\u2013induced dipole forces are similar to dipole\u2013dipole and dipole\u2013induced dipole interactions but involve ions, instead of only polar and non-polar molecules. Ion\u2013dipole and ion\u2013induced dipole forces are stronger than dipole\u2013dipole interactions because the charge of any ion is much greater than the charge of a dipole moment. Ion\u2013dipole bonding is stronger than hydrogen bonding.\nAn ion\u2013dipole force consists of an ion and a polar molecule interacting. They align so that the positive and negative groups are next to one another, allowing maximum attraction. An important example of this interaction is hydration of ions in water which give rise to hydration enthalpy. The polar water molecules surround themselves around ions in water and the energy released during the process is known as hydration enthalpy. The interaction has its immense importance in justifying the stability of various ions (like Cu2+) in water.\nAn ion\u2013induced dipole force consists of an ion and a non-polar molecule interacting. Like a dipole\u2013induced dipole force, the charge of the ion causes distortion of the electron cloud on the non-polar molecule.\nVan der Waals forces.\nThe van der Waals forces arise from interaction between uncharged atoms or molecules, leading not only to such phenomena as the cohesion of condensed phases and physical absorption of gases, but also to a universal force of attraction between macroscopic bodies.\nKeesom force (permanent dipole \u2013 permanent dipole).\nThe first contribution to van der Waals forces is due to electrostatic interactions between rotating permanent dipoles, quadrupoles (all molecules with symmetry lower than cubic), and multipoles. It is termed the \"Keesom interaction\", named after Willem Hendrik Keesom. These forces originate from the attraction between permanent dipoles (dipolar molecules) and are temperature dependent.\nThey consist of attractive interactions between dipoles that are ensemble averaged over different rotational orientations of the dipoles. It is assumed that the molecules are constantly rotating and never get locked into place. This is a good assumption, but at some point molecules do get locked into place. The energy of a Keesom interaction depends on the inverse sixth power of the distance, unlike the interaction energy of two spatially fixed dipoles, which depends on the inverse third power of the distance. The Keesom interaction can only occur among molecules that possess permanent dipole moments, i.e., two polar molecules. Also Keesom interactions are very weak van der Waals interactions and do not occur in aqueous solutions that contain electrolytes. The angle averaged interaction is given by the following equation:\nformula_2\nwhere \"d\" = electric dipole moment, formula_3 = permittivity of free space, formula_4 = dielectric constant of surrounding material, \"T\" = temperature, formula_5 = Boltzmann constant, and \"r\" = distance between molecules.\nDebye force (permanent dipoles\u2013induced dipoles).\nThe second contribution is the induction (also termed polarization) or Debye force, arising from interactions between rotating permanent dipoles and from the polarizability of atoms and molecules (induced dipoles). These induced dipoles occur when one molecule with a permanent dipole repels another molecule's electrons. A molecule with permanent dipole can induce a dipole in a similar neighboring molecule and cause mutual attraction. Debye forces cannot occur between atoms. The forces between induced and permanent dipoles are not as temperature dependent as Keesom interactions because the induced dipole is free to shift and rotate around the polar molecule. The Debye induction effects and Keesom orientation effects are termed polar interactions.\nThe induced dipole forces appear from the induction (also termed polarization), which is the attractive interaction between a permanent multipole on one molecule with an induced (by the former di/multi-pole) 31 on another. This interaction is called the \"Debye force\", named after Peter J. W. Debye.\nOne example of an induction interaction between permanent dipole and induced dipole is the interaction between HCl and Ar. In this system, Ar experiences a dipole as its electrons are attracted (to the H side of HCl) or repelled (from the Cl side) by HCl. The angle averaged interaction is given by the following equation:\nformula_6\nwhere formula_7 = polarizability.\nThis kind of interaction can be expected between any polar molecule and non-polar/symmetrical molecule. The induction-interaction force is far weaker than dipole\u2013dipole interaction, but stronger than the London dispersion force.\nLondon dispersion force (fluctuating dipole\u2013induced dipole interaction).\nThe third and dominant contribution is the dispersion or London force (fluctuating dipole\u2013induced dipole), which arises due to the non-zero instantaneous dipole moments of all atoms and molecules. Such polarization can be induced either by a polar molecule or by the repulsion of negatively charged electron clouds in non-polar molecules. Thus, London interactions are caused by random fluctuations of electron density in an electron cloud. An atom with a large number of electrons will have a greater associated London force than an atom with fewer electrons. The dispersion (London) force is the most important component because all materials are polarizable, whereas Keesom and Debye forces require permanent dipoles. The London interaction is universal and is present in atom-atom interactions as well. For various reasons, London interactions (dispersion) have been considered relevant for interactions between macroscopic bodies in condensed systems. Hamaker developed the theory of van der Waals between macroscopic bodies in 1937 and showed that the additivity of these interactions renders them considerably more long-range.\nRelative strength of forces.\nThis comparison is approximate. The actual relative strengths will vary depending on the molecules involved. For instance, the presence of water creates competing interactions that greatly weaken the strength of both ionic and hydrogen bonds. We may consider that for static systems, Ionic bonding and covalent bonding will always be stronger than intermolecular forces in any given substance. But it is not so for big moving systems like enzyme molecules interacting with substrate molecules. Here the numerous intramolecular (most often - hydrogen bonds) bonds form an active intermediate state where the intermolecular bonds cause some of the covalent bond to be broken, while the others are formed, in this way enabling the thousands of enzymatic reactions, so important for living organisms.\nEffect on the behavior of gases.\nIntermolecular forces are repulsive at short distances and attractive at long distances (see the Lennard-Jones potential). In a gas, the repulsive force chiefly has the effect of keeping two molecules from occupying the same volume. This gives a real gas a tendency to occupy a larger volume than an ideal gas at the same temperature and pressure. The attractive force draws molecules closer together and gives a real gas a tendency to occupy a smaller volume than an ideal gas. Which interaction is more important depends on temperature and pressure (see compressibility factor).\nIn a gas, the distances between molecules are generally large, so intermolecular forces have only a small effect. The attractive force is not overcome by the repulsive force, but by the thermal energy of the molecules. Temperature is the measure of thermal energy, so increasing temperature reduces the influence of the attractive force. In contrast, the influence of the repulsive force is essentially unaffected by temperature.\nWhen a gas is compressed to increase its density, the influence of the attractive force increases. If the gas is made sufficiently dense, the attractions can become large enough to overcome the tendency of thermal motion to cause the molecules to disperse. Then the gas can condense to form a solid or liquid, i.e., a condensed phase. Lower temperature favors the formation of a condensed phase. In a condensed phase, there is very nearly a balance between the attractive and repulsive forces.\nQuantum mechanical theories.\nIntermolecular forces observed between atoms and molecules can be described phenomenologically as occurring between permanent and instantaneous dipoles, as outlined above. Alternatively, one may seek a fundamental, unifying theory that is able to explain the various types of interactions such as hydrogen bonding, van der Waals force and dipole\u2013dipole interactions. Typically, this is done by applying the ideas of quantum mechanics to molecules, and Rayleigh\u2013Schr\u00f6dinger perturbation theory has been especially effective in this regard. When applied to existing quantum chemistry methods, such a quantum mechanical explanation of intermolecular interactions provides an array of approximate methods that can be used to analyze intermolecular interactions. One of the most helpful methods to visualize this kind of intermolecular interactions, that we can find in quantum chemistry, is the non-covalent interaction index, which is based on the electron density of the system. London dispersion forces play a big role with this.\nConcerning electron density topology, recent methods based on electron density gradient methods have emerged recently, notably with the development of IBSI (Intrinsic Bond Strength Index), relying on the IGM (Independent Gradient Model) methodology.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15418", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15418", "title": "Interatomic force", "text": ""}
{"id": "15420", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15420", "title": "IRQ", "text": "IRQ may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "15422", "revid": "46832078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15422", "title": "List of Internet top-level domains", "text": "This list of Internet top-level domains (TLD) contains top-level domains, which are those domains in the DNS root zone of the Domain Name System of the Internet. A list of the top-level domains by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) is maintained at the Root Zone Database. IANA also oversees the approval process for new proposed top-level domains for ICANN. As of April 2021, the IANA Root Zone Database listed 1,502 top-level domains, including active, reserved, retired, and special-use domains. By March 31, 2025, the number of actively delegated top-level domains had decreased to 1,264, reflecting removals, retirements, and changes in the root zone database. As of \u00a02021[ [update]], the IANA root database includes 1589 TLDs. That also includes 68 that are not assigned (revoked), 8 that are retired and 11 test domains. Those are not represented in IANA's listing and are not in root.zone file (root.zone file also includes one root domain).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTypes.\nIANA distinguishes the following groups of top-level domains:\nOriginal top-level domains.\nSeven generic top-level domains were created early in the development of the Internet, prior to the creation of ICANN in 1998.\nCountry code top-level domains.\nAs of 20 May 2017, there were 255 country-code top-level domains, purely in the Latin alphabet, using two-character codes. As of June 2022[ [update]], the number was 316, with the addition of internationalized domains.\nProposed internationalized ccTLDs.\nInternationalized domain names have been proposed for Japan and Libya.\nInternationalized generic top-level domains.\nAll of these TLDs are internationalized domain names (IDN) and support second-level IDNs.\nSpecial-use domains.\nICANN/IANA has created some special-use domain names which are meant for technical purposes. ICANN/IANA owns all of the special-use domain names.\nNon-IANA domains.\nBesides the TLDs managed (or at least tracked) by IANA or ICANN, other independent groups have created, or had attempted to create, their own TLDs with varying technical specifications, functions, and outcomes.\nMicrosoft Windows.\nWithin Microsoft Windows there are some special purpose domain names that partially conflict with publicly assigned ones.\nInternet Engineering Task Force proposals for local TLDs.\nThe IETF has submitted several requests for comments on TLDs that could be used to represent local devices and services.\nBlockchain-registered.\nBlockchain-based domains are registered and exchanged using a public blockchain like Ethereum. Oftentimes, these domains serve specific functions such as creating human-readable references to smart contract addresses used in DApps or personal wallet addresses. Generally, these non-standard domains are unreachable through the normal DNS resolution process and instead require clients to use some sort of transparent web proxy or gateway to access them\nAlternate roots.\nIn the case of alternative DNS roots, organizations or projects make use of the same mechanisms of the DNS but instead take on the role of ICANN in managing and administering an entirely separate root zone, thus having the ability to create new TLDs independently. However, this doesn't make these domains any less isolated from the rest of the internet, as the ability for clients to resolve them theoretically only requires switching to a recursive DNS resolver that recognizes and serves records underneath the alternate root zone.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nInternet Domain Notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15423", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15423", "title": "Irgun gang", "text": ""}
{"id": "15424", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15424", "title": "Industrial property organizations", "text": ""}
{"id": "15428", "revid": "30793817", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15428", "title": "Idealism", "text": "Philosophical view\nIdealism in philosophy, also known as philosophical idealism or metaphysical idealism, is the set of metaphysical perspectives asserting that, most fundamentally, reality is equivalent to mind, spirit, or consciousness; that reality or truth is entirely a mental construct; or that ideas are the highest type of reality or have the greatest claim to being considered \"real\". Because there are different types of idealism, it is difficult to define the term uniformly.\nIndian philosophy contains some of the first defenses of idealism, such as in Vedanta and in Shaiva Pratyabhij\u00f1a thought. These systems of thought argue for an all-pervading consciousness as the true nature and ground of reality. Idealism is also found in some streams of Mahayana Buddhism, such as in the Yog\u0101c\u0101ra school, which argued for a \"mind-only\" (\"cittamatra\") philosophy on an analysis of subjective experience. In the West, idealism traces its roots back to Plato in ancient Greece, who proposed that absolute, unchanging, timeless ideas constitute the highest form of reality: Platonic idealism. This was revived and transformed in the early modern period by Immanuel Kant's arguments that our knowledge of reality is completely based on mental structures: transcendental idealism.\nEpistemologically, idealism is accompanied by a rejection of the possibility of knowing the existence of any \"thing\" independent of mind. Ontologically, idealism asserts that the existence of all things depends upon the mind; thus, ontological idealism rejects the perspectives of physicalism and dualism. In contrast to materialism, idealism asserts the \"primacy\" of consciousness as the origin and prerequisite of all phenomena.\nIdealism came under attack from proponents of analytical philosophy, such as G. E. Moore and Bertrand Russell, but its critics also included the new realists and Marxists. However, many aspects and paradigms of idealism still have a large influence on subsequent philosophy.\nDefinitions.\n\"Idealism\" is a term with several related meanings. It comes via Latin \"idea\" from the Ancient Greek \"idea\" (\u1f30\u03b4\u03ad\u03b1) from \"idein\" (\u1f30\u03b4\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bd), meaning \"to see\". The term entered the English language by 1743. The term idealism was first used in the abstract metaphysical sense of the \"belief that reality is made up only of ideas\" by Christian Wolff in 1747. The term re-entered the English language in this abstract sense by 1796. A. C. Ewing gives this influential definition:\nthe view that there can be no physical objects existing apart from some experience...provided that we regard thinking as part of experience and do not imply by \"experience\" passivity, and provided we include under experience not only human experience but the so-called \"Absolute Experience\" or the experience of a God such as Berkeley postulates.\nA more recent definition by Willem deVries sees idealism as \"roughly, the genus comprises theories that attribute ontological priority to the mental, especially the conceptual or ideational, over the non-mental.\" As such, idealism entails a rejection of materialism (or physicalism) as well as the rejection of the mind-independent existence of matter (and as such, also entails a rejection of dualism).\nThere are two main metaphysical concepts on the position of idealism in contemporary philosophy, depending on whether its thesis is ontological or epistemic:\nThus, ontological idealism holds that reality itself is non-physical, immaterial, or experiential at its core, while epistemological idealist arguments merely affirm that reality can only be known through ideas and mental structures (without necessarily making metaphysical claims about things in themselves). Because of this, A.C. Ewing argued that instead of thinking about these two categories as forms of idealism proper, we should instead speak of epistemic and ontological arguments for idealism.\nThese two ways of arguing for idealism are sometimes combined to defend a specific type of idealism (as done by Berkeley), but they may also be defended as independent theses by different thinkers. For example, while F. H. Bradley and McTaggart focused on metaphysical arguments, Josiah Royce, and Brand Blanshard developed epistemological arguments.\nFurthermore, one might use epistemic arguments, but remain neutral about the metaphysical nature of things in themselves. This metaphysically neutral position, which is not a form of metaphysical idealism proper, may be associated with figures like Rudolf Carnap, Quine, Donald Davidson, and perhaps even Kant himself (though he is difficult to categorize). The most famous kind of epistemic idealism is associated with Kantianism and transcendental idealism, as well as with the related Neo-Kantian philosophies. Transcendental idealists like Kant affirm epistemic idealistic arguments without committing themselves to whether reality as such, the \"thing in itself\", is \"ultimately\" mental.\nTypes of ontological idealism.\nWithin ontological idealism, there are numerous further sub-types, including forms of pluralism, which hold that there are many independent mental substances or minds, such as Leibniz' monadology, and various forms of monism or absolute idealism (e.g. Hegelianism or Advaita Vedanta), which hold that the fundamental mental reality is a single unity or is grounded in some kind of singular Absolute. Beyond this, idealists disagree on which aspects of the mental are more metaphysically basic. Platonic idealism affirms that ideal forms are more basic to reality than the things we perceive, while subjective idealists and phenomenalists privilege sensory experiences. Personalism, meanwhile, sees persons or selves as fundamental.\nA common distinction is between subjective and objective forms of idealism. Subjective idealists like George Berkeley reject the existence of a mind-independent or \"external\" world (though not the \"appearance\" of such phenomena in the mind). However, not all idealists restrict the real to subjective experience. Objective idealists make claims about a trans-empirical world, but simply deny that this world is essentially divorced from or ontologically prior to mind or consciousness as such. Thus, objective idealism asserts that the reality of experiencing includes and transcends the realities of the object experienced and of the mind of the observer.\nIdealism is sometimes categorized as a type of metaphysical anti-realism or skepticism. However, idealists need not reject the existence of an objective reality that we can obtain knowledge of, and can merely affirm that this real natural world is mental. Thus, David Chalmers writes of anti-realist idealisms (which would include Berkeley's) and realist forms of idealism, such as \"panpsychist versions of idealism where fundamental microphysical entities are conscious subjects, and on which matter is realized by these conscious subjects and their relations.\"\nChalmers further outlines the following taxonomy of idealism:Micro-idealism is the thesis that concrete reality is wholly grounded in micro-level mentality: that is, in mentality associated with fundamental microscopic entities (such as quarks and photons). Macro-idealism is the thesis that concrete reality is wholly grounded in macro-level mentality: that is, in mentality associated with macroscopic (middle-sized) entities such as humans and perhaps non-human animals. Cosmic idealism is the thesis that concrete reality is wholly grounded in cosmic mentality: that is, in mentality associated with the cosmos as a whole or with a single cosmic entity (such as the universe or a deity). Guyer et al. also distinguish between forms of idealism which are grounded in substance theory (often found in the Anglophone idealisms of the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries) and forms of idealism which focus on activities or dynamic processes (favored in post-Kantian German philosophy).\nClassical Greek idealism.\nPre-Socratic philosophy.\nThere are some precursors of idealism in Ancient Greek Philosophy, though scholars disagree on whether any of these thinkers could be properly labeled \"idealist\" in the modern sense.\nOne example is Anaxagoras (480 BC) who taught that all things in the universe (apeiron) were set in motion by \"nous\" (\"mind\"). In the \"Phaedo\", Plato quotes him as saying, \"it is intelligence [nous] that arranges and causes all things\". Similarly, Parmenides famously stated that \"thinking and being are the same\". This has led some scholars, such as Hegel and E. D. Phillips, to label Parmenides an idealist.\nPlatonism and neoplatonism.\nPlato's theory of forms or \"ideas\" (\"eidos\") as described in dialogues like Phaedo, Parmenides and Sophist, describes ideal forms (for example the platonic solids in geometry or abstracts like Goodness and Justice), as perfect beings which \"exists-by-itself\" (Greek: \"auto kath' auto\"), that is, independently of any particular instance (whether physical or in the individual thought of any person). Anything that exists in the world exists by participating in one of these unique ideas, which are nevertheless interrelated causally with the world of becoming, with nature. Arne Gr\u00f8n calls this doctrine \"the classic example of a metaphysical idealism as a \"transcendent\" idealism\". Nevertheless, Plato holds that matter as perceived by us is real, though transitory, imperfect, and dependent on the eternal ideas for its existence. Because of this, some scholars have seen Plato as a dualist, though others disagree and favor a monist account.\nThe thought of Plato was widely influential, and later Late Platonist (or Neoplatonist) thinkers developed Platonism in new directions. Plotinus, the most influential of the later Platonists, wrote \"Being and Intellect are therefore one nature\" (\"Enneads\" V.9.8). According to scholars like Nathaniel Alfred Boll and Ludwig Noir\u00e9, with Plotinus, a true idealism which holds that only soul or mind exists appears for the first time in Western philosophy. Similarly, for Maria Luisa Gatti, Plotinus' philosophy is a \"'contemplationist metaphysics', in which contemplation, as creative, constitutes the reason for the being of everything\". For Neoplatonist thinkers, the first cause or principle is the Idea of the Good, i.e. The One, from which everything is derived a hierarchical procession (\"proodos\") (Enn. VI.7.15).\nIdealism in Judaism and Christianity.\nSome Christian theologians have held idealist views, often based on neoplatonism. Christian neoplatonism included figures like Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, and influenced numerous Christian thinkers, including the Cappadocian Fathers and Augustine. Despite the influence of Aristotelian scholasticism from the 12th century onward, there is certainly a sense in which some medieval scholastic philosophers retained influences from the Platonic idealism that came via Augustine. For example, the work of John Scotus Eriugena (c. 800 \u2013 c. 877) has been interpreted as an idealistic philosophy by Dermot Moran who writes that for Scotus \"all spatiotemporal reality is understood as immaterial, mind dependent, and lacking in independent existence\". Scotus thus wrote: \"the intellection of all things...is the being of all things\".\nIdealism was also defended in medieval Jewish philosophy. According to Samuel Lebens, early Hassidic rabbis like Yitzchak Luria (1534\u201372) defended a form of Kabbalistic idealism in which the world was God's dream or a fictional tale told by God.\nLater Western theistic idealism such as that of Hermann Lotze offers a theory of the \"world ground\" in which all things find their unity: it has been widely accepted by Protestant theologians.\nSeveral modern religious movements such as, for example, the organizations within the New Thought Movement and the Unity Church, may be said to have a particularly idealist orientation. The theology of Christian Science includes a form of idealism: it teaches that all that truly exists is God and God's ideas; that the world as it appears to the senses is a distortion of the underlying spiritual reality, a distortion that may be corrected (both conceptually and in terms of human experience) through a reorientation (spiritualization) of thought.\nIdealism in Eastern philosophy.\nThere are currents of idealism throughout Indian philosophy, ancient and modern. Some forms of Hindu idealism (like Advaita) defend a type of monism or non-dualism, in which a single consciousness (brahman) is all that exists. However, other traditions defend a theistic pluralism (e.g. Shaiva Siddhanta), in which there are many selves (atman) and one God.\nBuddhist idealism on the other hand is non-theistic and does not accept the existence of eternal selves (due to their adherence to the theory of not-self).\nHindu philosophy.\nA type of idealistic monism can be seen in the \"Upanishads\", which often describe the ultimate reality of brahman as \"being, consciousness, bliss\" (\"Saccid\u0101nanda\"). The \"Ch\u0101ndogya Upani\u1e63ad\" teaches that everything is an emanation of the immortal brahman, which is the essence and source of all things, and is identical with the self (atman). The \"B\u1e5bhad\u0101ra\u1e47yaka Upani\u1e63ad\" also describes brahman as awaress and bliss, and states that \"this great being (mahad bh\u016btam) without an end, boundless (ap\u0101ra), [is] nothing but vij\u00f1\u0101na [consciousness].\"\nIdealist notions can be found in different schools of Hindu philosophy, including some schools of Vedanta. Other schools like the Samkhya and Nyaya-Vaisheshika, Mimamsa, Yoga, Vishishtadvaita, Dvaita, and others opposed idealism in favor of realism.\nDifferent schools of Vedanta have different interpretations of brahman-atman, their foundational theory. Advaita Vedanta posits an absolute idealistic monism in which reality is one single absolute existence. Thus, brahman (the ultimate ground of all) is absolutely identical with all atmans (individual selves). Other forms of Vedanta like the Vishishtadvaita of Ramanuja and the Bhedabheda of Bh\u0101skara are not as radical in their non-dualism, accepting that there is a certain difference between individual souls and Brahman.\nAdvaita.\nThe most influential Advaita philosopher was \u0100di \u015aa\u1e45kara (788\u2013820). In his philosophy, brahman is the single non-dual foundation (\"adhi\u1e63\u1e6dhana\") for all existence. This reality is independent, self-established, irreducible, immutable, and free of space, time, and causation. In comparison to this reality, the world of plurality and appearances is illusory (maya), an unreal cognitive error (mithya). This includes all individual souls or selves, which are actually unreal and numerically identical to the one brahman.\n\u015aa\u1e45kara did not believe it was possible to prove the view that reality is \"one only, without a second\" (\"Chandogya\" 6.2.1) through independent philosophical reasoning. Instead, he accepts non-duality based on the authority of the Upani\u1e63ads. As such, most of his extant works are scriptural commentaries.\nNevertheless, he did provide various new arguments to defend his theories. A major metaphysical distinction for \u015aa\u1e45kara is between what changes and may thus be negated (the unreal) and what does not (which is what is truly real). He compares the real to clay (the substantial cause, analogous to brahman) and the unreal to a pot which depends on the clay for its being (analogous to all impermanent things in the universe). By relying on dependence relations and on the reality of persistence, \u015aa\u1e45kara concludes that metaphysical foundations are more real than their impermanent effects, and that effects are fully reducible and indeed identical to their metaphysical foundation. Through this argument from dependence, \u015aa\u1e45kara concludes that since all things in the universe undergoes change, they must depend on some really existent cause for their being, and this is the one primordial undifferentiated existence (\"Chandogya Bh\u0101\u1e63ya,\" 6.2.1\u20132). This one reality is the single cause that is in every object, and every thing is not different from this brahman since all things borrow their existence from it. \u015aa\u1e45kara also provides a cosmogony in which the world arises from an unmanifest state which is like deep dreamless sleep into a state in which \u012b\u015bvara (God) dreams the world into existence. As such, the world is not separate from God's mind.\n\u015aa\u1e45kara's philosophy, along with that of his contemporary Ma\u1e47\u1e0dana Mi\u015bra (c. 8th century CE), is at the foundation of Advaita school. The opponents of this school however, labeled him a m\u0101y\u0101v\u0101din (illusionist) for negating the reality of the world. They also criticized what they saw as a problematic explanation for how the world arises from m\u0101y\u0101 as an error. For them, if m\u0101y\u0101 is in brahman, then brahman has ignorance, but if it is not in brahman, then this collapses into a dualism of brahman and m\u0101y\u0101.\nOther idealist schools.\nPerhaps the most influential critic of Advaita was R\u0101m\u0101nuja (c. 1017 \u2013 c. 1137), the main philosopher of the competing Vi\u015bi\u1e63\u1e6d\u0101dvaita (qualified non-dual) school. His philosophy affirms the reality of the world and individual selves as well as affirming an underlying unity of all things with God. One of R\u0101m\u0101nuja's critiques of advaita is epistemological. If, as Advaita argues, all cognition other than pure undifferentiated consciousness is based in error, then it follows we would have no knowledge of the very fact that all individual cognition is error (\"\u015ar\u012b Bh\u0101\u1e63ya\", I.i.1).\nFurthermore, R\u0101m\u0101nuja also argues contra Advaita that individual selves are real and not illusory. This is because the very idea that an individual can be ignorant presupposes the very existence of that individual. Furthermore, since all Ved\u0101ntins agree that Brahman's nature is knowledge, consciousness and being, to say that brahman is ignorant is absurd, and so it must be individual souls which are ignorant. Thus, there must be individual selves with a metaphysically prior existence who then fall into ignorance (\"\u015ar\u012b Bh\u0101\u1e63ya\", I.i.1.). Selves might be individual, but as the \"Vedas\" state, they still share a sense of unity with brahman. For R\u0101m\u0101nuja, this is because selves are distinct modes or qualities in the cosmic body of Brahman (and are thus different and yet united with brahman). Brahman meanwhile is like the soul in the body of the world. Furthermore, brahman is a theistic creator God for R\u0101m\u0101nuja, which really exists as the union of two deities: Vishnu, and Lak\u1e63m\u012b.\nThe philosophy of the Tantric tradition of Trika Shaivism is a non-dual theistic idealism. The key thinkers of this philosophical tradition, known as the Pratyabhij\u00f1\u0101 (Recognition) school, are the Kashmirian philosophers Utpaladeva (c. 900\u2013950 CE) and Abhinavagupta (975\u20131025 CE). This tradition affirms a non-dual monism which sees God (Shiva) as a single cosmic consciousness. All selves (atman) are one with God, but they have forgotten this, and must recognize their true nature in order to reach liberation.\nUnlike in Advaita Vedanta however, the one cosmic consciousness is active and dynamic, consisting of spontaneous vibration (\"spanda\") since it has the quality of absolute freedom (\"sv\u0101t\u0101ntrya\"). Through the power (\"\u015aakti\") of dynamic vibrations, the absolute (Shiva-\u015aakti, consciousness and its power) creates the world, and so, the world is a real manifestation of absolute consciousness. Thus, in this system, the world and individual selves (which are dynamic, not an unchanging witness) are not an unreal illusion, but are seen as real and active expressions of God's creative freedom.\nIdealism has remained influential in modern Hindu philosophy, especially in Neo-Vedanta modernism. Prominent modern defenders include Ram Mohan Roy (1772\u20131833), Vivekananda (1863\u20131902), Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (\"An Idealist View of Life,\" 1932) and Aurobindo (1872\u20131950).\nBuddhist philosophy.\nBuddhist views reminiscent of idealism appear in Mahayana scriptures like the \"Explanation of the Profound Secrets\", \"Descent into La\u1e45ka\", and \"Ten Stages Sutra\". These theories, known as \"mind-only\" (\"cittamatra\") or \"the consciousness doctrine\" (\"vij\u00f1anavada\") were mostly associated with the Indian Buddhist philosophers of the Yog\u0101c\u0101ra school and the related epistemological school (Pram\u0101\u1e47av\u0101da). These figures include: Vasubandhu, Asa\u1e45ga, Dign\u0101ga, Dharmak\u012brti, Sthiramati, Dharmap\u0101la, J\u00f1\u0101na\u015br\u012bmitra, \u015aa\u1e45karanandana, and Ratn\u0101kara\u015b\u0101nti. Their arguments were a lively subject of debate for Buddhist and non-Buddhist philosophers in India for centuries. These discussions had a lasting influence on the later Buddhist philosophy of East Asian Buddhism and Tibetan Buddhism.\nThere is some modern scholarly disagreement about whether Indian Yog\u0101c\u0101ra Buddhism can be said to be a form of idealism. Some writers like philosopher Jay Garfield and German philologist Lambert Schmithausen argue that Indian Yogacarins are metaphysical idealists that reject the existence of a mind independent external world. Others see them as closer to an epistemic idealist like Kant who holds that our knowledge of the world is simply knowledge of our own concepts and perceptions. However, a major difference here is that while Kant holds that the thing-in-itself is unknowable, Indian Yogacarins held that ultimate reality is knowable, but only through the non-conceptual yogic perception of a highly trained meditative mind. Other scholars like Dan Lusthaus and Thomas Kochumuttom see Yog\u0101c\u0101ra as a kind of phenomenology of experience which seeks to understand how suffering (dukkha) arises in the mind, not provide a metaphysics.\nVasubandhu.\nWhatever the case, the works of Vasubandhu (fl. c.360) certainly include a refutation of mind-independent \"external\" objects (Sanskrit: b\u0101hy\u0101rtha) and argue that the true nature of reality is beyond subject-object distinctions. He views ordinary conscious experience as deluded in its perceptions of an external world separate from itself (which does not exist), and instead argues that all there is \"vij\u00f1apti\" (ideas, mental images, conscious appearances, representations). Vasubandhu begins his \"Twenty verses\" (\"Vi\u1e43\u015bik\u0101\") by affirming that \"all this [everything we take to exist] is mere appearance of consciousness [\"vij\u00f1apti\"], because of the appearance of non-existent objects, just as a man with an eye disease sees non-existent hairs\" (Vi\u1e43\u015b.1). His main argument against external objects is a critique of the atomist theories of his realist opponents (Ny\u0101ya and Abhidharma theorists).\nVasubandhu also responds against three objections to idealism which indicate his view that all appearances are caused by mind: (1) the issue of spatio-temporal continuity, (2) accounting for intersubjectivity, and (3) the causal efficacy of matter on subjects. For the first and third objections, Vasubandhu responds by arguing that dreams can also include spatio-temporal continuity, regularity and causal efficacy. Regarding intersubjectivity, Vasubandhu appeals to shared karma as well as mind to mind causation. After answering these objections, Vasubandhu argues that idealism is a better explanation than realism for everyday experiences. To do this, he relies on the Indian \"Principle of Lightness\" (an appeal to parsimony like Occam's Razor) and argues that idealism is the \"lighter\" theory since it posits a smaller number of entities. This is thus an argument from simplicity and an inference to the best explanation (i.e. an abductive argument).\nAs such, he affirms that our usual experience of being a self (\u0101tman) that knows objects is an illusory construct, and this constitutes what he calls the \"imagined nature\" aspect of reality.\nThus, for Vasubandhu, there is a more fundamental \"root consciousness\" that is empty of subject-object distinctions and yet originates all experiences \"just as waves originate on water\" (\"Thirty Verses\", \"Tri\u1e43\u015b\".17). However, Vasubandhu sees this philosophy as a mere conventional description, since ultimate reality is \"inconceivable\" (\"Tri\u1e43\u015b.\"29), an ineffable and non-conceptual \"thusness\" which cannot be fully captured in words and can only be known through meditative realization by yogis (\"yogacaras\", hence the name of his school). This is why certain modern interpreters, like Jonathan Gold, see Vasubandhu's thought as a \"conventionalist idealism\" or even a type of epistemic idealism like Kant's (and not a full blown objective idealism).\nThe Buddhist epistemologists.\nBuddhist arguments against external objects were further expanded and sharpened by later figures like Dign\u0101ga (fl. 6th century) and Dharmak\u012brti (fl. 7th century) who led an epistemological turn in medieval Indian philosophy.\nDign\u0101ga's main arguments against external objects (specifically, atomic particles) are found in his \"\u0100lambanapar\u012bk\u1e63\u0101\" (\"Examination of the Object of Consciousness\"). Dign\u0101ga argues that for something to be an object (\u0101lambana) of a conscious state, that object must be causally related to the consciousness and it must resemble that consciousness (in appearance or content). Dign\u0101ga then attempts to show that realism about external particulars cannot satisfy these two conditions. Since individual atoms lack a resemblance to the conscious state they supposedly cause, they cannot be the object of cognition. Furthermore, aggregates of atoms also cannot be the object, since they are merely a conceptual grouping of individual atoms (and thus, unreal), and only atoms have causal efficacy.\nDharmak\u012brti's view is summed up in the \"Pram\u0101na\u1e7f\u0101rttika\" (\"Commentary on Epistemology\") as follows: \"cognition experiences itself, and nothing else whatsoever. Even the particular objects of perception, are by nature just consciousness itself.\" One of his main arguments for idealism is the inference from \"the necessity of things only ever being experienced together with experience\" (Sanskrit: \"sahopalambhaniyama\")\".\" Dharmak\u012brti consicely states this argument in the \"Ascertainment of Epistemology\" (\"Pram\u0101\u1e47avini\u015bcaya\"): \"blue and the consciousness of blue are not different, because they must always be apprehended together.\"\"\" Since an object is never found independently of consciousness, objects cannot be mind-independent. This can be read as an epistemological argument for idealism which attempts to show there is no good reason (empirically or inferentially) to accept the existence of external objects.\"\"\nMost of the Yog\u0101c\u0101ra thinkers and epistemologists (including Dharmak\u012brti) defended the existence of multiple mindstreams, and even tackled the problem of other minds. As such, thinkers like Dharmak\u012brti were pluralists who held there were multiple minds in the world (in this they differ with Hindu Advaita thinkers who held there was a single cosmic consciousness).\"\" However, there was a certain sub-school of Indian Buddhists, exemplified by Praj\u00f1akaragupta, J\u00f1\u0101na\u015br\u012bmitra (fl. 975\u20131025 C.E.) and Ratnak\u012brti (11th century CE) who were not pluralists. In his \"Refutation of Other mindstreams\" (\"Sant\u0101n\u0101ntarad\u016b\u1e63a\u1e47a\"), Ratnak\u012brti argues that the existence of other minds cannot be established ultimately, and as such ultimate reality must be an undifferentiated non-dual consciousness (\"vij\u00f1\u0101n\u0101dvaita\"). This monistic interpretation of Yog\u0101c\u0101ra is known as the \"Citr\u0101dvaitav\u0101da\" school (the view of variegated non-duality) since it sees reality as a single multifaceted non-dual luminosity (\"citr\u0101dvaitaprak\u0101\u015ba\").\nChinese philosophy.\nIn Chinese philosophy, Yog\u0101c\u0101ra idealism was defended by Chinese Buddhists like Xuanzang (602\u2013664) and his students Kuiji (632\u2013682) and W\u014fnch'\u016dk (613\u2013696). Xuanzang had studied Yog\u0101c\u0101ra Buddhism at the great Indian university of Nalanda under the Indian philosopher \u015a\u012blabhadra. His work, especially \"The Demonstration of Consciousness-only\", was pivotal in the establishment of East Asian Yog\u0101c\u0101ra Buddhism (also known as \"consciousness only\", Ch: \"Weishi\" \u552f\u8b58), which in turn influenced East Asian Buddhist thought in general.\nYog\u0101c\u0101ra Buddhism also influenced the thought of other Chinese Buddhist philosophical traditions, such as Huayan, Tiantai, Pure Land, and Zen. Many Chinese Buddhist traditions like Huayan, Zen, and Tiantai were also strongly influenced by an important text called the \"Awakening of Faith in the Mah\u0101y\u0101na,\" which synthesized consciousness-only idealism with buddha-nature thought\".\" This text promoted an influential theory of mind which holds that all phenomena are manifestations of the \"One Mind\". Some scholars have seen this as an ontological monism\".\" One passage from the text states: \"the three worlds are illusory constructs, created by the mind alone\" and \"all dharmas are produced from the mind's giving rise to false thoughts\". Jorgensen et al. note that this indicates metaphysical idealism. The new philosophical trend ushered in by the \"Awakening of Faith\" was resisted by some Chinese Yog\u0101c\u0101ra thinkers, and the debates between the Yog\u0101c\u0101ra school of Xuanzang and those who instead followed the doctrines of the \"Awakening of Faith\" continued until the modern era. These debates happened in China as well as in Japan and Korea.\nThe doctrine that all phenomena arise from an ultimate principle, the One Mind, was adapted by the influential Huayan school, whose thought is exemplified by thinkers such as Fazang (643\u2013712) and Zongmi (780\u2013841). This tradition also promoted a kind of holism which sees every phenomenon in the cosmos as interfused and interconnected with every other phenomenon. Chinese scholars like Yu-lan Fung and Wing-tsit Chan see Huayan philosophy as a form of idealism, though other scholars have defended alternative interpretations. According to Wing-tsit Chan, since Huayan patriarch Fazang sees the One Mind as the basis for all things, including the external world, his system is one of objective idealism. A key distinction between Huayan's view of the world and that of the Yog\u0101c\u0101ra school is that in Huayan, there is a single intersubjective world (which nevertheless arises from mind), while Yog\u0101c\u0101ra holds that each mindstream projects its own world out of their underlying root consciousness.\nChinese Buddhist idealism also influenced Confucian philosophy through the work of thinkers like the Ming era (1368\u20131644) neo-confucian Wang Yangming (1472\u20131529). Wang's thought has been interpreted as a kind of idealism. According to Wang, the ultimate principle or pattern (\"l\u01d0\") of the whole universe is identical with the mind, which forms one body or substance (\"y\u00ec t\u01d0\") with \"Heaven, Earth, and the myriad creatures\" of the world. Wang argues that only this view can explain the fact that human beings experience innate care and benevolence for others as well as a sense of care for inanimate objects. Wang's thought, along with that of Lu Xiangshan, led to the creation of the School of Mind, an important Neo-Confucian tradition which emphasized these idealist views.\nYog\u0101c\u0101ra idealism saw a revival in the 20th century, associated figures like Yang Wenhui (1837\u20131911), Taixu, Liang Shuming, Ouyang Jingwu (1870\u20131943), Wang Xiaoxu (1875\u20131948), and Lu Cheng. Modern Chinese thinkers associated with consciousness-only linked the philosophy with Western philosophy (especially Hegelian and Kantian thought) and modern science. A similar trend occurred among some Japanese philosophers like Inoue Enry\u014d, who linked East Asian philosophies like Huayan with the philosophy of Hegel.\nBoth modern Chinese Buddhists and New Confucian thinkers participated in this revival of consciousness-only studies. The thought of New Confucians like Xiong Shili, Ma Yifu, Tang Junyi and Mou Zongsan, was influenced by Yog\u0101c\u0101ra consciousness-only philosophy, as well as by the metaphysics of the \"Awakening of Faith in the Mah\u0101y\u0101na,\" though their thought also contained many critiques of Buddhist philosophy\".\"\nModern philosophy.\nIt is only in the modern era that idealism became a central topic of argumentation among Western philosophers. This was also when the term \"idealism\" coined by Christian Wolff (1679\u20131754), though previous thinkers like Berkeley had argued for it under different names.\nIdealistic tendencies can be found in the work of some rationalist philosophers, like Leibniz and Nicolas Malebranche (though they did not use the term). Malebranche argued that Platonic ideas (which exist only in the mind of God) are the ultimate ground of our experiences and of the physical world, a view that prefigures later idealist positions. Some scholars also see Leibniz' philosophy as approaching idealism. Guyer et al. write that \"his view that the states of monads can be only perceptions and appetitions (desires) suggests a metaphysical argument for idealism, while his famous thesis that each monad represents the entire universe from its own point of view might be taken to be an epistemological ground for idealism, even if he does not say as much.\" However, there is still much debate in the contemporary scholarly literature on whether Leibniz can be considered an idealist.\nSubjective idealism.\nOne famous proponent of modern idealism was Bishop George Berkeley (1685\u20131753), an Anglo-Irish philosopher who defended a theory he called immaterialism. This kind of idealism is sometimes also called subjective idealism (also known as phenomenalistic idealism).\nBerkeley held that objects exist only to the extent that a mind perceives them and thus the physical world does not exist outside of mind. Berkeley's epistemic argument for this view (found in his \"A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge\") rests on the premise that we can only know ideas in the mind. Thus, knowledge does not extend to mind-independent things (\"Treatise\", 1710: Part I, \u00a72). From this, Berkeley holds that \"the existence of an idea consists in being perceived\", thus, regarding ideas \"their \"esse\" is \"percipi\"\", that is, to be is to be perceived (1710: Part I, \u00a73).\nBased on this restriction of existence to only what is being perceived, Berkeley holds that it is meaningless to think that there could exist objects that are not being perceived. This is the basic idea behind what has been called Berkeley's \"master argument\" for idealism, which states that \"one cannot conceive of anything existing unconceived because in trying to do so one is still conceiving of the object\" (1710: Part I, \u00a723). As to the question of how objects which are currently not being perceived by individual minds persist in the world, Berkeley answers that a single eternal mind keeps all of physical reality stable (and causes ideas in the first place), and this is God.\nBerkeley also argued for idealism based on a second key premise: \"an idea can be like nothing but an idea\" and as such there cannot be any things without or outside mind. This is because for something to be like something else, there must be something they have in common. If something is mind independent, then it must be completely different from ideas. Thus, there can be no relation between ideas in the mind and things \"without the mind\", since they are not alike. As Berkeley writes, \"...I ask whether those supposed originals or external things, of which our ideas are the pictures or representations, be themselves perceivable or no? if they are, then they are ideas, and we have gained our point; but if you say they are not, I appeal to any one whether it be sense, to assert a colour is like something which is invisible; hard or soft, like something which is intangible; and so of the rest.\" (1710: Part I, \u00a78).\nA similar idealistic philosophy was developed at around the same time as Berkeley by Anglican priest and philosopher Arthur Collier (\"Clavis Universalis\": \"Or, A New Inquiry after Truth, Being a Demonstration of the Non-Existence, or Impossibility, of an External World,\" 1713). Collier claimed to have developed his view that all matter depends on mind independently of Berkeley. Paul Brunton, a British philosopher and mystic, also taught a similar type of idealism called \"mentalism\".\nA.\u00a0A. Luce and John Foster are other subjective idealists. Luce, in \"Sense without Matter\" (1954), attempts to bring Berkeley up to date by modernizing his vocabulary and putting the issues he faced in modern terms, and treats the Biblical account of matter and the psychology of perception and nature. Foster's \"The Case for Idealism\" argues that the physical world is the logical creation of natural, non-logical constraints on human sense-experience. Foster's latest defense of his views (phenomenalistic idealism) is in his book \"A World for Us: The Case for Phenomenalistic Idealism\".\nCritics of subjective idealism include Bertrand Russell's popular 1912 book \"The Problems of Philosophy\", Australian philosopher David Stove, Alan Musgrave, and John Searle.\nEpistemic idealism.\nKant's Transcendental idealism.\nTranscendental idealism was developed by Immanuel Kant (1724\u20131804), who was the first philosopher to label himself an \"idealist\". In his \"Critique of Pure Reason,\" Kant was clear to distinguish his view (which he also called \"critical\" and \"empirical realism\") from Berkeley's idealism and from Descartes's views. Kant's philosophy holds that we only have knowledge of our experiences, which consists jointly of intuitions and concepts. As such, our experiences reflect our cognitive structures, not the intrinsic nature of mind-independent things. This means even time and space are not properties of things in themselves (i.e. mind independent reality underlying appearances).\nSince it focuses on the mind dependent nature of knowledge and not on metaphysics per se, transcendental idealism is a type of epistemological idealism. Unlike metaphysical forms of idealism, Kant's transcendental idealism does not deny the existence of mind independent things or affirm that they must be mental. He thus accepts that we can conceive of external objects as distinct from our representations of them. However, he argues that we cannot know what external objects are \"in themselves\". As such, Kant's system can be called idealist in some respects (e.g. regarding space and time) and also realist in that he accepts there must be \"some\" mind independent reality (even if we cannot know its ultimate nature and thus must remain agnostic about this). Kant's system also affirms the reality of a free truly existent self and of a God, which he sees as being possible because the non-temporal nature of the thing-in-itself allows for a radical freedom and genuine spontaneity.\nKant's main argument for his idealism, found throughout the \"Critique of Pure Reason\", is based on the key premise that we always represent objects in space and time through our a priori intuitions (knowledge which is independent from any experience). Thus, according to Kant, space and time can never represent any \"property at all of any things in themselves nor any relations of them to each other, i.e., no determination of them that attaches to objects themselves and that would remain even if one were to abstract from all subjective conditions of intuition\" (CPuR A 26/B 42).\nKant's main point is that since our mental representations have spatio-temporal structure, we have no real grounds for positing that the real objects our mind represents in this way also have spatio-temporal structure in themselves. Kant makes this argument in different parts of the \"Critique\", such as when he asks rhetorically:If there did not lie in you a faculty for intuiting a priori; if this subjective condition were not at the same time the universal a priori condition under which alone the object of ... intuition is possible; if the object ([e.g.,] the triangle) were something in itself without relation to your subject: then how could you say that what necessarily lies in your subjective conditions for constructing a triangle must also necessarily pertain to the triangle in itself. (A 48/B 65)Throughout his career, Kant labored to distinguish his philosophy from metaphysical idealism, as some of his critics charged him with being a Berkeleyian idealist. He argued that even if we cannot know how things are in themselves, we do know they must exist, and that we know this \"through the representations which their influence on our sensibility provides for us.\" In the second edition of his \"Critique\", he even inserted a \"refutation of idealism\". For Kant, \"the perception of this persistent thing is possible only through a thing outside me and not through the mere representation of a thing outside me.\"\nNeo-Kantianism.\nKant's philosophy was extremely influential on European enlightenment thinkers (and counter-enlightenment ones as well), and his ideas were widely discussed and debated. Transcendental idealism was also defended by later Kantian philosophers who adopted his method, such as Karl Leonhard Reinhold and Jakob Sigismund Beck.\nThe mid-19th century saw a revival of Kantian philosophy, which became known as Neo-Kantianism, with its call of \"Back to Kant\". This movement was especially influential on 19th century German academic philosophy (and also continental philosophy as a whole). Some important figures include:\u00a0Hermann Cohen (1842\u20131918), Wilhelm Windelband (1848\u20131914), Ernst Cassirer, Hermann von Helmholtz, Eduard Zeller, Leonard Nelson, Heinrich Rickert, and Friedrich Albert Lange. A key concern of the Neo-Kantians was to update Kantian epistemology, particularly in order to provide an epistemic basis for the modern sciences (all while avoiding ontology altogether, whether idealist or materialist). Neo-Kantianism rejected metaphysical idealism while also accepting the basic Kantian premise that \"our experience of reality is always structured by the distinctive features of human mentality.\" Hence, Cassirer defended an epistemic worldview that held that one cannot reduce reality to any independent or substantial object (physical or mental), instead, there are only different ways of describing and organizing experience.\nNeo-Kantianism influenced the work of the Vienna circle and its ambassadors to the Anglophone world, Rudolf Carnap 1891\u20131970) and Hans Reichenbach. Charles Bernard Renouvier was the first philosopher in France to formulate a system based on Kant's critical idealism, which he termed Neo-criticism \"(n\u00e9o-criticisme\"). It is a transformation rather than a continuation of Kantianism.\nGerman idealism.\nSeveral important German thinkers who were deeply influenced by Kant are the German idealists: Johann Gottlieb Fichte (1762\u20131814), Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling (1775\u20131854), and Georg Friedrich Hegel (1770\u20131831). Though heavily drawing on Kant, these thinkers were not transcendental idealists as such, and they sought to move beyond the idea that things in themselves are unknowable \u2013an idea they considered as opening the door to skepticism and nihilism.\nPost-Kantian German idealists thus rejected transcendental idealism by arguing against the opposition of a mind-independent world of being and a subjective world of mental constructs (or the separation between the knowledge and what is known, between subject and object, real and ideal). This new German idealism was distinguished by an \"inseparability of being and thinking\" and \"a dynamic conception of self-consciousness\" that sees reality as spontaneous conscious activity and its expressions. As such, this kind of metaphysical idealism, focused on dynamic processes and forces, was opposed to older forms of idealism, which based itself on substance theory (which these Germans labeled \"dogmatism\").\nThe first thinker to elaborate this type of dynamic idealism was J. G. Fichte (\"Doctrine of Wissenschaft,\" 1810\u20131813). For Fichte, the primordial act at the ground of being is called \"self-positing\". Fichte argues that self-consciousness or the I is a spontaneous unconditioned self-creating act which he also called the deed-act (\"tathandlung\"). Fichte argues that positing something unconditioned and independent at the ground of all is the only way to avoid an epistemic infinite regress. According to Fichte, this \"I am\" or \"absolute subject\" which \"originally posits its own being absolutely\" (\"Doctrine\" I, 2: 261), \"is at the same time the actor and the product of the act; the actor, and that which the activity brings forth; act and deed are one and the same\" (\"Doctrine\" I, 2: 259). Fichte also argues that this \"I\" has the capacity to \"counter-posit\" a \"not-I\", leading to a subject-object relationship. The I also has a third capacity Fichte calls \"divisibility\", which allows for the existence of plurality in the world, which however must be understood as manifestations of the \"I-activity\", and as being \"within the I\".\nFichte's philosophy was adopted by Schelling who defended this new idealism as a full monistic ontology which tried to account for all of nature which he would eventually name \"absolute idealism\". For Schelling, reality is an \"original unity\" (\"urspr\u00fcngliche Einheit\") or a \"primordial totality\" (\"uranf\u00e4ngliche Ganzheit\") of opposites. This is an absolute which he described as an \"eternal act of cognition\" is disclosed in subjective and objective modes, the world of ideas and nature. \nG.\u00a0W.\u00a0F. Hegel also defended a dynamic absolute idealism that sees existence as an all-inclusive whole. However, his system differs from his predecessors' in that it is not grounded on some initial subject, mind, or \"I\" and tries to move beyond all bifurcation subject and object, of the dualism between thinking and being (which for Hegel just leads to various contradictions). As such, Hegel's system is an ontological monism fundamentally based on a unity between being and thought, subject and object, which he saw as being neither materialistic realism nor subjective idealism (which still stands in an opposition to materialism and thus remains stuck in the subject-object distinction).\nIn his \"Phenomenology of Spirit\" (1807), Hegel provides an epistemological argument for idealism, focusing on proving the \"metaphysical priority of identities over and against their opposed elements\". Hegel's argument begins with his conception of knowledge, which he holds is a relation between a claim about a subject and an object that allows for a correspondence between their structural features (and is thus a type of correspondence theory). Hegel argues that if knowledge is possible, real objects must also have a similar structure as thought (without, however, being reduced to thoughts). If not, there could be no correspondence between what the object is and what a subject believes to be true about the object. For Hegel, any system in which the subject that knows and the object which is known are structurally independent would make the relations necessary for knowledge impossible. Hegel also argues that finite qualities and objects depend on other finite things to determine them. An infinite thinking being, on the other hand, would be more self-determining and hence most fully real.\nHegel argued that a careful analysis of the act of knowledge would eventually lead to an understanding of the unity of subjects and the objects in a single all-encompassing whole. In this system, experiences are not independent of the thing in itself (as in Kant) but are manifestations grounded in a metaphysical absolute, which is also experiential (but since it resists the experiential subject, can be known through this resistance). Thus, our own experiences can lead us to an insight into the thing in itself. Furthermore, since reality is a unity, all knowledge is ultimately self-knowledge, or as Hegel puts it, it is the subject\u00a0being \"in the other with itself\" (\"im Anderen bei sich selbst sein\"). Since all things have spirit (\"Geist\"), a philosopher can attain what he termed \"absolute knowing\" (\"absolutes Wissen\"), which is the knowledge that all things are ultimately manifestations of an infinite absolute spirit.\nLater, in his \"Science of Logic\" (1812\u20131814), Hegel further develops a metaphysics in which the real and objective activity of thinking unfolds itself in numerous ways (as objects and subjects). This ultimate activity of thought, which is \"not\" the activity of specific subjects, is an immediate fact, a given (\"vorhandenes\"), which is self-standing and self-organizing. In manifesting the entire world, the absolute enacts a process of self-actualization through a grand structure or master logic, which is what Hegel calls \"reason\" (\"Vernunft\"), and which he understands as a teleological reality.\nHegelianism was deeply influential throughout the 19th century, even as some Hegelians (like Marx) rejected idealism. Later idealist Hegelians include Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg (1802\u201372) and Rudolf Hermann Lotze (1817\u201381).\nSchopenhauer's philosophy.\nThe philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer owes much to the thought of Kant and to that of the German idealists, which he nevertheless strongly criticizes. Schopenhauer maintains Kant's idealist epistemology which sees even space, time and causality as mere mental representations (vorstellungen) conditioned by the subjective mind. However, he replaces Kant's unknowable thing-in-itself with an absolute reality underlying all ideas that is a single irrational Will, a view that he saw as directly opposed to Hegel's rational Spirit. This philosophy is laid out in \"The World as Will and Representation\" (WWR 1818, 2nd ed. 1844).\nSchopenhauer accepts Kant's view that there can be no appearances without there being something which appears. However, unlike Kant, Schopenhauer writes that \"we have immediate cognition of the thing in itself when it appears to us as our own body\". (WWR \u00a76, pp.\u00a040\u20131). Schopenhauer argues that, even though we do experience our own bodies through the categories of space, time and causality, we also experience it in another more direct and internal way through the experience of willing. This immediate experience reveals that it is will alone which \"gives him the key to his own appearance, reveals to him the meaning and shows him the inner workings of his essence, his deeds, his movements\" (WWR \u00a718, p.\u00a0124). Thus, for Schopenhauer, it is desire, a \"dark, dull driving\", which is at the root of action, not reason. Furthermore, since this is the only form of insight we have of the inner essence of any reality, we must apply this insight \"to [the] appearances in the inorganic [and organic] world as well.\" Schopenhauer compares willing with many natural forces. As such, Will is \"a name signifying the being in itself of every thing in the world and the sole kernel of every appearance\" (WWR \u00a723, pp.\u00a0142\u20133).\nBecause irrational Willing is the most foundational reality, life is filled with frustration, irrationality and disappointment. This is the metaphysical foundation of Schopenhauer's pessimistic philosophy of life. The best we can hope for is to deny and try to escape (however briefly) the incessant force of the Will, through art, aesthetic experience, asceticism, and compassion.\nGentile's actual idealism.\nActual idealism is a form of idealism developed by Giovanni Gentile which argues that reality is the ongoing act of thinking, or in Italian \"pensiero pensante\" and thus, only thoughts exist. He further argued that our combined thoughts defined and produced reality. Gentile also nationalizes this idea, holding that the state is a composition of many minds coming together to construct reality. Giovanni Gentile was a key supporter of fascism, regarded by many as the \"philosopher of fascism\". His idealist theory argued for the unity of all society under one leader, which allows it to act as one body.\nAnglo-American Idealism.\nIdealism was widespread in Anglo-American philosophy during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. It was the dominant metaphysics in the English speaking world during the last decades of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth century. During this time, the defenders of British idealism made significant contributions to all fields of philosophy. However, other philosophers, like McTaggart, broke from this trend and instead defended a pluralistic idealism in which the ultimate reality is a plurality of minds.\nMany Anglo-American idealists were influenced by Hegelianism, but they also drew on Kant, Plato and Aristotle. Key figures of this transatlantic movement include many of the British idealists, such as T. H. Green (1836\u20131882), F. H. Bradley (1846\u20131924), Bernard Bosanquet (1848\u20131923), J. H. Muirhead (1855\u20131940), H. H. Joachim (1868\u20131938), A. E. Taylor (1869\u20131945), R. G. Collingwood (1889\u20131943), G. R. G. Mure (1893\u20131979) and Michael Oakeshott. American idealist philosophers include Josiah Royce (1855\u20131916) and Brand Blanshard (1892\u20131987).\nBritish absolute idealism.\nOne of the early influential British idealists was Thomas Hill Green, known for his posthumous \"Prolegomena to Ethics\". Green argues for an idealist metaphysics in this text as a foundation for free will and ethics. In a Kantian fashion, Green first argues that knowledge consists in seeing relations in consciousness, and that any sense of something being \"real\" or \"objective\" has no meaning outside of consciousness. He then argues that experience as consciousness of related events \"cannot be explained by any natural history, properly so called\" and thus \"the understanding which presents an order of nature to us is in principle one with an understanding which constitutes that order itself.\"\nGreen then further argues that individual human beings are aware of an order of relations which extends beyond the bounds of their individual mind. For Green, this greater order must be in a larger transpersonal intelligence, while the world is \"a system of related facts\" which is made possible and revealed to individual beings by the larger intelligence. Furthermore, Green also holds that participation in the transpersonal mind is constituted by the apprehension of a portion of the overall order by animal organisms. As such, Green accepts the reality of biological bodies when he writes that \"in the process of our learning to know the world, an animal organism, which has its history in time, gradually becomes the vehicle of an eternally complete consciousness.\"\nAnother paradigmatic British absolute idealist is Francis Herbert Bradley, who affirms that \"the Absolute is not many; there are no independent reals\". This absolute reality \"is one system, and ... its contents are nothing but sentient experience. It will hence be a single and all-inclusive experience, which embraces every partial diversity in concord.\" Bradley presents an anti-realist idealism which rejects the ultimate reality of relations, which for him are mere appearance, \"a makeshift, a mere practical compromise, most necessary, but in the end most indefensible.\"\nBradley presented his idealism in his \"Appearance and Reality\" (1893) by arguing that the ideas we use to understand reality are contradictory. He deconstructs numerous ideas including primary and secondary qualities, substances and attributes, quality and relation, space, time and causality and the self. Most famously, Bradley argued that any ultimate distinction between qualities and relations is untenable since \"qualities are nothing without relations\" since \"their plurality depends on relation, and, without that relation, they are not distinct. But, if not distinct, then not different, and therefore not qualities.\" Furthermore, for Bradley, the same thing turns out to be true of relations, and of both taken together, since for a relation to relate to a quality, it would then require a further relation. As such, qualities and relations are appearance, not ultimate truth, since \"ultimate reality is such that it does not contradict itself\".\nEven though all appearances are \"not truth\", it is still possible to have true knowledge of ultimate reality, which must be a unity beyond contradictions but which still allows for diversity. Bradley thinks that this character of reality as a diverse unity is revealed to us in sentient experience, since our various experiences must be grounded and caused by some undifferentiated and pre-abstract reality. However he also admits \"our complete inability to understand this concrete unity in detail\".\nAmerican idealism.\nIdealism also became popular in the United States with thinkers like Charles Sanders Peirce (1839\u20131914), who defended an \"objective idealism\" in which, as he put it, \"matter is effete mind, inveterate habits becoming physical laws\". Peirce initially defended a type of representationalism alongside his form of Pragmatism which was metaphysically neutral since it is \"no doctrine of metaphysics\". However, in later years (after c.1905), Peirce defended an objective idealism which held that the universe evolved from a state of maximum spontaneous freedom (which he associated with mind) into its present state where matter were merely \"congealed\" mind. In arguing for this view, he followed the classic idealist premise that states there must be a metaphysical equality (an isomorphism) between thought and being, and as such, \"the root of all being is One\". A key feature of Peirce's idealism is \"Tychism\", which he defined as \"the doctrine that absolute chance is a factor of the universe.\" This allows for an element of chance or indeterminism in the universe which allows for cosmological evolution.\nUnder the influence of Peirce, it was Josiah Royce (1855\u20131916) who became the leading American idealist at the turn of the century. Royce's idealism incorporated aspects of Peirce's Pragmatism and is defended in his \"The Spirit of Modern Philosophy\" (1892). One of Royce's arguments for idealism is his argument from meaning, which states the possibility of there being meaning at all requires an identity between what is meant (ordinary objects) and what makes meaning (ordinary subjects).\nIn his \"The World and the Individual\" (2 vols, 1899 and 1901), Royce also links meaning with purpose, seeing the meaning of a term as its intended purpose. Royce was an absolute idealist who held that ultimately reality was a super-self, an absolute mind. Royce argues that for a mind to be able represent itself and its representations (and not lead to a vicious infinite regress), it must be complex and capacious enough, and only an absolute mind has this capacity.\nThe American philosopher Brand Blanshard (1892\u20131987) was also a proponent of idealism who accepted a \"necessary isomorphism between knowledge and its object\". His idealism is most obvious in \"The Nature of Thought\" (1939), where he discusses how all perception is infused with concepts. He then argues from a coherence theory of truth that the \"character of reality\" must also include coherence itself, and thus, knowledge must be similar to what it knows. Not only that, but knowledge must be part of a single system with the world it knows, and causal relations must be also involve logical relations. These considerations lead to an idealism which sees the world as system of relations that cannot be merely physical.\nPluralistic idealism.\nPluralistic idealism takes the view that there are many individual minds, monads, or processes that together underlie the existence of the observed world and which make possible the existence of the physical universe. Pluralistic idealism does not assume the existence of a single ultimate mind or absolute as with the total monism of absolute idealism, instead it affirms an ultimate plurality of ideas or beings.\nPersonalism.\nPersonalism is the view that the individual minds of persons or selves are the basis for ultimate reality and value and as such emphasizes the fundamentality and inherent worth of persons. Modern personalist idealism emerged during the reaction against what was seen as a dehumanizing impersonalism of absolute idealism, a reaction which was led by figures like Hermann Lotze (1817\u20131881). Personalists affirmed personal freedom against what they saw as a monism that lead to totalitarianism by subordinating the individual to the collective.\nSome idealistic personalists defended a theistic personalism (often influenced by Aquinas) in which reality is a society of minds ultimately dependent on a supreme person (God). Defenders of a Theistic and idealistic personalism include Borden Parker Bowne (1847\u20131910), Andrew Seth Pringle-Pattison (1856\u20131931), Edgar S. Brightman and George Holmes Howison (1834\u20131916). These theistic personalists emphasize the dependence of all individual minds on God.\nHowever, other personalists like British idealist J.\u00a0M.\u00a0E. McTaggart and Thomas Davidson merely argued for a community of individual minds or spirits, without positing a supreme personal deity who creates or grounds them. Similarly, James Ward (1843\u20131925) was inspired by Leibniz to defend a form of pluralistic idealism in which the universe is composed of \"psychic monads\" of different levels, interacting for mutual self-betterment.\nAmerican personalism was particularly associated with idealism and with Boston university, where Bowne (who had studied with Lotze) developed his personalist idealism and published his \"Personalism\" (1908). Bowne's students, like Edgar Sheffield Brightman, Albert C. Knudson (1873\u20131953), Francis J. McConnell (1871\u20131953), and Ralph T. Flewelling (1871\u20131960), continued to develop his personal idealism after his death. The \"Boston personalism\" tradition also influenced the later work of Peter A. Bertocci (1910\u20131989), as well as the ideas of Martin Luther King Jr., who studied at Boston University with personalist philosophers and was shaped by their worldview.\nGeorge Holmes Howison meanwhile, developed his own brand of \"California personalism\". Howison argued that both impersonal monistic idealism and materialism run contrary to the experience of moral freedom, while \"personal idealism\" affirms it. To deny freedom to pursue truth, beauty, and \"benignant love\" is to undermine every profound human venture, including science, morality, and philosophy. Howison, in his book \"The Limits of Evolution and Other Essays Illustrating the Metaphysical Theory of Personal Idealism\", developed a democratic idealism that extended all the way to God, who instead of a monarch, was seen as the ultimate democrat in eternal relation to other eternal persons.\nAnother pluralistic idealism was Thomas Davidson's (1840\u20131900) \"apeirotheism\", which he defined as \"a theory of Gods infinite in number\". The theory was indebted to Aristotle's view of the eternal rational soul and the nous. Identifying Aristotle's God with rational thought, Davidson argued, contrary to Aristotle, that just as the soul cannot exist apart from the body, God cannot exist apart from the world.\nAnother influential British idealist, J. M. E. McTaggart (1866\u20131925), defended a theory in which reality is a community of individual spirits connected by the relation of love. McTaggart defends ontological idealism through a mereological argument which argues only spirits can be substances, as well as through an argument for the unreality of time (a position he also defends in \"The Unreality of Time\").\nIn \"The Nature of Existence\" (1927), McTaggart's argument relies on the premise that substances are infinitely divisible and cannot have simple parts. Furthermore, each of their infinite parts determines every other part. He then analyzes various characteristics of reality such as time, matter, sensation, and cogitation and attempts to show they cannot be real elements of real substances, but must be mere appearances. For example, the existence of matter cannot be inferred based on sensations, since they cannot be divided to infinity (and thus cannot be substances). Spirits on the other hand are true infinitely divisible substances. They have \"the quality of having content, all of which is the content of one or more selves\", and know themselves through direct perception as substances persisting through time. For McTaggart, there is a multiplicity of spirits, which are nevertheless related to each other harmoniously through their love for each other.\nMcTaggart also criticizes Hegel's view of the state in his \"Studies in Hegelian Cosmology\" (1901)\",\" arguing that metaphysics can give very little guidance to social and political action, just like it can give us very little guidance in other practical matters, like engineering.\nContemporary idealism.\nToday, idealism remains a minority view in Western analytic circles. In spite of this, the study of the work of the Anglo-American idealists saw a revival in the 21st century with an increase in publications at the turn of the century, and they are now considered to have made important contributions to philosophy.\nSeveral modern figures continue to defend idealism. Recent idealist philosophers include A. A. Luce (\"Sense without Matter\", 1954), Timothy Sprigge (\"The Vindication of Absolute Idealism\", 1984), Leslie Armour, Vittorio H\u00f6sle (\"Objective Idealism\", 1998), John Andrew Foster (\"A World for Us\", 2008), John A. Leslie (\"Infinite Minds: A Philosophical Cosmology\", 2002), and Bernardo Kastrup (\"The Idea of the World\", 2018). In 2022, Howard Robinson authored \"Perception and Idealism\".\nBoth Foster and Sprigge defend idealism through an epistemic argument for the unity of the act of perception with its object. Sprigge also made an argument from grounding, which held that our phenomenal objects presuppose some noumenal ground. As such For Sprigge, the physical world \"consists in innumerable mutually interacting centres of experience, or, what comes to the same, of pulses and flows of experience.\" Thus, the noumenal ground is the totality of all experiences, which are one \"concrete universal\", that resembles Bradley's absolute.\nHelen Yetter-Chappell has defended nontheistic (quasi-)Berkeleyan idealism.\nAnalytic idealism.\nA recent strand of idealist metaphysics has been developed within analytic philosophy by Bernardo Kastrup. In his doctoral dissertation Analytic Idealism (2019), he argues that reality is constituted by universal consciousness and introduces the notion of dissociation as a mechanism to explain how individual conscious agents arise within a single underlying mind. His later work Analytic Idealism in a Nutshell has been the subject of reviews and discussion in contemporary philosophy (e.g. Sj\u00f6stedt-Hughes 2025). Building on this approach, Bruno Tonetto\u2019s Return to Consciousness (2025) synthesizes consciousness-first arguments from science, metaphysics, and cultural analysis, presenting idealism as a unifying worldview. These contributions exemplify a small but ongoing effort to revive idealist metaphysics in analytic philosophy of mind.\nIdealistic theories based on 20th-century science.\nIdealist notions took a strong hold among physicists of the early 20th century confronted with the paradoxes of quantum physics and the theory of relativity.\nArthur Eddington, a British astrophysicist of the early 20th century, wrote in his book \"The Nature of the Physical World\" that the stuff of the world is mind-stuff, adding that \"The mind-stuff of the world is, of course, something more general than our individual conscious minds.\" Ian Barbour, in his book \"Issues in Science and Religion\", cites Arthur Eddington's \"The Nature of the Physical World\" (1928) as a text that argues The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principles provides a scientific basis for \"the defense of the idea of human freedom\" and his \"Science and the Unseen World\" (1929) for support of philosophical idealism \"the thesis that reality is basically mental.\"\nThe physicist Sir James Jeans wrote: \"The stream of knowledge is heading towards a non-mechanical reality; the Universe begins to look more like a great thought than like a great machine. Mind no longer appears to be an accidental intruder into the realm of matter... we ought rather hail it as the creator and governor of the realm of matter.\"\nThe chemist Ernest Lester Smith, a member of the occult movement Theosophy, wrote a book \"Intelligence Came First\" (1975) in which he claimed that consciousness is a fact of nature and that the cosmos is grounded in and pervaded by mind and intelligence.\nCriticism.\nIn the Western world, the popularity of idealism as a metaphysical view declined severely in the 20th century, especially in English language analytic philosophy. This was partly due to the criticisms of British philosophers like G. E. Moore and Bertrand Russell and also due to the critiques of the American \"new realists\" like E.B. Holt, Ralph Barton Perry and Roy Wood Sellars.\nMoore famously critiqued idealism and defended realism in \"The Refutation of Idealism\" (1903), and \"A Defence of Common Sense\" (1925). In the \"Refutation,\" Moore argues that arguments for idealism most often rely on the premise that to be is to be perceived (\"esse est percipi\"), but that if this is true \"how can we infer that anything whatever, let alone everything is an inseparable aspect of any experience?\". Bertrand Russell's popular 1912 book \"The Problems of Philosophy\" also contained a similar critique. Their main objection is that idealists falsely presuppose that the mind's relation to any object is a necessary condition for the existence of the object. Russell thinks this fallacy fails to make \"the distinction between act and object in our apprehending of things\" (1912 [1974: 42]). Guyer et al. write that the success of these arguments might be controversial and that \"the charge that they simply conflate knowledge and object hardly seems to do justice to the elaborate arguments of the late nineteenth-century idealists.\" It also relies on a realist epistemology in which knowledge stands \"in an immediate relation to an independent individual object\".\nRegarding positive arguments, Moore's most famous argument \"for\" the existence of external matter (found in \"Proof of an External World\", 1939) was an epistemological argument from common sense facts, sometimes known as \"Here is one hand\". Idealism was also more recently critiqued in the works of Australian philosopher David Stove, and by Alan Musgrave, and John Searle.\nPhysicist Milton A. Rothman has written that idealism is incompatible with science and is not considered an empirical system of knowledge unlike realism which is pragmatical and makes testable predictions. Rothman commented that \"idealism saying nothing about why ten different observers in different parts of the world measure the speed of light to be the same. If the light beam exists only a construct in my mind, then how does an experimenter in Moscow always get the same result that I do in, say Princeton\".\nPhilosopher and physicist Mario Bunge has written that idealistic thinking is often found in pseudosciences as it postulates immaterial entities that disregard scientific laws.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15430", "revid": "47382355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15430", "title": "Inheritance", "text": "Practice of passing on property upon the death of individuals\nInheritance is the practice of receiving private property, titles, debts, entitlements, privileges, rights, and obligations upon the death of an individual. The rules of inheritance differ among societies and have changed over time. In legal terms, succession refers to the process by which a deceased person\u2019s rights and property are transferred to their heirs, while inheritance refers to the actual property or assets that those heirs receive.\nSuccession may occur either under the generally applicable statutory rules, referred to as intestate succession, or in accordance with the provisions set forth in a valid will. The rules for a testator to devise and bequeath private property and/or debts via will, often must be attested by a notary or by other lawful means.\nLegal systems can differ significantly in how property passes from a deceased person to their heirs, with common law jurisdictions typically requiring formal probate procedures, while civil law systems often allow heirs to acquire ownership automatically by operation of law - the principle of saisine or seizin (Quebec).\nTerminology.\nIn law, an \"heir\" ( \"heiress\") is a person who is entitled to receive a share of property from a \"decedent\" (a person who died), subject to the rules of inheritance in the jurisdiction where the decedent was a citizen, or where the decedent died or owned property at the time of death.\nThe inheritance may be either under the terms of a will or by intestacy laws if the deceased had no will. However, the will must comply with the laws of the jurisdiction at the time it was created or it will be declared invalid - for example, some states do not recognise handwritten wills as valid, or only in specific circumstances - and the intestacy laws then apply.\nThe exclusion from inheritance of a person who was an heir in a previous will, or would be expected to inherit under the laws of intestate succession, is termed \"disinheritance\".\nA person does not become an heir before the death of the deceased, since the exact identity of the persons entitled to inherit is determined only then. Members of ruling noble or royal houses who are expected to become heirs are called \"heirs apparent\" if first in line and incapable of being displaced from inheriting by another claim; otherwise, they are \"heirs presumptive\". There is a further concept of joint inheritance, pending renunciation by all but one, which is called \"coparceny\".\nIn modern law, the terms \u2018'inheritance'\u2019 and '\u2018heir\u2019' apply only to property passed by \"intestate succession\"\u00a0\u2013 that is, from a person who dies without a will. Property distributed under a will passes to \"beneficiaries,\" who may be called \"devisees\" for real property, \"legatees\" for money, and recipients of \"bequests\" for other personal property.\nExcept in some jurisdictions where a person cannot be legally disinherited (such as the US state of Louisiana, which allows disinheritance only under specifically enumerated circumstances), a person who would otherwise be an heir may be disinherited completely under the terms of a will (an example is that of the will of comedian Jerry Lewis; his will specifically disinherited his six children by his first wife, and their descendants, leaving his entire estate to his second wife).\nInheritance has been compared to nepotism.\nHistory.\nDetailed anthropological and sociological studies have been made about customs of patrimonial inheritance, where only male children can inherit. Some cultures also employ matrilineal succession, where property can only pass along the female line, most commonly going to the sister's sons of the decedent; but also, in some societies, from the mother to her daughters. Some ancient societies and most modern states employ egalitarian inheritance, without discrimination based on gender and/or birth order.\nReligious laws about inheritance.\nJewish laws.\nThe inheritance is patrimonial. The father \u2014that is, the owner of the land\u2014 bequeaths only to his male descendants, so the Promised Land passes from one Jewish father to his sons. According to the Law of Moses, the firstborn son was entitled to receive twice as much of his father's inheritance as the other sons ().\nIf there were no living sons and no descendants of any previously living sons, daughters inherit. In Numbers 27, the five daughters of Zelophehad come to Moses and ask for their father's inheritance, as they have no brothers. The order of inheritance is set out: a man's sons inherit first, daughters if no sons, brothers if he has no children, and so on.\nLater, in Numbers 36, some of the heads of the families of the tribe of Manasseh come to Moses and point out that, if a daughter inherits and then marries a man not from her paternal tribe, her land will pass from her birth-tribe's inheritance into her marriage-tribe's. So a further rule is laid down: if a daughter inherits land, she must marry someone within her father's tribe. (The daughters of Zelophehad marry the sons' of their father's brothers. There is no indication that this was not their choice.)\nThe laws of Jewish inheritance are discussed in the Talmud, in the Mishneh Torah and by Saadiah ben Joseph among other sources. All these sources agree that the firstborn son is entitled to a double portion of his father's estate. This means that, for example, if a father left five sons, the firstborn receives a third of the estate and each of the other four receives a sixth. If he left nine sons, the firstborn receives a fifth and each of the other eight receive a tenth. If the eldest surviving son is not the firstborn son, he is not entitled to the double portion.\nPhilo of Alexandria and Josephus also comment on the Jewish laws of inheritance, praising them above other law codes of their time. They also agreed that the firstborn son must receive a double portion of his father's estate.\nChristian laws.\nAt first, Christianity did not have its own inheritance traditions distinct from Judaism. With the accession of Emperor Constantine in 306, Christians both began to distance themselves from Judaism and to have influence on the law and practices of secular institutions. From the beginning, this included inheritance. The Roman practice of adoption was a specific target, because it was perceived to be in conflict with the Judeo-Christian doctrine of primogeniture. As Stephanie Coontz documents in \"Marriage, a History\" (Penguin, 2006), not only succession but the whole constellation of rights and practices that included marriage, adoption, legitimacy, consanguinity, and inheritance changed in Western Europe from a Greco-Roman model to a Judeo-Christian pattern, based on Biblical and traditional Judeo-Christian principles. The transformation was essentially complete in the Middle Ages, although in English-speaking countries there was additional development under the influence of Protestantism. Even when Europe became secularized and Christianity faded into the background, the legal foundation Christendom had laid remained. Only in the era of modern jurisprudence have there been significant changes.\nIslamic laws.\nThe Quran introduced a number of different rights and restrictions on matters of inheritance, including general improvements to the treatment of women and family life compared to the pre-Islamic societies that existed in the Arabian Peninsula at the time. Furthermore, the Quran introduced additional heirs that were not entitled to inheritance in pre-Islamic times, mentioning nine relatives specifically of which six were female and three were male. However, the inheritance rights of women remained different to those of men because in Islam someone always has a responsibility of looking after a woman's expenses. According to 4:11, for example, a son is entitled to twice as much inheritance as a daughter. The Quran also presented efforts to fix the laws of inheritance, and thus forming a complete legal system. This development was in contrast to pre-Islamic societies where rules of inheritance varied considerably. In addition to the above changes, the Quran imposed restrictions on testamentary powers of a Muslim in disposing his or her property.\nThree verses of the Quran, 4:11, 4:12 and 4:176, give specific details of inheritance and shares, in addition to few other verses dealing with testamentary. But this information was used as a starting point by Muslim jurists who expounded the laws of inheritance even further using Hadith, as well as methods of juristic reasoning like Qiyas. Nowadays, inheritance is considered an integral part of Sharia law and its application for Muslims is mandatory, though many peoples (see Historical inheritance systems), despite being Muslim, have other inheritance customs.\nInequality.\nThe distribution of the inherited wealth has varied greatly among different cultures and legal traditions. In nations using civil law, for example, the right of children to inherit wealth from parents in pre-defined ratios is enshrined in law, as far back as the Code of Hammurabi (ca. 1750 BC). In the US State of Louisiana, the only US state where the legal system is derived from the Napoleonic Code, this system is known as \"forced heirship\" which prohibits disinheritance of adult children except for a few narrowly defined reasons that a parent is obligated to prove. Other legal traditions, particularly in nations using common law, allow inheritances to be divided however one wishes, or to disinherit any child for any reason.\nIn cases of unequal inheritance, the majority might receive a small amount while the minority inherits a larger amount. The amount of inheritance is often far less than the value of a business initially given to the son, especially when a son takes over a thriving multimillion-dollar business, yet the daughter is given the balance of the actual inheritance amounting to far less than the value of the business that was initially given to the son. This is especially seen in old world cultures, but continues in many families to this day.\nArguments for eliminating forced heirship include the right to property and the merit of individual allocation of capital over government wealth confiscation and redistribution, but this does not resolve what some describe as the problem of unequal inheritance. In terms of inheritance inequality, some economists and sociologists focus on the inter generational transmission of income or wealth which is said to have a direct impact on one's mobility (or immobility) and class position in society. Nations differ on the political structure and policy options that govern the transfer of wealth.\nAccording to the American federal government statistics compiled by Mark Zandi in 1985, the average US inheritance was $39,000. In subsequent years, the overall amount of total annual inheritance more than doubled, reaching nearly $200 billion. By 2050, there will be an estimated $25 trillion inheritance transmitted across generations.\nSome researchers have attributed this rise to the baby boomers generation. Historically, the baby boomers were the largest influx of children conceived after WW2. For this reason, Thomas Shapiro suggests that this generation \"is in the midst of benefiting from the greatest inheritance of wealth in history\". Inherited wealth may help explain why many Americans who have become rich may have had a \"substantial head start\". In September 2012, according to the Institute for Policy Studies, \"over 60 percent\" of the Forbes richest 400 Americans \"grew up in substantial privilege\", and often (but not always) received substantial inheritances.\nOther research has shown that many inheritances, large or small, are rapidly squandered. Similarly, analysis shows that over two-thirds of high-wealth families lose their wealth within two generations, and almost 80% of high-wealth parents \"feel the next generation is not financially responsible [and/or competent] enough to handle inheritance\".\nSocial stratification.\nIt has been argued that inheritance plays a significant effect on social stratification. Inheritance is an integral component of family, economic, and legal institutions, and a basic mechanism of class stratification. It also affects the distribution of wealth at the societal level. The total cumulative effect of inheritance on stratification outcomes takes three forms, according to scholars who have examined the subject.\nThe first form of inheritance is the inheritance of cultural capital (i.e. linguistic styles, higher status social circles, and aesthetic preferences). The second form of inheritance is through familial interventions in the form of \"inter vivos\" transfers (i.e. gifts between the living), especially at crucial junctures in the life courses. Examples include during a child's milestone stages, such as going to college, getting married, getting a job, and purchasing a home. The third form of inheritance is the transfers of bulk estates at the time of death of the testators, thus resulting in significant economic advantage accruing to their children. The average age of receiving an inheritance has been estimated at around 60 years. The origin of the stability of inequalities is material (personal possessions one is able to obtain) and is also cultural, rooted either in varying child-rearing practices that are geared to socialization according to social class and economic position. Child-rearing practices among those who inherit wealth may center around favoring some groups at the expense of others at the bottom of the social hierarchy.\nSociological and economic effects of inheritance inequality.\nIt is further argued that the degree to which economic status and inheritance is transmitted across generations determines one's life chances in society. Although many have linked one's social origins and educational attainment to life chances and opportunities, education cannot serve as the most influential predictor of economic mobility. In fact, children of well-off parents generally receive better schooling and benefit from material, cultural, and genetic inheritances. Likewise, schooling attainment is often persistent across generations and families with higher amounts of inheritance are able to acquire and transmit higher amounts of human capital. Lower amounts of human capital and inheritance can perpetuate inequality in the housing market and higher education. Research reveals that inheritance plays an important role in the accumulation of housing wealth. Those who receive an inheritance are more likely to own a home than those who do not regardless of the size of the inheritance.\nOften, racial or religious minorities and individuals from socially disadvantaged backgrounds receive less inheritance and wealth. As a result, mixed races might be excluded in inheritance privilege and are more likely to rent homes or live in poorer neighborhoods, as well as achieve lower educational attainment compared with whites in America.\nNations with the highest income and wealth inequalities often have the highest rates of homicide and disease (such as obesity, diabetes, and hypertension) which results in high mortality rates. A \"New York Times\" article reveals that the U.S. is the world's wealthiest nation, but \"ranks twenty-ninth in life expectancy, right behind Jordan and Bosnia\" and \"has the second highest mortality rate of the comparable OECD countries\". This has been regarded as highly attributed to the significant gap of inheritance inequality in the country, although there are clearly other factors such as the affordability of healthcare.\nWhen social and economic inequalities centered on inheritance are perpetuated by major social institutions such as family, education, religion, etc., these differing life opportunities are argued to be transmitted from each generation. As a result, this inequality is believed to become part of the overall social structure.\nWomen's unequal inheritance rights refer to the disparities and discriminatory practices that women face in inheriting property and assets compared to men. These inequalities stem from a combination of legal, cultural, and religious practices that often prioritize male heirs over female ones, resulting in significant socio-economic consequences for women.\nDynastic wealth.\nDynastic wealth is monetary inheritance that is passed on to generations that did not earn it. Dynastic wealth is linked to the term Plutocracy. Much has been written about the rise and influence of dynastic wealth including the bestselling book \"Capital in the Twenty-First Century\" by the French economist Thomas Piketty.\nBill Gates uses the term in his article \"Why Inequality Matters\".\nSoviet response to inheritance.\nAs Communism is founded on the Marxist Labor Theory of Value, any money collected in the course of a lifetime is justified if it was based on the fruits of the person's own labor and not from exploiting others. The first communist government installed after the Russian Revolution resolved to abolish the right of inheritance regardless of being the result of someone's work or exploitation, with some exceptions.\nTaxation.\nMany states have inheritance taxes or estate taxes, under which a portion of any inheritance or estate becomes government revenue.\nInheritance and pensions.\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nIn the United Arab Emirates, government pensions can, under specific conditions, be transferred to heirs after the death of a pensioner. This reflects a broader approach in some countries to support families of deceased retirees.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15432", "revid": "1185535921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15432", "title": "ISO 6166", "text": ""}
{"id": "15435", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15435", "title": "Ignatius of Antioch", "text": "Patriarch of Antioch from 68 to 107\nIgnatius of Antioch (; ; died c. 108/140), also known as Ignatius Theophorus (), was an early Christian writer and Patriarch of Antioch. While en route to Rome, where he met his martyrdom, Ignatius wrote a series of letters. This correspondence forms a central part of a later collection of works by the Apostolic Fathers. He is considered one of the three most important of these, together with Clement of Rome and Polycarp. Although the authenticity of his letters has been questioned, they continue to serve as an example of early Christian theology, and address important topics including ecclesiology, the sacraments, and the role of bishops.\nLife.\nNothing is known of Ignatius' life apart from the words of his letters and later traditions. It is said Ignatius converted to Christianity at a young age. Tradition identifies him and his friend Polycarp as disciples of John the Apostle. Later, Ignatius was chosen to serve as Bishop of Antioch; the fourth-century Church historian Eusebius writes that Ignatius succeeded Evodius. Theodoret of Cyrrhus claimed that St. Peter himself left directions that Ignatius be appointed to this episcopal see. Ignatius was called \"Theophorus\" (God Bearer). A tradition exists that he was one of the children whom Jesus Christ took in his arms and blessed.\nVeneration.\nIgnatius' feast day was kept in his own Antioch on 17 October, the day on which he is now celebrated in the Catholic Church and generally in western Christianity, although from the 12th century until 1969 it was put at 1 February in the General Roman Calendar.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church it is observed on 20 December. The Synaxarium of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria places it on the 24th of the Coptic Month of Koiak (which is also the 24th day of the fourth month of Tahisas in the Synaxarium of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church), corresponding in three years out of every four to 20 December in the Julian Calendar, which currently falls on 2 January of the Gregorian Calendar.\nIgnatius is honored in the Church of England and in the Episcopal Church on 17 October. Likewise, Lutheran Churches honor Ignatius on 17 October.\nMartyrdom.\nCircumstances of martyrdom.\nIgnatius was condemned to death for his faith, but instead of being executed in his home town of Antioch, the bishop was taken to Rome by a company of ten soldiers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'From Syria even unto Rome I fight with beasts, both by land and sea, both by night and day, being bound to ten leopards, I mean a band of soldiers...'\u2014\u200a\nScholars consider Ignatius' transport to Rome unusual since those persecuted as Christians would be expected to be punished locally. Stevan Davies has pointed out that \"no other examples exist from the Flavian age of any prisoners except citizens or prisoners of war being brought to Rome for execution\".\nIf Ignatius had been a Roman citizen, he could have appealed to the emperor, with the common result of execution by beheading rather than torture. However, Ignatius's letters state that he was put in chains during the journey, but it was against Roman law for a citizen to be put in bonds during an appeal to the emperor.\nAllen Brent suggests that Ignatius was transferred to Rome for the emperor to provide a spectacle as a victim in the Colosseum. Brent also asserts, contrary to some, that \"it was normal practice to transport condemned criminals from the provinces in order to offer spectator sport in the Colosseum at Rome.\"\nStevan Davies rejects this idea, reasoning that: \"If Ignatius was in some way a donation by the Imperial Governor of Syria to the games at Rome, a single prisoner seems a rather miserly gift.\" Instead, Davies proposes that Ignatius may have been indicted by a legate, or representative, of the governor of Syria while the governor was away temporarily, and sent to Rome for trial and execution. Under Roman law, only the governor of a province or the emperor himself could impose capital punishment, so the legate would have faced the choice of imprisoning Ignatius in Antioch or sending him to Rome. Transporting the bishop might have avoided further agitation by the Antiochian Christians.\nChristine Trevett calls Davies' suggestion \"entirely hypothetical\" and concludes that no fully satisfactory solution to the problem can be found: \"I tend to take the bishop at his word when he says he is a condemned man. But the question remains, why is he going to Rome? The truth is that we do not know.\"\nRoute of travel to Rome.\nDuring the journey to Rome, Ignatius and his entourage of soldiers made a number of lengthy stops in Asia Minor, deviating from the most direct land route from Antioch to Rome. Ignatius' route of travel has been reconstructed as follows:\nDuring the journey, the soldiers seem to have allowed the chained Ignatius to meet with entire congregations of Christians, at least at Philadelphia (cf. http:// 7), and numerous Christian visitors and messengers were allowed to meet with him individually. Via these messengers, Ignatius sent six letters to nearby churches, and one to Polycarp, the bishop of Smyrna.\nThese aspects of Ignatius' martyrdom are also unusual, in that a prisoner would normally be transported on the most direct route to his destination. Travel by land in the Roman Empire was far more expensive than by sea, especially since Antioch was a major sea port. Davies argues that Ignatius' circuitous route can only be explained by positing that he was not the main purpose of the soldiers' trip and that the various stops in Asia Minor were for other state business. He suggests that such a scenario would also explain the relative freedom that Ignatius was given to meet with other Christians during the journey.\nDate of martyrdom.\nTradition places Ignatius's martyrdom in the reign of Trajan (c. 98\u2013117). The earliest source for this is the 4th-century church historian Eusebius of Caesarea. Richard Pervo argues that Eusebius may have had an ideological interest in dating church leaders as early as possible, and asserting a continuous succession between the original apostles of Jesus and the leaders of the church in his day. However, Jonathon Lookadoo argues that John Malalas and the Acts of Martyrdom's accounts of Ignatius are independent from Eusebius and they still place his death under Trajan.\nWhile many scholars accept this traditional dating, others have argued for a somewhat later date. Richard Pervo dated Ignatius' death to 135\u2013140. British classicist Timothy Barnes has argued for a date in the 140s, on the grounds that Ignatius seems to have quoted a work of the Gnostic Ptolemy, who became active only in the 130s. \u00c9tienne Decrept has argued from the testimony of John Malalas and the \"Acts of Drosis\" that Ignatius was martyred under the reign of Trajan during Apollo's festival in July 116, and in response to the earthquake at Antioch in late 115.\nDeath and aftermath.\nIgnatius wrote that he would be thrown to the beasts; in the fourth century, Eusebius reports a tradition that this did happen, while Jerome is the first to explicitly mention lions. John Chrysostom is the first to place Ignatius' martyrdom at the Colosseum. Modern scholars are uncertain whether any of these authors had sources other than Ignatius' own writings.\nAccording to a medieval Christian text titled \"Martyrium Ignatii\", Ignatius' remains were carried back to Antioch by his companions after his martyrdom. The sixth-century writings of Evagrius Scholasticus state that the reputed remains of Ignatius were moved by the Emperor Theodosius II to the Tychaeum, or Temple of Tyche, and converted it into a church dedicated to Ignatius. In 637, when Antioch was captured by the Rashidun Caliphate, the relics were transferred to the Basilica di San Clemente in Rome.\nThe \"Martyrium Ignatii\".\nThe \"Martyrium Ignatii\" is an account of the saint's martyrdom. It is presented as an eye-witness account for the church of Antioch, attributed to Ignatius' companions, Phil\u014d of Cilicia, deacon at Tarsus, and Rheus Agathopus, a Syrian.\nIts most reliable manuscript is the 10th-century collection \"Codex Colbertinus\" (Paris), in which it is the final item. The \"Martyrium\" presents the confrontation of Bishop Ignatius with Emperor Trajan at Antioch, a familiar trope of \"Acta\" of the martyrs, and many details of the long journey to Rome. The Synaxarium of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria says that he was thrown to the wild beasts that devoured him.\nEpistles.\nThe following seven epistles preserved under the name of Ignatius are generally considered authentic since they were mentioned by the historian Eusebius in the first half of the fourth century.\nSeven original epistles:\nStyle and structure.\nIgnatius's letters bear signs of being written in great haste, such as run-on sentences and an unsystematic succession of thought. Ignatius modelled them after the biblical epistles of Paul, Peter, and John, quoting or paraphrasing these apostles' works freely. For example, in his letter to the Ephesians he quoted 1 Corinthians 1:18:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Let my spirit be counted as nothing for the sake of the cross, which is a stumbling-block to those that do not believe, but to us salvation and life eternal.\u2014\u200a\nRecensions.\nThe text of these epistles is known in three different recensions (versions): the Short Recension, found in three pre-AD 900\u00a0 Syriac manuscripts; the Middle Recension, attested as of 2024 by about three dozen manuscripts, manuscript fragments and manuscript compilations in Greek, Latin, Armenian, Slavonic, Coptic, Arabic, Ethiopic and Syriac, usually containing at least the Epistle to the Romans, often 3-16 others, and post-dating the Short Recension manuscripts; and the Long Recension, found in numerous Late Medieval manuscripts in Greek, Latin and Georgian which typically contain expanded collections of around 13 letters. The original letters were written in Ancient Greek with some Latinisms, but the Middle Recension manuscripts in other languages seem to be based on more than one Greek source, as some variant readings found in them seem too divergent to be merely caused by the ambiguities of translation. In this regard, it was also noted that the Middle Recension's Epistle to the Romans was apparently transmitted on two different routes \u2013 together with the \"Martyrium Ignatii\" but none of the other epistles, as well as part of a collection of Ignatian epistles and occasionally also the \"Martyrium Ignatii\" (in which case, the Epistle to the Romans is placed after the \"Martyrium\"). Unfortunately, the famous Laurentian Library manuscript (the main source for reconstructing the Middle Recension text) has lost one or more leaves at the end; it does not contain the Epistle to the Romans in its present state, but other Ignatian letter collections of comparable age generally feature this epistle as the very last; thus, it is quite likely that the Laurentian manuscript also ended with the Epistle to the Romans before it got damaged.\nFor some time, it was believed that the Long Recension was the only extant version of the Ignatian epistles, but around 1628 a Latin translation of the Middle Recension was discovered by Archbishop James Ussher, who published it in 1646. For around a quarter of a century after this, it was debated which recension represented the original text of the epistles. But John Pearson's strong defense of the authenticity of the Middle Recension in the late 17th century established a scholarly consensus that the Middle Recension is the original version of the text. The Long Recension is the product of a fourth-century Arian Christian, who interpolated the Middle Recension epistles in order posthumously to enlist Ignatius as an unwitting witness in theological disputes of that age. This individual also forged the six spurious epistles attributed to Ignatius (see below).\nThe manuscripts representing the Short Recension of the Ignatian epistles were discovered and published by William Cureton in the mid-19th century. For a brief period, there was a scholarly debate on the question of whether the Short Recension was earlier and more original than the Middle Recension. But by the end of the 19th century, Theodor Zahn and J. B. Lightfoot had established a scholarly consensus that it is (contrary to the \"lectio brevior\" rule-of-thumb) far easier to arrive at the Short Recension text by summarizing the Middle Recension, than expanding the Short Recension to gain the Middle Recension text; thus, the Short Recension post-dates the Middle Recension, even though the former is, as of 2024, attested by older manuscripts. This consensus has been questioned again in the early 21st century by such experts as Markus Vinzent, but so far not very successfully. Other recent studies have claimed that the Short Recension parallels the long Recension in intent but is opposite in method: instead of adding, it seems to selectively excise material relevant to post-3rd century questions of dogma \"within mainstream\" (\"Orthodox\"=\"Catholic\", at that time) Christianity. While this results in a more theologically neutral text \u2013 also observed by Vinzent, but interpreted as indication of the Short Recension being older \u2013, the Short Recension's missing passages often interrupt the flow of the stylistically elaborate arguments and exhortations which are characteristic for the Ignatian corpus (and even were imitated \u2013 with varying success \u2013 in the Long Recension and the now-rejected letters): the Short Recension appears not only as theologically less developed, but also as stylistically less \"typically Ignatian\".\nAuthenticity.\nThe earliest known texts of six of the seven letters are found in the Codex Mediceo Laurentianus, written in Greek in the 11th century (which also contains the pseudepigraphical letters of the Long Recension, except that to the Philippians), while the letter to the Romans is found in the Codex Colbertinus.\nThough the Catholic Church has always supported the authenticity of at least seven letters, some Protestants have tended to deny the authenticity of all the epistles because they seem to attest to a monarchical episcopate in the second century. John Calvin called the epistles \"rubbish published under Ignatius' name\".\nIn 1886, Presbyterian minister and church historian William Dool Killen published a long essay attacking the authenticity of the epistles attributed to Ignatius. He argued that Pope Callixtus\u00a0I, bishop of Rome, forged the letters around AD 220 to garner support for a monarchical episcopate, modeling Saint Ignatius after his own life to give precedent for his own authority. Killen contrasted this episcopal polity with the presbyterian polity in the writings of Polycarp.\nDoubts about the letters' authenticity continued throughout the 20th century and beyond. In the 1970s and 1980s, the scholars Robert Joly, Reinhard H\u00fcbner, Markus Vinzent, and Thomas Lechner argued forcefully that the epistles of the Middle Recension were forgeries from the reign of Marcus Aurelius (161\u2013180). Joseph Ruis-Camps published a study arguing that the Middle Recension letters were pseudepigraphically composed based on an original, smaller, authentic corpus of four letters (Romans, Magnesians, Trallians, and Ephesians). In 2009, Otto Zwierlein support the thesis of a forgery written around 170\u00a0AD.\nThese publications stirred up heated scholarly controversy, but by 2017, most patristic scholars accepted the authenticity of the seven original epistles. However, starting with a collection of studies published in 2018, the view that all the letters are a pseudepigraphy most likely composed by a Roman pro-monepiscopate faction in 160\u2013180 is again proposed by \"a significant number of Ignatian researchers\". As of 2020, most of these were from Germany, with UK/US authors generally accepting the seven Middle Recension letters as genuine. In notable contrast to previous research, 21st-century Ignatian studies \u2013 regardless of their conclusions \u2013 usually treat the questions of dating and authenticity as independent of each other and requiring separate proofs or refutations. A very early (pre-110) or extremely late (post-180) date is widely (but not universally) dismissed nowadays; as of 2020 most authors either propose the letters to be authentic and date from the mid-late 110s, or date them to almost 150 (with either view as regards authenticity), or consider them pseudepigraphic \u2013 and possibly a deliberate novel-like hagiographic fiction, closely tied in some way to Lucian's \"Peregrinus Proteus\", and unrelated except in name to the Ignatius mentioned by Polycarp \u2013 dating from post-160.\nConfounding the questions of how and when the Ignatiana were assembled, and which letters and what text-type are genuine (or at least the most ancient), are the facts that a full critical edition has not been published since Lightfoot, and that as of 2024 no stemmatic analysis has been conducted. Also, the term \"recension\" \u2013 first applied to the Ignatiana in the early Modern era, when the manuscript evidence was still fairly straightforward \u2013 is far more ambiguous today and liable to lead to confusion between the different \"collections\" and the different \"text-types\" evidenced in the known Ignatiana manuscripts, even in some professional and scholarly sources. Unfortunately, this most severely affects the \"7-letter middle-recension\" version which today is the only one not rejected by a large majority of experts. For example, the reconstruction of the \"middle recension\" \"text\" was largely based on letters from \"long\" \"collections\", and was usually called \"shorter recension\" before Cureton published the even shorter text-type from the Syriac manuscripts.\nReception in Antiquity.\nResolving the questions of dating and authenticity is made difficult by the comparative lack of reception of the Ignatian letters in proto-orthodox writings. The Epistle of Polycarp to the Philippians (\"Pol.Phil.\") seems to imply that the Ignatian letters were collated into a collection before AD 150 already, but the pertinent passages are considered suspect by most authors today. Irenaeus, who was said to be familiar with Ignatius' close acquaintance Polycarp, in his \"Against Heresies\" V,28:4 (Lugdunum, c.180 AD) cites a passage found in the Epistle of Ignatius to the Romans (\"Ign.Rom.\") almost verbatim, but claims it was \"said\" by \"someone of our[ people]\" (\"quidam de nostris dixit\"), contrasting with his usual tendency to reference his authorities by name. Moreover, Irenaeus also attests elsewhere that he is quite familiar with \"Pol.Phil.\", in which a martyr named Ignatius is discussed, and it is striking that he attributes his \"Ign.Rom.\" citation to an anonymous \"someone\" instead of referring it to the martyr he knew from Polycarp's letter.\nIn the 3rd century AD, Origen gives an abbreviated quotation from the Epistle of Ignatius to the Ephesians in his 6th homily on Luke (Caesarea c.\u00a0240\u00a0AD), and at about the same time in his \"Commentary on the Song of Songs\" (prologue, chapter 2) gives a brief quote from Ignatius' Roman epistle as something which Ignatius \"said\" and Origen \"remembered\". Eusebius is the first author to provide unequivocal testimony to more than 3 Ignatian letters, proving they were known in southern Syria Palaestina by about 300 AD. However, while Eusebius lists only those 7 letters which today are considered genuine by many, the early Ignatiana manuscripts neither contain all of these 7 letters and no others, nor are they arranged in the sequence given by Eusebius: typically, \"Ign.Rom.\" is missing, the other 6 letters are arranged in various different sequences, and at least one of the pseudo-Ignatian letters is added.\nEven as late as around 400\u00a0AD, John Chrysostom \u2013 an Antiochene who knew of Ignatius supposed relics located there \u2013 in his homily on Ignatius neither gives any corroborating details of his venerated compatriot's life, nor references the letters; compare, for example, his first homily on Priscilla and Aquila which quotes the primary sources verbatim. Neither do pre-Eusebius authors in the doctrinal disputes, which started in the mid-late 2nd and became highly divisive in the 3rd to 5th centuries AD, refer to or quote the Ignatian letters, even when doing so would have given a decisive authority to the argument. And as Markus Vinzent \u2013 one of the few present-day experts who advocates an original collection of only 3 letters and does not dismiss the \"short recension\" as an abbreviation of the \"middle recension\" \u2013 has noted, all presently known early quotations from the Ignatian corpus are from passages which are \"identical\" (if the uncertainties of translation are accounted for) in the 3- and 7-letter collections, as well as in the short- and middle-recension text-types. The first unequivocal attestations for the existence of the 7 letters listed by Eusebius and the middle-recension text, on the other hand, considerably post-date Eusebius, and are roughly contemporary with the first witnesses to the long-recension text and the pseudepigraphically expanded collections.\nIn summary, during the initial ~150 years during which a compilation of all Ignatian letters was supposedly available, at least two letters are attested to exist in written form by presently-known sources, one of which (Ephesians) was used as a source, while two passages from another (Romans) are independently cited as having been \"said\" \u2013 once by Ignatius, and once by an unspecified \"someone\". But even Origen, who speaks of Ignatius' \"letters\" in plural, does not indicate if he knew of more than the two letters he cited from, and his choice of words seems to suggest that at the time of his writing, he had at most one letter at hand. This widespread absence of Ignatian references in authors that could be expected to quote or at least paraphrase Ignatius' letters, and attribute them by name, is in striking contrast to the same authors' use of Polycarp or Clement of Rome, and to the subsequent popularity of the Ignatian letters. This discrepancy was already noted by the 19th-century authors mentioned above. The 7-letter-middle-recension hypothesis is thus, more than 300 years after John Pearson, still only based on the testimony of Eusebius, has no \"material\" support yet, and the pre-Eusebian \"references\" cannot distinguish between a 3-letter and a 7-letter hypothesis (and can even be interpreted as favoring the former); meanwhile, the short recension has even less evidence in its favor, at least if the \"Lectio brevior\" rule-of-thumb is held not to apply in this case. The expanded collections and the long recension, on the other hand, are today universally and robustly rejected by experts as post-AD 300 pseudepigraphies/forgeries. The earliest known source, as of 2022, which contains \"only\" the 7 letters listed by Eusebius \u2013 albeit in a very different sequence \u2013 \"and\" uses the middle-recension text, is a 13th-century Arabic manuscript (\"Sin. ar. 505\").\nTheology.\nChristology.\nIgnatius is known to have taught the deity of Christ:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is one Physician who is possessed both of flesh and spirit; both made and not made; God existing in flesh; true life in death; both of Mary and of God; first passible and then impassible, even Jesus Christ our Lord.\u2014\u200a\nThe same section in text of the Long Recension says the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But our Physician is the Only true God, the unbegotten and unapproachable, the Lord of all, the Father and Begetter of the only-begotten Son. We have also as a Physician the Lord our God, Jesus the Christ, the only-begotten Son and Word, before time began, but who afterwards became also man, of Mary the virgin. For \"the Word was made flesh\". Being incorporeal, He was in the body, being impassible, He was in a passible body, being immortal, He was in a mortal body, being life, He became subject to corruption, that He might free our souls from death and corruption, and heal them, and might restore them to health when they were diseased with ungodliness and wicked lusts.\u2014\u200a\nHe stressed the value of the Eucharist, calling it a \"medicine of immortality\" (\"Ignatius to the Ephesians\" 20:2). He regarded persecution and suffering as conferring grace and earnestly longed for his own martyrdom.\nIgnatius is claimed to be the first known Christian writer to argue in favor of Christianity's replacement of the Sabbath with the Lord's Day:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Be not seduced by strange doctrines nor by antiquated fables, which are profitless. For if even unto this day we live after the manner of Judaism, we avow that we have not received grace. ...If then those who had walked in ancient practices attained unto newness of hope, no longer observing Sabbaths but fashioning their lives after the Lord's day, on which our life also arose through Him ... how shall we be able to live apart from Him?\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If, therefore, those who were brought up in the ancient order of things have come to the possession of a new hope, no longer observing the Sabbath, but living in the observance of the Lord's day, on which also our life has sprung up again by Him and by His death \u2013 whom some deny, by which mystery we have obtained faith, and therefore endure, that we may be found the disciples of Jesus Christ, our only Master \u2013 how shall we be able to live apart from Him, whose disciples the prophets themselves in the Spirit did wait for Him as their Teacher? And therefore He whom they rightly waited for, being come, raised them from the dead.\u2014\u200a\nThis passage has provoked textual debate since the only Greek manuscript extant read \u039a\u03b1\u03c4\u03b1 \u03ba\u03c5\u03c1\u03b9\u03b1\u03ba\u03ae\u03bd \u03b6\u03c9\u03ae\u03bd \u03b6\u03c9\u03bd\u03c4\u03b5\u03c2 which could be translated \"living according to the Lord's life\". Most scholars, however, have followed the Latin text (secundum dominicam) omitting \u03b6\u03c9\u03ae\u03bd and translating \"living according to Lord's Day\".\nEcclesiology.\nIgnatius is the earliest known Christian writer to emphasize loyalty to a single bishop in each city (or diocese) who is assisted by both presbyters (elders) and deacons. Earlier writings only mention either bishops or presbyters.\nFor instance, his writings on bishops, presbyters and deacons:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Take care to do all things in harmony with God, with the bishop presiding in the place of God, and with the presbyters in the place of the council of the apostles, and with the deacons, who are most dear to me, entrusted with the business of Jesus Christ, who was with the Father from the beginning and is at last made manifest.\u2014\u200a\nHe is also responsible for the first known use of the Greek word \"katholikos\" (\u03ba\u03b1\u03b8\u03bf\u03bb\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2), or catholic, meaning \"universal\", \"complete\", \"general\", and/or \"whole\" to describe the Church, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Wherever the bishop appears, there let the people be; as wherever Jesus Christ is, there is the Catholic Church. It is not lawful to baptize or give communion without the consent of the bishop. On the other hand, whatever has his approval is pleasing to God. Thus, whatever is done will be safe and valid.\u2014\u200a\nAnglican bishop and theologian Joseph Lightfoot states the word \"catholic (\u03ba\u03b1\u03b8\u03cc\u03bb\u03bf\u03c5)\" meant \"universal\" to Ignatius, as that term was commonly used at the time by classical and ecclesiastical writers. Later usages of \"Catholic Church\" denote a particular church with orthodox beliefs and apostolic succession, as opposed to heretical or schismatic church bodies. Ignatius of Antioch is also attributed one of the earliest uses of the term \"Christianity\" () c.\u2009100 AD.\nParallels with Peregrinus Proteus.\nSeveral scholars have noted that there are striking similarities between Ignatius and the Christian-turned-Cynic philosopher Peregrinus Proteus, who is satirized by Lucian in \"The Passing of Peregrinus\":\nIt is generally believed that these parallels are the result of Lucian intentionally copying traits from Ignatius and applying them to his satire of Peregrinus. If the dependence of Lucian on the Ignatian epistles is accepted, then this places an upper limit on the date of the epistles during the 160s AD, just before \"The Passing of Peregrinus\" was written.\nIn 1892, Daniel V\u00f6lter sought to explain the parallels by proposing that the Ignatian epistles were in fact \"written\" by Peregrinus, and later attributed to the saint, but this speculative theory has failed to make a significant impact on the academic community.\nPseudo-Ignatius.\nEpistles attributed to Saint Ignatius, but of spurious origin (their author is often called Pseudo-Ignatius in English) include:\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15437", "revid": "53503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15437", "title": "ITU prefix", "text": "Radio and television call sign prefix\nThe International Telecommunication Union (ITU) allocates call sign prefixes for radio and television stations of all types. They also form the basis for, but may not exactly match, aircraft registration identifiers. These prefixes are agreed upon internationally, and are a form of country code. A call sign can be any number of letters and numerals but each country must only use call signs that begin with the characters allocated for use in that country.\nWith regard to the second and/or third letters in the prefixes in the list below, if the country in question is allocated all callsigns with A to Z in that position, then that country can also use call signs with the digits 0 to 9 in that position. For example, the United States is assigned KA\u2013KZ, and therefore can also use prefixes like K1 or K9.\nWhile ITU prefix rules are adhered to in the context of international broadcasting, including amateur radio, it is rarer for countries to assign broadcast call signs to conventional AM, FM, and television stations with purely domestic reach; the United States, Canada, Mexico, Japan, South Korea, the Philippines, and Argentina are among those that do. Canada presents one notable exception to the ITU prefix rules: Since 1936, it has used \"CB\" for its own Canadian Broadcasting Corporation stations, whereas Chile is officially assigned the CB prefix. Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada's broadcasting rules indicate this is through a \"special arrangement\", without elaborating. In any case, the two countries are geographically separate enough to prevent confusion; Canada's shortwave broadcasters and amateur radio stations have always used one of its assigned ITU prefixes.\nUnallocated and unavailable call sign prefixes.\nUnallocated: The following call sign prefixes are available for future allocation by the ITU. (\"x\" represents any letter; \"n\" represents any digit from 2\u20139.)\nUnavailable: Under present ITU guidelines the following call sign prefixes shall not be allocated. They are sometimes used unofficially \u2013 such as amateur radio operators operating in a disputed territory or in a nation state that has no official prefix (e.g. S0 in Western Sahara or station 1A0 at Knights of Malta headquarters in Rome). (\"x\" represents any letter; \"n\" represents any digit from 2\u20139.)\nAllocation table.\nLinked country codes are from ISO 3166-1.\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Series allocated to an international organization.\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Provisional allocation in accordance with No. S19.33: \"Between radiocommunication conferences, the Secretary-General is authorized to deal with questions relating to changes in the allocation of series of call signs, on a provisional basis, and subject to confirmation by the following conference.\"\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Half series allocation. The first country listed uses all callsigns beginning with the listed prefix followed by A-M, and the second country listed uses N-Z.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15440", "revid": "42342156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15440", "title": "IBM PC keyboard", "text": "Computer hardware\nThe keyboard for IBM PC-compatible computers is standardized. However, during the more than 30 years of PC architecture being frequently updated, many keyboard layout variations have been developed.\nA well-known class of IBM PC keyboards is the Model M. Introduced in 1984 and manufactured by IBM, Lexmark, Maxi Switch and Unicomp, the vast majority of Model M keyboards feature a buckling spring key design and many have fully swappable keycaps.\nKeyboard layouts.\nThe PC keyboard changed over the years, often at the launch of new IBM PC versions.\nCommon additions to the standard layouts include additional power management keys, volume controls, media player controls (e.g. \"Play/Pause\", \"Previous track\", \"Next track\") and miscellaneous user-configurable shortcuts for email client, World Wide Web browser, etc.\nThe IBM PC layout, particularly the Model M, has been extremely influential, and today most keyboards use some variant of it. This has caused problems for applications developed with alternative layouts, which require keys that are in awkward positions on the Model M layout \u2013 often requiring the pinkie to operate \u2013 and thus require remapping for comfortable use. One notable example is the escape key, used by the vi editor: on the ADM-3A terminal this was located where the Tab key is on the IBM PC, but on the IBM PC the Escape key is in the corner; this is typically solved by remapping Caps Lock to Escape. Another example is the Emacs editor, which makes extensive use of modifier keys, and uses the Control key more than the meta key (IBM PC instead has the Alt key) \u2013 these date to the Knight keyboard, which had the Control key on the \"inside\" of the Meta key, opposite to the Model M, where it is on the \"outside\" of the Alt key; and to the space-cadet keyboard, where the four bucky bit keys (Control, Meta, Super, Hyper) are in a row, allowing easy chording to press several, unlike on the Model M layout. This results in the \"Emacs pinky\" problem.\nReception.\nAlthough \"PC Magazine\" praised most aspects of the 1981 IBM PC keyboard's hardware design, it questioned \"how IBM, that ultimate pro of keyboard manufacture, could put the left-hand shift key at the awkward reach they did\". The magazine reported in 1982 that it received more letters to its \"Wish List\" column asking for the ability to determine the status of the three lock keys than on any other topic. \"Byte\" columnist Jerry Pournelle described the keyboard as \"infuriatingly excellent\". He praised its feel but complained that the Shift and other keys' locations were \"enough to make a saint weep\", and denounced the trend of PC compatible computers to emulate the layout but not the feel. He reported that the layout \"nearly drove\" science-fiction editor Jim Baen \"crazy\", and that \"many of [Baen's] authors refused to work with that keyboard\" so could not submit manuscripts in a compatible format. The magazine's official review was more sanguine. It praised the keyboard as \"bar none, the best ... on any microcomputer\" and described the unusual Shift key locations as \"minor [problems] compared to some of the gigantic mistakes made on almost every other microcomputer keyboard\".\n\"I wasn't thrilled with the placement of [the left Shift and Return] keys, either\", IBM's Don Estridge stated in 1983. He defended the layout, however, stating that \"every place you pick to put them is not a good place for somebody ... there's no consensus\", and claimed that \"if we were to change it now we would be in hot water\".\nStandard key meanings.\nThe PC keyboard with its various keys has a long history of evolution reaching back to teletypewriters. In addition to the 'old' standard keys, the PC keyboard has accumulated several special keys over the years. Some of the additions have been inspired by the opportunity or requirement for improving user productivity with general office application software, while other slightly more general keyboard additions have become the factory standards after being introduced by certain operating system or GUI software vendors such as Microsoft.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15441", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15441", "title": "Italian battleship Giulio Cesare", "text": "Italian Royal Navy dreadnought battleship\nGiulio Cesare was one of three dreadnought battleships built for the Royal Italian Navy () in the 1910s. Completed in 1914, she was little used and saw no combat during the First World War. The ship supported operations during the Corfu Incident in 1923 and spent much of the rest of the decade in reserve. She was rebuilt between 1933 and 1937 with more powerful guns, additional armor and considerably more speed than before.\nDuring World War II, both \"Giulio Cesare\" and her sister ship, , participated in the Battle of Calabria in July 1940, when the former was lightly damaged. They were both present when British torpedo bombers attacked the fleet at Taranto in November 1940, but \"Giulio Cesare\" was not damaged. She escorted several convoys to North Africa and participated in the Battle of Cape Spartivento in late 1940 and the First Battle of Sirte in late 1941. She was designated as a training ship in early 1942, and escaped to Malta after the Italian armistice the following year. The ship was transferred to the Soviet Union in 1949 and renamed Novorossiysk (). The Soviets also used her for training until she was sunk in 1955, with the loss of 617 men, by an explosion most likely caused by an old German mine. She was salvaged the following year and later scrapped.\nDescription.\nThe \"Conte di Cavour\" class was designed to counter the French dreadnoughts which caused them to be slower and more heavily armored than the first Italian dreadnought, . The ships were long at the waterline and overall. They had a beam of , and a draft of . The \"Conte di Cavour\"-class ships displaced at normal load, and at deep load. They had a crew of 31 officers and 969 enlisted men. The ships were powered by three sets of Parsons steam turbines, two sets driving the outer propeller shafts and one set the two inner shafts. Steam for the turbines was provided by 24 Babcock &amp; Wilcox boilers, half of which burned fuel oil and the other half burning both oil and coal. Designed to reach a maximum speed of from , \"Giulio Cesare\" failed to reach this goal on her sea trials, reaching only from . The ships carried enough coal and oil to give them a range of at .\nArmament and armor.\nThe main battery of the \"Conte di Cavour\" class consisted of thirteen 305-millimetre Model 1909 guns, in five gun turrets, with a twin-gun turret superfiring over a triple-gun turret in fore and aft pairs, and a third triple turret amidships. Their secondary armament consisted of eighteen guns mounted in casemates on the sides of the hull. For defense against torpedo boats, the ships carried fourteen guns; thirteen of these could be mounted on the turret tops, but they could be positioned in 30 different locations, including some on the forecastle and upper decks. They were also fitted with three submerged torpedo tubes, one on each broadside and the third in the stern.\nThe \"Conte di Cavour\"-class ships had a complete waterline armor belt that had a maximum thickness of amidships, which reduced to towards the stern and towards the bow. They had two armored decks: the main deck was thick on the flat that increased to on the slopes that connected it to the main belt. The second deck was thick. Frontal armor of the gun turrets was in thickness and the sides were thick. The armor protecting their barbettes ranged in thickness from . The walls of the forward conning tower were 280 millimetres thick.\nModifications and reconstruction.\nShortly after the end of World War I, the number of 76.2\u00a0mm guns was reduced to 13, all mounted on the turret tops, and six new 76.2-millimeter anti-aircraft (AA) guns were installed abreast the aft funnel. In addition two license-built 2-pounder () AA guns were mounted on the forecastle deck. In 1925\u20131926 the foremast was replaced by a four-legged (tetrapodal) mast, which was moved forward of the funnels, the rangefinders were upgraded, and the ship was equipped to handle a Macchi M.18 seaplane mounted on the amidships turret. Around the same time, either one or both of the ships was equipped with a fixed aircraft catapult on the port side of the forecastle.\n\"Giulio Cesare\" began an extensive reconstruction in October 1933 at the Cantieri del Tirreno shipyard in Genoa that lasted until October 1937. A new bow section was grafted over the existing bow which increased her length by to and her beam increased to . The ship's draft at deep load increased to . All of the changes made increased her displacement to at standard load and at deep load. The ship's crew increased to 1,260 officers and enlisted men. Two of the propeller shafts were removed and the existing turbines were replaced by two Belluzzo geared steam turbines rated at . The boilers were replaced by eight Yarrow boilers. On her sea trials in December 1936, before her reconstruction was fully completed, \"Giulio Cesare\" reached a speed of from . In service her maximum speed was about and she had a range of at a speed of .\nThe main guns were bored out to and the center turret and the torpedo tubes were removed. All of the existing secondary armament and AA guns were replaced by a dozen 120\u00a0mm guns in six twin-gun turrets and eight AA guns in twin turrets. In addition the ship was fitted with a dozen Breda light AA guns in six twin-gun mounts and twelve Breda M31 anti-aircraft machine guns, also in twin mounts. In 1940 the 13.2\u00a0mm machine guns were replaced by AA guns in twin mounts. \"Giulio Cesare\" received two more twin mounts as well as four additional 37\u00a0mm guns in twin mounts on the forecastle between the two turrets in 1941. The tetrapodal mast was replaced with a new forward conning tower, protected with thick armor. Atop the conning tower there was a fire-control director fitted with two large stereo-rangefinders, with a base length of .\nThe deck armor was increased during the reconstruction to a total of over the engine and boiler rooms and over the magazines, although its distribution over three decks, meant that it was considerably less effective than a single plate of the same thickness. The armor protecting the barbettes was reinforced with plates. All this armor weighed a total of . The existing underwater protection was replaced by the Pugliese torpedo defense system that consisted of a large cylinder surrounded by fuel oil or water that was intended to absorb the blast of a torpedo warhead. It lacked, however, enough depth to be fully effective against contemporary torpedoes. A major problem with the reconstruction was that the ship's increased draft meant that the waterline armor belt was almost completely submerged with any significant load.\nConstruction and service.\n\"Giulio Cesare\", named after Julius Caesar, was laid down at the Gio. Ansaldo &amp; C. shipyard in Genoa on 24 June 1910 and launched on 15 October 1911. She was completed on 14 May 1914 and served as a flagship in the southern Adriatic Sea during World War I. She saw no action, however, and spent little time at sea. Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel, the Italian naval chief of staff, believed that Austro-Hungarian submarines and minelayers could operate too effectively in the narrow waters of the Adriatic. The threat from these underwater weapons to his capital ships was too serious for him to use the fleet in an active way. Instead, Revel decided to implement a blockade at the relatively safer southern end of the Adriatic with the battle fleet, while smaller vessels, such as the MAS torpedo boats, conducted raids on Austro-Hungarian ships and installations. Meanwhile, Revel's battleships would be preserved to confront the Austro-Hungarian battle fleet in the event that it sought a decisive engagement.\n\"Giulio Cesare\" made port visits in the Levant in 1919 and 1920. Both \"Giulio Cesare\" and \"Conte di Cavour\" supported Italian operations on Corfu in 1923 after an Italian general and his staff were murdered at the Greek\u2013Albanian frontier; Benito Mussolini, who had been looking for a pretext to seize Corfu, ordered Italian troops to occupy the island. \"Cesare\" became a gunnery training ship in 1928, after having been in reserve since 1926. She was reconstructed at Cantieri del Tirreno, Genoa, between 1933 and 1937. Both ships participated in a naval review by Adolf Hitler in the Bay of Naples in May 1938 and covered the invasion of Albania in May 1939.\nWorld War II.\nEarly in World War II, the ship took part in the Battle of Calabria (also known as the Battle of Punta Stilo), together with \"Conte di Cavour\", on 9 July 1940, as part of the 1st Battle Squadron, commanded by Admiral Inigo Campioni, during which she engaged major elements of the British Mediterranean Fleet. The British were escorting a convoy from Malta to Alexandria, while the Italians had finished escorting another from Naples to Benghazi, Libya. Admiral Andrew Cunningham, commander of the Mediterranean Fleet, attempted to interpose his ships between the Italians and their base at Taranto. Crew on the fleets spotted each other in the middle of the afternoon and the battleships opened fire at 15:53 at a range of nearly . The two leading British battleships, and , replied a minute later. Three minutes after she opened fire, shells from \"Giulio Cesare\" began to straddle \"Warspite\" which made a small turn and increased speed, to throw off the Italian ship's aim, at 16:00. Some rounds fired by \"Giulio Cesare\" overshot \"Warspite\" and near-missed the destroyers HMS \"Decoy\" and \"Hereward\", puncturing their superstructures with splinters. At that same time, a shell from \"Warspite\" struck \"Giulio Cesare\" at a distance of about . The shell pierced the rear funnel and detonated inside it, blowing out a hole nearly across. Fragments started several fires and their smoke was drawn into the boiler rooms, forcing four boilers off-line as their operators could not breathe. This reduced the ship's speed to . Uncertain how severe the damage was, Campioni ordered his battleships to turn away in the face of superior British numbers and they successfully disengaged. Repairs to \"Giulio Cesare\" were completed by the end of August and both ships unsuccessfully attempted to intercept British convoys to Malta in August and September.\nOn the night of 11 November 1940, \"Giulio Cesare\" and the other Italian battleships were at anchor in Taranto harbor when they were attacked by 21 Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers from the British aircraft carrier , along with several other warships. One torpedo sank \"Conte di Cavour\" in shallow water, but \"Giulio Cesare\" was not hit during the attack. She participated in the Battle of Cape Spartivento on 27 November 1940, but never got close enough to any British ships to fire at them. The ship was damaged in January 1941 by splinters from a near miss during an air raid on Naples by Vickers Wellington bombers of the Royal Air Force; repairs at Genoa were completed in early February. On 8 February, she sailed from to the Straits of Bonifacio to intercept what the Italians thought was a Malta convoy, but was actually a raid on Genoa. She failed to make contact with any British forces. She participated in the First Battle of Sirte on 17 December 1941, providing distant cover for a convoy bound for Libya, and briefly engaging the escort force of a British convoy. She also provided distant cover for another convoy to North Africa in early January 1942. \"Giulio Cesare\" was reduced to a training ship afterwards at Taranto and later Pola. After the Italian surrender on 8 September 1943, she steamed to Taranto, putting down a mutiny and enduring an ineffective attack by five German aircraft en route. She then sailed for Malta where she arrived on 12 September to be interned. The ship remained there until 17 June 1944 when she returned to Taranto where she remained for the next four years.\nSoviet service.\nAfter the war, \"Giulio Cesare\" was allocated to the Soviet Union as part of war reparations. She was moved to Augusta, Sicily, on 9 December 1948, where an unsuccessful attempt was made at sabotage. The ship was stricken from the naval register on 15 December and turned over to the Soviets on 6 February 1949 under the temporary name of \"Z11\" in Vlor\u00eb, Albania. She was renamed \"Novorossiysk\", after the Soviet city of that name on the Black Sea. The Soviets used her as a training ship, and gave her eight refits. In 1953, all Italian light AA guns were replaced by eighteen 37 mm 70-K AA guns in six twin mounts and six singles. Also replaced were her fire-control systems and radars. This was intended as a temporary rearmament, as the Soviets drew up plans to replace her secondary 120\u00a0mm mounts with the 130\u00a0mm/58 SM-2 that was in development, and the 100\u00a0mm and 37\u00a0mm guns with 8 quadruple 45\u00a0mm. While at anchor in Sevastopol on the night of 28/29 October 1955, an explosion ripped a hole in the forecastle forward of 'A' turret. The flooding could not be controlled, and she capsized with the loss of 617 men, including 61 men sent from other ships to assist.\nThe cause of the explosion is still unclear. The official cause, regarded as the most probable, was a magnetic RMH or LMB bottom mine, laid by the Germans during World War II and triggered by the dragging of the battleship's anchor chain before mooring for the last time. Subsequent searches located 32 mines of these types, some of them within of the explosion. The damage was consistent with an explosion of of TNT, and more than one mine may have detonated. Other explanations for the ship's loss have been proposed, and the most popular of these is that she was sunk by Italian frogmen of the wartime special operations unit \"Decima Flottiglia MAS\" who \u2013 more than ten years after the cessation of hostilities \u2013 were either avenging the transfer of the former Italian battleship to the USSR or sinking it on behalf of NATO. \"Novorossiysk\" was stricken from the naval register on 24 February 1956, salvaged on 4 May 1957, and subsequently scrapped.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15442", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15442", "title": "INS Vikrant (1961)", "text": "Majestic-class aircraft carrier of the Indian Navy\nINS Vikrant (from Sanskrit \"vikr\u0101nta\", \"courageous\") was a of the Indian Navy. The ship was laid down as HMS \"Hercules\" for the British Royal Navy during World War II, but was put on hold when the war ended. India purchased the incomplete carrier in 1957, and construction was completed in 1961. \"Vikrant\" was commissioned as the first aircraft carrier of the Indian Navy and played a key role in enforcing the naval blockade of East Pakistan during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971.\nIn its later years, the ship underwent major refits to embark modern aircraft, before being decommissioned in January 1997. She was preserved as a museum ship in the Naval Docks in Mumbai until 2012. In January 2014, the ship was sold through an online auction and scrapped in November 2014 after final clearance from the Supreme Court.\nHistory and construction.\nIn 1943 the Royal Navy commissioned six light aircraft carriers in an effort to counter the German and Japanese navies. The 1942 Design Light Fleet Carrier, commonly referred to as the British Light Fleet Carrier, was the result. Serving with eight navies between 1944 and 2001, these ships were designed and constructed by civilian shipyards as an intermediate step between the full-sized fleet aircraft carriers and the less expensive but limited-capability escort carriers. Sixteen light fleet carriers were ordered, and all of them were laid down as what became the \"Colossus\" class in 1942 and 1943. The final six ships were modified during construction to handle larger and faster aircraft, and were re-designated as the \"Majestic\" class. The improvements from the \"Colossus\" class to the \"Majestic\" class included heavier displacement, armament, catapult, aircraft lifts and aircraft capacity. Construction on the ships was suspended at the end of World War II, as the ships were more than the Royal Navy's peacetime requirements. \nInstead, the carriers were modernized and sold to several Commonwealth nations. The ships were similar, but each varied depending on the requirements of the country the ship was sold to.\nHMS \"Hercules\", the fifth ship in the \"Majestic\" class, was ordered on 7 August 1942 and laid down on 14 October 1943 by Vickers-Armstrongs at High Walker on the River Tyne. After World War II ended with Japan's surrender on 2 September 1945, she was launched on 22 September and her construction was suspended in May 1946. At the time of suspension, she was 75 per cent complete. Her hull was preserved, and in May 1947 she was laid up in Gareloch off the Clyde. In January 1957, she was purchased by India and was towed to Belfast to complete her construction and modifications by Harland &amp; Wolff. Several improvements to the original design were ordered by the Indian Navy, including an angled deck, steam catapults and a modified island.\nDesign and description.\n\"Vikrant\" displaced at standard load and at deep load. She had an overall length of , a beam of and a mean deep draught of . She was powered by a pair of Parsons geared steam turbines, driving two propeller shafts, using steam provided by four Admiralty three-drum boilers. The turbines produced a total of which gave a maximum speed of . \"Vikrant\" carried about of fuel oil that gave her a range of at ; and at . The air and ship crew consisted of 1,110 officers and men. \nThe ship was armed with sixteen Bofors anti-aircraft guns, but these were later reduced to eight. At various times, its aircraft consisted of Hawker Sea Hawk and STOVL BAe Sea Harrier jet fighters, Sea King Mk 42B and HAL Chetak helicopters, and Breguet Br.1050 Aliz\u00e9 anti-submarine aircraft. The carrier fielded between 21 and 23 aircraft of all types. \"Vikrant\"'s flight decks were designed to handle aircraft weighing up to , but remained the heaviest landing weight of an aircraft. Larger lifts were installed later. The ship was equipped with one LW-05 air-search radar, one ZW-06 surface-search radar, one LW-10 tactical radar and one Type 963 aircraft landing radar with other communication systems.\nService.\nThe Indian Navy's first aircraft carrier was commissioned as INS \"Vikrant\" on 4 March 1961 in Belfast by Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit, the Indian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom. The name \"Vikrant\" was derived from the Sanskrit word \"vikr\u0101nta\" meaning \"stepping beyond\", \"courageous\" or \"bold\". Captain Pritam Singh Mahindroo was the first commanding officer of the ship. Two squadrons were to be embarked on the \nship - INAS 300 commanded by Lieutenant Commander B. R. Acharya which had British Hawker Sea Hawk fighter-bombers; and INAS 310 commanded by Lieutenant Commander Mihir K. Roy which had French Aliz\u00e9 anti-submarine aircraft. On 18 May 1961, the first jet landed on her deck. It was piloted by Lieutenant Radhakrishna Hariram Tahiliani, who later served as admiral and Chief of the Naval Staff of India from 1984 to 1987. \"Vikrant\" formally joined the Indian Navy's fleet in Bombay (now Mumbai) on 3 November 1961, when she was received at Ballard Pier by then Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru. That December, the ship was deployed for Operation Vijay (the code name for the annexation of Goa) off the coast of Goa with two destroyers, and . \"Vikrant\" did not see action and patrolled along the coast to deter foreign interference. During the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965, \"Vikrant\" was in dry dock refitting, and did not see any action.\nIn June 1970, \"Vikrant\" was docked at the Naval Dockyard, Bombay, due to many internal fatigue cracks and fissures in the water drums of her boilers that could not be repaired by welding. As replacement drums were not available locally, four new ones were ordered from Britain, and Naval Headquarters issued orders to not use the boilers until further notice. On 26 February 1971 the ship was moved from Ballard Pier Extension to the anchorage without replacement drums. The main objective behind this move was to light up the boilers at reduced pressure, and work up the main and flight deck machinery that had been idle for almost seven months. On 1 March, the boilers were ignited, and basin trials up to 40 revolutions per minute (RPM) were conducted. Catapult trials were conducted on the same day.\nThe ship began preliminary sea trials on 18 March and returned two days later. Trials were again conducted on 26\u201327 April. The navy decided to limit the boilers to a pressure of and the propeller revolutions to 120 RPM ahead and 80 RPM astern, reducing the ship's speed to . With the growing expectations of a war with Pakistan in the near future, the navy started to transfer its ships to strategically advantageous locations in Indian waters. The primary concern of Naval Headquarters about the operation was the serviceability of \"Vikrant\". When asked his opinion regarding the involvement of \"Vikrant\" in the war, Fleet Operations Officer Captain Gulab Mohanlal Hiranandani told the Chief of the Naval Staff Admiral Sardarilal Mathradas Nanda:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...during the 1965 war \"Vikrant\" was sitting in Bombay Harbour and did not go out to sea. If the same thing happened in 1971, \"Vikrant\" would be called a white elephant and naval aviation would be written off. \"Vikrant\" had to be seen being operational even if we didn't fly any aircraft.\u2014\u200a\nNanda and Hiranandani proved to be instrumental in taking \"Vikrant\" to war. There were objections that the ship might have severe operational difficulties that would expose the carrier to increased danger on operations. In addition, the three s acquired by the Pakistan Navy posed a significant risk to the carrier. In June, extensive deep sea trials were carried out, with steel safety harnesses around the three boilers still operational. Observation windows were fitted as a precautionary measure to detect any steam leaks. By the end of June, the trials were complete and \"Vikrant\" was cleared to participate on operations, with its speed restricted to 14 knots.\nIndo-Pakistani War of 1971.\nAs part of preparations for the war, \"Vikrant\" was assigned to Eastern Naval Command, then to the Eastern Fleet. This fleet consisted of INS \"Vikrant\", the two s and , the two Petya III-class corvettes and , and one submarine, . The main reason behind strengthening the Eastern Fleet was to counter the Pakistani maritime forces deployed in support of military operations in East Bengal. A surveillance area of , confined by a triangle with a base of and sides of , was set up in the Bay of Bengal. Any ship in this area was to be challenged and checked. If found to be neutral, it would be escorted to the nearest Indian port, otherwise, it would be captured and taken as a war prize.\nIn the meantime, intelligence reports confirmed Pakistan was going to deploy the US-built . \"Ghazi\" was considered a serious threat to \"Vikrant\" by the Indian Navy, as \"Vikrant\"'s approximate position would be known by the Pakistanis once she started operating aircraft. Of the four available surface ships, INS \"Kavaratti\" had no sonar, which meant the other three ships had to remain in close vicinity, around close to \"Vikrant\", without which the carrier would be completely vulnerable to attacks by \"Ghazi\".\nOn 23 July, \"Vikrant\" sailed off to Cochin in company with the Western Fleet. En route, before reaching Cochin on 26 July, Sea King landing trials were carried out. After completion of the radar and communication trials on 28 July, she departed for Madras, escorted by \"Brahmaputra\" and \"Beas\". The next major problem was operating aircraft from the carrier. The commanding officer of the ship, Captain (later Vice Admiral) Swaraj Prakash, was seriously concerned about flight operations. He was concerned aircrew morale would be adversely affected if flight operations were not undertaken, which could be disastrous. Naval Headquarters remained stubborn on the speed restrictions, and sought confirmation from Prakash whether it was possible to embark an Aliz\u00e9 without compromising the speed restrictions. The speed restrictions imposed by the headquarters meant Aliz\u00e9 aircraft would have to land at close to stalling speed. Eventually the aircraft weight was reduced, which allowed several of the aircraft to embark along with a Seahawk squadron.\nBy the end of September, \"Vikrant\" and her escorts had reached Port Blair. En route to Visakhapatnam, tactical exercises were conducted in the presence of the Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief of Eastern Naval Command. From Vishakhapatnam, \"Vikrant\" set out for Madras for maintenance. Rear Admiral S. H. Sarma was appointed Flag Officer Commanding Eastern Fleet and arrived at Vishakhapatnam on 14 October. After receiving reports that Pakistan might launch preemptive strikes, maintenance was stopped for another tactical exercise, which was completed during the night of 26\u201327 October at Vishakhapatnam. \"Vikrant\" then returned to Madras to resume maintenance. On 1 November, the Eastern Fleet was formally constituted, and on 13 November, all the ships set out for the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. To avoid misadventures, the plan was to sail \"Vikrant\" to a remote anchorage, isolating it from combat. Simultaneously, deception signals would give the impression of \"Vikrant\" operating somewhere between Madras and Vishakhapatnam.\nOn 23 November, an emergency was declared in Pakistan after a clash of Indian and Pakistani troops in East Pakistan two days earlier. On 2 December, the Eastern Fleet proceeded to its patrol area in anticipation of an attack by Pakistan. The Pakistan Navy had deployed \"Ghazi\" on 14 November with the explicit goal of targeting and sinking \"Vikrant\", and \"Ghazi\" reached a location near Madras by the 23rd. In an attempt to deceive the Pakistan Navy and \"Ghazi\", India's Naval Headquarters deployed \"Rajput\" as a decoy\u2014the ship sailed off the coast of Vishakhapatnam and broadcast a significant amount of radio traffic, making her appear to be \"Vikrant\". \"Ghazi\", meanwhile, sank off the Visakhapatnam coast under mysterious circumstances. On the night of 3\u20134 December, a muffled underwater explosion was detected by a coastal battery. The next morning, a local fisherman observed flotsam near the coast, causing Indian naval officials to suspect a vessel had sunk off the coast. The next day, a clearance diving team was sent to search the area, and they confirmed \"Ghazi\" had sunk in shallow waters.\nThe reason for \"Ghazi\"'s fate is unclear. The Indian Navy's official historian G. M. Hiranandani suggests three possibilities after analysinh the position of the rudder and extent of the damage suffered. The first was that \"Ghazi\" had come up to periscope depth to identify her position and may have seen an anti-submarine vessel that caused her to crash dive, which in turn may have led her to bury her bow in the bottom. The second possibility is closely related to the first: on the night of the explosion, \"Rajput\" was on patrol off Visakhapatnam and observed a severe disturbance in the water. Suspecting that it was a submarine, the ship dropped two depth charges on the spot, on a position that was very close to the wreckage. The third possibility is that there was a mishap when \"Ghazi\" was laying mines on the day before hostilities broke out.\n\"Vikrant\" was redeployed towards Chittagong at the outbreak of hostilities. On 4 December, the ship's Sea Hawks struck shipping in the Chittagong and Cox's Bazar harbours, sinking or incapacitating most of the ships present. Later strikes targeted Khulna and the Port of Mongla, which continued until 10 December, while other operations were flown to support a naval blockade of East Pakistan. On 14 December, the Sea Hawks attacked the cantonment area in Chittagong, destroying several Pakistani army barracks. Medium anti-aircraft fire was encountered during this strike. Simultaneous attacks by Aliz\u00e9s continued on Cox's Bazar. After this, \"Vikrant\"'s fuel levels dropped to less than 25 per cent and the aircraft carrier sailed to Paradip for refueling. The crew of \"Vikrant\" earned two Maha Vir Chakras and twelve Vir Chakra gallantry medals for their role in the war.\nLater years.\n\"Vikrant\" did not see much service after the war, and was given two major modernisation refits\u2014the first one from 1979 to 1981 and the second one from 1987 to 1989. In the first phase, her boilers, radars, communication systems and anti-aircraft guns were modernised, and facilities to operate Sea Harriers were installed. In the second phase, facilities to operate the new Sea Harrier Vertical/Short Take Off and Land (V/STOL) fighter aircraft and the new Sea King Mk 42B Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) helicopters were introduced. A 9.75-degree ski-jump ramp was fitted. The steam catapult was removed during this phase. in 1991, \"Vikrant\" again underwent a six-month refit, followed by another fourteen-month refit in 1992\u201394. She remained operational thereafter, flying Sea Harriers, Sea Kings and Chetaks until her final sea outing on 23 November 1994. In the same year, a fire was also recorded aboard. In January 1995, the navy decided to keep \"Vikrant\" in \"safe to float\" state. She was laid up and formally decommissioned on 31 January 1997.\nSquadrons embarked.\nDuring her service, INS \"Vikrant\" embarked four squadrons of the Naval Air Arm of the Indian Navy:\nMuseum ship.\nFollowing decommissioning in 1997, \"Vikrant\" was earmarked for preservation as a museum ship in Mumbai. Lack of funding prevented progress on the ship's conversion to a museum and it was speculated \"Vikrant\" would be converted into a training ship. In 2001, the ship was opened to the public by the Indian Navy, but the Government of Maharashtra was unable to find a partner to operate the museum on a permanent, long-term basis and the museum was closed after it was deemed unsafe for the public in 2012.\nScrapping.\nIn August 2013, Vice Admiral Shekhar Sinha, Commander-in-Chief of Western Naval Command, said the Ministry of Defence would scrap the ship as she had become very difficult to maintain and no private bidders had offered to fund the museum's operations. On 3 December 2013, the Indian government decided to auction the ship. The Bombay High Court dismissed a public-interest lawsuit filed by Kiran Paigankar to stop the auction, stating the vessel's dilapidated condition did not warrant her preservation, nor were the necessary funds or government support available. In January 2014, the ship was sold through an online auction to a Darukhana ship-breaker for \u20b9 crore (). The Supreme Court of India dismissed another lawsuit challenging the ship's sale and scrapping on 14 August 2014. \"Vikrant\" remained beached off Darukhana in Mumbai Port while awaiting the final clearances of the Mumbai Port Trust. On 12 November 2014, the Supreme Court gave its final approval for the carrier to be scrapped, which commenced on 22 November 2014.\nOn 7 April 2022, an FIR against an ex-MP Kirit Somaiya, his son Neil and others was registered, on charges of alleged cheating and criminal breach of trust linked to the collection of funds up to Rs. 57 crore for restoring the decommissioned aircraft carrier INS \"Vikrant\". The Trombay Police booked them under Section 420 (cheating and dishonesty including delivery of property), Section 406 (punishment for criminal breach of trust) and Section 34 (common intentions) of the Indian Penal Code. According to the complaint, the father and son duo collected the money in 2013\u201314 in the name of restoring \"Vikrant\", but the funds collected were spent on personal use. Somaiya was leading the front of attacking the government's intent of commercializing the decommissioned ship by handing it to private players.\nLegacy.\nIn memory of \"Vikrant\", the Vikrant Memorial was unveiled by Vice Admiral Surinder Pal Singh Cheema, Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief of the Western Naval Command at K Subash Marg at the Naval Dockyard of Mumbai on 25 January 2016. The memorial is made from metal recovered from the ship. \nIn February 2016, the Indian automobile manufacturer Bajaj unveiled a new motorbike made with metal from \"Vikrant\"'s scrap and named it Bajaj V in honour of \"Vikrant\".\nThe navy has named its first home-built carrier INS \"Vikrant\" in honour of INS \"Vikrant\" (R11). The new carrier is built by Cochin Shipyard Limited, and will displace . The keel was laid down in February 2009 and she was launched in August 2013 under the premiership of then PM Dr. Manmohan Singh. The ship was commissioned on 2 September 2022 by PM Narendra Modi.\nIn popular culture.\nThe decommissioned ship featured prominently in the film \"ABCD 2\" as a backdrop while it was moored near Darukhana in Mumbai.\nAfter the decommissioning of INS \"Vikrant\", Mumbai-based artist Arzan Khambatta was approached by veterans who had served on the warship to create a sculpture in its memory. Using actual metal from the ship, Khambatta crafted a tribute that now stands at Lion Gate, a historic naval entrance in Mumbai.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
