{"id": "16812", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16812", "title": "Kenesaw Mountain Landis", "text": "American judge and first commissioner of baseball (1866\u20131944)\nKenesaw Mountain Landis (; November 20, 1866 \u2013 November 25, 1944) was an American jurist who served as a United States federal judge from 1905 to 1922 and as the first commissioner of baseball from 1920 until his death in 1944. He is remembered for his resolution of the Black Sox Scandal, in which he expelled eight members of the Chicago White Sox from organized baseball for conspiring to lose the 1919 World Series and repeatedly refused their reinstatement requests. His iron rule over baseball in the near quarter-century of his commissionership is generally credited with restoring public confidence in the game.\nLandis was born in Millville, Ohio. Raised in Indiana, he became a lawyer, and then personal secretary to Walter Q. Gresham, the new United States secretary of state, in 1893. He returned to private practice after Gresham died in office.\nPresident Theodore Roosevelt appointed Landis to the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois in 1905. Landis received national attention in 1907 when he fined Standard Oil of Indiana more than $29 million (approximately $980 million in 2025) for violating federal laws forbidding rebates on railroad freight tariffs. Although Landis's action was reversed on appeal, he was seen as a judge determined to rein in big business. During and after World War I, Landis presided over several high-profile trials of draft resisters and others whom he saw as opposing the war effort. He imposed heavy sentences on those who were convicted, although some of the convictions were reversed on appeal, and other sentences were commuted.\nIn 1920, Landis was a leading candidate when American League and National League team owners, embarrassed by the Black Sox scandal and other instances of players throwing games, sought someone to rule over baseball. Landis was given full power to act in the sport's best interest, and used that power extensively over the next quarter century. Landis was widely praised for cleaning up the game, although some of his decisions in the Black Sox matter remain controversial: supporters of \"Shoeless Joe\" Jackson and Buck Weaver contend that he was overly harsh. Others blame Landis for, in their view, delaying the racial integration of baseball. Landis was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame by a special vote shortly after he died in 1944.\nEarly life and pre-judicial career (1866\u20131905).\nBoyhood and early career (1866\u20131893).\nKenesaw Mountain Landis was born in Millville, Ohio, on November 20, 1866, the sixth child and fourth son of Abraham Hoch Landis, a physician, and Mary Kumler Landis. The Landises descended from Swiss Mennonites. Abraham Landis had been wounded fighting in the U.S. Army at the Battle of Kennesaw Mountain in Georgia, and when the new baby's parents proved unable to agree on a name, Mary Landis proposed that they call him Kenesaw Mountain. (At the time, both spellings of \"Kenesaw\" were used, but later \"Kennesaw Mountain\" became the accepted spelling of the battle site.)\nAbraham Landis worked in Millville as a country physician. When Kenesaw was eight, the elder Landis moved his family to Delphi, Indiana, and subsequently to Logansport, Indiana, where he purchased and ran several local farms\u2014his war injury had caused him to scale back his medical practice. Two of Kenesaw's four brothers, Charles Beary Landis and Frederick Landis, became members of Congress.\nAs \"Kenny\", as he was sometimes known, grew, he did an increasing share of the farm work, later stating, \"I did my share\u2014and it was a substantial share\u2014in taking care of the 13\u00a0acres\u00a0... I do not remember that I particularly liked to get up at 3:30 in the morning.\" Kenesaw began his off-farm career at age ten as a news delivery boy. He left school at 15 after an unsuccessful attempt to master algebra. He worked at the local general store and then as errand boy with the Vandalia Railroad. Landis applied for a job as a brakeman, but was laughingly dismissed as too small. He then worked for the Logansport \"Journal\", and taught himself shorthand reporting, becoming in 1883 official court reporter for the Cass County Circuit Court. Landis later wrote, \"I may not have been much of a judge, nor baseball official, but I do pride myself on having been a real shorthand reporter.\" He served in that capacity until 1886. In his spare time, he became a prize-winning bicycle racer and played on and managed a baseball team. Offered a professional contract as a ballplayer, he turned it down, stating that he preferred to play for the love of the game.\nIn 1886, Landis first ventured into Republican Party politics, supporting a friend, Charles F. Griffin, for Indiana secretary of state. Griffin won, and Landis was rewarded with a civil service job in the Indiana Department of State. While employed there, he applied to be an attorney. At that time, in Indiana, an applicant needed only to prove that he was 21 and of good moral character, and Landis was admitted. Landis opened a practice in Marion, Indiana, but attracted few clients in his year of work there. Realizing that an uneducated lawyer was unlikely to build a lucrative practice, Landis enrolled at Cincinnati's YMCA Law School (now part of Northern Kentucky University) in 1889. Landis transferred to Union Law School (part of Northwestern University) the following year, and in 1891, he took his law degree from Union and was admitted to the Illinois Bar. He began a practice in Chicago, served as an assistant instructor at Union and with fellow attorney Clarence Darrow helped found the nonpartisan Chicago Civic Centre Club, devoted to municipal reform. Landis practiced with college friend Frank O. Lowden; the future commissioner and his law partner went into debt to impress potential clients, buying a law library secondhand.\nWashington years and aftermath (1893\u20131905).\nIn March 1893, President Grover Cleveland appointed federal judge Walter Q. Gresham as his secretary of state, and Gresham hired Landis as his personal secretary. Gresham had a long career as a political appointee in the latter part of the 19th century; though he lost his only two bids for elective office, he served in three Cabinet positions and was twice a dark horse candidate for the Republican presidential nomination. Although Gresham was a Republican, he had supported Cleveland (a Democrat) in the 1892 election because of his intense dislike for the Republican nominee, President Benjamin Harrison. Kenesaw Landis had appeared before Judge Gresham in court. According to Landis biographer J. G. Taylor Spink, Gresham thought Landis \"had something on the ball\" and believed that Landis's shorthand skills would be of use.\nIn Washington, Landis worked hard to protect Gresham's interests in the State Department, making friends with many members of the press. He was less popular among many of the Department's senior career officials, who saw him as brash. When word leaked concerning President Cleveland's Hawaiian policy, the President was convinced Landis was the source of the information and demanded his dismissal. Gresham defended Landis, stating that Cleveland would have to fire both of them, and the President relented, later finding out that he was mistaken in accusing Landis. President Cleveland grew to like Landis, and when Gresham died in 1895, offered Landis the post of United States ambassador to Venezuela. Landis declined the diplomatic post, preferring to return to Chicago to begin a law practice and to marry Winifred Reed, daughter of the Ottawa, Illinois, postmaster. The two married July 25, 1895; they had two surviving children, a boy, Reed, and a girl, Susanne\u2014a third child, Winifred, died almost immediately after being born.\nLandis built a corporate law practice in Chicago; with the practice doing well, he deeply involved himself in Republican Party politics. He built a close association with his friend Lowden and served as his campaign manager for governor of Illinois in 1904. Lowden was defeated, but would later serve two terms in the office and be a major contender for the 1920 Republican presidential nomination. A seat on the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois was vacant; President Theodore Roosevelt offered it to Lowden, who declined it and recommended Landis. Other recommendations from Illinois politicians followed, and Roosevelt nominated Landis for the seat. According to Spink, President Roosevelt wanted \"a tough judge and a man sympathetic with his viewpoint in that important court\"; Lowden and Landis were, like Roosevelt, on the progressive left of the Republican Party. On March 18, 1905, Roosevelt transmitted the nomination to the Senate, which confirmed Landis the same afternoon, without any committee hearing; he received his commission the same day.\nJudge (1905\u20131922).\nLandis's courtroom, room 627 in the Chicago Federal Building, was ornate and featured two murals: one of King John conceding Magna Carta, the other of Moses about to smash the tablets of the Ten Commandments. The mahogany and marble chamber was, according to Landis biographer David Pietrusza, \"just the spot for Landis's sense of the theatrical. In it he would hold court for nearly the next decade and a half.\" According to Spink, \"It wasn't long before Chicago writers discovered they had a 'character' on the bench.\" A. L. Sloan of the Chicago \"Herald-American\", a friend of Landis, recalled:\nThe Judge was always headline news. He was a great showman, theatrical in appearance, with his sharp jaw and shock of white hair, and people always crowded into his courtroom, knowing there would be something going on. There were few dull moments.\nIf Judge Landis was suspicious of an attorney's line of questioning, he would wrinkle his nose, and once told a witness, \"Now let's stop fooling around and tell exactly what did happen, without reciting your life's history.\" When an elderly defendant told him that he would not be able to live to complete a five-year sentence, Landis scowled at him and asked, \"Well, you can try, can't you?\" When a young man stood before him for sentencing after admitting to stealing jewels from a parcel, the defendant's wife stood near him, infant daughter in her arms, and Landis mused what to do about the situation. After a dramatic pause, Landis ordered the young man to take his wife and daughter and go home with them, expressing his unwillingness to have the girl be the daughter of a convict. According to sportswriter Ed Fitzgerald in \"SPORT\" magazine, \"[w]omen wept unashamed and the entire courtroom burst into spontaneous, prolonged applause.\"\nLandis had been a lawyer with a corporate practice; upon his elevation to the bench, corporate litigants expected him to favor them. According to a 1907 magazine article about Landis, \"Corporations smiled pleasantly at the thought of a corporation lawyer being on the bench. They smile no more.\" In an early case, Landis fined the Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing Company the maximum $4,000 for illegally importing workers, even though his wife's brother-in-law served on the corporate board. In another decision, Landis struck down a challenge to the Interstate Commerce Commission's (ICC) jurisdiction over rebating, a practice banned by the Elkins Act of 1903 in which railroads and favored customers agreed that the customers would pay less than the posted tariff, which by law was to be the same for all shippers. Landis's decision allowed the ICC to take action against railroads which gave rebates.\nStandard Oil (1905\u20131909).\nBy the first decade of the 20th century, a number of business entities had formed trusts, which dominated their industries. Trusts often sought to purchase or otherwise neutralize their competitors, allowing the conglomerates to raise prices to high levels. In 1890, Congress had passed the Sherman Anti-Trust Act, but it was not until the Theodore Roosevelt administration (1901\u20131909) that serious efforts were made to break up or control the trusts. The dominant force in the oil industry was Standard Oil, controlled by John D. Rockefeller. Modern-day ExxonMobil, Atlantic Richfield, Chevron, Sohio, Amoco and Continental Oil all trace their ancestry to various parts of Standard Oil.\nIn March 1906, Commissioner of Corporations James Rudolph Garfield submitted a report to President Roosevelt, alleging large-scale rebating in Standard Oil shipments. Federal prosecutors in several states and territories sought indictments against components of the Standard Oil Trust. On June 28, 1906, Standard Oil of Indiana was indicted on 6,428\u00a0counts of violation of the Elkins Act for accepting rebates on shipments on the Chicago &amp; Alton Railroad. The case was assigned to Landis.\nTrial on the 1,903\u00a0counts that survived pretrial motions began on March 4, 1907. The fact that rebates had been given was not contested; what was at issue was whether Standard Oil knew the railroad's posted rates, and if it had a duty to enquire if it did not. Landis charged the jury that it \"was the duty of the defendant diligently in good faith to get from the Chicago &amp; Alton\u00a0... the lawful rate\". The jury found Standard Oil guilty on all 1,903\u00a0counts.\nThe maximum fine that Landis could impose was $29,240,000. To aid the judge in determining the sentence, Landis issued a subpoena for Rockefeller to testify as to Standard Oil's assets. The tycoon had often evaded subpoenas, not having testified in court since 1888. Deputy United States Marshals visited Rockefeller's several homes, as well as the estates of his friends, in the hope of finding him. After several days, Rockefeller was found at his lawyer's estate in northwestern Massachusetts and was served with the subpoena. The tycoon duly came to Landis's Chicago courtroom, making his way through a mob anxious to see the proceedings. Rockefeller's actual testimony, proffered after the judge made him wait through several cases and witnesses, proved to be anticlimactic, as he professed almost no knowledge of Standard Oil's corporate structure or assets.\nOn August 3, 1907, Landis pronounced sentence. He fined Standard Oil the maximum penalty, $29,240,000, the largest fine imposed on a corporation to that date. The corporation quickly appealed; in the meantime, Landis was lionized as a hero. According to Pietrusza, \"much of the nation could hardly believe a federal judge had finally cracked down on a trust\u2014and cracked down \"hard\"\u00a0\". President Roosevelt, when he heard the sentence, reportedly stated, \"That's bully.\" Rockefeller was playing golf in Cleveland when he was brought a telegram containing the news. Rockefeller calmly informed his golfing partners of the amount, and proceeded to shoot a personal record score, later stating, \"Judge Landis will be dead a long time before this fine is paid.\" He proved correct; the verdict and sentence were reversed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit on July 22, 1908. In January 1909, the Supreme Court refused to hear the case, and in a new trial before another judge (Landis recused himself), Standard Oil was acquitted.\nFederal League and Baby Iraene cases (1909\u20131917).\nA lifelong baseball fan, Landis often slipped away from the courthouse for a White Sox or Cubs game. In 1914, the two existing major leagues were challenged by a new league, the Federal League. In 1915, the upstart league brought suit against the existing leagues and owners under the Sherman Act and the case was assigned to Landis. Baseball owners feared that the reserve clause, which forced players to sign new contracts only with their former team, and the 10-day clause, which allowed teams (but not players) to terminate player contracts on ten days notice, would be struck down by Landis.\nLandis held hearings in late January 1915, and newspapers expected a quick decision, certainly before spring training began in March. During the hearings, Landis admonished the parties, \"Both sides must understand that any blows at the thing called baseball would be regarded by this court as a blow to a national institution\". When the National League's chief counsel, future senator George Wharton Pepper referred to the activities of baseball players on the field as \"labor\", Landis interrupted him: \"As a result of 30\u00a0years of observation, I am shocked because you call playing baseball 'labor.'\u00a0\" Landis reserved judgment, and the parties waited for his ruling. Spring training passed, as did the entire regular season and the World Series. In December 1915, still with no word from Landis, the parties reached a settlement, and the Federal League disbanded. Landis made no public statement as to the reasons for his failure to rule, though he told close friends that he had been certain the parties would reach a settlement sooner or later. Most observers thought that Landis waited because he did not want to rule against the two established leagues and their contracts.\nIn 1916, Landis presided over the \"Ryan Baby\" or \"Baby Iraene\" case. The recent widow of a prominent Chicago banker, Anna Dollie Ledgerwood Matters, had brought a baby girl home from a visit to Canada and claimed that the child was her late husband's posthumous heir. Matters had left an estate of $250,000. However, a shop girl from Ontario, Margaret Ryan, claimed the baby was hers and brought a writ of \"habeas corpus\" in Landis's court. Ryan stated that she had given birth to the girl in an Ottawa hospital but had been told her baby had died. In the era before blood and DNA testing, Landis relied on witness testimony and awarded the child to Ryan. The case brought comparisons between Landis and King Solomon, who had judged a similar case. Landis was reversed by the Supreme Court, which held he had no jurisdiction in the matter. A Canadian court later awarded the child to Ryan.\nAlthough Landis was an autocrat in the courtroom, he was less so at home. In a 1916 interview, he stated,\nEvery member of this family does exactly what he or she wants to do. Each one is his or her supreme court. Everything for the common good of the family is decided according to the wishes of the whole family. Each one knows what is right and each one can do whatever he thinks is best. It is purely democratic.\nWartime cases (1917\u20131919).\nIn early 1917, Landis considered leaving the bench and returning to private practice\u2014though he greatly enjoyed being a judge, the salary of $7,500 was considerably lower than what he could make as an attorney. The entry of the United States into World War I in April ended Landis's determination to resign; a firm supporter of the war effort, he felt he could best serve the country by remaining on the bench. Despite this decision and his age, fifty, Landis wrote to Secretary of War Newton D. Baker, asking him to take him into the service and send him to France, where the war was raging. Baker urged Landis to make speeches in support of the war instead, which he did. The judge's son, Reed, had already served briefly in the Illinois National Guard; during the war he became a pilot, and eventually an ace.\nLandis's disdain for draft dodgers and other opponents of the war was evident in July 1917, when he presided over the trials of some 120 men, mostly foreign-born Socialists, who had resisted the draft and rioted in Rockford, Illinois. According to Pietrusza, Landis \"was frequently brutal in his remarks\" to the defendants, interrogating them on their beliefs and actions. Landis tried the case in Rockford, and found all guilty, sentencing all but three to a year and a day in jail, the maximum sentence. The prisoners were ordered to register for the draft after serving their sentences\u2014except 37, whom he ordered deported.\nOn September 5, 1917, federal officers raided the national headquarters, in Chicago, of the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW, sometimes \"Wobblies\"), as well as 48 of the union's halls across the nation. The union had opposed the war and urged members and others to refuse conscription into the armed forces. On September 28, 166\u00a0IWW leaders, including union head Big Bill Haywood were indicted in the Northern District of Illinois; their cases were assigned to Landis. Some 40\u00a0of the indicted men could not be found; a few others had charges dismissed against them. Ultimately, Landis presided over a trial against 113\u00a0defendants, the largest federal criminal trial to that point.\nThe trial began on April 1, 1918. Landis quickly dismissed charges against a dozen defendants. Jury selection occupied a month. Communist journalist John Reed attended the trial, and wrote of his impressions of Landis:\nSmall on the huge bench sits a wasted man with untidy white hair, an emaciated face in which two burning eyes are set like jewels, parchment-like skin split by a crack for a mouth; the face of Andrew Jackson three years dead\u00a0... Upon this man has devolved the historic role of trying the Social Revolution. He is doing it like a gentleman. In many ways a most unusual trial. When the judge enters the court-room after recess, no one rises\u2014he himself has abolished the pompous formality. He sits without robes, in an ordinary business suit, and often leaves the bench to come down and perch on the step of the jury box. By his personal orders, spittoons are placed by the prisoners' seats\u00a0... and as for the prisoners themselves, they are permitted to take off their coats, move around, read newspapers. It takes some human understanding for a Judge to fly in the face of judicial ritual as much as that.\nHaywood biographer Melvyn Dubofsky wrote that Landis \"exercised judicial objectivity and restraint for five long months\". Baseball historian Harold Seymour stated that \"[o]n the whole, Landis conducted the trial with restraint, despite his reputation as a foe of all radical groups.\" Landis dismissed charges against an elderly defendant who was in obvious pain as he testified, and allowed the release of a number of prisoners on bail or on their own recognizances.\nOn August 17, 1918, following the closing argument for the prosecution (the defendants waived argument), Landis instructed the jury. The lead defense counsel objected to the wording of the jury charge several times, but Haywood believed it to have been fair. After 65\u00a0minutes, the jury returned with guilty verdicts for all of the remaining accused, much to their shock; they had believed that Landis's charge pointed towards their acquittal. When the defendants returned to court on August 29, Landis listened with patience to the defendants' final pleas. For the sentencing, according to Richard Cahan in his history of Chicago's district court, \"mild-mannered Landis returned a changed man\". Although two defendants received only ten days in jail, all others received at least a year and a day, and Haywood and fourteen others received twenty years. A number of defendants, including Haywood, obtained bail during the appeal; even before Haywood's appeals were exhausted, he jumped bail and took ship for the Soviet Union. The labor leader hung a portrait of Landis in his Moscow apartment, and when Haywood died in 1928, he was interred near John Reed (who had died of illness in Moscow after the Bolshevik Revolution) in the Kremlin Wall\u2014they remain the only Americans so honored. President Calvin Coolidge commuted the sentences of the remaining incarcerated defendants in 1923, much to the disgust of Landis, who issued an angry statement. After leaving his judgeship, Landis referred to the defendants in the Haywood case as \"scum\", \"filth\", and \"slimy rats\".\nLandis hoped that the Kaiser, Wilhelm II would be captured and tried in his court; he wanted to indict the Kaiser for the murder of a Chicagoan who lost his life on the in 1915. The State Department notified Landis that extradition treaties did not permit the rendition of the Kaiser, who fled into exile in the Netherlands as the war concluded. Nevertheless, in a speech, Landis demanded that Kaiser Wilhelm, his six sons, and 5,000\u00a0German military leaders \"be lined up against a wall and shot down in justice to the world and to Germany\".\nEven with the armistice in November 1918, the war-related trials continued. The Socialist Party of America, like the IWW, had opposed the war, and had also been raided by federal authorities. Seven Socialist Party leaders, including Victor Berger, who was elected to Congress in November 1918, were indicted for alleged anti-war activities. The defendants were charged under the Espionage Act of 1917, which made it illegal \"to utter, print, write, or publish any disloyal, profane, scurrilous or abusive language\" about the armed forces, the flag, the Constitution, or democracy. The defendants, who were mostly of German birth or descent, moved for a change of venue away from Landis's courtroom, alleging that Landis had stated on November 1, 1918, that \"[i]f anybody has said anything about the Germans that is worse than I have said, I would like to hear it so I could use it myself.\" Landis, however, examined the transcript of the trial in which the statement was supposedly made, failed to find it, declared the affidavit in support of the motion \"perjurious\", and denied the motion. While the jury was being selected, Berger was indicted on additional espionage charges for supposedly violating the law during an earlier, unsuccessful political campaign. At the conclusion of the case, Landis took an hour to dramatically charge the jury, emphasizing the secretive nature of conspiracies and pointing at the jury box as he noted, \"the country was then at war\". At one point, Landis leapt out of his seat, twirled his chair around, then sat on its arm. Later in his charge, he lay prone upon the bench. The jury took less than a day to convict Congressman-elect Berger and his four remaining codefendants. Landis sentenced each defendant to twenty years in federal prison. Landis denied the defendants bail pending appeal, but they quickly obtained it from an appellate court judge. The Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals declined to rule on the case itself, sending it on to the Supreme Court, which on January 31, 1921, overturned the convictions and sentences by a 6\u20133 vote, holding that Landis should have stepped aside once he was satisfied that the affidavit was legally sufficient, leaving it for another judge to decide whether it was actually true. Landis refused to comment on the Supreme Court's decision, which ordered a new trial. In 1922, the charges against the defendants were dropped by the government.\nBuilding trades award, controversy, and resignation (1920\u20131922).\nThe postwar period saw considerable deflation; the shortage of labor and materials during the war had led to much higher wages and prices, and in the postwar economic readjustment, wages were cut heavily. In Chicago, employers in the building trades attempted a 20%\u00a0wage cut; when this was rejected by the unions, a lockout followed. Both sides agreed to submit the matter to a neutral arbitrator, and settled on Landis, who agreed to take the case in June 1921. By this time, Landis was Commissioner of Baseball, and still a federal judge. In September, Landis issued his report, cutting wages by an average of 12.5%. To improve productivity, he also struck restrictions on machinery which saved labor, established a standardized overtime rate, and resolved jurisdictional conflicts between unions. The labor organizations were not completely satisfied, but Landis's reforms were adopted in many places across the country and were credited with reviving the building industry.\nCriticism of Landis having both the judicial and baseball positions began almost as soon as his baseball appointment was announced in November 1920. On February 2, 1921, lame duck Congressman Benjamin F. Welty (Democrat-Ohio) offered a resolution calling for Landis's impeachment. On February 11, Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer opined that there was no legal impediment to Landis holding both jobs. On February 14, the House Judiciary Committee voted 24\u20131 to investigate Landis. Reed Landis later stated, \"[n]one of the other congressmen wanted Father impeached but they did want him to come down and defend himself because they knew what a show it would be.\"\nAlthough Welty's departure from office on March 4, 1921, began a lull in criticism of Landis, in April, the judge made a controversial decision in the case of Francis J. Carey, a 19-year-old bank teller, who had pleaded guilty to embezzling $96,500. Carey, the sole support of his widowed mother and unmarried sisters, gained Landis's sympathy. He accused the bank of underpaying Carey, and sent the youth home with his mother. Two members of the Senate objected to Landis's actions, and the \"New York Post\" compared Carey with \"Les Mis\u00e9rables's\" Jean Valjean, noting \"[b]etween a loaf of bread [Valjean was incarcerated for stealing one] and $96,500 there is a difference.\" A bill barring outside employment by federal judges had been introduced by Landis's foes, but had expired with the end of the congressional session in March; his opponents tried again in July, and the bill failed in the Senate on a tie vote. On September 1, 1921, the American Bar Association, a trade group of lawyers, passed a resolution of censure against Landis.\nBy the end of 1921, the controversy was dying down, and Landis felt that he could resign without looking pressured. On February 18, 1922, he announced his resignation as judge effective March 1, stating, \"There are not enough hours in the day for all these activities\". In his final case, he fined two theatre owners for evading the federal amusement tax. One owner had refused to make restitution before sentencing; he was fined $5,000. The owner who had tried to make his shortfall good was fined one cent.\nBaseball commissioner (1920\u20131944).\nAppointment.\nBlack Sox scandal.\nBy 1919, the influence of gamblers on baseball had been a problem for several years. Historian Paul Gardner wrote,\nBaseball had for some time been living uneasily in the knowledge that bribes were being offered by gamblers, and that some players were accepting them. The players knew it was going on, and the owners knew it was going on. But more important, the players knew that the owners knew \u2014 and they knew the owners were doing nothing about it for fear of a scandal that might damage organized baseball. Under such conditions it quite obviously did not pay to be honest.\nThe 1919 World Series between the Chicago White Sox and Cincinnati Reds was much anticipated as the nation attempted to return to normalcy in the postwar period. Baseball's popularity had surged during the 1919 season, and several MLB attendance records were set. The powerful White Sox, with their superstar batter \"Shoeless Joe\" Jackson and star pitchers Eddie Cicotte and Claude \"Lefty\" Williams, were believed likely to defeat the less-well-regarded Reds. To the surprise of many, the Reds beat the White Sox five games to three (from 1919 to 1921, the World Series was a best-of-nine affair).\nRumors that the series was fixed began to circulate after gambling odds against the Reds winning dropped sharply before the series began and gained more credibility after the White Sox lost four of the first five games. Cincinnati lost the next two games, and speculation began that the Reds were losing on purpose to extend the series and increase gate revenues. However, Cincinnati won Game Eight 10\u20135 to end the series, as Williams lost his third game (Cicotte lost the other two). After the series, according to Gene Carney, who wrote a book about the scandal, \"there was more than the usual complaining from those who had bet big on the Sox and lost\".\nThe issue of the 1919 Series came to the public eye again in September 1920 after allegations that a game between the Chicago Cubs and Philadelphia Phillies on August 31 had been fixed, and a grand jury was empaneled in state court in Chicago to investigate baseball gambling. Additional news came from Philadelphia, where gambler Billy Maharg stated that he had worked with former boxer Abe Attell and New York gambler Arnold Rothstein to get the White Sox to throw the 1919 Series. Cicotte and Jackson were called before the grand jury where they gave statements incriminating themselves and six teammates: Williams, first baseman Chick Gandil, shortstop Swede Risberg, third baseman Buck Weaver, center fielder Happy Felsch and reserve infielder Fred McMullin. Williams and Felsch were also called before the grand jury and incriminated themselves and their teammates. Through late September, the 1920 American League season had been one of the most exciting on record, with the White Sox, Cleveland Indians and New York Yankees dueling for the league lead. By September 28, the Yankees were close to elimination, but the White Sox and Indians were within percentage points of each other. On that day, however, the eight players, seven of whom were still on the White Sox, were indicted. They were immediately suspended by White Sox owner Charles Comiskey. The Indians were able to pull ahead and win the pennant, taking the American League championship by two games over Chicago.\nSearch for a commissioner.\nBaseball had been governed by a three-man National Commission, consisting of American League president Ban Johnson, National League president John Heydler and Cincinnati Reds owner Garry Herrmann. In January 1920, Herrmann left office at the request of other club owners, leaving the Commission effectively deadlocked between Johnson and Heydler. A number of club owners, disliking one or both league presidents, preferred a single commissioner to rule over the game, but were willing to see the National Commission continue if Herrmann was replaced by someone who would provide strong leadership. Landis's name was mentioned in the press for this role, and the influential baseball newspaper \"The Sporting News\" sought his appointment.\nAnother proposal, known as the \"Lasker Plan\" after Albert Lasker, a shareholder in the Chicago Cubs who had proposed it, was for a three-man commission to govern the game, drawn from outside baseball. On September 30, 1920, with the Black Sox scandal exposed, National League President Heydler began to advocate for the Lasker Plan, and by the following day, four major league teams had supported him. Among the names discussed in the press for membership on the new commission were Landis, former secretary of the treasury William Gibbs McAdoo, former president William Howard Taft, and General John J. Pershing.\nThe start of the 1920 World Series on October 5 distracted the public from baseball's woes for a time, but discussions continued behind the scenes. By mid-October, 11 of the 16 team owners (all eight from the National League and the owners of the American League Yankees, White Sox and Boston Red Sox) were demanding the end of the National Commission and the appointment of a three-man commission whose members would have no financial interest in baseball. Heydler stated his views on baseball's requirements:\nWe want a man as chairman who will rule with an iron hand\u00a0... Baseball has lacked a hand like that for years. It needs it now worse than ever. Therefore, it is our object to appoint a big man to lead the new commission.\nOn November 8, the owners of the eight National League and three American League teams which supported the Lasker Plan met and unanimously selected Landis as head of the proposed commission. The American League clubs that supported the plan threatened to move to the National League, away from Johnson, who opposed it. Johnson had hoped that the minor leagues would support his position; when they did not, he and the \"Loyal Five\" teams agreed to the Lasker Plan. In the discussions among the owners that followed, they decided that Landis would be the only commissioner\u2013no associate members would be elected. On November 12, the team owners came to Landis's courtroom to approach him. Landis was trying a bribery case; when he heard noise in the back of the courtroom from the owners, he gaveled them to silence. He made them wait 45\u00a0minutes while he completed his docket, then met with them in his chambers.\nThe judge heard out the owners; after expressing initial reluctance, he took the job for seven years at a salary of $50,000, on condition he could remain on the federal bench. During Landis's time serving as both judge and commissioner, he allowed a $7,500 reduction in his commissioner salary, to reflect his pay as judge. The appointment of Landis was met with acclaim in the press. A tentative agreement was signed by the parties a month later\u2014an agreement which itemized Landis's powers over baseball, and which was drafted by the judge. The owners were still reeling from the perception that baseball was crooked, and accepted the agreement virtually without dissent. Under the terms of the contract, Landis could not be dismissed by the team owners, have his pay reduced, or even be criticized by them in public. He also had nearly unlimited authority over every person employed in the major or minor leagues, from owners to batboys, including the ability to ban people from the leagues for life. The owners waived any recourse to the courts to contest Landis's will. Humorist Will Rogers stated, \"[D]on't kid yourself that that old judicial bird isn't going to make those baseball birds walk the chalkline\". Player and manager Leo Durocher later stated, \"The legend has been spread that the owners hired the Judge off the federal bench. Don't you believe it. They got him right out of Dickens.\"\nEstablishing control.\nBanning the Black Sox.\nOn January 30, 1921, Landis, speaking at an Illinois church, warned:\nNow that I am in baseball, just watch the game I play. If I catch any crook in baseball, the rest of his life is going to be a pretty hot one. I'll go to any means and to anything possible to see that he gets a real penalty for his offense.\nThe criminal case against the Black Sox defendants suffered unexpected setbacks, with evidence vanishing, including some of the incriminating statements made to the grand jury. The prosecution was forced to dismiss the original indictments, and bring new charges against seven of the ballplayers (McMullin was not charged again). Frustrated by the delays, Landis placed all eight on an \"ineligible list\", banning them from major and minor league baseball. Comiskey supported Landis by giving the seven who remained under contract to the White Sox their unconditional release. Public sentiment was heavily against the ballplayers, and when Jackson, Williams, Felsch, and Weaver played in a semi-pro game, \"The Sporting News\" mocked the 3,000 attendees, \"Just Like Nuts Go to See a Murderer\".\nThe criminal trial of the Black Sox indictees began in early July 1921. Despite what Robert C. Cottrell, in his book on the scandal, terms \"the mysterious loss of evidence\", the prosecution was determined to pursue the case, demanding five-year prison terms for the ballplayers for defrauding the public by throwing the series. On August 2, 1921, the jury returned not guilty verdicts against all defendants, leading to happy pandemonium in the courtroom, joined by the courtroom bailiffs, with even the trial judge, Hugo Friend, looking visibly pleased. The players and jury retired to an Italian restaurant and partied well into the night.\nThe jubilation proved short-lived. On August 3, Landis issued a statement:\nRegardless of the verdict of juries, no player that throws a ball game; no player that undertakes or promises to throw a ball game; no player that sits in a conference with a bunch of crooked players and gamblers where the ways and means of throwing ball games are planned and discussed and does not promptly tell his club about it, will ever play professional baseball. Of course, I don't know that any of these men will apply for reinstatement, but if they do, the above are at least a few of the rules that will be enforced. Just keep in mind that, regardless of the verdict of juries, baseball is competent to protect itself against crooks, both inside and outside the game.\nAccording to ESPN columnist Rob Neyer, \"with that single decision, Landis might have done more for the sport than anyone else, ever. Certainly, Landis never did anything more important.\" According to Carney, \"The public amputation of the eight Sox was seen as the only acceptable cure.\" Over the years of Landis's commissionership, a number of the players applied for reinstatement to the game, notably Jackson and Weaver. Jackson, raised in rural South Carolina and with limited education, was said to have been drawn unwillingly into the conspiracy, while Weaver, though admitting his presence at the meetings, stated that he took no money. Both men stated that their play on the field, and their batting percentages during the series (.375 for Jackson, .324 for Weaver) indicated that they did not help to throw the series. None was reinstated during their lifetimes, with Landis telling a group of Weaver supporters that his presence at the meetings with the gamblers was sufficient to bar him. \nEfforts continued after the death of Landis in 1944 to reinstate Jackson (which would make him eligible for election to the National Baseball Hall of Fame) and Weaver (deemed by some the least culpable of the eight), even after the deaths of both former players. In the 1990s, a petition drive to reinstate Jackson drew 60,000\u00a0signatures. He was treated sympathetically in movies such as \"Eight Men Out\" and \"Field of Dreams\", and Hall of Famers Ted Williams and Bob Feller expressed their support for Jackson's induction into the Hall. In 2025, Commissioner Rob Manfred announced that players would be removed from the ineligible list upon their deaths and lifted all extant bans on deceased players, including the Black Sox.\nCracking down on gambling.\nLandis felt that the Black Sox scandal had been initiated by people involved in horse racing, and stated that \"by God, as long as I have anything to do with this game, they'll never get another hold on it.\" In 1921, his first season as commissioner, New York Giants owner Charles Stoneham and manager John McGraw purchased Oriental Park Racetrack in Havana, Cuba. Landis gave Stoneham and McGraw an ultimatum\u2014they could not be involved in both baseball and horse racing. They quickly put the track back on the market.\nEven before the Black Sox scandal had been resolved, Landis acted to clean up other gambling cases. Eugene Paulette, a first baseman for the Philadelphia Phillies, had been with the St. Louis Cardinals in 1919, and had met with gamblers. It is uncertain if any games were fixed, but Paulette had written a letter naming two other Cardinals who might be open to throwing games. The letter had fallen into the hands of Phillies president William F. Baker, who had taken no action until Landis's appointment, then turned the letter over to him. Paulette met with Landis once, denying any wrongdoing, then refused further meetings. Landis placed him on the ineligible list in March 1921. In November 1921, Landis banned former St. Louis Browns player Joe Gedeon, who had been released by the Browns after admitting to sitting in on meetings with gamblers who were trying to raise the money to bribe the Black Sox. When a minor league official asked if he was eligible, Landis settled the matter by placing Gedeon on the ineligible list.\nTwo other player gambling affairs marked Landis's early years as commissioner. In 1922, Giants pitcher Phil Douglas, embittered at McGraw for disciplining him for heavy drinking, wrote a letter to Cardinals outfielder Leslie Mann, suggesting that he would take a bribe to ensure the Giants did not win the pennant. Although Mann had been a friend, the outfielder neither smoked nor drank and had long been associated with the YMCA movement; according to baseball historian Lee Allen, Douglas might as well have sent the letter to Landis himself. Mann immediately turned over the letter to his manager, Branch Rickey, who ordered Mann to contact Landis at once. The Giants placed Douglas on the ineligible list, an action backed by Landis after meeting with the pitcher. On September 27, 1924, Giants outfielder Jimmy O'Connell offered Phillies shortstop Heinie Sand $500 if Sand didn't \"bear down too hard against us today\". Sand was initially inclined to let the matter pass, but recalling the fate of Weaver and other Black Sox players, told Art Fletcher, his manager. Fletcher met with Heydler, who contacted Landis. O'Connell did not deny the bribe attempt, and was placed on the ineligible list.\nIn total, Landis banned eighteen players from the game. Landis biographer Pietrusza details the effect of Landis's stand against gambling:\nBefore 1920 if one player approached another player to throw a contest, there was a very good chance he would not be informed upon. Now, there was an excellent chance he would be turned in. No honest player wanted to meet the same fate as Buck Weaver\u00a0... Without the forbidding example of Buck Weaver to haunt them, it is unlikely Mann and Sand would have snitched on their fellow players. After Landis' unforgiving treatment of the popular and basically honest Weaver they dared not to. And once prospectively crooked players knew that honest players would no longer shield them, \"the scandals stopped\".\nRuth-Meusel barnstorming incident.\nAt the time of Landis's appointment as commissioner, it was common for professional baseball players to supplement their pay by participating in postseason \"barnstorming\" tours, playing on teams which would visit smaller cities and towns to play games for which admission would be charged. Since 1911, however, players on the two World Series teams had been barred from barnstorming. The rule had been leniently enforced\u2014in 1916, several members of the champion Red Sox, including pitcher George Herman \"Babe\" Ruth, had barnstormed and had been fined a token $100 each by the National Commission.\nRuth, who after the 1919 season had been sold to the Yankees, and who by then had mostly abandoned his pitching role for the outfield, was the focus of considerable fan interest as he broke batting records in 1920 and 1921, some by huge margins. Ruth's major league record 29\u00a0home runs with the Red Sox in 1919 fell to his own efforts in 1920, when he hit 54. He then proceeded to hit 59 in 1921, leading the Yankees to their first pennant. Eight major league teams failed to hit as many home runs in 1921 as Ruth hit by himself. The Yankees lost the 1921 World Series to the Giants (Ruth was injured and missed several games) and after the series, the outfielder proposed to capitalize on fan interest by leading a team of barnstormers, including Yankees teammate Bob Meusel, in violation of the rule. According to Cottrell,\n[T]he two men clashed who helped the national pastime overcome the Black Sox scandal, one through his seemingly iron will, the other thanks to his magical bat. Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis and Babe Ruth battled over the right of a ballplayer from a pennant-winning squad to barnstorm in the off-season. Also involved was the commissioner's continued determination to display, as he had through his banishment of the Black Sox, that he had established the boundaries for organized baseball. These boundaries, Landis intended to demonstrate, applied even to the sport's most popular and greatest star. Significant too, only Babe Ruth now contended with Commissioner Landis for the title of baseball's most important figure.\nRuth had asked Yankees general manager Ed Barrow for permission to barnstorm. Barrow had no objection but warned Ruth he must obtain Landis's consent. Landis biographer Spink, who was at the time the editor of \"The Sporting News\", stated, \"I can say that Ruth knew exactly what he was doing when he defied Landis in October, 1921. He was willing to back his own popularity and well-known drawing powers against the Judge.\" Ruth, to the commissioner's irritation, did not contact Landis until October 15, one day before the first exhibition. When the two spoke by telephone, Landis ordered Ruth to attend a meeting with him; Ruth refused, stating that he had to leave for Buffalo for the first game. Landis angrily refused consent for Ruth to barnstorm, and after slamming down the receiver, is recorded as saying, \"Who the hell does that big ape think he is? That blankety-blank! If he goes on that trip it will be one of the sorriest things he has ever done.\" By one account, Yankees co-owner Colonel Tillinghast Huston attempted to dissuade Ruth as he departed, only to be told by the ballplayer, \"Aw, tell the old guy to jump in a lake.\"\nThe tour also featured fellow Yankees Meusel and Bill Piercy (who had been called up late in the season and was ineligible for the World Series) as well as Tom Sheehan, who had been sent to the minor leagues before the end of the season. Two other Yankees, Carl Mays and Wally Schang, had been scheduled to join the tour, but given Landis's position, according to Spink, \"wisely decided to pass it up\". Spink describes the tour as \"a fiasco.\" On Landis's orders, it was barred from all major and minor league ballparks. In addition, it was plagued by poor weather, and was called off in late October. In early December, Landis suspended Ruth, Piercy, and Meusel until May 20, 1922. Yankees management was relieved; they had feared Landis would suspend Ruth for the season or even longer. Both the Yankees and Ruth repeatedly asked Landis for the players' early reinstatement, which was refused, and when Landis visited the Yankees during spring training in New Orleans, he lectured Ruth for two hours on obeying authority. \"He sure can talk\", noted Ruth.\nWhen Ruth returned on May 20, he batted 0-for-4, and was booed by the crowd at the Polo Grounds. According to Pietrusza, \"Always a politician, there was one boss Landis did fear: public opinion. He had no guarantee at the start of the Ruth controversy that the public and press would back him as he assumed unprecedented powers over baseball. Now, he knew they would.\"\nPolicies as commissioner.\nMajor-minor league relations; development of the farm system.\nAt the start of Landis's commissionership, the minor league teams were for the most part autonomous of the major leagues; in fact the minor leagues independently chose to accept Landis's rule. To ensure players did not become mired in the minor leagues without a chance to earn their way out, major league teams were able to draft players who played two consecutive years with the same minor league team. Several minor leagues were not subject to the draft; Landis fought for the inclusion of these leagues, feeling that the non-draft leagues could prevent players from advancing as they became more skilled. By 1924, he had succeeded, as the International League, the final holdout, accepted the draft.\nBy the mid-1920s, major league clubs were beginning to develop \"farm systems\", that is, minor league teams owned or controlled by them, at which they could develop young prospects without the risk of the players being acquired by major league rivals. The pioneer in this development was Branch Rickey, who then ran the St. Louis Cardinals. As the 1921 National Agreement among the major and minor leagues which implemented Landis's hiring lifted a ban on major league teams owning minor league ones, Landis was limited in his avenues of attack on Rickey's schemes. Developing talent at little cost thanks to Rickey, the Cardinals dominated the National League, winning nine league titles in the years from 1926 to 1946.\nSoon after Landis's appointment, he surprised the major league owners by requiring that they disclose their minor league interests. Landis fought against the practice of \"covering up\", using transfers between two teams controlled by the same major league team to make players ineligible for the draft. His first formal act as commissioner was to declare infielder Phil Todt a free agent, dissolving his contract with the St. Louis Browns (at the time run by Rickey, who soon thereafter moved across town to run the Cardinals); in 1928, he ruled future Hall of Famer Chuck Klein a free agent as he held the Cardinals had tried to cover Klein up by having him play in a league where they owned two affiliates. The following year, he freed Detroit Tigers prospect and future Hall of Famer Rick Ferrell, who attracted a significant signing bonus from the Browns. In 1936, Landis found that teenage pitching prospect Bob Feller's signing by minor league club Fargo-Moorhead had been a charade; the young pitcher was for all intents and purposes property of the Cleveland Indians. However, Feller indicated that he wanted to play for Cleveland and Landis issued a ruling which required the Indians to pay damages to minor league clubs, but allowed them to retain Feller, who went on to a Hall of Fame career with the Indians.\nLandis's attempts to crack down on \"covering up\" provoked the only time he was ever sued by one of his owners. After the 1930 season, minor leaguer Fred Bennett, convinced he was being covered up by the Browns, petitioned Landis for his release. Landis ruled that the Browns could either keep Bennett on their roster for the entire 1931 season, trade him, or release him. Instead, Browns owner Phil Ball brought suit against Landis in his old court in Chicago. Federal judge Walter C. Lindley ruled for Landis, noting that the agreements and rules were intended to \"endow the Commissioner with all the attributes of a benevolent but absolute despot and all the disciplinary powers of the proverbial \"pater familias\"\". Ball intended to appeal, but after a meeting between team owners and Landis in which the commissioner reminded owners of their agreement not to sue, decided to drop the case.\nLandis had hoped that the large Cardinals farm system would become economically unfeasible; when it proved successful for the Cardinals, he had tolerated it for several years and was in a poor position to abolish it. In 1938, however, finding that the Cardinals effectively controlled multiple teams in the same league (a practice disliked by Landis), he freed 70\u00a0players from their farm system. As few of the players were likely prospects for the major leagues, Landis's actions generated headlines, but had little effect on the Cardinals organization, and the development of the modern farm system, whereby each major league club has several minor league teams which it uses to develop talent, proceeded apace. Rob Neyer describes Landis's effort as \"a noble effort in a good cause, but it was also doomed to fail.\"\nBaseball color line.\nOne of the most controversial aspects of Landis's commissionership is the question of race. From 1884, black ballplayers were informally banned from organized baseball. No black ballplayer played in organized baseball during Landis's commissionership; Rickey (then running the Brooklyn Dodgers) broke the color line by signing Jackie Robinson to play for the minor league Montreal Royals in 1946, after Landis's death. Robinson became the first African-American in the major leagues since the 19th century, playing with the Dodgers beginning in 1947.\nAccording to contemporary newspaper columns, at the time of his appointment as commissioner, Landis was considered a liberal on race questions; two Chicago African-American newspapers defended him against the 1921 efforts to impeach him from his judgeship. However, a number of baseball authors have ascribed racism to Landis, who they say actively perpetuated baseball's color line. James Bankes, in \"The Pittsburgh Crawfords\", tracing the history of that Negro league team, states that Landis, whom the author suggests was a Southerner (Landis was born in Ohio and raised in Indiana), made \"little effort to disguise his racial prejudice during 25\u00a0years in office\" and \"remained a steadfast foe of integration\". Negro league historian John Holway incorrectly termed Landis \"the hard-bitten Carolinian [\"sic\"] Kennesaw [\"sic\"] Mountain Landis\". In a 2000 article in \"Smithsonian\" magazine, writer Bruce Watson states that Landis \"upheld baseball's unwritten ban on black players and did nothing to push owners toward integration\". A number of authors say that Landis banned major league play against black teams for fear the white teams would lose, though they ascribe various dates for this action, and the Dodgers are known to have played black teams in and around their Havana spring training base as late as 1942.\nLandis's documented actions on race are inconsistent. In 1938, Yankee Jake Powell was interviewed by a radio station, and when asked what he did in the offseason, made comments that were interpreted as meaning he worked as a police officer and beat up African Americans. Landis suspended Powell for ten days. In June 1942, the Negro league Kansas City Monarchs played several games against the white \"Dizzy Dean All-Stars\" at major league ballparks, attracting large crowds. After three games, all won by the Monarchs, Landis ordered a fourth canceled, on the ground that the games were outdrawing major league contests. On one occasion, Landis intervened in Negro league affairs, though he had no jurisdiction to do so. The Crawfords lost a game to a white semi-pro team when their star catcher Josh Gibson dropped a pop fly, and Gibson was accused of throwing the game at the behest of gamblers. Landis summoned the black catcher to his office, interviewed him, and announced that Gibson was cleared of wrongdoing.\nIn July 1942, Dodgers manager Leo Durocher charged that there was a \"grapevine understanding\" keeping blacks out of baseball. He was summoned to Landis's Chicago office, and after emerging from a meeting with the commissioner, alleged that he had been misquoted. Landis then addressed the press, and stated,\nNegroes are not barred from organized baseball by the commissioner and never have been in the 21\u00a0years I have served. There is no rule in organized baseball prohibiting their participation and never has been to my knowledge. If Durocher, or if any other manager, or all of them, want to sign one, or twenty-five Negro players, it is all right with me. That is the business of the managers and the club owners. The business of the commissioner is to interpret the rules of baseball, and to enforce them.\nIn his 1961 memoir, \"Veeck as in Wreck\", longtime baseball executive and owner Bill Veeck told of his plan, in 1942, to buy the Phillies and stock the team with Negro league stars. Veeck wrote that he told Landis, who reacted with shock, and soon moved to block the purchase. In his book, Veeck placed some of the blame on National League president Ford C. Frick, but later reserved blame exclusively for Landis, whom he accused of racism, stating in a subsequent interview, \"[a]fter all, a man who is named Kenesaw Mountain was not born and raised in the state of Maine.\" However, when Veeck was asked for proof of his allegations against Landis, he stated, \"I have no proof of that. I can only surmise.\" According to baseball historian David Jordan, \"Veeck, nothing if not a storyteller, seems to have added these embellishments, sticking in some guys in black hats, simply to juice up his tale.\"\nIn November 1943, Landis agreed after some persuasion that black sportswriter Sam Lacy should make a case for integration of organized baseball before the owners' annual meeting. Instead of Lacy attending the meeting, actor Paul Robeson did. Robeson, though a noted black actor and advocate of civil rights, was a controversial figure for his affiliation with the Communist Party. The owners heard Robeson out, but at Landis's suggestion, did not ask him any questions or begin any discussion with him.\nNeyer noted that \"Landis has been blamed for delaying the integration of the major leagues, but the truth is that the owners didn't want black players in the majors any more than Landis did. And it's not likely that, even if Landis hadn't died in 1944, he could have prevented Branch Rickey from bringing Jackie Robinson to the National League in 1947.\" The Baseball Writers' Association of America after Landis's death in 1944 renamed its Most Valuable Player Awards after Landis, but removed his name in 2020 with a vote of 89 percent of voting members in favor. The president of the association said Landis had \"notably failed to integrate the game during his tenure\".\nC. C. Johnson Spink, son of Landis biographer J. G. Taylor Spink and his successor as editor of \"The Sporting News\", noted in the introduction to the reissue of his father's biography of Landis,\nK.M. Landis was quite human and not infallible. If, for example, he did drag his feet at erasing baseball's color line, he was grievously wrong, but then so were many others of his post-Civil War generation.\nWorld Series and All-Star Game; other innovations.\nLandis took full jurisdiction over the World Series, as a contest between representatives of the two major leagues. Landis was blamed when the umpires called a game on account of darkness with the score tied during the 1922 World Series, even though there was still light. Landis decided that such decisions in future would be made by himself, moved forward the starting time of World Series games in future years, and announced that proceeds from the tied game would be donated to charity. In the 1932 World Series, Landis ordered that tickets for Game One at Yankee Stadium only be sold as part of strips, forcing fans to purchase tickets for all Yankee home games during that Series. Bad weather and the poor economy resulted in a half-filled stadium, and Landis allowed individual game sales for Game Two. During the 1933 World Series, he instituted a rule that only he could throw a player out of a World Series game, a rule which followed the ejection of Washington Senator Heinie Manush by umpire Charley Moran. The following year, with the visiting Cardinals ahead of the Detroit Tigers, 9\u20130 in Game Seven, he removed Cardinal Joe Medwick from the game for his own safety when Medwick, the left fielder, was pelted with fruit by Tiger fans after Medwick had been involved in a fight with one of the Tigers. Spink notes that Landis would most likely not have done so were the game within reach of the Tigers. In the 1938 World Series, umpire Moran was hit by a wild throw and suffered facial injuries. He was able to continue, but the incident caused Landis to order that World Series games and All-Star Games be played with six umpires.\nThe All-Star Game began in 1933; Landis had been a strong supporter of the proposal for such a contest, and after the first game remarked, \"That's a grand show, and it should be continued.\" He never missed an All-Star Game in his lifetime; his final public appearance was at the 1944 All-Star Game in Pittsburgh.\nIn 1928, National League ball clubs proposed an innovation whereby each team's pitcher, usually the weakest hitter in the lineup, would not bat, but be replaced for the purposes of batting and base-running by a tenth player. There were expectations that at the interleague meetings that year, the National League teams would vote for it, and the American League teams against it, leaving Landis to cast the deciding vote. The proposal was withdrawn, and Landis did not disclose how he would have voted on this early version of the \"designated hitter\" rule.\nLandis disliked the innovation of \"night baseball\", played in the evening with the aid of artificial light, and sought to discourage it. Despite this, he attended the first successful minor league night game, in Des Moines, Iowa, in 1930. When major league night baseball began in the late 1930s, Landis got the owners to restrict the number of such games. During World War II, many restrictions on night baseball were reduced, with the Washington Senators permitted to play all their home games (except those on Sundays and holidays) at night.\nWorld War II, death, and legacy.\nWith the entry of the United States into World War II in late 1941, Landis wrote to President Franklin D. Roosevelt, inquiring as to the wartime status of baseball. The President urged Landis to keep baseball open, foreseeing that even those fully engaged in war work would benefit from such inexpensive diversions. Many major leaguers enlisted or were drafted; even so Landis repeatedly stated, \"We'll play as long as we can put nine men on the field.\" Although many of the teams practiced at their normal spring training sites in 1942, beginning the following year they were required to train near their home cities or in the Northeast. Landis was as virulently opposed to the Axis powers as he had been towards the Kaiser, writing that peace would not be possible until \"about fifteen thousand little Hitler, Himmlers and Hirohitos\" were killed.\nLandis retained a firm hold on baseball despite his advancing years and, in 1943, banned Phillies owner William D. Cox from baseball for betting on his own team. In 1927, Landis's stance regarding gambling had been codified in the rules of baseball: \"Any player, umpire, or club or league official or employee who shall bet any sum whatsoever upon any baseball game in connection with which the bettor had a duty to perform shall be declared permanently ineligible.\" Cox was required to sell his stake in the Phillies.\nIn early October 1944, Landis checked into St. Luke's Hospital in Chicago, where his wife Winifred had been hospitalized, with a severe cold. While in the hospital, he had a heart attack, causing him to miss the World Series for the first time in his commissionership. He remained fully alert, and as usual signed the World Series share checks to players. His contract was due to expire in January 1946; on November 17, 1944, baseball's owners voted him another seven-year term. However, he died on November 25. His longtime assistant, Leslie O'Connor, wept as he read the announcement for the press. Landis is buried at Oak Woods Cemetery in Chicago.\nTwo weeks after his death, Landis was voted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame by a special committee vote. American League president Will Harridge said of Landis, \"He was a wonderful man. His great qualities and downright simplicity impressed themselves deeply on all who knew him.\" Pietrusza suggests that the legend on Landis's Hall of Fame plaque is his true legacy: \"His integrity and leadership established baseball in the esteem, respect, and affection of the American people.\" Pietrusza notes that Landis was hired by the baseball owners to clean up the sport, and \"no one could deny Kenesaw Mountain Landis had accomplished what he had been hired to do\". According to his first biographer, Spink:\n[Landis] may have been arbitrary, self-willed and even unfair, but he 'called 'em as he saw 'em' and he turned over to his successor and the future a game cleansed of the nasty spots which followed World War I. Kenesaw Mountain Landis put the fear of God into weak characters who might otherwise have been inclined to violate their trust. And for that, I, as a lifelong lover of baseball, am eternally grateful.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16814", "revid": "17167633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16814", "title": "Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedron", "text": "Any of 4 regular star polyhedra\nIn geometry, a Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedron is any of four regular star polyhedra.\nThey may be obtained by stellating the regular convex dodecahedron and icosahedron, and differ from these in having regular pentagrammic faces or vertex figures. They can all be seen as three-dimensional analogues of the pentagram in one way or another.\nCharacteristics.\nThe Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedra are the regular star polyhedra, obtained by extending both regular icosahedron and regular dodecahedron, an operation named stellation. This operation results in four different polyhedra:\nJohn Conway introduces operators for the Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedra known as \"greatenings\"\u2014(g), maintaining the type of faces, shifting and resizing them into parallel planes\u2014and \"stellations\"\u2014(s), changing pentagonal faces into pentagrams\u2014of the convex solids. In his naming convention, the small stellated dodecahedron is just the \"stellated dodecahedron\".\nBy the construction above, these figures have pentagrams (star pentagons) as faces or vertex figures. The dual polyhedron of a great dodecahedron is the small stellated dodecahedron, and the dual of a great icosahedron is the great stellated dodecahedron. The four share the symmetry as both regular icosahedron and regular dodecahedron, the icosahedral symmetry.\nEuler characteristic.\nA Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedron covers its circumscribed sphere more than once, with the centers of faces acting as winding points in the figures which have pentagrammic faces, and the vertices in the others. Because of this, they are not necessarily topologically equivalent to the sphere as Platonic solids are, and in particular, the Euler relation\nformula_1\ndoes not always hold. Schl\u00e4fli held that all polyhedra must have \u03c7 = 2, and he rejected the small stellated dodecahedron and great dodecahedron as proper polyhedra. This view was never widely held.\nA modified form of Euler's formula, using density (formula_2) of the vertex figures (formula_3) and faces (formula_4) was given by Arthur Cayley, and holds both for convex polyhedra (where the correction factors are all 1), and the Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedra:\nformula_5\nand by this calculation, the density of the great icosahedron and the great stellated dodecahedron are 7, whereas the great dodecahedron and the small stellated dodecahedron are 3.\nDuality and Petrie polygons.\nThe Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedra exist in dual pairs. Duals have the same Petrie polygon, or more precisely, Petrie polygons with the same two-dimensional projection.\nThe following images show the two dual compounds with the same edge radius. They also show that the Petrie polygons are skew.\nTwo relationships described in the article below are also easily seen in the images: That the violet edges are the same, and that the green faces lie in the same planes.\nHistory.\nMost, if not all, of the Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedra were known of in some form or other before Kepler. A small stellated dodecahedron appears in a marble tarsia (inlay panel) on the floor of St. Mark's Basilica, Venice, Italy. It dates from the 15th century and is sometimes attributed to Paolo Uccello.\nIn his \"Perspectiva corporum regularium\", a book of woodcuts published in 1568, Wenzel Jamnitzer depicts the great stellated dodecahedron and a great dodecahedron. It is clear from the general arrangement of the book that he regarded only the five Platonic solids as regular.\nThe small and great stellated dodecahedra, sometimes called the Kepler polyhedra, were first recognized as regular by Johannes Kepler around 1619. He obtained them by stellating the regular convex dodecahedron, for the first time treating it as a surface rather than a solid. He noticed that by extending the edges or faces of the convex dodecahedron until they met again, he could obtain star pentagons. Further, he recognized that these star pentagons are also regular. In this way, he constructed the two stellated dodecahedra. Each has the central convex region of each face \"hidden\" within the interior, with only the triangular arms visible. Kepler's final step was to recognize that these polyhedra fit the definition of regularity, even though they were not convex, as the traditional Platonic solids were.\nIn 1809, Louis Poinsot rediscovered Kepler's figures by assembling star pentagons around each vertex. He also assembled convex polygons around star vertices to discover two more regular stars, the great icosahedron and great dodecahedron. Some people call these two the Poinsot polyhedra. Poinsot did not know if he had discovered all the regular star polyhedra. Three years later, Augustin Cauchy proved the list complete by stellating the Platonic solids, and almost half a century after that, in 1858, Bertrand provided a more elegant proof by faceting them. The following year, Arthur Cayley gave the Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedra the names by which they are generally known today. A hundred years later, John Conway developed a systematic terminology for stellations in up to four dimensions. Within this scheme, the small stellated dodecahedron is just the \"stellated dodecahedron\".\nArtist M. C. Escher's interest in geometric forms often led to works based on or including regular solids; \"Gravitation\" is based on a small stellated dodecahedron. A dissection of the great dodecahedron was used for the 1980s puzzle Alexander's Star. Norwegian artist Vebj\u00f8rn Sand's sculpture \"The Kepler Star\" is displayed near Oslo Airport, Gardermoen. The star spans 14 meters and consists of both a regular icosahedron and a regular dodecahedron inside a great stellated dodecahedron.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16815", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16815", "title": "Krak\u00f3w", "text": "City in Poland\n, officially the Royal Capital City of Krak\u00f3w, is the second-largest and one of the oldest cities in Poland. Situated on the Vistula River in Lesser Poland Voivodeship, the city has a population of 804,237 (2023), with approximately 8 million additional people living within a radius. Krak\u00f3w was the official capital of Poland until 1596 and has traditionally been one of the leading centres of Polish academic, cultural, and artistic life. Cited as one of Europe's most beautiful cities, its Old Town was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1978, one of the world's first sites granted the status.\nThe city began as a hamlet on Wawel Hill and was a busy trading centre of Central Europe in 985. In 1038, it became the seat of Polish monarchs from the Piast dynasty, and subsequently served as the centre of administration under Jagiellonian kings and of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth until the late 16th century, when Sigismund III transferred his royal court to Warsaw. With the emergence of the Second Polish Republic in 1918, Krak\u00f3w reaffirmed its role as the nucleus of a national spirit. After the invasion of Poland, at the start of World War II, the newly defined became the seat of Nazi Germany's General Government. The Jewish population was forced into the Krak\u00f3w Ghetto, a walled zone from where they were sent to Nazi extermination camps such as the nearby Auschwitz, and Nazi concentration camps like P\u0142asz\u00f3w. However, the city was spared from destruction. In 1978, Karol Wojty\u0142a, archbishop of Krak\u00f3w, was elevated to the papacy as Pope John Paul, the first non-Italian pope in 455 years.\nThe Old Town and historic centre of Krak\u00f3w, along with the nearby Wieliczka Salt Mine, are Poland's first World Heritage Sites. Its extensive cultural and architectural legacy across the epochs of Gothic, Renaissance, and Baroque architecture includes Wawel Cathedral and Wawel Royal Castle on the banks of the Vistula, St. Mary's Basilica, Saints Peter and Paul Church, and the largest medieval market square in Europe, . Krak\u00f3w is home to Jagiellonian University, one of the oldest universities in the world and often considered Poland's most reputable academic institution of higher learning. The city also hosts a number of institutions of national significance, including the National Museum, Krak\u00f3w Opera, Juliusz S\u0142owacki Theatre, National Stary Theatre, and the Jagiellonian Library.\nKrak\u00f3w is classified as a global city with the ranking of \"high sufficiency\" by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network. The city is served by John Paul II International Airport, the country's second busiest airport and the most important international airport for the inhabitants of south-eastern Poland. In 2000, Krak\u00f3w was named European Capital of Culture. In 2013, Krak\u00f3w was officially approved as a UNESCO City of Literature. The city hosted World Youth Day in 2016, and the European Games in 2023.\nEtymology.\nThe name of Krak\u00f3w is traditionally derived from Krakus (Krak, Grakch), the legendary founder of Krak\u00f3w and a ruler of the early Medieval tribe of Vistulans. In Polish, is an archaic possessive form of \"Krak\" and essentially means \"Krak's (town)\". The true origin of the name is highly disputed among historians, with many theories in existence and no unanimous consensus. The first recorded mention of Prince Krakus (then written as \"Grakch\") dates back to 1190, although the town existed as early as the seventh century, when it was inhabited by the tribe of Vistulans. It is possible that the name of the city is derived from the word , meaning 'crow' or 'raven'.\nThe city's full official name is , which can be translated as \"Royal Capital City of Krak\u00f3w\". In English, a person born or living in Krak\u00f3w is a Cracovian ( or ). Until the 1990s the English version of the name was often written as Cracow, but now the most widespread modern English version is Krakow.\nForeign names include German ; Ukrainian (\"Krakiv\"); Czech and Slovak \"Krakov\"; Latin, Italian, Spanish and Romanian \"Cracovia\"; French ; archaic Romanian and Hungarian .\nHistory.\nOrigins and Middle Ages.\nKrak\u00f3w's early history begins with evidence of a Stone Age settlement on the present site of the Wawel Hill. A legend attributes Krak\u00f3w's founding to the mythical ruler Krakus, who built it above a cave occupied by a dragon, Smok Wawelski. The first written record of the city's name dates back to 965, when Krak\u00f3w was described as a notable commercial centre controlled first by Moravia (876\u2013879), but captured by a Bohemian duke Boleslaus I in 955. The first acclaimed ruler of Poland, Mieszko I, took Krak\u00f3w from the Bohemians and incorporated it into the holdings of the Piast dynasty towards the end of his reign.\nIn 1038, Krak\u00f3w became the seat of the Polish government. By the end of the tenth century, the city was a leading centre of trade. Brick buildings were constructed, including the Royal Wawel Castle with St. Felix and Adaukt Rotunda, Romanesque churches such as St. Andrew's Church, a cathedral, and a basilica. The city was sacked and burned during the Mongol invasion of 1241. It was rebuilt practically identically, based on new location act and incorporated in 1257 by the high duke Boles\u0142aw V the Chaste who following the example of Wroc\u0142aw, introduced city rights modelled on the Magdeburg law allowing for tax benefits and new trade privileges for the citizens. In 1259, the city was again ravaged by the Mongols. A third attack in 1287 was repelled thanks in part to the newly built fortifications. In 1315 a large alliance of Poland, Denmark, Norway and Sweden was formed in Krak\u00f3w.\nIn 1335, King Casimir III the Great () declared the two western suburbs to be a new city named after him, Kazimierz (). The defensive walls were erected around the central section of Kazimierz in 1362, and a plot was set aside for the Augustinian order next to Ska\u0142ka. The city rose to prominence in 1364, when Casimir founded the University of Krak\u00f3w, the second oldest university in central Europe after the Charles University in Prague.\nThe city continued to grow under the Jagiellonian dynasty. As the capital of the Kingdom of Poland and a member of the Hanseatic League, the city attracted many craftsmen from abroad, businesses, and guilds as science and the arts began to flourish. The royal chancery and the university ensured a first flourishing of Polish literary culture in the city.\nEarly modern period.\nThe 15th and 16th centuries were known as Poland's or Golden Age. Many works of Polish Renaissance art and architecture were created, including synagogues in Krak\u00f3w's Jewish quarter located in the north-eastern part of Kazimierz, such as the Old Synagogue. During the reign of Casimir IV, various artists came to work and live in Krak\u00f3w, and Johann Haller established a printing press in the city after Kasper Straube had printed the Calendarium Cracoviense, the first work printed in Poland, in 1473.\nIn 1520, the most famous church bell in Poland, named after Sigismund I of Poland, was cast by Hans Behem. At that time, Hans D\u00fcrer, a younger brother of artist and thinker Albrecht D\u00fcrer, was Sigismund's court painter. Hans von Kulmbach made altarpieces for several churches. In 1553, the Kazimierz district council gave the Jewish Qahal (council of a Jewish self-governing community) a licence for the right to build their own interior walls across the western section of the already existing defensive walls. The walls were expanded again in 1608 due to the growth of the community and influx of Jews from Bohemia. In 1572, King Sigismund II Augustus, the last of the Jagiellons, died childless. The Polish throne passed to Henry III of France and then to other foreign-based rulers in rapid succession, causing a decline in the city's importance. Furthermore, in 1596, Sigismund III of the House of Vasa moved the administrative capital of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth from Krak\u00f3w to Warsaw. The city was destabilised by pillaging in the 1650s during the Swedish invasion, especially during the 1655 siege. Later in 1707, the city underwent an outbreak of bubonic plague that left 20,000 of the city's residents dead.\n19th century.\nAlready weakened during the 18th century, by the mid-1790s the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth had twice been partitioned by its neighbors: Russia, the Habsburg empire and Prussia. In 1791, the Holy Roman Emperor Leopold II changed the status of Kazimierz as a separate city and made it into a district of Krak\u00f3w. The richer Jewish families began to move out. However, because of the injunction against travel on the Sabbath, most Jewish families stayed relatively close to the historic synagogues. In 1794, Tadeusz Ko\u015bciuszko initiated an unsuccessful insurrection in the town's Main Square which, in spite of his victorious Battle of Rac\u0142awice against a numerically superior Russian army, resulted in the third and final partition of Poland. As a result, Krak\u00f3w fell under Habsburg rule.\nIn 1802, German became the town's official language. Of the members appointed by the Habsburgs to the municipal council only half were Polish. From 1796 to 1809, the population of the city rose from 22,000 to 26,000 with an increasing percentage of nobles and officials. In 1809, Napoleon Bonaparte captured former Polish territories from Austria and made the town part of the Duchy of Warsaw. During the time of the Duchy of Warsaw, requirements to upkeep the Polish army followed by tours of Austrian, Polish and Russian troops, plus Russian occupation and a flood in the year 1813 all added up to the adverse development of the city with a high debt burden on public finances and many workshops and trading houses needing to close their activities.\nFollowing Napoleon's defeat, the 1815 Congress of Vienna restored the pre-war boundaries but also created the partially independent and neutral Free City of Krak\u00f3w. In addition to the historic city of Krak\u00f3w itself, the Free City included the towns of Chrzanow, Trzebinia and Nowa Gora and 224 villages. Outside the city, mining and metallurgy started developing. The population of Krak\u00f3w itself grew in this time from 23,000 to 43,000; that of the overall republic from 88,000 to 103,000. The population of the city had an increasing number of Catholic clergy, officials and intelligentsia with which the rich townspeople sympathised. They were opposed to the conservative landed aristocracy who also were drawn more and more to the city real estates even though their income still mainly came from their agricultural possessions in the Republic, the Kingdom of Poland and Galicia. The percentage of the Jewish population in the city also increased in this time from 20.8% to 30.4%. However, nationalist sentiment and other political issues led to instability; this culminated in the Krak\u00f3w uprising of 1846, which was crushed by the Austrian authorities. The Free City was therefore annexed into the Austrian Empire as the Grand Duchy of Krak\u00f3w (, ), which was legally separate from but administratively part of the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria (more simply Austrian Galicia).\nDuring the era of the free city, a free trade zone led to positive economic development. But because of the unstable political situation and insecurity about the future, not much of the accumulated wealth was invested. Through the increase of taxes, customs and regulations, prices soared and the city fell into a recession. From 1844 to 1850 the population was diminished by over 4,000 inhabitants.\nIn 1866, Austria granted a degree of autonomy to Galicia after its own defeat in the Austro-Prussian War. Krak\u00f3w, being politically freer than the Polish cities under Prussian (later German) and Russian rule, became a Polish national symbol and a centre of culture and art, known frequently as the \"Polish Athens\" (). Many leading Polish artists of the period resided in Krak\u00f3w, among them the seminal painter Jan Matejko, laid to rest at Rakowicki Cemetery, and the founder of modern Polish drama, Stanis\u0142aw Wyspia\u0144ski. Fin de si\u00e8cle Krak\u00f3w evolved into a modern metropolis; running water and electric streetcars were introduced in 1901, and between 1910 and 1915, Krak\u00f3w and its surrounding suburban communities were gradually combined into a single administrative unit called Greater Krak\u00f3w ().\nAt the outbreak of World War I on 3 August 1914, J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski formed a small cadre military unit, the First Cadre Company\u2014the predecessor of the Polish Legions\u2014which set out from Krak\u00f3w to fight for the liberation of Poland. The city was briefly besieged by Russian troops in November 1914. Austrian rule in Krak\u00f3w ended in 1918 when the Polish Liquidation Committee assumed power.\n20th century to the present.\nFollowing the emergence of the Second Polish Republic in 1918, Krak\u00f3w resumed its role as a major Polish academic and cultural centre, with the establishment of new universities such as the AGH University of Science and Technology and the Jan Matejko Academy of Fine Arts, as well as several new and essential vocational schools. The city became an important cultural centre for Polish Jews, including both Zionist and Bundist groups. Krak\u00f3w was also an influential centre of Jewish spiritual life, with all its manifestations of religious observance\u2014from Orthodox to Hasidic and Reform Judaism\u2014flourishing side by side.\nFollowing the invasion of Poland by Nazi Germany in September 1939, the city of Krak\u00f3w became part of the General Government, a separate administrative region of the Third Reich. On 26\u00a0October 1939, the Nazi r\u00e9gime set up , one of four districts within the General Government. On the same day, the city of Krak\u00f3w became the capital of the administration. The General Government was ruled by Governor-General Hans Frank, who was based in the city's Wawel Castle. The Nazis envisioned turning Krak\u00f3w into a completely Germanised city; after removal of all Jews and Poles, renaming of locations and streets into the German language, and sponsorship of propaganda portraying the city as historically German. On 28\u00a0November 1939, Frank set up ('Jewish Councils') to be run by Jewish citizens for the purpose of carrying out orders for the Nazis. These orders included the registration of all Jewish people living in each area, the collection of taxes, and the formation of forced-labour groups. The Polish Home Army maintained a parallel underground administrative system.\nAt the outbreak of World War II, some 56,000 Jews resided in Krak\u00f3w\u2014almost one-quarter of a total population of about 250,000; by November 1939, the Jewish population of the city had grown to approximately 70,000. According to German statistics from 1940, over 200,000 Jews lived within the entire Krak\u00f3w District, comprising more than 5\u00a0percent of the district's total population. However, these statistics probably underestimate the situation. In November 1939, during an operation known as ('special operation Krak\u00f3w'), the Germans arrested more than 180 university professors and academics, and sent them to the Sachsenhausen and Dachau concentration camps, though the survivors were later released on the request of prominent Italians.\nBefore the formation of ghettos, which began in the Krak\u00f3w District in December 1939, Jews were encouraged to flee the city. For those who remained, the German authorities decided in March 1941 to allocate a then-suburban neighborhood, Podg\u00f3rze District, to become Krak\u00f3w's ghetto, where many Jews subsequently died of illness or starvation. Initially, most ghettos were open and Jews were allowed to enter and exit freely, but as security became tighter the ghettos were generally closed. From autumn 1941, the SS developed the policy of extermination through labour, which further worsened the already bleak conditions for Jews. The inhabitants of the Krak\u00f3w Ghetto were later murdered or sent to German extermination camps, including Be\u0142\u017cec and Auschwitz, and to Krak\u00f3w-P\u0142asz\u00f3w concentration camp. The largest deportations within the Distrikt occurred from June to September 1942. More specifically, mass deportation from Krak\u00f3w's ghetto occurred in the first week of June 1942, and the ghetto was finally liquidated in March 1943.\nThe film director Roman Polanski survived the Krak\u00f3w Ghetto. Oskar Schindler selected employees from the ghetto to work in his enamelware factory , saving them from the camps. Similarly, many men capable of physical labor were saved from deportation to extermination camps and instead sent to labor camps across the General Government. By September 1943, the last of the Jews from the Krak\u00f3w Ghetto had been deported. Although looted by occupational authorities, Krak\u00f3w remained relatively undamaged at the end of World War II, with most of the city's historical and architectural legacy spared. Soviet forces under the command of Marshal Ivan Konev entered the city on 18\u00a0January 1945 and began arresting Poles loyal to the Polish government-in-exile or those who had served in the Home Army.\nAfter the war, under the Polish People's Republic (officially declared in 1952), the intellectual and academic community of Krak\u00f3w came under complete political control. The universities were soon deprived of their printing rights and autonomy. The Stalinist government of Poland ordered the construction of the country's largest steel mill in the newly created suburb of Nowa Huta. The creation of the giant Lenin Steelworks (now Sendzimir Steelworks owned by Mittal) sealed Krak\u00f3w's transformation from a university city into an industrial centre.\nIn an effort that spanned two decades, Karol Wojty\u0142a, the cardinal archbishop of Krak\u00f3w from 1964 to 1978, successfully lobbied for permission to build the first churches in the newly industrialized suburbs. In 1978, the Catholic Church elevated Wojty\u0142a to the papacy as John Paul II, the first non-Italian pope in over 450 years. In the same year, UNESCO, following the application of local authorities, placed Krak\u00f3w Old Town on the first list of World Heritage Sites.\nGeography.\nKrak\u00f3w lies in the southern part of Poland, on the Vistula River, approximately above sea level. The city is located on the border between different physiographic regions: the Krak\u00f3w-Cz\u0119stochowa Upland in the north-western parts of the city, the Ma\u0142opolska Upland in the north-east, the Sandomierz Basin (east) and the Western Beskidian Foothills of the Carpathians (south).\nThere are five nature reserves in Krak\u00f3w, with a combined area of ca. . Due to their ecological value, these areas are legally protected. The western part of the city, along its northern and north-western side, borders an area of international significance known as the Jurassic Bielany-Tyniec refuge. The main motives for the protection of this area include plant and animal wildlife and the area's geomorphological features and landscape. Another part of the city is located within the ecological 'corridor' of the Vistula River valley. This corridor is also assessed as being of international significance as part of the Pan-European ecological network.\nClimate.\nKrak\u00f3w has a humid continental climate, denoted by K\u00f6ppen classification as \"Dfb\", somewhat bordering on an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\"); with climate change winters are rapidly becoming milder and summers longer and hotter more like humid subtropical climate (Cfa), hot summers days above 30C are increasingly common, but with winter temperatures on average still below freezing, it is perhaps best defined as having a semicontinental climate. In older reference periods it was classified as a warm summer continental climate (\"Dfb\"). By classification of Wincenty Oko\u0142owicz, it has a warm temperate climate in the centre of continental Europe with the \"fusion\" of different features.\nDue to its geographic location, the city may be under marine influence, sometimes Arctic influence, but without direct influence, giving the city variable meteorological conditions over short spaces of time. The city lies in proximity to the Tatra Mountains and there are often occurrences of a foehn wind called halny, causing temperatures to rise rapidly. In relation to Warsaw, temperatures are very similar for most of the year, except that in the colder months southern Poland has a larger daily temperature range, more moderate winds, generally more rainy days and with greater chances of clear skies on average, especially in winter. The higher sun angle also allows for a longer growing season. In addition, for older data there was less sun than the capital of the country, about 30 minutes daily per year, but both have small differences in relative humidity and the direction of the winds is northeast.\nThe climate table below presents weather data with averages from 1991 to 2020, sunshine ranges from 1971 to 2000, and valid extremes from 1951 to the present day:\nCityscape.\nKrak\u00f3w provides a showcase setting for many historic forms of architecture developed over the ten centuries, especially Gothic, Renaissance and Baroque styles. Renowned artisans and skilled craftsmen from present-day Italy and Germany were brought and sponsored by kings or nobles who contributed to architectural wealth and diversity. The Brick Gothic manner as well as countless structural elements such as the Renaissance attics with decorative pinnacles became recognisable features of historical buildings in Krak\u00f3w. Built from its earliest nucleus outward, the city's monuments can be seen in historical order by walking from the city centre out, towards its newer districts.\nKrak\u00f3w's historic centre, which includes the Old Town (\"Stare Miasto\"), the Main Market Square (\"Rynek G\u0142\u00f3wny\"), the Cloth Hall (\"Sukiennice\"), the Barbican (\"Barbakan\"), St. Florian's Gate, Kazimierz and the Wawel Castle, was included as the first of its kind on the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites in 1978. The central core surrounded by Planty Park remains the most prominent example of an old town in the country, with the medieval street layout still in existence. Krak\u00f3w was the royal capital of Poland for many centuries, until Sigismund III Vasa relocated the court to Warsaw in 1596. The district is bisected by the Royal Road, the coronation route traversed by the Kings of Poland. Several important monuments were lost in the course of history, notably the Ratusz town hall. However, the Gothic Town Hall Tower measuring in height remains standing.\nIn addition to the old town, the city's district of Kazimierz is particularly notable for its many renaissance buildings and picturesque streets, as well as the historic Jewish quarter located in the north-eastern part of Kazimierz. Kazimierz was founded in the 14th century to the south-east of the city centre and soon became a wealthy, well-populated area where construction of imposing properties became commonplace. Perhaps the most important feature of medieval Kazimierz was the only major, permanent bridge (\"Pons Regalis\") across the northern arm of the Vistula. This natural barrier used to separate Kazimierz from the Old Town for several centuries, while the bridge connected Krak\u00f3w to the Wieliczka Salt Mine and the lucrative Hungarian trade route. The last structure at this location (at the end of modern Stradom Street) was dismantled in 1880 when the northern arm of the river was filled in with earth and rock, and subsequently built over.\nBy the 1930s, Krak\u00f3w had 120 officially registered synagogues and prayer houses that spanned across the old city. Much of Jewish intellectual life had moved to new centres like Podg\u00f3rze. This, in turn, led to the redevelopment and renovation of much of Kazimierz and the development of new districts in Krak\u00f3w. Most historic buildings in central Kazimierz today are preserved in their original form. Some old buildings, however, were not repaired after the devastation brought by the Second World War, and have remained empty. Most recent efforts at restoring the historic neighborhoods gained new impetus around 1993. Kazimierz is now a well-visited area, seeing a booming growth in Jewish-themed restaurants, bars, bookstores and souvenir shops.\nAs the city of Krak\u00f3w began to expand further under the rule of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the new architectural styles also developed. Key buildings from the 19th and early 20th centuries in Krak\u00f3w include the Jan Matejko Academy of Fine Arts, the directorate of the Polish State Railways as well as the original complex of Krak\u00f3w G\u0142\u00f3wny railway station and the city's Academy of Economics. It was also at around that time that Krak\u00f3w's first radial boulevards began to appear, with the city undergoing a large-scale program aimed at transforming the ancient Polish capital into a sophisticated regional centre of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. New representative government buildings and multi-story tenement houses were built at around that time. Much of the urban-planning beyond the walls of the Old Town was done by Polish architects and engineers trained in Vienna. Some major projects of the era include the development of the Jagiellonian University's new premises and the building of the Collegium Novum just west of the Old Town. The imperial style planning of the city's further development continued until the return of Poland's independence, following the First World War. Early modernist style in Krak\u00f3w is represented by such masterpieces as the Palace of Art by Franciszek M\u0105czy\u0144ski and the 'House under the Globe'. Secession style architecture, which had arrived in Krak\u00f3w from Vienna, became popular towards the end of the Partitions.\nWith Poland's regained independence came the major change in the fortunes of Krak\u00f3w\u2014now the second most important city of a sovereign nation. The state began to make new plans for the city development and commissioned a number of representative buildings. The predominant style for new projects was modernism with various interpretations of the art-deco style. Important buildings constructed in the style of Polish modernism include the Feniks 'LOT' building on Basztowa Street, the Feniks department store on the Main Square and the Municipal Savings Bank on Szczepa\u0144ski Square. The J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski house is also of note as a particularly good example of interwar architecture in the city.\nAfter the Second World War, new Communist government adopted Stalinist monumentalism. The doctrine of Socialist realism in Poland, as in other countries of the Eastern Bloc, was enforced from 1949 to 1956. It involved all domains of art, but its most spectacular achievements were made in the field of urban design. The guidelines for this new trend were spelled-out in a 1949 resolution of the National Council of Party Architects. Architecture was to become a weapon in establishing the new social order by the communists.&lt;ref name=\"inyourpocket/sightseeing\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The ideological impact of urban design was valued more than aesthetics. It aimed at expressing persistence and power. This form of architecture was implemented in the new industrial district of Nowa Huta with apartment blocks constructed according to a Stalinist blueprint, with repetitious courtyards and wide, tree-lined avenues.\nSince the style of the Renaissance was generally regarded as the most revered in old Polish architecture, it was also used for augmenting Poland's Socialist national format. However, in the course of incorporating the principles of Socialist realism, there were quite a few deviations introduced by the communists. From 1953, critical opinions in the Party were increasingly frequent, and the doctrine was given up in 1956 marking the end of Stalinism. The soc-realist centre of Nowa Huta is considered to be a meritorious monument of the times. This period in postwar architecture was followed by the mass-construction of large Panel System apartment blocks, most of which were built outside the city centre and thus do not encroach upon the beauty of the old or new towns. Some examples of the new style (e.g., Hotel Cracovia) recently listed as heritage monuments were built during the latter half of the 20th century in Krak\u00f3w.\nAfter the Revolutions of 1989 and the birth of the Third Republic in the latter half of the 20th century, a number of new architectural projects were completed, including the construction of large business parks and commercial facilities such as the Galeria Krakowska, or infrastructure investments like the Krak\u00f3w Fast Tram. A good example of this would be the Manggha Museum of Japanese Art and Technology designed by Arata Isozaki, the 2007-built \"Pawilon Wyspia\u0144ski 2000\", which is used as a multi-purpose information and exhibition space, or the Ma\u0142opolski Garden of Arts (\"\"), a multi-purpose exhibition and theatre complex located in the historic Old Town.\nParks and gardens.\nThere are about 40 parks in Krak\u00f3w, including dozens of gardens and forests. Several, like the Planty Park, Botanical Garden, Zoological Garden, Royal Garden, Park Krakowski, Jordan Park and B\u0142onia Park are located in the centre of the city; with others, such as Zakrz\u00f3wek, Wanda Green Ravine Park, Wolski forest, Strzelecki Park and Lotnik\u00f3w Park in the surrounding districts. Parks cover about of the city.\nThe best-known park in Krak\u00f3w is the Planty Park. Established between 1822 and 1830 in place of the old city walls, it forms a green belt around the Old Town and consists of a chain of smaller gardens designed in various styles and adorned with monuments. The park has an area of and a length of , forming a scenic walkway popular with Cracovians.\nJordan Park, founded in 1889 by Henryk Jordan, was the first public park of its kind in Europe. Built on the banks of the Rudawa, the park was equipped with running and exercise tracks, playgrounds, a swimming pool, amphitheatre, pavilions, and a pond for boat rowing and water bicycles. It is located in the grounds of one of the city's larger parks, B\u0142onia Park. The less prominent Park Krakowski, founded in 1885 by Stanis\u0142aw Rehman, was a popular destination point for Cracovians at the end of the 19th century, but has since been greatly reduced in size because of rapid real estate development.\nEnvironment.\nThere are five nature reserves in Krak\u00f3w with a total area of . Smaller green zones constitute parts of the Krak\u00f3w-Cz\u0119stochowa Upland Jurassic Landscape Parks' Board, which deals with the protection areas of the Polish Jura. Under its jurisdiction are: the Bielany-Tyniec Landscape Park (Park Biela\u0144sko-Tyniecki), Tenczynek Landscape Park (Park Tenczi\u0144ski) and Krak\u00f3w Valleys Landscape Park (Park Krajobrazowy Dolinki Krakowskie), with their watersheds. The natural reserves of the Polish Jura Chain are part of the CORINE biotopes programme due to their unique flora, fauna, geomorphology and landscape. The western part of Krak\u00f3w constitutes the so-called Obszar Krakowski ecological network, including the ecological corridor of the Vistula. The southern slopes of limestone hills provide conditions for the development of thermophilous vegetation, grasslands and shrubs.\nThe city is spaced along an extended latitudinal transect of the Vistula River Valley with a network of tributaries including its right tributary Wilga, and left: Rudawa, Bia\u0142ucha, D\u0142ubnia and Sanka. The rivers and their valleys along with bodies of water are some of the most interesting natural wonders of Krak\u00f3w.\nKrak\u00f3w and its environment, surrounded by mountains, suffer from Europe's dirtiest air pollution because of smog, caused by burning coal for heating, especially in winter.\nGovernance.\nThe Krak\u00f3w City Council has 43 elected members, one of whom is the mayor, or President of Krak\u00f3w, elected every four years. The election of the City Council and of the local head of government, which takes place at the same time, is based on legislation introduced on 20\u00a0June 2002. The President of Krak\u00f3w, re-elected for his fourth term in 2014, is Jacek Majchrowski. Several members of the Polish national Parliament (Sejm) are elected from the Krak\u00f3w constituency. The city's official symbols include a coat of arms, a flag, a seal, and a banner.\nResponsibilities of Krak\u00f3w's president include drafting and implementing resolutions, enacting city bylaws, managing the city budget, employing city administrators, and preparing against floods and natural disasters. The president fulfills his duties with the help of the City Council, city managers and city inspectors. In the 1990s, the city government was reorganised to better differentiate between its political agenda and administrative functions. As a result, the Office of Public Information was created to handle inquiries and foster communication between city departments and citizens at large.\nIn 2000, the city government introduced a new long-term program called \"Safer City\" in cooperation with the Police, Traffic, Social Services, Fire, Public Safety, and the Youth Departments. Subsequently, the number of criminal offences dropped by 3 percent between 2000 and 2001, and the rate of detection increased by 1.4 percent to a total of 30.2 percent in the same period. The city is receiving help in carrying out the program from all educational institutions and the local media, including TV, radio and the press.\nDistricts.\nKrak\u00f3w is divided into 18 administrative districts (\"dzielnica\") or boroughs, each with a degree of autonomy within its own municipal government. Prior to March 1991, the city had been divided into four quarters which still give a sense of identity to Krak\u00f3w: the towns of Podg\u00f3rze, Nowa Huta and Krowodrza, which were amalgamated into the city as it expanded; and the ancient town centre of Krak\u00f3w itself.\nThe oldest neighborhoods of Krak\u00f3w were incorporated into the city before the late 18th century. These include the Old Town (\"Stare Miasto\"), once contained within the city defensive walls and now encircled by the Planty park; the Wawel District, which is the site of the Royal Castle and the cathedral; Stradom and Kazimierz with its historic Jewish quarter, the latter originally divided into Christian and Jewish quarters; and the ancient town of Kleparz.\nMajor districts added in the 19th and 20th centuries include Podg\u00f3rze\u2014until 1915, a separate town on the southern bank of the Vistula\u2014and Nowa Huta, to the east of the city centre, which was built after World War II.\nAmong the most notable historic districts of the city are: Wawel Hill, home to Wawel Castle and Wawel Cathedral, where many historic Polish kings are buried; the medieval Old Town, with its Main Market Square; dozens of old churches and museums; the 14th-century buildings of the Jagiellonian University; and Kazimierz, the historical centre of Krak\u00f3w's Jewish social and religious life.\nThe Old Town district of Krak\u00f3w is home to about six thousand historic sites and more than two million works of art. Its rich variety of heritage architecture includes Romanesque (e.g. St. Andrew's Church), Renaissance (e.g. Krak\u00f3w Cloth Hall), Baroque (e.g. Saints Peter and Paul Church) and Gothic buildings. Krak\u00f3w's palaces, churches, theatres and mansions display a great variety of color, architectural details, stained glass, paintings, sculptures, and furnishings.\nIn the Market Square stands the Gothic St. Mary's Basilica (\"Ko\u015bci\u00f3\u0142 Mariacki\"). Rebuilt in the 14th century, it features the famous wooden altar (Altarpiece of Veit Stoss), the largest Gothic altarpiece in the world, carved by Veit Stoss. A trumpet call (\"hejna\u0142 mariacki\") is sounded every hour from the church's main tower. The melody, which used to announce the opening and closing of city gates, ends unexpectedly in midstream. According to legend, the tune was played during the 13th-century Tatar invasion by a guard warning citizens against the attack. Whilst playing, he was shot by an archer of the invading Tatar forces and the bugle call broke off at the moment he died. The story is recounted in Eric P. Kelly's 1928 book \"The Trumpeter of Krakow\", which won a Newbery Award.\nThe current divisions were introduced by the Krak\u00f3w City Hall on 19\u00a0April 1995. The districts were each assigned a Roman numeral as well as a name: Stare Miasto (I), Grzeg\u00f3rzki (II), Pr\u0105dnik Czerwony (III), Pr\u0105dnik Bia\u0142y (IV), Krowodrza (V), Bronowice (VI), Zwierzyniec (VII), D\u0119bniki (VIII), \u0141agiewniki-Borek Fa\u0142\u0119cki (IX), Swoszowice (X), Podg\u00f3rze Duchackie (XI), Bie\u017can\u00f3w-Prokocim (XII), Podg\u00f3rze (XIII), Czy\u017cyny (XIV), Mistrzejowice (XV), Bie\u0144czyce (XVI), Wzg\u00f3rza Krzes\u0142awickie (XVII), and Nowa Huta (XVIII).\nMap of districts of the City of Krak\u00f3w\nIV\nVI\nVII\nV\nI\nII\nIII\nXVII\nX\nVIII\nXI\nXII\nXIII\nXIV\nXVIII\nEconomy.\nKrak\u00f3w is one of Poland's most important economic centres and the economic hub of the Lesser Poland (Ma\u0142opolska) region. Since the fall of communism, the private sector has been growing steadily. There are about 50 large multinational companies in the city, including Google, Uber, IBM, Shell, UBS, HSBC, Motorola, Aptiv, MAN, General Electric, ABB, Aon, Akamai, Cisco, Hitachi, Altria, Capgemini, and Sabre Holdings, along with other British, German and Scandinavian-based firms. The city is also the global headquarters for Comarch, an enterprise software house. Krak\u00f3w is the second most-visited city in Poland (after Warsaw). According to the World Investment Report 2011 by the UN Conference for Trade and Development (UNCTAD), Krak\u00f3w is also the most emergent city location for investment in global BPO projects (Business Process Outsourcing) in the world.\nIn 2011, the city budget, which is presented by the Mayor of Krak\u00f3w on 15\u00a0November annually, has a projected revenue of 3,500,000,000 z\u0142oty. The primary sources of revenue were as follows: 14% from the municipal taxation on real estate properties and the use of amenities, 30% in transfers from the national budget, and 34% in state subsidies. Projected expenditures, totaling 3,520,000,000 z\u0142oty, included 21% in city development costs and 79% in city maintenance costs. Of the maintenance costs, as much as 39% were spent on education and childcare. The City of Krak\u00f3w's development costs included; 41% toward construction of roads, transport, and communication (combined), and 25% for the city's infrastructure and environment. The city has a high bond credit rating, and some 60% of the population is under the age of 45.\nUnity Tower was completed in 2020 after almost 30 years, creating a new business and residential centre. It is the second-tallest building in the city after K1.\nKnowledge and innovation community.\nKrak\u00f3w is one of the co-location centres of Knowledge and Innovation Community (Sustainable Energy) of The European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT).\nInnoEnergy is an integrated alliance of reputable organisations from the education, research and industry sectors. It was created based on long standing links of cooperation as well as the principles of excellence. The partners have jointly developed a strategy to tackle the weaknesses of the European innovation landscape in the field of sustainable energy.\nTransport.\nPublic transport is based on a fairly dense network of tram and bus routes operated by a municipal company, supplemented by a number of private minibus operators. There is no rapid transit system in Krak\u00f3w, but metro line is planned. First works are expected to commence in 2028. Local trains connect some of the suburbs. The bulk of the city's historic area has been turned into a pedestrian zone with rickshaws and horse-drawn carriages; however, the trams run within a three-block radius. The historic means of transportation in the city can be examined at the Museum of Municipal Engineering in the Kazimierz district, with many old trams, cars and buses.\nRailway connections are available to most Polish cities, e.g. Katowice, Cz\u0119stochowa, Szczecin, Gdynia and Warsaw. International destinations include Bratislava, Budapest, Vienna, Prague, Berlin, Hamburg, Lviv, Kyiv, and Odesa (June\u2013September). The main railway station is located just outside the Old Town District and is well-served by public transport.\nKrak\u00f3w's airport, officially named Krak\u00f3w John Paul II International Airport (), is located west of the city. Direct trains cover the route between Krak\u00f3w G\u0142\u00f3wny train station and the airport in 20 minutes. Krak\u00f3w Airport served around 5,800,000 passengers in 2017. Also, the Katowice International Airport is located or about 75 minutes from Krak\u00f3w.\nIn Autumn 2016 Poland's oldest Bicycle-sharing system was modernized and now offers 1,500 bikes at 169 stations under the name of Wavelo \"\", which is owned by BikeU of the French multinational company Egis.\nDemographics.\nKrak\u00f3w had a recorded population of 774,839 in 2019, which increased to 804,237 in 2023. Selected demographic indicators are presented in a table (below), compiled on the basis of only the population living in Krak\u00f3w permanently. The larger metropolitan area of the city encompasses a territory in which (in 2010) 1,393,893 inhabitants live.\nAlready in the Middle Ages, the population of Krak\u00f3w consisting of numerous ethnic groups, began to grow rapidly. It doubled between 1100 and 1300 from 5,000 to 10,000, and in 1400 counted 14,000 inhabitants. By 1550, the population of metropolitan Krak\u00f3w was 18,000; although it decreased to 15,000 in the next fifty years due to calamity. By the early 17th century the Krak\u00f3w population had reached 28,000 inhabitants.\nIn the historical 1931 census preceding World War II, 78.1% of Cracovians declared Polish as their primary language, with Yiddish or Hebrew at 20.9%, Ukrainian 0.4%, German 0.3%, and Russian 0.1%. The ravages of history have greatly reduced the percentage of ethnic minorities living in Krak\u00f3w.\nIn the last two decades, Krak\u00f3w has seen a large growth of immigrant population. In the 2002 census, only 0.25% of respondents living in the city declared a non-Polish nationality primarily Ukrainian and Russian. As of 2019, it was estimated that foreigners accounted for as much as 10% of the city's population, with Ukrainians being the most numerous group (between 11,000 and 50,000).\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe metropolitan city of Krak\u00f3w has more than 300 churches and is known as the city of churches. The abundance of historic landmark temples along with the plenitude of monasteries and convents earned the city a countrywide reputation as the \"Northern Rome\" in the past. The churches of Krak\u00f3w comprise over 120 places of worship (2007) of which over 65 were built in the 20th century. More are still being added. In addition to Roman Catholicism, other denominations present include Jehovah's Witnesses, Mariavite Church, Polish Catholic Church, Polish Orthodox Church, Protestantism and Latter-Day Saints. As of 2017, weekly Mass attendance in the Archdiocese of Krak\u00f3w was 49.9 percent, above the national Polish average of 38.3 percent.\nKrak\u00f3w contains also an outstanding collection of monuments of Jewish sacred architecture unmatched anywhere in Poland. Krak\u00f3w was an influential centre of Jewish spiritual life before the outbreak of World War II, with all its manifestations of religious observance from Orthodox to Hasidic and Reform flourishing side by side. There were at least 90 synagogues in Krak\u00f3w active before the Nazi German invasion of Poland, serving its burgeoning Jewish community of 60,000\u201380,000 (out of the city's total population of 237,000), established since the early 12th century.\nMost synagogues of Krak\u00f3w were ruined during World War II by the Nazis who despoiled them of all ceremonial objects, and used them as storehouses for ammunition, firefighting equipment, as general storage facilities and stables. The post-Holocaust Jewish population of the city had dwindled to about 5,900 before the end of the 1940s. Poland was the only Eastern Bloc country to allow free Jewish aliyah (emigration to Israel) without visas or exit permits upon the conclusion of World War II. In recent time, thanks to efforts of the local Jewish and Polish organisations including foreign financial aid from the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee, many synagogues underwent major restorations and serve religious and tourist purposes.\nEducation.\nKrak\u00f3w is a major centre of education. Twenty-four institutions of higher education offer courses in the city, with more than 200,000 students. Jagiellonian University, the oldest university in Poland and ranked by the \"Times Higher Education Supplement\" as the second-best university in the country, was founded in 1364 as \"Studium Generale\" and renamed in 1817 to commemorate the royal Jagiellonian dynasty of Poland and Lithuania. Its principal academic asset is the Jagiellonian Library, with more than 4\u00a0million volumes, including a large collection of medieval manuscripts like Copernicus' \"De Revolutionibus\" and the Balthasar Behem Codex. With 42,325 students (2005) and 3,605 academic staff, the Jagiellonian University is also one of the leading research centres in Poland. Famous historical figures connected with the university include Saint John Cantius, Jan D\u0142ugosz, Nicolaus Copernicus, Andrzej Frycz Modrzewski, Jan Kochanowski, King John III Sobieski, Pope John Paul II and Nobel laureates Ivo Andri\u0107 and Wis\u0142awa Szymborska.\nAGH University of Science and Technology, established in 1919, is the largest technical university in Poland, with more than 15 faculties and student enrollment exceeding 30,000. It was ranked by the Polish edition of \"Newsweek\" as the best technical university in the country in 2004. During its 80-year history, more than 73,000 students graduated from AGH with master's or bachelor's degrees. Some 3,600 persons were granted the degree of Doctor of Science, and about 900 obtained the qualification of \"Doctor habilitatus\".\nOther institutions of higher learning include Academy of Music in Krak\u00f3w first conceived as conservatory in 1888, one of the oldest and most prestigious conservatories in Central Europe and a major concert venue; Krak\u00f3w University of Economics, established in 1925; Pedagogical University, in operation since 1946; Agricultural University of Krak\u00f3w, offering courses since 1890 (initially as a part of Jagiellonian University); Academy of Fine Arts, the oldest Fine Arts Academy in Poland, founded by the Polish painter Jan Matejko; Ludwik Solski Academy for the Dramatic Arts; The Pontifical Academy of Theology; AGH University of Science and Technology and Krak\u00f3w University of Technology, which has more than 37,000 graduates.\nScientific societies and their branches in Krak\u00f3w conduct scientific and educational work in local and countrywide scale. The Academy of Learning, Association of Law Students' Library of the Jagiellonian University, Polish Copernicus Society of Naturalists and the Polish Section of Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers all have their main seats in Krak\u00f3w.\nCulture.\nKrak\u00f3w was named the official European Capital of Culture for the year 2000 by the European Union. Major landmarks include the Main Market Square with St. Mary's Basilica and the Sukiennice Cloth Hall, the Wawel Castle, the National Art Museum, the Sigismund Bell at the Wawel Cathedral, and the medieval St. Florian's Gate with the Barbican along the Royal Coronation Route. Among them is the Czartoryski Museum featuring works by Leonardo da Vinci and Rembrandt as well as the Archaeological Museum of Krak\u00f3w whose collection highlights include the Zbruch Idol and the Bronocice Pot.\nMuseums and national art galleries.\nAs of 2023[ [update]], Krak\u00f3w hosts approximately 82 museums and various museum branches; the city also has a number of art collections and public art galleries. The National Museum, established in 1879, as well as the National Art Collection on Wawel Hill, are all accessible to the general public.\nThe Royal Chambers at Wawel feature art, period furniture, Polish and European paintings, collectibles, and a major collection of 16th-century monumental Flemish tapestries. Wawel Treasury and Armoury features Polish royal memorabilia, jewels, applied art, and 15th- to 18th-century arms. The Wawel Eastern Collection features Turkish tents and military accessories. The National Museum holds the largest body of artworks in the country with collections consisting of several hundred thousand items kept mostly in the Main Building at 3\u00a0Maja Street, although there are eleven other separate divisions of the museum in the city, one of the most popular being the Gallery of 19th Century Polish Art at Sukiennice which houses a collection of some of the best-known paintings and sculptures of the Young Poland movement. Inaugurated in 2013, the latest division of the National Museum is the \"Europeum\", with works by Brueghel among a hundred Western European paintings.\nOther notable museums in Krak\u00f3w include the Manggha Museum of Japanese Art and Technology (at M. Konopnickiej 26), Stanis\u0142aw Wyspia\u0144ski Museum (at 11 Szczepanska St), Jan Matejko Manor House in Krzes\u0142awice, the Emeryk Hutten-Czapski Museum, devoted to the master painter and his life, and J\u00f3zef Mehoffer Manor.\nThe Rynek Underground museum, situated under the city's main square, showcases Krak\u00f3w's more than 1,000-year history through its streets, activities and artifacts. The construction of the museum was preceded by extensive excavations starting in 2005, and continuing eventually until 2010, as more and more physical evidence was uncovered.\nKrakil, the Museum of illusions, is a space where illusions are combined with scientific inventions and the arts. Physics and optics are displayed together with artworks and classical riddles.\nThe Polish Aviation Museum, considered one of the world's best aviation museums by CNN, features over 200 aircraft including a Sopwith Camel among other First World War biplanes, a comprehensive display of aero engines, and a complete collection of airplane types developed by Poland after 1945. Activities of smaller museums around Krak\u00f3w and in the Lesser Poland region are promoted and supported by the Ma\u0142opolska Institute of Culture, which organises annual Ma\u0142opolska Heritage Days.\nPerforming arts.\nThe city has several famous theatres, including the Narodowy Stary Teatr (the National Old Theatre), the Juliusz S\u0142owacki Theatre, the Bagatela Theatre, the Ludowy Theatre, and the Groteska Theatre of Puppetry, as well as the Opera Krakowska and Krak\u00f3w Operetta. The city's principal concert hall and the home of the Krak\u00f3w Philharmonic Orchestra is the Krak\u00f3w Philharmonic (\"Filharmonia Krakowska\") built in 1931.\nKrak\u00f3w hosts many annual and biannual artistic events, some of international significance such as the Misteria Paschalia (Baroque music), Sacrum-Profanum (contemporary music), the Krak\u00f3w Screen Festival (popular music), the Festival of Polish Music (classical music), Dedications (theatre), the Krak\u00f3w Film Festival (one of Europe's oldest short films events), Etiuda&amp;Anima International Film Festival (the oldest international art-film event in Poland), Biennial of Graphic Arts, and the Jewish Culture Festival. Krak\u00f3w was the residence of two Polish Nobel laureates in literature, Wis\u0142awa Szymborska and Czes\u0142aw Mi\u0142osz; a third Nobel laureate, the Yugoslav writer Ivo Andri\u0107, lived and studied in Krak\u00f3w. Other former longtime residents include internationally renowned Polish film directors Andrzej Wajda and Roman Polanski, both of whom are Academy Award winners.\nMusic.\nOpera Krakowska one of the leading national opera companies, stages 200 performances each year including ballet, operettas and musicals. It has, in its main repertoire, the greatest world and Polish opera classics. The Opera moved into its first permanent House in the autumn of 2008. It is in charge also of the \"Summer Festival of Opera and Operetta\".\nKrak\u00f3w is home to two major Polish festivals of early music presenting forgotten Baroque oratorios and operas: \"Opera Rara\", and \"Misteria Paschalia\". Meanwhile, Capella Cracoviensis runs the \"Music in Old Krakow International Festival\".\nAcademy of Music in Krak\u00f3w, founded in 1888, is known worldwide as the \"alma mater\" of the contemporary Polish composer Krzysztof Penderecki and it is also the only one in Poland to have two winners of the International Chopin Competition in Warsaw among its alumni. The academy organises concerts of its students and guests throughout the whole year.\nMusic organisations and venues include: Krak\u00f3w Philharmonic, \"Sinfonietta Cracovia\" (a.k.a. the Orchestra of the Royal City of Krak\u00f3w), the Polish Radio Choir of Krak\u00f3w, \"Organum\" Academic Choir, the Mixed Maria\u0144ski Choir (\"Mieszany Ch\u00f3r Maria\u0144ski\"), Krak\u00f3w Academic Choir of the Jagiellonian University, the Krak\u00f3w Chamber Choir, \"Amar Corde\" String Quartet, \"Consortium Iagellonicum\" Baroque Orchestra of the Jagiellonian University, Brass Band of T. Sendzimir Steelworks, and \"Camerata\" Chamber Orchestra of Radio Krak\u00f3w.\nTourism.\nAccording to official statistics, in 2019 Krak\u00f3w was visited by over 14\u00a0million tourists including 3.3\u00a0million foreign travellers. The visitors spent over 7.5\u00a0billion zloty (ca. \u20ac1.7\u00a0billion) in the city (without travel costs and pre-booked accommodation). Most foreign tourists came from Germany (14.2%), United Kingdom (13.9%), Italy (11.5%), France (11.2%), Spain (10.4%) and Ukraine (5.4%). The Krak\u00f3w tour-guide from the Lesser Poland Visitors Bureau indicated that not all statistics are recorded due to the considerable number of those who come, staying in readily available private rooms paid for by cash, especially from Eastern Europe.&lt;ref name=\"rp.pl/398262\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThe main reasons for visiting the city are: its historical monuments, recreation as well as relatives and friends (placing third in the ranking), religion and business. There are 120 quality hotels in Krak\u00f3w (usually about half full) offering 15,485 overnight accommodations. The average stay lasts for about 4 to 7 nights. The survey conducted among the travelers showed that they enjoyed the city's friendliness most, with 90% of Polish tourists and 87% foreigners stating that they would recommend visiting it. Notable points of interest outside the city include the Wieliczka Salt Mine, the Tatra Mountains to the south, the historic city of Cz\u0119stochowa (north-west), the well-preserved former Nazi concentration camp at Auschwitz, and Ojcowski National Park, which includes the Renaissance Castle at Pieskowa Ska\u0142a. Krak\u00f3w has been awarded a number of top international rankings such as the 1st place in the \"Top city-break destinations 2014\" survey conducted by the British consumer association \"Which?\".\nSports.\nFootball is the most popular sport in the city. The two football teams with the largest following are thirteen-time Polish champion Wis\u0142a Krak\u00f3w, and five-time champion Cracovia, both founded in 1906 as the oldest still existing in Poland. They have been involved in the most intense rivalry in the country and one of the most intense in all of Europe, known as the Holy War (\"\"). Other football clubs include Hutnik Krak\u00f3w, Wawel Krak\u00f3w, Wieczysta Krak\u00f3w and one-time Polish champion Garbarnia Krak\u00f3w. There is also the first-league rugby club Juvenia Krak\u00f3w. Krak\u00f3w has a number of additional, equally valued sports teams including twelve-time Polish ice hockey champions Cracovia and the twenty-time women's basketball champions Wis\u0142a Krak\u00f3w. The Cracovia Marathon, with thousands of participants from two dozen countries annually, has been held in the city since 2002.\nThe construction of a new Tauron Arena Krak\u00f3w began in May 2010; for concerts, indoor athletics, hockey, basketball, futsal and other events. The facility has an area of 61,434 m2, with a maximum arena court area of 4,546 m2. The average capacity is 18,000 for concerts, and 15,000 for sport events, with the maximum number of spectators being 22,000. The Arena boasts Poland's largest LED media fa\u00e7ade, with a total surface of 5,200 m2 of LED strip lighting, wrapping around the stadium, and one of Europe's largest LED screens, measuring over 540 m2.\nKrak\u00f3w was the host city of the 2014 FIVB Men's Volleyball World Championship and 2016 European Men's Handball Championship. It was also selected as the European City of Sport for 2014. Krak\u00f3w was bidding to host the 2022 Winter Olympics with Jasn\u00e1 but the bid was rejected by a majority (69.72%) of the vote in a referendum on 16\u00a0May 2014. Krakow and the Malopolska region hosted the 2023 European Games from 21 June to 2 July 2023. More than 7,000 athletes representing 49 countries participated.\nInternational relations.\nConsulates.\nThere are eight consulates general in Krak\u00f3w \u2013 Austria, France, Germany, Hungary, Russia, Slovakia, Ukraine, United States, three honorary consulates general \u2013 India, Japan, Turkey, 24 honorary consulates \u2013 Belgium, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Indonesia, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Mongolia, Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Uruguay, and a Representative of the Government of Kurdistan Region.\nContemporary foreign names for the city.\nKrak\u00f3w is referred to by various names in different languages. An old English name for the city is Cracow; though it has become less common in recent decades, some sources still use it. The city is known in Czech, Slovak and Serbian as \"Krakov\", in Hungarian as , in Lithuanian as , in Finnish as , in German and Dutch as , in Latin, Spanish and Italian as , in French as , in Portuguese as and in Russian as \u041a\u0440\u0430\u043a\u043e\u0432. Ukrainian and Yiddish languages refer to it as (\u041a\u0440\u0430\u043a\u0456\u0432) and () respectively.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nKrak\u00f3w is twinned, or maintains close relations, with 36 cities around the world:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16817", "revid": "4626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16817", "title": "Kepler-poinsot solid", "text": ""}
{"id": "16818", "revid": "26618737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16818", "title": "Kora (instrument)", "text": "Stringed instrument from West Africa\nThe kora (Manding languages: \"k\u0254ra\") is a stringed instrument used extensively in West Africa. A kora typically has 21 strings, which are played by plucking with the fingers. It has features of the lute and harp.\nDescription.\nThe kora is built from a gourd, cut in half and covered with cow skin to make a resonator with a long hardwood neck. The skin is supported by two handles that run underneath it. It has 21 strings, each of which plays a different note. These strings are supported by a notched, double free-standing bridge. The kora doesn't fit into any one category of musical instrument, but rather several, and must be classified as a \"double-bridge-harp-lute.\" The strings run in two divided ranks, characteristic of a double harp. They do not end in a soundboard but are instead held in notches on a bridge, classifying it as a bridge harp. The strings originate from a string arm or neck and cross a bridge directly supported by a resonating chamber, also making it a lute.\nThe sound of a kora resembles that of a harp, though when played in the traditional style it bears resemblance to a guitar played using the flamenco or Delta blues technique of plucking polyrhythmic patterns with both hands (using the remaining fingers to secure the instrument by holding the hand posts on either side of the strings). Ostinato riffs (\"kumbengo\") and improvised solo runs (\"birimintingo\") are played at the same time by skilled players.\nKora players have traditionally come from jali families (also from the Mandinka tribes) who are traditional historians, genealogists and storytellers who pass their skills on to their descendants. Though played in Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mali and Senegal, the instrument was first discovered in the Gambia. While those from neighbouring Guinea were known to carry the lute, Senegalese Griots were known as carriers of a hand drum known as the 'sabar'. Most West African musicians prefer the term \"jali\" to \"griot,\" which is the French word. \"Jali\" means something similar to a \"bard\" or oral historian.\nTraditional koras feature strings, eleven played by the left hand and ten by the right. Modern koras made in the Casamance region of southern Senegal sometimes feature additional bass strings, adding up to four strings to the traditional 21. Strings were traditionally made from thin strips of hide, such as cow or antelope skin. Today, most strings are made from harp strings or nylon fishing line, sometimes plaited together to create thicker strings.\nA vital accessory in the past was the nyenmyemo, a leaf-shaped plate of tin or brass with wire loops threaded around the edge. Clamped to the bridge, or the top end of the neck it produced sympathetic sounds, serving as an amplifier since the sound carried well into the open air. In today's environment, players usually prefer or need an electronic pickup.\nBy moving the konso (a system of leather tuning rings) up and down the neck, a kora player can retune the instrument into one of four seven-note scales. These scales are close in tuning to western major, minor and Lydian modes.\nHistory.\nPossible Antecedents.\nIn the 1300s, the traveller Ibn Battuta mentioned that the women who accompanied Dugha to perform were carrying bows that they plucked. He did not mention the number of strings, but this clearly shows the existence of harp instruments in 14th century Mali and could be the earliest written reference to the kora. The kora is designed like a bow with a gourd, similarly to Ibn Battuta's description, but Battuta did not go into enough detail about the instruments for them to be identifiable. \nLegendary Origin.\nMandinka oral tradition preserves several legends of the origin of the kora, but all of them claim that the instrument originated in Kaabu. In the stories, the famous Jali Mady Wouling https:// purchased the instrument from a djinn or spirit. and was the https://, the first song played was kelefaba.\nModern history.\nThe earliest European reference to the kora in Western literature is in \"Travels in Interior Districts of Africa\" (1799) by the Scotsman \nMungo Park. \nThe kora is mentioned in the Senegalese national anthem \"Pincez tous vos koras, frappez les balafons.\"\nIn the late 20th century, a 25-string model of the kora was developed, though it has been adopted by only a few players, primarily in the region of Casamance, in southern Senegal. Some kora players such as Seckou Keita have double necked koras, allowing them to switch from one tuning to another within seconds, giving them increased flexibility.\nThe French Benedictine monks of the Keur Moussa Abbey in Senegal (who possibly were the first to introduce guitar machine heads instead of leather rings in the late seventies) conceived a method based on scores to teach the instrument. Brother Dominique Catta, choirmaster of the Keur Moussa Abbey, was the first Western composer who wrote for the kora (solo pieces as well as duets with Western instruments).\nAn electric instrument modeled on the kora (but made primarily of metal) called the gravikord was invented in the late 20th century by instrument builder and musician Robert Grawi. It has 24 strings and is tuned and played differently than the kora. Another instrument, the gravi-kora, a 21-stringed electro-acoustic instrument, was later developed by Robert Grawi especially for kora players who wanted a modern instrument. Its playing and tuning are the same as the traditional kora. The gravi-kora has been adopted by kora players such as Daniel Berkman, Jacques Burtin, and Foday Musa Suso, who featured it in recordings with jazz innovator Herbie Hancock, with his band \"Mandingo\", and on Suso's \"New World Power\" album.\nTuning.\nNowadays, koras are increasingly made with guitar machine heads instead of the traditional konso (leather rings). The advantage is that they are much easier to tune. The disadvantage is that this design limits the tuning range of the instrument because string lengths are more fixed and lighter strings are needed to lift it much more than a tone. Learning to tune a traditional kora is arguably as difficult as learning to play it, and many tourists who are entranced by the sound while in West Africa buy koras and then find themselves unable to keep it in tune once they are home, relegating it to the status of ornament. Koras can be converted to replace the leather rings with machine heads. Wooden pegs and harp pegs are also used, but both can still cause tuning problems in damper climates unless made with great skill. \nScores.\nAs part of the oral tradition of West Africa, music for the kora was not written until the 20th century. Ethnomusicologists were the only ones to record some traditional airs in the normal grand staff method, using the G clef and the F clef.\nToday, kora scores are written on a single G clef, following the Keur Moussa notation system. This notation system was created for the kora in the late 1970s by Brother Dominique Catta, a monk of the Keur Moussa Monastery (Senegal). The seven low notes that should be written on the F clef are replaced by Arabic or Roman numerals and written on the G clef.\nWhile jali still compose in the traditional way (without writing scores), some Western musicians began to write partitures for the kora and adopted the Keur Moussa notation system at the beginning of the 1980s. More than 200 scores have already been written for kora solo or kora and Western instruments. Two notable Western composers for the kora are Brother Dominique Catta and Jacques Burtin (France), who wrote most of these scores, though composers like Carole Ouellet (Canada), Brother Gr\u00e9goire Philippe (Monast\u00e8re de Keur Moussa) and Sister Claire Marie Ledoux (France) have also contributed with their own original works.\nDerek Gripper (Cape Town, South Africa) has transcribed a number of West African kora compositions by Toumani Diabat\u00e9 and others for performance on western-style classical guitar, and has performed some of these transcriptions on two recordings and in concert from 2012 through 2017.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16819", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16819", "title": "K-12 School", "text": ""}
{"id": "16820", "revid": "1119262", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16820", "title": "Kathleen Kenyon", "text": "British archaeologist (1906\u20131978)\nDame Kathleen Mary Kenyon, (5 January 1906 \u2013 24 August 1978) was a British archaeologist of Neolithic culture in the Fertile Crescent. She led excavations of Tell es-Sultan, the site of ancient Jericho, from 1952 to 1958, and has been called one of the most influential archaeologists of the 20th century. She was Principal of St Hugh's College, Oxford, from 1962 to 1973, having undertaken her own studies at Somerville College, Oxford.\nBiography.\nKathleen Kenyon was born in London, England, in 1906. She was the eldest daughter of Sir Frederic Kenyon, biblical scholar and later director of the British Museum. Her grandfather was lawyer and Fellow of All Souls College, John Robert Kenyon, and her great-great-grandfather was the politician and lawyer Lloyd Kenyon, 1st Baron Kenyon. She grew up in Bloomsbury, in a house attached to the British Museum, with her mother, Amy Kenyon, and sister Nora Kenyon. Known for being hard-headed and stubborn, Kathleen grew up as a tomboy, fishing, climbing trees and playing a variety of sports.\nDetermined that she and her sister should be well educated, Kathleen's father encouraged wide reading and independent study. In later years Kenyon would remark that her father's position at the British Museum was particularly helpful for her education. Kathleen was an excellent student, winning awards at school and particularly excelling in history. She studied first at St Paul's Girls' School, where she was head girl, before winning an Exhibition to read history at Somerville College, Oxford. While at Oxford, Kenyon won a Blue in hockey and became the first female president of the Oxford University Archaeological Society. She graduated in 1928 with a third class degree and began a career in archaeology the following year.\nAlthough working on several important sites across Europe, it was her excavations in Tell es-Sultan (Jericho) in the 1950s that established her as one of the foremost archaeologists in the field. In 1962, Kenyon was made Principal of St Hugh's College, Oxford. She retired in 1973 to Erbistock and was appointed a DBE. Kenyon never married. From 1974, Kenyon was the honorary vice president of the Chester Archaeological Society.\nArchaeological career.\nA career in archaeology was first suggested to Kathleen by Margery Fry, librarian at Somerville College. After graduation Kenyon's first field experience was as a photographer for the pioneering excavations at Great Zimbabwe in 1929, led by Gertrude Caton Thompson. \nReturning to England, Kenyon joined the archaeologist couple Tessa Wheeler and her husband Mortimer Wheeler on their excavation of the Romano-British settlement of Verulamium (St Albans), 20 miles North of London. Working there each summer between 1930 and 1935, Kenyon learned from Mortimer Wheeler the discipline of meticulously controlled and recorded stratigraphic excavation. \nIn the years 1931 to 1934, Kenyon worked simultaneously at Samaria, then under the administration of the British Mandate for Palestine, with John and Grace Crowfoot. There she cut a stratigraphic trench across the summit of the mound and down the Northern and Southern slopes, exposing the Iron II to the Roman period stratigraphic sequence of the site. In addition to providing crucial dating material for the Iron Age stratigraphy of Palestine, she obtained key stratified data for the study of late Hellenistic and early Roman eastern \"terra sigilata\" wares. In 1957, Kenyon introduced categories A, B, C, to classify eastern \"sigillata\" but without determining the exact place of manufacture. In 1934, Kenyon was closely associated with the Wheelers in the foundation of the Institute of Archaeology of University College London. \nIn the years leading up to the Second World War work in the Middle East became increasingly difficult, so, from 1936 to 1939, she carried out important excavations at the Jewry Wall in Leicester. The excavations were published in February 1937 in the \"Illustrated London News\" with pioneering reconstruction drawings by the artist Alan Sorrell whom she had happened to notice sketching her dig. Kenyon initially thought the overall Jewry Wall site was that of the town forum. Although she modified her views when she uncovered the remains of the baths, she continued to believe that the area had originally been laid out as the forum, with the Jewry Wall the west wall of the basilica, but argued that in a second phase of building the site had been converted to public baths. In a series of excavations undertaken between 1961 and 1972, the true remains of the forum were identified further east. The Jewry Wall was then identified as the wall of the \"palaestra\" (gymnasium) of the baths complex.\nDigging Jericho.\nDuring the Second World War, Kenyon served as Divisional Commander of the British Red Cross in Hammersmith, London, and later as acting director and secretary of the Institute of Archaeology of the University of London.\nAfter the war, she excavated in Southwark, at The Wrekin, Shropshire, and elsewhere in Britain, as well as at Sabratha, a Roman city in Libya. As a member of the Council of the British School of Archaeology in Jerusalem (BSAJ), Kenyon was involved in the efforts to reopen the School after the hiatus of the Second World War. In January 1951 she travelled to Transjordan and undertook excavations in the West Bank at Jericho (Tell es-Sultan) on behalf of the BSAJ. The initial findings were first viewed by the public in the Dome of Discovery at the Festival of Britain 1951 with a reconstruction drawing by Alan Sorrell. Her work at Jericho, from 1952 until 1958, made her world-famous and established a lasting legacy in the archaeological methodology of the Levant. Ground-breaking discoveries concerning the Neolithic cultures of the Levant were made in this ancient settlement. Her excavation of the Early Bronze Age walled city and the external cemeteries of the end of the Early Bronze Age, together with her analysis of the stratified pottery of these periods established her as the leading authority on that period. Kenyon focused her attention on the absence of certain Cypriot pottery at City IV, arguing for an older destruction date than that of her predecessors. Jericho was recognised as the oldest continuously occupied settlement in history because of her discoveries. At the same time she also completed the publication of the excavations at Samaria. Her volume, \"Samaria Sebaste III: The Objects\", appeared in 1957. Having completed her excavations at Tell es-Sultan in 1958, Kenyon excavated in Jerusalem from 1961 to 1967, concentrating on the 'City of David' to the immediate south of the Temple Mount.\nAlthough Kenyon had no doubt the sites she excavated were linked to the Old Testament narrative, she nevertheless drew attention to inconsistencies, concluding that Solomon's \"stables\" at Megiddo were totally impractical for holding horses (1978:72), and that Jericho fell long before Joshua's arrival (1978:35). Consequently, Kenyon's work has been cited to support the minimalist school of Biblical archaeology.\nLegacy.\nKenyon's legacy in the field of excavation technique and ceramic methodology is attested to by Larry G. Herr, one of the directors of the Madaba Plains Project. He attributes to her directly the first of the key events (after the advances made by William Foxwell Albright at Tell Beit Mirsim in the 1920s) that brought about our modern understanding of pottery in the southern Levant:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The first event was the refinement of stratigraphic techniques that Kathleen Kenyon's dig at Jericho catalyzed. The strict separation of earth layers, or archaeological sediments, also allowed the strict separation of ceramic assemblages\".\nHerr detects Kenyon's powerful indirect influence in the second event that promoted advance within ceramic methodology, namely:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"the importation of Kenyon's digging techniques by Larry Toombs and Joe Callaway to Ernest Wright's project at Balata. Here, they combined Wright's interest in ceramic typology in the best Albright tradition with Kenyon's methods of excavation, which allowed the isolation of clear, stratigraphically determined pottery assemblages\".\nHerr summarises the somewhat mixed nature of Kenyon's legacy: for all the positive advances, there were also shortcomings:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFrom 1948 to 1962, she lectured in Levantine archaeology at the Institute of Archaeology, University College London. Kenyon's teaching complemented her excavations at Jericho and Jerusalem. In 1962, she was appointed Principal of St Hugh's College, Oxford.\nAwards and commemoration.\nIn the 1973 New Year Honours, following her retirement from Oxford, she was appointed a Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) \"for services to archaeology\"; she had received the CBE in the 1954 New Year Honours. She was an elected Fellow of the British Academy (FBA) and of the Society of Antiquaries of London (FSA). She was made a Grand Officer of the Order of Independence by the King of Jordan in 1977.\nThe British School of Archaeology in Jerusalem, amalgamated within the Council for British Research in the Levant (CBRL) in 1998, was officially renamed the Kenyon Institute on 10 July 2003 in honour of Kathleen Kenyon.\nAt St Hugh's College, Oxford, the Kenyon Building was constructed between 1964 and 1965 to provide student accommodation; designed by modern architect David Roberts, the building has already been given a heritage listing. In 2025, the University of Leicester announced that their first academic building to be named after a woman would be the Kathleen Kenyon Building, housing its Schools of Archaeology &amp; Ancient History and Museum Studies, which merged on 1 August 2025 to form the School of Heritage &amp; Culture.\nKenyon collections.\nThe Kathleen Kenyon Archaeology Collection, a collection of Kenyon's books and papers from her home office purchased from her estate in 1984, is housed at Baylor University in Waco, Texas. Baylor Libraries do not hold the copyright for these materials.\nThe finds from her excavations are held in a number of collections, including the British Museum, the British Institute for Libyan and Northern African Studies and the UCL Institute of Archaeology, while the bulk of archive material is located at the Manchester Museum.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16821", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16821", "title": "Callicrates", "text": "5th-century BC Greek architect\nCallicrates or Kallikrates (; ) was an ancient Greek architect active in the middle of the fifth century BC. He and Ictinus were architects of the Parthenon (Plutarch, \"Pericles\", 13). An inscription identifies him as the architect of \"the Temple of Nike\" on the Acropolis of Athens (IG I3 35). The temple in question is either the amphiprostyle Temple of Athena Nike now visible on the site or a small-scale predecessor (naiskos) whose remains were found in the later temple's foundations. \nAn inscription identifies Callicrates as one of the architects of the Classical circuit wall of the Acropolis (IG I3 45), and Plutarch further states (loc. cit.) that he was contracted to build the middle of three defensive walls linking Athens and Piraeus.\nA crater on the planet Mercury was named in his honor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16822", "revid": "18685076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16822", "title": "Kingdom of Jerusalem", "text": "Crusader state in the Levant from 1099 to 1291\nThe Kingdom of Jerusalem, also known as the Crusader Kingdom, was one of the Crusader states established in the Levant immediately after the First Crusade. It lasted for almost 200 years, from the accession of Godfrey of Bouillon in 1099 until the fall of Acre in 1291. Its history is divided into two periods with a brief interruption in its existence, beginning with its collapse after the siege of Jerusalem in 1187 and its restoration after the Third Crusade in 1192.\nThe original kingdom lasted from 1099 to 1187 before being almost entirely overrun by the Ayyubid Sultanate under Saladin. Following the Third Crusade, it was re-established in Acre in 1192. The re-established state is commonly known as the \"Second Kingdom of Jerusalem\" or alternatively as the \"Kingdom of Acre\" after its new capital city. Acre remained the capital for the rest of its existence, even during the two decades that followed the Crusaders' establishment of partial control over Jerusalem during the Sixth Crusade, through the diplomacy of Emperor Frederick II.\nThe vast majority of the Crusaders who settled the Kingdom of Jerusalem were from the Kingdom of France, as were the knights and soldiers who made up the bulk of the steady flow of reinforcements throughout its 200-year existence; its rulers and elite were therefore predominantly French. French Crusaders brought their language to the Levant, thus establishing Old French as the \"lingua franca\" of the Crusader states, in which Latin served as the official language. While the majority of the population in the countryside comprised Christians and Muslims from local Levantine ethnicities, many Europeans (primarily French and Italian) also arrived to settle in villages across the region.\nGeographic boundaries.\nAt first, the kingdom was little more than a loose collection of towns and cities captured during the First Crusade, but at its height in the mid-12th century, the kingdom encompassed roughly the territory of modern-day Israel, Palestine, and the southern half of Lebanon, including Beirut. From the Mediterranean Sea, the kingdom extended in a thin strip of land from Beirut in the north to the Sinai Desert in the south; into modern Jordan and Syria in the east, and towards Egypt in the west. Three other Crusader states founded during and after the First Crusade were located further north: the County of Edessa (1097\u20131144), the Principality of Antioch (1098\u20131268), and the County of Tripoli (1109\u20131289). While all were independent, they were closely tied to Jerusalem. Beyond these to the north and west lay the states of Armenian Cilicia and the Byzantine Empire, with which Jerusalem had a close relationship in the 12th century. Further east, various Muslim emirates were ultimately allied with the Abbasid Caliphate in Baghdad. The kingdom was increasingly dominated by the Italian city-states of Venice and Genoa.\nThe Holy Roman Emperor, Frederick II (reigned 1220\u20131250), had ambitions in the Crusader state, claiming the kingdom by marriage, but his presence sparked a civil war (1228\u20131243) among the kingdom's nobility. The kingdom became little more than a pawn in the politics and warfare of the Ayyubid and Mamluk dynasties in Egypt, as well as the Khwarezmian and Mongol invaders. As a relatively minor kingdom, it received little financial or military support from Europe; despite numerous small expeditions, Europeans generally proved unwilling to undertake an expensive journey to the east for an apparently losing cause. The Mamluk sultans Baibars (reigned 1260\u20131277) and al-Ashraf Khalil (reigned 1290\u20131293) eventually reconquered all the remaining Crusader strongholds, culminating in the destruction of Acre in 1291.\nPeople.\nThe kingdom was ethnically, religiously, and linguistically diverse, although the Crusaders established themselves and their descendants as an elite Catholic minority. They imported many customs and institutions from their homelands in Europe, and there were close familial and political connections with the West throughout the kingdom's existence. The kingdom also inherited \"oriental\" qualities, influenced by pre-existing customs and populations. The majority of the kingdom's inhabitants were native Christians, especially Greek and Syriac Orthodox, as well as Sunni and Shi'a Muslims. The native Christians and Muslims, who were a marginalized lower class, tended to speak Greek and Arabic, while the Crusaders, who came mainly from the Kingdom of France, spoke French. There were also a small number of Jews and Samaritans.\nAccording to Benjamin of Tudela, who travelled through the kingdom around 1170, there were 1,000 Samaritans in Nablus, 200 in Caesarea and 300 in Ascalon. This sets a lower bound for the Samaritan population at 1,500, since the contemporary Samaritan chronicle \"Tolidah\" mentions communities in Gaza and Acre as well. Benjamin of Tudela estimates the total Jewish population of 14 cities in the kingdom to be 1,200, making the Samaritan population of the time larger than the Jewish, perhaps for the only time in history.\nHistory.\nFirst Crusade and the foundation of the kingdom.\nThe First Crusade was preached at the Council of Clermont in 1095 by Pope Urban II, with the goal of assisting the Byzantine Empire against the invasions of the \"Turks and Arabs\" and \"to destroy this vile race from the lands of our friends.\" However, the main objective quickly became the control of the Holy Land. The Byzantines were frequently at war with the Seljuks and other Turkish dynasties for control of Anatolia and Syria. The Sunni Seljuks had formerly ruled the Seljuk Empire, but this empire had collapsed into several smaller states after the death of Malik-Shah I in 1092. Malik-Shah was succeeded in the Anatolian Sultanate of Rum by Kilij Arslan I, and in Syria by his brother Tutush I, who died in 1095. Tutush's sons Fakhr al-Mulk Radwan and Duqaq inherited Aleppo and Damascus respectively, further dividing Syria amongst emirs antagonistic towards each other, as well as Kerbogha, the atabeg of Mosul. This disunity among the Anatolian and Syrian emirs allowed the Crusaders to overcome any military opposition they faced on the way to Jerusalem.\nEgypt and much of Palestine were controlled by the Fatimid Caliphate, which had extended further into Syria before the arrival of the Seljuks. Warfare between the Fatimids and Seljuks caused great disruption for the local Christians and for Western pilgrims. The Fatimids, under the nominal rule of caliph al-Musta'li but actually controlled by vizier al-Afdal Shahanshah, had lost Jerusalem to the Seljuks in 1073; they recaptured it in 1098 from the Artuqids, a smaller Turkish tribe associated with the Seljuks, just before the arrival of the Crusaders.\nThe Crusaders arrived at Jerusalem in June 1099; a few of the neighbouring towns (Ramla, Lydda, Bethlehem, and others) were taken first, and Jerusalem was captured on 15 July. On 22 July a council was held in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre to establish a king for the newly created Kingdom of Jerusalem. Raymond IV, Count of Toulouse and Godfrey of Bouillon were recognized as the leaders of the crusade and the siege of Jerusalem. Raymond was the wealthier and more powerful of the two, but at first he refused to become king, perhaps attempting to show his piety and probably hoping that the other nobles would insist upon his election anyway. The more popular Godfrey did not hesitate like Raymond, and he accepted the position as leader. Most modern historians chronicle that he took the title \"Advocatus Sancti Sepulchri\" (\"advocate\" or \"defender\" of the Holy Sepulchre). Others report that Godfrey seems to have used the more ambiguous term \"princeps\", or simply retained his title of \"dux\" from Lower Lorraine. According to William of Tyre, writing in the mid-12th century when Godfrey had become a legendary hero, he refused to wear \"a crown of gold\" where Christ had worn \"a crown of thorns\". Raymond was incensed and took his army to forage away from the city. The new kingdom, and Godfrey's reputation, was secured with the defeat of the Egyptian army under al-Afdal Shahanshah at the Battle of Ascalon on 12 August, but Raymond and Godfrey's continued antagonism prevented the Crusaders from taking control of Ascalon.\nThere was still some uncertainty about what to do with the new kingdom. The papal legate Daimbert of Pisa convinced Godfrey to hand over Jerusalem to him as Latin patriarch, with the intention to set up a theocratic state directly under papal control. According to William of Tyre, Godfrey may have supported Daimbert's efforts, and he agreed to take possession of \"one or two other cities and thus enlarge the kingdom\" if Daimbert were permitted to rule Jerusalem. Godfrey did indeed increase the boundaries of the kingdom by capturing Jaffa, Haifa, Tiberias, and other cities, and reducing many others to tributary status. He set the foundations for the system of vassalage in the kingdom, establishing the Principality of Galilee and the County of Jaffa, but his reign was short, and he died of an illness in 1100. His brother Baldwin of Boulogne successfully outmanoeuvred Daimbert and claimed Jerusalem for himself as \"King of the Latins of Jerusalem\". Daimbert compromised by crowning Baldwin in Bethlehem rather than Jerusalem, but the path for a monarchy in Jerusalem had been laid. Within this framework, a Catholic church hierarchy was established, overtop of the local Eastern Orthodox and Syriac Orthodox authorities, who retained their own hierarchies (the Catholics considered them schismatics and thus illegitimate, and vice versa). Under the Latin patriarch, there were four suffragan archdioceses and numerous dioceses.\nExpansion.\nDuring Baldwin's reign, the kingdom expanded further. The number of European inhabitants increased, as the minor Crusade of 1101 brought reinforcements to the kingdom. Baldwin repopulated Jerusalem with Franks and native Christians, after his expedition across the Jordan in 1115. With help from the Italian city-states and other adventurers, notably King Sigurd I of Norway, Baldwin captured the port cities of Acre (1104), Beirut (1110), and Sidon (1111), while exerting his suzerainty over the other Crusader states to the north \u2013 Edessa (which he had founded in 1097 during the crusade), Antioch, and Tripoli, which he helped capture in 1109. He successfully defended against Muslim invasions, from the Fatimids at the numerous battles at Ramla and elsewhere in the southwest of the kingdom, and from Damascus and Mosul at the Battle of al-Sannabra in the northeast in 1113. As historian Thomas Madden says, Baldwin was \"the true founder of the kingdom of Jerusalem\", who \"had transformed a tenuous arrangement into a solid feudal state. With brilliance and diligence, he established a strong monarchy, conquered the Palestinian coast, reconciled the crusader barons, and built strong frontiers against the kingdom's Muslim neighbours.\"\nBaldwin brought with him an Armenian wife, traditionally named Arda (although never named such by contemporaries), whom he had married to gain political support from the Armenian population in Edessa, and whom he quickly set aside when he no longer needed Armenian support in Jerusalem. He bigamously married Adelaide del Vasto, regent of Sicily, in 1113, but was convinced to divorce her as well in 1117; Adelaide's son from her first marriage, Roger II of Sicily, never forgave Jerusalem and for decades withheld much-needed Sicilian naval support.\nBaldwin died without heirs in 1118 during a campaign against Egypt, and the kingdom was offered to his brother Eustace III of Boulogne, who had accompanied Baldwin and Godfrey on the crusade. Eustace was uninterested, and instead the crown passed to Baldwin's relative, probably a cousin, Baldwin of Le Bourg, who had previously succeeded him in Edessa. Baldwin II was an able ruler, and he too successfully defended against Fatimid and Seljuk invasions. Although Antioch was severely weakened after the Battle of Ager Sanguinis in 1119, and Baldwin was held captive by the emir of Aleppo from 1123 to 1124, Baldwin led the Crusader states to victory at the Battle of Azaz in 1125. His reign saw the establishment of the first military orders, the Knights Hospitaller and the Knights Templar; the earliest surviving written laws of the kingdom, compiled at the Council of Nablus in 1120; and the first commercial treaty with the Republic of Venice, the , in 1124. The increase of naval and military support from Venice led to the capture of Tyre that year. The influence of Jerusalem was further extended over Edessa and Antioch, where Baldwin acted as regent when their own leaders were killed in battle, although there were regency governments in Jerusalem as well during Baldwin's captivity. Baldwin was married to the Armenian noblewoman Morphia of Melitene and had four daughters: Hodierna and Alice, who married into the families of the Count of Tripoli and Prince of Antioch; Ioveta, who became an influential abbess; and the eldest, Melisende, who was his heir and succeeded him upon his death in 1131, with her husband Fulk V of Anjou as king-consort. Their son, the future Baldwin III, was named co-heir by his grandfather.\nEdessa, Damascus, and the Second Crusade.\nFulk was an experienced Crusader and had brought military support to the kingdom during a pilgrimage in 1120. He brought Jerusalem into the sphere of the Angevin Empire, as the father of Geoffrey V of Anjou and grandfather of the future Henry II of England. Not everyone appreciated the imposition of a foreigner as king. In 1132 Antioch, Tripoli, and Edessa all asserted their independence and conspired to prevent Fulk from exercising the suzerainty of Jerusalem over them. He defeated Tripoli in battle and settled the regency in Antioch by arranging a marriage between the countess, Melisende's niece Constance, and his own relative Raymond of Poitiers. Meanwhile, in Jerusalem, the native Crusader nobles opposed Fulk's preference for his Angevin retinue. In 1134 Hugh II of Jaffa revolted against Fulk, allying with the Muslim garrison at Ascalon, for which he was convicted of treason . The Latin patriarch William of Malines intervened to settle the dispute, but an assassination attempt was made on Hugh, for which Fulk was blamed. This scandal allowed Melisende and her supporters to gain control of the government, just as her father had intended. Accordingly, Fulk \"became so uxorious that...not even in unimportant cases did he take any measures without her knowledge and assistance.\"\nFulk was faced with a new and more dangerous enemy: the atabeg Zengi of Mosul, who had taken control of Aleppo and had set his sights on Damascus as well; the union of these three states would have been a serious blow to the growing power of Jerusalem. A brief intervention in 1137\u20131138 by Byzantine Emperor John II Comnenus, who wished to assert imperial suzerainty over all the Crusader states, did nothing to stop the threat of Zengi; in 1139 Damascus and Jerusalem recognized the severity of the threat to both states, and an alliance was concluded which halted Zengi's advance. Fulk used this time to construct numerous castles, including Ibelin and Kerak. After the death of both Fulk and Emperor John in separate hunting accidents in 1143, Zengi invaded and conquered Edessa in 1144. Queen Melisende, now regent for her elder son Baldwin III, appointed Manasses of Hierges as constable to head the army after Fulk's death, but Edessa could not be recaptured. The fall of Edessa shocked Europe, and a Second Crusade arrived in 1148.\nAfter meeting in Acre in June, the crusading kings Louis VII of France and Conrad III of Germany agreed with Melisende, Baldwin and the major nobles of the kingdom to attack Damascus. Zengi's territory had been divided amongst his sons after his death in 1145, and Damascus no longer felt threatened, so an alliance had been made with Zengi's son Nur ad-Din, the emir of Aleppo. Perhaps remembering attacks launched on Jerusalem from Damascus in previous decades, Damascus seemed to be the best target for the crusade, rather than Aleppo or another city to the north which would have allowed for the recapture of Edessa. The subsequent Siege of Damascus was a complete failure; when the city seemed to be on the verge of collapse, the Crusader army suddenly moved against another section of the walls, and was driven back. The Crusaders retreated within three days. There were rumours of treachery and bribery, and Conrad felt betrayed by the nobility of Jerusalem. Whatever the reason for the failure, the French and German armies returned home, and a few years later Damascus was firmly under Nur ad-Din's control.\nCivil war.\nThe failure of the Second Crusade had dire long-term consequences for the kingdom. The West was hesitant to send large-scale expeditions; for the next few decades, only small armies came, headed by minor European nobles who desired to make pilgrimage. The Muslim states of Syria were meanwhile gradually united by Nur ad-Din, who defeated the Principality of Antioch at the Battle of Inab in 1149 and gained control of Damascus in 1154. Nur ad-Din was pious, and during his rule the concept of jihad came to be interpreted as a kind of counter-crusade against the kingdom, which was an impediment to Muslim unity, both political and spiritual.\nIn Jerusalem, the Crusaders were distracted by a conflict between Melisende and Baldwin. Melisende continued to rule as regent long after Baldwin came of age. She was supported by Manasses of Hierges, who essentially governed for her as constable; her son Amalric, whom she set up as count of Jaffa; Philip of Milly; and the Ibelin family. Baldwin asserted his independence by mediating disputes in Antioch and Tripoli, and he gained the support of the Ibelin brothers when they began to oppose Manasses' growing power, thanks to his marriage to their widowed mother Helvis of Ramla. In 1153 Baldwin had himself crowned as sole ruler, and a compromise was reached by which the kingdom was divided in two, with Baldwin taking Acre and Tyre in the north and Melisende remaining in control of Jerusalem and the cities of the south. Baldwin was able to replace Manasses with one of his own supporters, Humphrey II of Toron. Baldwin and Melisende knew that this situation was untenable. Baldwin invaded his mother's possessions, defeated Manasses, and besieged his mother in the Tower of David in Jerusalem. Melisende surrendered and retired to Nablus, but Baldwin appointed her his regent and chief advisor, and she retained some of her influence, especially in appointing ecclesiastical officials. In 1153 Baldwin launched an offensive against Ascalon, the fortress in the south from which Fatimid Egyptian armies had continually raided Jerusalem since the foundation of the kingdom. The fortress was captured and was added to the County of Jaffa.\nByzantine alliance and invasion of Egypt.\nWith the capture of Ascalon the southern border of the kingdom was secure, and Egypt\u2014formerly a major threat to the kingdom but destabilized under the reign of several underaged caliphs\u2014was reduced to a tributary state. Nur ad-Din remained a threat in the east, and Baldwin had to contend with the advances of Byzantine Emperor Manuel I Comnenus, who claimed suzerainty over the Principality of Antioch. In order to bolster the defences of the kingdom against the growing strength of the Muslims, Baldwin made the first direct alliance with the Byzantine Empire by marrying Theodora Comnena, a niece of Manuel; Manuel married Baldwin's cousin Maria. As William of Tyre put it, it was hoped that Manuel would be able \"to relieve from his own abundance the distress under which our realm was suffering and to change our poverty into superabundance\". The relationship between Byzantium and Jerusalem has divided historians, with some historians supporting the Byzantine interpretation that Amalric recognised Manuel as his overlord, while other scholars such as Andrew Jotischky see the relationship as one of Byzantine protection of Orthodox Christians in Jerusalem.\nWhen Baldwin died childless in 1162, a year after his mother Melisende, the kingdom passed to Amalric, who renewed the alliance negotiated by Baldwin. In 1163 the chaotic situation in Egypt led to a refusal to pay tribute to Jerusalem, and Egyptian vizier Shawar sent request Nur ad-Din for assistance. In response, Amalric invaded Egypt but was turned back when the Egyptians flooded the Nile at Bilbeis. Shawar again requested help from Nur ad-Din, who sent his general Shirkuh, but Shawar quickly turned against him and allied with Amalric. Amalric and Shirkuh both besieged Bilbeis in 1164, but both withdrew due to Nur ad-Din's campaigns against Antioch, where Bohemond III of Antioch and Raymond III of Tripoli were defeated at the Battle of Harim. It seemed likely that Antioch would fall to Nur ad-Din, but he withdrew when Emperor Manuel sent a large Byzantine force to the area. Nur ad-Din sent Shirkuh back to Egypt in 1166, and Shawar again allied with Amalric, who was defeated at the Battle of al-Babein. Despite the defeat, both sides withdrew, but Shawar remained in control with a Crusader garrison in Cairo. \nAmalric cemented his alliance with Manuel by marrying Manuel's niece Maria Komnene in 1167, and an embassy led by William of Tyre was sent to Constantinople to negotiate a military expedition, but in 1168 Amalric pillaged Bilbeis without waiting for the naval support promised by Manuel. Amalric accomplished nothing else, but his actions prompted Shawar to switch sides again and seek help from Shirkuh. Shawar was promptly executed by Shirkuh, and when Shirkuh died in 1169, he was succeeded by his nephew Yusuf, better known as Saladin. That year, Manuel sent a large Byzantine fleet of some 300 ships to assist Amalric, and the town of Damietta was placed under siege. However, the Byzantine fleet sailed with enough provisions for only three months. By the time the Crusaders were ready, supplies were already running out, and the fleet retired. Each side sought to blame the other for the failure, but both knew that they could not take Egypt without the other's assistance: the alliance was maintained, and plans for another campaign in Egypt were made, which ultimately were to come to nought.\nIn the end, Nur ad-Din was victorious and Saladin established himself as Sultan of Egypt. Saladin began to assert his independence from Nur ad-Din, and with the death of both Amalric and Nur ad-Din in 1174, he was well-placed to exert control over Nur ad-Din's Syrian possessions as well. Upon the death of the pro-western Emperor Manuel in 1180, the Kingdom of Jerusalem lost its most powerful ally.\nThe subsequent events have often been interpreted as a struggle between two opposing factions, the \"court party\", made up of Baldwin's mother, Amalric's first wife Agnes of Courtenay, her immediate family, and recent arrivals from Europe who were inexperienced in the affairs of the kingdom and who were in favour of war with Saladin; and the \"noble party\", led by Raymond of Tripoli and the lesser nobility of the kingdom, who favoured peaceful co-existence with the Muslims. This is the interpretation offered by William of Tyre, who was firmly placed in the \"noble\" camp, and his view was taken up by subsequent historians; in the 20th century, Marshall W. Baldwin, Steven Runciman, and Hans E. Mayer favoured this interpretation. Peter W. Edbury, on the other hand, argues that William as well as the 13th-century authors who continued William's chronicle and were allied to Raymond's supporters in the Ibelin family, cannot be considered impartial. Although the events were clearly a dynastic struggle, \"the division was not between native barons and newcomers from the West, but between the king's maternal and paternal kin.\"\nMiles of Plancy was briefly \"bailli\" or regent during Baldwin IV's minority. Miles was assassinated in October 1174, and Count Raymond III of Tripoli, Amalric's first cousin, became regent. It is highly probable that Raymond or his supporters engineered the assassination. Baldwin reached his majority in 1176, and despite his leprosy he no longer had any legal need for a regent. Since Raymond was his nearest relative in the male line with a strong claim to the throne, there was concern about the extent of his ambitions, although he had no direct heirs of his own. To balance this, the king turned from time to time to his uncle, Joscelin III of Edessa, who was appointed seneschal in 1176; Joscelin was more closely related to Baldwin than Raymond was but had no claim to the throne.\nAs a leper, Baldwin had no children and could not be expected to rule long, so the focus of his succession passed to his sister Sibylla and his younger half-sister Isabella. Baldwin and his advisors recognised that it was essential for Sibylla to be married to a Western nobleman in order to access support from European states in a military crisis; while Raymond was still regent, a marriage was arranged for Sibylla and William of Montferrat, a cousin of Louis VII of France and of Frederick Barbarossa, Holy Roman Emperor. It was hoped that by allying with a relative of the Western emperor, Frederick would come to the kingdom's aid. Jerusalem looked again towards the Byzantine Empire for help, and Emperor Manuel was looking for a way to restore his empire's prestige after his defeat at the Battle of Myriokephalon in 1176; this mission was undertaken by Raynald of Ch\u00e2tillon. After William of Montferrat arrived in 1176, he fell ill and died in June 1177, leaving Sibylla widowed and pregnant with the future Baldwin V. Raynald was then named regent.\nSoon afterwards, Philip of Flanders arrived in Jerusalem on pilgrimage; he was Baldwin IV's cousin, and the king offered him the regency and command of the army, both of which Philip refused, although he objected to the appointment of Raynald as regent. Philip then attempted to intervene in the negotiations for Sibylla's second husband, and suggested one of his own retinue, but the native barons refused his suggestion. In addition, Philip seemed to think he could carve out a territory of his own in Egypt, but he refused to participate in the planned Byzantine-Jerusalem expedition. The expedition was delayed and finally cancelled, and Philip took his army away to the north.\nMost of the army of Jerusalem marched north with Philip, Raymond III, and Bohemond III to attack Hama, and Saladin took the opportunity to invade the kingdom. Baldwin proved to be an effective and energetic king as well as a brilliant military commander: he defeated Saladin at the Battle of Montgisard in September 1177 despite being greatly outnumbered and having to rely on a levee-en-masse. Although Baldwin's presence despite his illness was inspirational, direct military decisions were actually made by Raynald.\nHugh III of Burgundy was expected to come to Jerusalem and marry Sibylla, but Hugh was unable to leave France due to the political unrest there in 1179\u20131180 following the death of Louis VII. Meanwhile, Baldwin IV's stepmother Maria, mother of Isabella and stepmother of Sibylla, married Balian of Ibelin. At Easter in 1180, Raymond and his cousin Bohemond III of Antioch attempted to force Sibylla to marry Balian's brother Baldwin of Ibelin. Raymond and Bohemond were King Baldwin's nearest male relatives in the paternal line, and could have claimed the throne if the king died without an heir or a suitable replacement. Before Raymond and Bohemond arrived, Agnes and King Baldwin arranged for Sibylla to be married to a Poitevin newcomer, Guy of Lusignan, whose older brother Amalric was already an established figure at court. Internationally, the Lusignans were useful as vassals of Baldwin and Sibylla's cousin Henry II of England. Baldwin betrothed eight-year-old Isabella to Humphrey IV of Toron, stepson of the powerful Raynald of Ch\u00e2tillon, thereby removing her from the influence of the Ibelin family and that of her mother.\nThe dispute between the two factions in the kingdom affected the election of a new Patriarch in 1180. When Patriarch Amalric died on 6 October 1180, the two most obvious choices for his successor were William of Tyre and Heraclius of Caesarea. They were fairly evenly matched in background and education, but politically they were allied with opposite parties, as Heraclius was one of Agnes of Courtenay's supporters. The canons of the Holy Sepulchre asked the king for advice, and Heraclius was chosen through Agnes' influence. There were rumours that Agnes and Heraclius were lovers, but this information comes from the partisan 13th-century continuations of William of Tyre's history, and there is no other evidence to substantiate such a claim.\nAt the end of 1181, Raynald of Ch\u00e2tillon raided south into Arabia, in the direction of Medina, although he did not make it that far. It was probably around this time that Raynald also attacked a Muslim caravan. The kingdom had a truce with Saladin at the time, and Raynald's actions have been seen as an independent act of brigandage; it is possible that he was trying to prevent Saladin from moving his forces north to take control of Aleppo, which would have strengthened Saladin's position. In response, Saladin attacked the kingdom in 1182, but was defeated at Belvoir Castle. King Baldwin, although quite ill, was still able to command the army in person. Saladin attempted to besiege Beirut from land and sea, and Baldwin raided Damascene territory, but neither side did significant damage. In December 1182, Raynald launched a naval expedition on the Red Sea, which made it as far south as Rabigh. The expedition was defeated and two of Raynald's men were actually taken to Mecca to be executed in public. Like his earlier raids, Raynald's expedition is usually seen as selfish and ultimately fatal for Jerusalem, but according to Bernard Hamilton, it was actually a shrewd strategy, meant to damage Saladin's prestige and reputation.\nIn 1183 a general tax was levied throughout the kingdom, which was unprecedented in Jerusalem and almost all of medieval Europe to that point. The tax helped pay for larger armies for the next few years. More troops were certainly needed, since Saladin was finally able to gain control of Aleppo, and with peace in his northern territories, he could focus on Jerusalem in the south. King Baldwin was so incapacitated by his leprosy that it was necessary to appoint a regent, and Guy of Lusignan was chosen, as he was Baldwin's legal heir and the king was not expected to live. The inexperienced Guy led the Frankish army against Saladin's incursions into the kingdom, but neither side made any real gains, and Guy was criticized by his opponents for not striking against Saladin when he had the chance.\nIn October 1183, Isabella married Humphrey of Toron at Kerak during a siege by Saladin, who perhaps hoped to take some valuable prisoners. As King Baldwin, although now blind and crippled, had recovered enough to resume his reign and his command of the army, Guy was removed from the regency and his five-year-old stepson, King Baldwin's nephew and namesake Baldwin, was crowned as co-king in November. King Baldwin himself then went to relieve the castle, carried on a litter, and attended by his mother. He was reconciled with Raymond of Tripoli and appointed him military commander. The siege was lifted in December and Saladin retreated to Damascus. Saladin attempted another siege in 1184, but Baldwin repelled that attack as well, and Saladin raided Nablus and other towns on the way home.\nIn October 1184, Guy of Lusignan led an attack on the Bedouin nomads from his base in Ascalon. Unlike Raynald's attacks on caravans, which may have had some military purpose, Guy attacked a group that was usually loyal to Jerusalem and provided intelligence about the movements of Saladin's troops. At the same time, King Baldwin contracted his final illness and Raymond of Tripoli, rather than Guy, was appointed as his regent. His nephew Baldwin was paraded in public, wearing his crown as Baldwin V. Baldwin IV finally succumbed to his leprosy in May 1185.\nMeanwhile, the succession crisis had prompted a mission to the West to seek assistance. In 1184, Patriarch Heraclius travelled throughout the courts of Europe, but no help was forthcoming. Heraclius offered the \"keys of the Holy Sepulchre, those of the Tower of David and the banner of the Kingdom of Jerusalem\", but not the crown itself, to both Philip II of France and Henry II of England; the latter, as a grandson of Fulk, was a first cousin of the royal family of Jerusalem, and had promised to go on crusade after the murder of Thomas Becket. Both kings preferred to remain at home to defend their own territories, rather than act as regent for a child in Jerusalem. The few European knights who did travel to Jerusalem did not even see any combat, since the truce with Saladin had been re-established. William V of Montferrat was one of the few who came to his grandson Baldwin V's aid.\nBaldwin V's rule, with Raymond of Tripoli as regent and his great-uncle Joscelin of Edessa as his guardian, was short. He was a sickly child and died in the summer of 1186. Raymond and his supporters went to Nablus, presumably in an attempt to prevent Sibylla from claiming the throne, but Sibylla and her supporters went to Jerusalem, where it was decided that the kingdom should pass to her, on the condition that her marriage to Guy be annulled. She agreed but only if she could choose her own husband and king, and after being crowned, she immediately crowned Guy with her own hands. Raymond had refused to attend the coronation, and in Nablus he suggested that Isabella and Humphrey should be crowned instead, but Humphrey refused to agree to this plan which would have certainly started a civil war. Humphrey went to Jerusalem and swore allegiance to Guy and Sibylla, as did most of Raymond's other supporters. Raymond himself refused to do so and left for Tripoli; Baldwin of Ibelin also refused, gave up his fiefs, and left for Antioch.\nLoss of Jerusalem and the Third Crusade.\nRaymond of Tripoli allied with Saladin against Guy and allowed a Muslim garrison to occupy his fief in Tiberias, probably hoping that Saladin would help him overthrow Guy. Saladin, meanwhile, had pacified his Mesopotamian territories, and was now eager to attack the crusader kingdom; he did not intend to renew the truce when it expired in 1187. Before the truce expired, Raynald of Chatillon, the lord of Oultrejourdain and of Kerak and one of Guy's chief supporters, recognized that Saladin was massing his troops, and attacked Muslim caravans in an attempt to disrupt this. Guy was on the verge of attacking Raymond, but realized that the kingdom would need to be united in the face of the threat from Saladin, and Balian of Ibelin effected a reconciliation between the two during Easter in 1187. Saladin attacked Kerak again in April, and in May, a Muslim raiding party ran into the much smaller embassy on its way to negotiate with Raymond, and defeated it at the Battle of Cresson near Nazareth. Raymond and Guy finally agreed to attack Saladin at Tiberias, but could not agree on a plan; Raymond thought a pitched battle should be avoided, but Guy probably remembered the criticism he faced for avoiding battle in 1183, and it was decided to march out against Saladin directly. On 4 July 1187, the army of the kingdom was utterly destroyed at the Battle of Hattin. Raymond of Tripoli, Balian of Ibelin, and Reginald of Sidon escaped, but Raynald was executed by Saladin and Guy was imprisoned in Damascus.\nOver the next few months, Saladin easily overran the entire kingdom. Only the port of Tyre remained in Frankish hands, defended by Conrad of Montferrat, who had coincidentally arrived just in time from Constantinople. The fall of Jerusalem essentially ended the first Kingdom of Jerusalem. Much of the population, swollen with refugees fleeing Saladin's conquest of the surrounding territory, was allowed to flee to Tyre, Tripoli, or Egypt (whence they were sent back to Europe), but those who could not pay for their freedom were sold into slavery, and those who could were often robbed by Christians and Muslims alike on their way into exile. The capture of the city led to the Third Crusade, launched in 1189 and led by Richard the Lionheart, Philip Augustus and Frederick Barbarossa, though the last drowned en route.\nGuy of Lusignan, who had been refused entry to Tyre by Conrad, began to besiege Acre in 1189. During the lengthy siege, which lasted until 1191, Patriarch Heraclius, Queen Sibylla and her daughters, and many others died of disease. With the death of Sibylla in 1190, Guy now had no legal claim to the kingship, and the succession passed to Sibylla's half-sister Isabella. Isabella's mother Maria and the Ibelins (now closely allied to Conrad) argued that Isabella and Humphrey's marriage was illegal, as she had been underage at the time; underlying this was the fact that Humphrey had betrayed his wife's cause in 1186. The marriage was annulled amid some controversy. Conrad, who was now the nearest kinsman to Baldwin V in the male line, and had already proved himself a capable military leader, then married Isabella, but Guy refused to concede the crown.\nWhen Richard arrived in 1191, he and Philip took different sides in the succession dispute. Richard backed Guy, his vassal from Poitou, while Philip supported Conrad, a cousin of his late father Louis VII. After much ill feeling and ill health, Philip returned home in 1191, soon after the fall of Acre. Richard defeated Saladin at the Battle of Arsuf in 1191 and the Battle of Jaffa in 1192, recovering most of the coast, but could not recover Jerusalem or any of the inland territory of the kingdom. It has been suggested that this may have actually been a strategic decision by Richard rather than a failure as such, as he may have recognized that Jerusalem, in particular, was in fact a strategic liability as long as the Crusaders were obligated to defend it, as it was isolated from the sea where Western reinforcements could arrive. Conrad was unanimously elected king in April 1192, but was murdered by the Hashshashin only days later. Eight days after that, the pregnant Isabella was married to Count Henry II of Champagne, nephew of Richard and Philip, but politically allied to Richard. As compensation, Richard sold Guy the island of Cyprus, which Richard had captured on the way to Acre, although Guy continued to claim the throne of Jerusalem until his death in 1194.\nThe crusade came to an end peacefully, with the Treaty of Ramla negotiated in 1192; Saladin allowed pilgrimages to be made to Jerusalem, allowing the crusaders to fulfil their vows, after which they all returned home. The native crusader barons set about rebuilding their kingdom from Acre and the other coastal cities.\nKingdom of Acre.\nFor the next hundred years, the Kingdom of Jerusalem remained a tiny kingdom hugging the Syrian coastline. Its capital was moved to Acre and controlled most of the coastline of present-day Israel and southern and central Lebanon, including the strongholds and towns of Jaffa, Arsuf, Caesarea, Tyre, Sidon, and Beirut. At best, it included only a few other significant cities, such as Ascalon and some interior fortresses, as well as suzerainty over Tripoli and Antioch. The new king, Henry of Champagne, died accidentally in 1197, and Isabella married for a fourth time, to Aimery of Lusignan, Guy's brother. Aimery had already inherited Cyprus from Guy, and had been crowned king by Frederick Barbarossa's son, Emperor Henry VI. Henry led a crusade in 1197 but died along the way. Nevertheless, his troops recaptured Beirut and Sidon for the kingdom before returning home in 1198. A five-year truce was then concluded with the Ayyubids in Syria in 1198.\nThe Ayyubid empire had fallen into civil war after the death of Saladin in 1193. His sons claimed various parts of his empire: az-Zahir took control of Aleppo, al-Aziz Uthman held Cairo, while his eldest son, al-Afdal, retained Damascus. Saladin's brother Al-Adil Sayf ad-Din (often called \"Saphadin\" by the Crusaders) acquired al-Jazira (northern Mesopotamia), and al-Adil's son al-Mu'azzam took possession of Karak and Transjordan. In 1196, al-Afdal was driven out of Damascus by al Adil in alliance with Uthman. When Uthman died in 1198, al Afdal returned to power as regent in Egypt for Uthman's infant son. Allied with az-Zahir, he then attacked his uncle in Damascus. The alliance fell apart, and al-Adil then defeated al Afdal in Egypt and annexed the country. In 1200 Al-Adil proclaimed himself Sultan of Egypt and Syria, entrusting Damascus to al-Mu'azzam and al-Jazira to another son, al-Kamil. Following a second unsuccessful siege of Damascus by the two brothers, Al Afdal accepted a fief consisting of Samosata and a number of other towns. Az-Zahir of Aleppo submitted to his uncle in 1202, thus re-uniting the Ayyubid territories.\nMeanwhile, schemes were hatched to reconquer Jerusalem through Egypt. A Fourth Crusade was planned after the failure of the Third, but it resulted in the sack of Constantinople in 1204, and most of the crusaders involved never arrived in the kingdom. Aimery, however, not knowing of the diversion to Constantinople, raided Egypt in advance of the expected invasion. Both Isabella and Aimery died in 1205 and again an underage girl, Isabella and Conrad's daughter Maria of Montferrat, became queen of Jerusalem. Isabella's half-brother John of Ibelin, the Old Lord of Beirut governed as regent until 1210 when Maria married an experienced French knight, John of Brienne. Maria died in childbirth in 1212, and John of Brienne continued to rule as regent for their daughter Isabella II.\nFifth and Sixth Crusades and Frederick II.\nThe Fourth Lateran Council in 1215 called for a new, better-organized crusade against Egypt. In late 1217 King Andrew II of Hungary and Duke Leopold VI of Austria arrived in Acre and, along with John of Brienne, raided territory further inland, including Mount Tabor, but without success. After the departure of the Hungarians, the remaining Crusaders set about refortifying Caesarea and the Templar fortress of Ch\u00e2teau P\u00e8lerin throughout the winter of 1217 and spring of 1218.\nIn the spring of 1218 the Fifth Crusade began in earnest when German crusader fleets landed at Acre. Along with King John, who was elected leader of the crusade, the fleets sailed to Egypt and besieged Damietta at the mouth of the Nile in May. The siege progressed slowly, and the Egyptian sultan al-Adil died in August 1218, supposedly of shock after the Crusaders managed to capture one of Damietta's towers. He was succeeded by his son al-Kamil. In the autumn of 1218 reinforcements arrived from Europe, including the papal legate Pelagius of Albano. In the winter the crusaders were affected by floods and disease, and the siege dragged on throughout 1219, when Francis of Assisi arrived to attempt to negotiate a truce. Neither side could agree to terms, despite the Ayyubid offer of a thirty-year truce and the restoration of Jerusalem and most of the rest of the former kingdom. The Crusaders finally managed to starve out the city and captured it in November. Al-Kamil retreated to the nearby fortress of al-Mansurah, but the crusaders remained in Damietta throughout 1219 and 1220, awaiting the arrival of Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II, while King John returned to Acre briefly to defend against al-Mu'azzam, who was raiding the kingdom from Damascus in John's absence. Still expecting the emperor's imminent arrival, in July 1221, the Crusaders set off towards Cairo, but they were stopped by the rising Nile, which al-Kamil allowed to flood by breaking the dams along its course. The sultan easily defeated the trapped Crusader army and regained Damietta. Emperor Frederick had, in fact, never left Europe at all.\nAfter the failure of the crusade, John travelled throughout Europe seeking assistance, but found support only from Frederick, who then married John and Maria's daughter Isabella II in 1225. The next year, Isabella died giving birth to their son Conrad IV, who succeeded his mother to the throne although he never appeared in the East. Frederick had reneged on his promise to lead the Fifth Crusade, but was now eager to cement his claim to the throne through Conrad. There were also plans to join with al-Kamil in attacking al-Mu'azzam in Damascus, an alliance which had been discussed with Egyptian envoys in Italy. But after continually delaying his departure for the Holy Land, including suffering an outbreak of disease in his fleet, he was excommunicated by Pope Gregory IX in 1227. The crusaders, led not by Frederick but by his representatives Richard Filangieri, Henry IV, Duke of Limburg, and Hermann of Salza, Grand Master of the Teutonic Knights, arrived in the east late in 1227, and while waiting for the emperor they set about refortifying Sidon, where they built the sea castle, and Montfort, which later became the headquarters of the Teutonic Knights. The Ayyubids of Damascus did not dare attack, as al-Mu'azzam had suddenly died not long before. Frederick finally arrived on the Sixth Crusade in September 1228, and claimed the regency of the kingdom in the name of his infant son.\nFrederick immediately came into conflict with the native nobles of Outremer, some of whom resented his attempts to impose Imperial authority over both Cyprus and Jerusalem. The Cypriot nobles were already quarrelling amongst themselves about the regency for Henry I of Cyprus, who was still a child. The High Court of Cyprus had elected John of Ibelin as regent, but Henry's mother Alice of Champagne wished to appoint one of her supporters; Alice and her party, members or supporters of the Lusignan dynasty, sided with Frederick, whose father had crowned Aimery of Lusignan king in 1197. At Limassol, Frederick demanded that John give up not only the regency of Cyprus, but also John's own lordship of Beirut on the mainland. John argued that Frederick had no legal authority to make such demands and refused to give up either title. Frederick then imprisoned John's sons as hostages to guarantee John's support for his crusade.\nJohn did accompany Frederick to the mainland, but Frederick was not well-received there; one of his few supporters was Balian, Lord of Sidon, who had welcomed the crusaders the year before and now acted as an ambassador to the Ayyubids. The death of al-Mu'azzam negated the proposed alliance with al-Kamil, who along with his brother al-Ashraf had taken possession of Damascus (as well as Jerusalem) from their nephew, al-Mu'azzam's son an-Nasir Dawud. However, al-Kamil presumably did not know of the small size of Frederick's army, nor the divisions within it caused by his excommunication, and wished to avoid defending his territories against another crusade. Frederick's presence alone was sufficient to regain Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Nazareth, and a number of surrounding castles without a fight: these were recovered in February 1229, in return for a ten-year truce with the Ayyubids and freedom of worship for Jerusalem's Muslim inhabitants. The terms of the treaty were unacceptable to the Patriarch of Jerusalem Gerald of Lausanne, who placed the city under interdict. In March, Frederick crowned himself in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, but because of his excommunication and the interdict Jerusalem was never truly reincorporated into the kingdom, which continued to be ruled from Acre.\nMeanwhile, in Italy, the Pope used Frederick's excommunication as an excuse to invade his Italian territories; the papal armies were led by Frederick's former father-in-law John of Brienne. Frederick was forced to return home in 1229, leaving the Holy Land \"not in triumph, but showered with offal\" by the citizens of Acre.\nWar of the Lombards and the Barons' Crusade.\nNevertheless, Frederick sent an Imperial army in 1231, under Richard Filangieri, who occupied Beirut and Tyre, but was unable to gain control of Acre. John's supporters formed a commune in Acre, of which John himself was elected mayor in 1232. With the help of the Genoese merchants, the commune recaptured Beirut. John also attacked Tyre, but was defeated by Filangieri at the Battle of Casal Imbert in May 1232.\nIn Cyprus, King Henry I came of age in 1232 and John's regency was no longer necessary. Both John and Filangieri raced back to Cyprus to assert their authority, and the imperial forces were defeated at the Battle of Agridi on June 15. Henry became the undisputed king of Cyprus, but continued to support the Ibelins over the Lusignans and the imperial party. On the mainland, Filangieri had the support of Bohemund IV of Antioch, the Teutonic Knights, the Knights Hospitaller, and the Pisan merchants. John was supported by his nobles on Cyprus, and by his continental holdings in Beirut, Caesarea, and Arsuf, as well as by the Knights Templar and the Genoese. Neither side could make any headway, and in 1234 Gregory IX excommunicated John and his supporters. This was partly revoked in 1235, but still no peace could be made. John died in 1236 and the war was taken up by his son Balian of Beirut and his nephew Philip of Montfort.\nMeanwhile, the treaty with the Ayyubids was set to expire in 1239. Plans for a new crusade to be led by Frederick came to nothing, and Frederick himself was excommunicated by Gregory IX again in 1239. However, other European nobles took up the cause, including Theobald IV, Count of Champagne and King of Navarre, Peter of Dreux, and Amaury de Montfort, who arrived in Acre in September 1239. Theobald was elected leader of the crusade at a council in Acre, attended by most of the important nobles of the kingdom, including Walter of Brienne, John of Arsuf, and Balian of Sidon. The arrival of the crusade was a brief respite from the Lombard War; Filangieri remained in Tyre and did not participate. The council decided to refortify Ascalon in the south and attack Damascus in the north.\nThe crusaders may have been aware of the new divisions among the Ayyubids; al-Kamil had occupied Damascus in 1238 but had died soon afterwards, and his territory was inherited by his family. His sons al-Adil abu Bakr and as-Salih Ayyub inherited Egypt and Damascus. Ayyub marched on Cairo in an attempt to drive out al-Adil, but during his absence al-Kamil's brother as-Salih Isma'il took over Damascus, and Ayyub was taken prisoner by an-Nasir Dawud. The Crusaders, meanwhile, marched to Ascalon. Along the way, Walter of Brienne captured livestock intended to resupply Damascus, as the Ayyubids had probably learned of the Crusaders' plans to attack it. The victory was short-lived, however, as the Crusaders were then defeated by the Egyptian army at Gaza in November 1239. Henry II, Count of Bar was killed and Amaury of Montfort captured. The Crusaders returned to Acre, possibly because the native barons of the kingdom were suspicious of Filangieri in Tyre. Dawud took advantage of the Ayyubid victory to recapture Jerusalem in December, the ten-year truce having expired.\nAlthough Ayyub was Dawud's prisoner, the two now allied against al-Adil in Egypt, which Ayyub seized in 1240. In Damascus, Isma'il recognized the threat of Dawud and Ayyub against his own possessions, and turned to the Crusaders for assistance. Theobald concluded a treaty with Isma'il, in return for territorial concessions that restored Jerusalem to Christian control, as well as much of the rest of the former kingdom, even more territory than Frederick had recovered in 1229. Theobald, however, was frustrated by the Lombard War, and returned home in September 1240. Almost immediately after Theobald's departure, Richard of Cornwall arrived. He completed the rebuilding of Ascalon, and also made peace with Ayyub in Egypt. Ayyub confirmed Isma'il's concessions in 1241, and prisoners taken at Gaza were exchanged by both sides. Richard returned to Europe in 1241.\nAlthough the kingdom had essentially been restored, the Lombard War continued to occupy the kingdom's nobility. As the Templars and Hospitallers supported opposite sides, they also attacked each other, and the Templars broke the treaty with the Ayyubids by attacking Nablus in 1241. Conrad proclaimed that he had come of age in 1242, eliminating both Frederick's claim to the regency and the need for an imperial guardian to govern in his place, although he had not yet turned 15, the age of majority according to the customs of Jerusalem. Through Conrad, Frederick tried to send an imperial regent, but the anti-imperial faction in Acre argued that Jerusalem's laws allowed them to appoint their own regent. In June the \"Haute Cour\" granted the regency to Alice of Champagne, who, as the daughter of Isabella I, was Conrad's great-aunt and his closest relative living in the kingdom. Alice ordered Filangieri to be arrested, and along with the Ibelins and Venetians, besieged Tyre, which fell in July 1243. The Lombard War was over, but the king was still absent, as Conrad never came to the East. Alice was prevented from exercising any real power as regent by Philip of Montfort, who took control of Tyre, and Balian of Beirut, who continued to hold Acre.\nCrusade of Louis IX.\nThe Ayyubids were still divided between Ayyub in Egypt, Isma'il in Damascus, and Dawud in Kerak. Isma'il, Dawud, and al-Mansur Ibrahim of Homs went to war with Ayyub, who hired the Khwarazmians to fight for him. The Khwarazmians were nomadic Turks from central Asia, who had recently been displaced by the Mongols further to the east and were now residing in Mesopotamia. With Ayyub's support, they sacked Jerusalem in the summer of 1244, leaving it in ruins and useless to both Christians and Muslims. In October, the Khwarazmians, along with the Egyptian army under the command of Baibars, were met by the Frankish army, led by Philip of Montfort, Walter of Brienne, and the masters of the Templars, Hospitallers, and Teutonic Knights, along with al-Mansur and Dawud. On October 17 the Egyptian-Khwarazmian army destroyed the Frankish-Syrian coalition, and Walter of Brienne was taken captive and later executed. By 1247, Ayyub had reoccupied most of the territory that had been conceded in 1239, and had also gained control of Damascus.\nA new crusade was discussed at the Council of Lyon in 1245 by Pope Innocent IV. The council deposed Frederick II, so no help could be expected from the empire, but King Louis IX of France had already vowed to go on crusade. Louis arrived in Cyprus in 1248, where he gathered an army of his own men, including his brothers Robert of Artois, Charles of Anjou, and Alphonse of Poitiers, and those of Cyprus and Jerusalem, led by the Ibelin family John of Jaffa, Guy of Ibelin, and Balian of Beirut. Once again the target was Egypt. Damietta was captured without resistance when the Crusaders landed in June 1249, but the crusade halted there until November, by which time the Egyptian sultan Ayyub had died and had been succeeded by his son Turanshah. In February, the Crusaders were defeated at the Battle of al-Mansurah, where Robert of Artois was killed. The crusaders were unable to cross the Nile, and, suffering from disease and lack of supplies, retreated towards Damietta in April. They were defeated along the way at the Battle of Fariskur, with Louis being taken captive by Turanshah. During Louis' captivity, Turanshah was overthrown by his Mamluk soldiers, led by the general Aybak, who then released Louis in May in return for Damietta and a large ransom. For the next four years Louis resided in Acre, and helped refortify that city along with Caesarea, Jaffa, and Sidon. He also made truces with the Ayyubids in Syria, and sent embassies to negotiate with the Mongols, who were beginning to threaten the Muslim world, before returning home in 1254. He left behind a large garrison of French soldiers in Acre, under the command of Geoffrey of Sergines.\nIn the midst of these events, Alice of Champagne had died in 1246 and had been replaced as regent by her son King Henry I of Cyprus, for whom John of Jaffa served as \"bailli\" in Acre. During Louis IX's stay in Acre, Henry I died in 1253, and was succeeded in Cyprus by his infant son Hugh II. Hugh was technically regent of Jerusalem as well, both for Conrad and for Conrad's son Conradin after Conrad died in 1254. Both Cyprus and Jerusalem were governed by Hugh's mother Plaisance of Antioch, but John remained \"bailli\" for Hugh in Acre. John made peace with Damascus and attempted to regain Ascalon; the Egyptians, now ruled by the Mamluk sultanate, besieged Jaffa in 1256 in response. John defeated them, and afterwards gave up the bailliage to his cousin John of Arsuf.\nWar of Saint Sabas.\nIn 1256 the commercial rivalry between the Venetian and Genoese merchant colonies broke out into open warfare. In Acre, the two colonies disputed possession of the monastery of Saint Sabas. The Genoese, assisted by the Pisan merchants, attacked the Venetian quarter and burned their ships, but the Venetians drove them out. The Venetians were then expelled from Tyre by Philip of Monfort. John of Arsuf, John of Jaffa, John II of Beirut, the Templars, and the Teutonic Knights supported the Venetians, who also convinced the Pisans to join them, while the Hospitallers supported the Genoese. In 1257 the Venetians conquered the monastery and destroyed its fortifications, although they were unable to expel the Genoese completely. They blockaded the Genoese quarter, but the Genoese were supplied by the Hospitallers, whose complex was nearby, and by Philip of Montfort who sent food from Tyre. In August 1257, John of Arsuf tried to end the war by granting commercial rights in Acre to the Republic of Ancona, an Italian ally of Genoa, but aside from Philip of Montfort and the Hospitallers, the rest of the nobles continued to support Venice. In June 1258, Philip and the Hospitallers marched on Acre while a Genoese fleet attacked the city by sea. The naval battle was won by Venice, and the Genoese were forced to abandon their quarter and flee to Tyre with Philip. The war also spread to Tripoli and Antioch, where the Embriaco family, descended from Genoese crusaders, was pitted against Bohemond VI of Antioch, who supported the Venetians. In 1261 the Patriarch, Jacques Pantaleon, organised a council to re-establish order in the kingdom, though the Genoese did not return to Acre.\nMongols.\nIt was during this period that the Mongols arrived in the Near East. Their presence further east had already displaced the Khwarazmians, and emissaries had been sent by various popes as well as Louis IX to ally or negotiate with them, but they were uninterested in alliances. They sacked Baghdad in 1258, and Aleppo and Damascus in 1260, destroying both the Abbasid caliphate and the last vestiges of the Ayyubid dynasty. Hethum I of Armenia and Bohemond VI of Antioch had already submitted to the Mongols as vassals. Some of the Mongols were Nestorian Christians, including Kitbuqa, one of the generals at the sieges of Baghdad and Damascus, but despite this, the nobles of Acre refused to submit. As the kingdom was by now a relatively unimportant state, the Mongols paid little attention to it, but there were a few skirmishes in 1260: the forces of Julian of Sidon killed the nephew of Kitbuqa, who responded by sacking Sidon, and John II of Beirut was also captured by the Mongols during another raid. The apparently inevitable Mongol conquest was stalled when Hulagu, the Mongol commander in Syria, returned home after the death of his brother M\u00f6ngke Khan, leaving Kitbuqa with a small garrison. The Mamluks of Egypt then sought, and were granted, permission to advance through Frankish territory, and defeated the Mongols at the Battle of Ain Jalut in September 1260. Kitbuqa was killed and all of Syria fell under Mamluk control. On the way back to Egypt, the Mamluk sultan Qutuz was assassinated by the general Baibars, who was far less favourable than his predecessor to alliances with the Franks.\nFall of Acre.\nJohn of Arsuf had died in 1258 and was replaced as \"bailli\" by Geoffrey of Sergines, Louis IX's lieutenant in Acre. Plaisance died in 1261, but as her son Hugh II was still underage, Cyprus passed to his cousin Hugh of Antioch-Lusignan, whose mother Isabella of Cyprus, Alice of Champagne and Hugh I of Cyprus' daughter and Hugh II's aunt, took over the regency in Acre. She appointed, as \"bailli\", her husband Henry of Antioch (who was also Plaisance's uncle), but died in 1264. The regency in Acre was then claimed by Hugh of Antioch-Lusignan and his cousin Hugh of Brienne, and Hugh II died in 1267 before he reached the age of majority. Hugh of Antioch-Lusignan won the dispute and succeeded Hugh II on Cyprus as Hugh III. When Conradin was executed in Sicily in 1268, there was no other Hohenstaufen heir to succeed him, and Hugh III inherited the Kingdom of Jerusalem as well in 1269. This was disputed by another branch of the Lusignan family: Maria of Antioch claimed the throne as the closest living descendant of Isabella I, but for the moment her claim was ignored. By this time, the Mamluks under Baibars were taking advantage of the kingdom's constant disputes, and began conquering the remaining crusader cities along the coast. In 1265, Baibars took Caesarea, Haifa and Arsuf, and Safad and Toron in 1266. In 1268 he captured Jaffa and Beaufort, and then besieged and destroyed Antioch.\nHugh III and Baibars made a one-year truce after these conquests; Baibars knew that Louis IX was planning another crusade from Europe, and assumed that the target would once again be Egypt. But instead the crusade was diverted to Tunis, where Louis died. Baibars was free to continue his campaigns: in 1270 he had the Assassins kill Philip of Montfort, and in 1271 he captured the Hospitaller and Teutonic Knights strongholds of Krak des Chevaliers and Montfort Castle. He also besieged Tripoli, but abandoned it in May when Prince Edward of England arrived, the only part of Louis IX's crusade to arrive in the east. Edward could do nothing except arrange a ten-year truce with Baibars, who nevertheless attempted to have him assassinated as well. Edward left in 1272, and despite the Second Council of Lyon's plans for another crusade in 1274, no further large-scale expedition ever arrived. Hugh III's authority on the mainland began to break down; he was an unpopular king, and Beirut, the only territory left outside of Acre and Tyre, started to act independently. Its heiress, Isabella of Ibelin (widow of Hugh II), actually placed it under Baibars' protection. Finding the mainland ungovernable, Hugh III left for Cyprus, leaving Balian of Arsuf as \"bailli\". Then in 1277, Maria of Antioch sold her claim to the kingdom to Charles of Anjou, who sent Roger of San Severino to represent him. The Venetians and Templars supported the claim, and Balian was powerless to oppose him. Baibars died in 1277 and was succeeded by Qalawun. In 1281 the ten-year truce expired and was renewed by Roger. Roger returned to Europe after the Sicilian Vespers in 1282, and was replaced by Odo Poilechien. Hugh III attempted to re-assert his authority on the mainland by landing at Beirut in 1283, but this was ineffective and he died in Tyre in 1284. He was succeeded briefly by his son John II, who died soon after in 1285, and was succeeded by his brother, Hugh III's other son Henry II. That year Qalawun captured the Hospitaller fortress of Marqab. Charles of Anjou also died in 1285, and the military orders and the commune of Acre accepted Henry II as king; Odo Poilechen refused to recognize him, but was allowed to hand Acre over to the Templars rather than Henry directly, and the Templars then handed it to the king. War broke out between the Venetians and Genoese again in 1287, and Tripoli fell to Qalawun in 1289. Although it was only a matter of time before Acre also fell, the end of the crusader kingdom was actually instigated in 1290 by newly arrived Crusaders, who rioted in Acre and attacked the city's Muslim merchants. Qalawun died before he could retaliate, but his son al-Ashraf Khalil arrived to besiege Acre in April 1291. Acre was defended by Henry II's brother Amalric of Tyre, the Hospitallers, Templars, and Teutonic Knights, the Venetians and Pisans, the French garrison led by Jean I de Grailly, and the English garrison led by Otton de Grandson, but they were vastly outnumbered. Henry II himself arrived in May during the siege, but the city fell on May 18. Henry, Amalric, Otton, and Jean escaped, as did a young Templar named Roger de Flor, but most of the other defenders did not, including the master of the Templars Guillaume de Beaujeu. Tyre fell without a fight the next day, Sidon fell in June, and Beirut in July.\nThe Crusaders moved their headquarters north to cities such as Tortosa, but lost that too, and were forced to relocate their headquarters offshore to Cyprus. Some naval raids and attempts to retake territory were made over the next ten years, but with the loss of the island of Arwad in 1302\u20131303, the Kingdom of Jerusalem ceased to exist on the mainland.\nLife in the early kingdom.\n The Latin population of the kingdom was always small; although a steady stream of settlers and new crusaders continually arrived, most of the original crusaders who fought in the First Crusade simply went home. According to William of Tyre, \"barely three hundred knights and two thousand foot soldiers could be found\" in the kingdom in 1100 during Godfrey's siege of Arsuf. From the very beginning, the Latins were little more than a colonial frontier exercising rule over the native Jewish, Samaritan, Muslim, Greek Orthodox, and Syriac populations.\nAs new generations grew up in the kingdom, they began to think of themselves as natives. Although they never gave up their core identity as Western Europeans or Franks, their clothing, diet, and commercialism integrated much oriental, particularly Byzantine, influence. As the chronicler Fulcher of Chartres wrote around 1124,\nFor we who were Occidentals now have been made Orientals. He who was a Roman or Frank has in this land been made into a Galilaean, or an inhabitant of Palestine. He who was of Rheims or Chartres has now become a citizen of Tyre or Antioch. We have already forgotten the places of our birth; already they have become unknown to many of us, or, at least, are unmentioned.\nThe crusaders and their descendants often learned to speak Greek, Arabic, and other eastern languages, and intermarried with the native Christians (whether Greek, Syriac, or Armenian) and sometimes with converted Muslims. Nonetheless, the Frankish principalities remained a distinctive Occidental colony in the heart of Islam.\nFulcher, a participant in the First Crusade and chaplain of Baldwin I, continued his chronicle up to 1127. Fulcher's chronicle was very popular and was used as a source by other historians in the West, such as Orderic Vitalis and William of Malmesbury. Almost as soon as Jerusalem had been captured, and continuing throughout the 12th century, many pilgrims arrived and left accounts of the new kingdom; among them are the English S\u00e6wulf, the Kievan Abbot Daniel, the Frank Fretellus, the Byzantine Johannes Phocas, and the Germans John of W\u00fcrzburg and Theoderich. Aside from these, thereafter there is no eyewitness to events in Jerusalem until William of Tyre, archbishop of Tyre and chancellor of Jerusalem, who began writing around 1167 and died around 1184, although he includes much information about the First Crusade and the intervening years from the death of Fulcher to his own time, drawn mainly from the writings of Albert of Aix and Fulcher himself.\nFrom the Muslim perspective, a chief source of information is Usamah ibn Munqidh, a soldier and frequent ambassador from Damascus to Jerusalem and Egypt, whose memoirs, \"Kitab al i'tibar\", include lively accounts of crusader society in the east. Further information can be gathered from travellers such as Benjamin of Tudela and Ibn Jubayr.\nCrusader society.\nThe Kingdom at first was virtually bereft of a loyal subject population and had few knights to implement the laws and orders of the realm. With the arrival of Italian trading firms, the creation of the military orders, and immigration by European knights, artisans, and farmers, the affairs of the Kingdom improved and a feudal society developed, similar to but distinct from the society the crusaders knew in Europe. The nature of this society has long been a subject of debate among crusade historians.\nIn the 19th and early 20th centuries, French scholars, such as E. G. Rey, Gaston Dodu, and Ren\u00e9 Grousset presumed that the Crusaders, Muslims and Christians lived in a totally integrated society. Ronnie Ellenblum claims this view was influenced by French imperialism and colonialism; if medieval French crusaders could integrate themselves into local society, then certainly modern French colonies in the Levant could thrive. In the mid-20th century, scholars such as Joshua Prawer, R. C. Smail, Meron Benvenisti, and Claude Cahen argued instead that the Crusaders lived totally segregated from the native inhabitants, who were thoroughly Arabicized and/or Islamicized and were a constant threat to the foreign crusaders. Prawer argued further that the kingdom was an early attempt at colonization, in which the Crusaders were a small ruling class, who were dependent on the native population for survival but made no attempt to integrate with them. For this reason, the rural European society to which the Crusaders were accustomed was replaced by a more secure urban society in the pre-existing cities of the Levant.\nAccording to Ellenblum's interpretation, the inhabitants of the Kingdom (Latin Christians living alongside native Greek and Syriac Christians, Shia and Sunni Arabs, Sufis, Bedouin, Druze, Jews, and Samaritans) all had major differences between each other as well as with the crusaders. Relations between eastern Christians and the Latin Crusaders were \"complex and ambiguous\", not simply friendly or hostile. He argues that Eastern Christians probably felt closer ties to their fellow Christian crusaders than Muslim Arabs. The Crusaders were neither totally integrated with the native population, nor segregated in the cities away from the rural natives; rather they settled in both urban and rural areas; specifically, in areas traditionally inhabited by Eastern Christians. Areas that were traditionally Muslim had very little crusader settlement, just as they already had very few native Christian inhabitants.\nInto this mixed society the crusaders adapted existing institutions and introduced their familiar customs from Europe. As in Europe the nobles had vassals and were themselves vassals to the king. Agricultural production was regulated by the \"iqta\", a Muslim system of land ownership and payments roughly (though far from exactly) equivalent to the feudal system of Europe, and this system was not heavily disrupted by the Crusaders.\nAs Hans Mayer says, \"the Muslim inhabitants of the Latin Kingdom hardly ever appear in the Latin chronicles\", so information on their role in society is difficult to find. The Crusaders \"had a natural tendency to ignore these matters as simply without interest and certainly not worthy of record.\" Although Muslims, as well as Jews and Eastern Christians, had virtually no rights in the countryside, where they were essentially the property of the crusader lord who owned the land, tolerance for other faiths was, in general, no higher or lower than that found elsewhere in the Middle East. Greeks, Syriacs, and Jews continued to live as they had before, subject to their own laws and courts, with their former Muslim overlords simply replaced by the Crusaders; Muslims now joined them at the lowest level of society. The \"ra'is\", the leader of a Muslim or Syriac community, was a kind of vassal to whatever noble owned his land, but as the crusader nobles were absentee landlords the \"ra'is\" and their communities had a high degree of autonomy.\nArab-Andalusian geographer and traveller Ibn Jubayr, who was hostile to the Franks, described the Muslims living under the Christian crusaders' Kingdom of Jerusalem in the late 12th-century:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the cities, Muslims and Eastern Christians were free, although no Muslims were permitted to live in Jerusalem itself. They were second-class citizens and played no part in politics or law, and owed no military service to the crown, although in some cities they may have been the majority of the population. Likewise, citizens of the Italian city-states owed nothing as they lived in autonomous quarters in the port cities.\n21st century positions on the question of cultural integration or cultural apartheid remain divergent. Interactions between the Franks and the native Muslims and Christians, though muddled, exhibited a practical coexistence. Though likely overstated, the accounts of Usamah Ibn-Munqidh of Shaizar's travels through Antioch and Jerusalem described a level of aristocratic exchange elevated above ethnic prejudice. Contact between Muslims and Christians came on the administrative or personal level (on the basis of taxes or translation), not communal or cultural, representative of a hierarchical lord over subject relationship. Evidence of inter-cultural integration remains scarce, but evidence of inter-cultural cooperation and complex social interaction proves more common. Key use of the word dragoman, literally translator, with Syriac administrators and Arabic headsmen represented the direct need for negotiation of interests on both sides. Comments on households with Arabic-speaking Christians and a few Arabized Jews and Muslims represent a less dichotomous relationship than the mid-20th-century historians depicted. Rather, the commonality of Frankish Christians having non-Frankish priests, doctors, and other roles within households and inter-cultural communities presents the lack of standardized discrimination. Jerusalemite William of Tyre complained about a trend to hire Jewish or Muslim medical practitioners over their Latin and Frankish counterparts. Evidence even indicates alterations to Frankish cultural and social customs regarding hygiene (notorious amongst Arabs for their lack of washing and knowledge of bathhouse culture), going so far as to ensure water supplies for domestic use in addition to irrigation.\nPopulation.\nIt is impossible to give an accurate estimate of the population of the kingdom. Josiah Russell calculates that all of Syria had about 2.3 million people at the time of the crusades, with perhaps eleven thousand villages; most of these, of course, were outside of crusader rule even at the greatest extent of all four crusader states. It has been estimated by scholars such as Joshua Prawer and Meron Benvenisti that there were at most 120,000 Franks and 100,000 Muslims living in the cities, with another 250,000 Muslim and Eastern Christian peasants in the countryside. The Crusaders accounted for 15\u201325% of the total population. Benjamin Z. Kedar estimates that there were between 300,000 and 360,000 non-Franks in the Kingdom, 250,000 of whom were villagers in the countryside, and \"one may assume that Muslims were in the majority in some, possibly most parts of the kingdom of Jerusalem\u2026\" As Ronnie Ellenblum points out, there simply is not enough existing evidence to accurately count the population and any estimate is inherently unreliable. Contemporary chronicler William of Tyre recorded the census of 1183, which was intended to determine the number of men available to defend against an invasion, and to determine the amount of tax money that could be obtained from the inhabitants, Muslim or Christian. If the population was actually counted, William did not record the number. In the 13th century, John of Ibelin drew up a list of fiefs and the number of knights owed by each, but this gives no indication of the non-noble, non-Latin population.\nThe Mamluks, led by Baibars, eventually made good their pledge to cleanse the entire Middle East of the Franks. With the fall of Antioch (1268), Tripoli (1289), and Acre (1291), those Christians unable to leave the cities were massacred or enslaved and the last traces of Christian rule in the Levant disappeared.\nSlavery.\nAn unknown number of Muslim slaves lived in the Kingdom. There was a very large slave market in Acre that functioned throughout the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Italian merchants were sometimes accused of selling Southeastern European Christians as slaves along with Muslim slaves. Slavery was less common than ransom, especially for prisoners of war; the large numbers of prisoners taken during raids and battles every year ensured that ransom money flowed freely between the Christian and Muslim states. Escape for prisoners and slaves was probably not difficult, as the inhabitants of the countryside were majority Muslim, and fugitive slaves were always a problem. The only legal means of manumission was conversion to (Catholic) Christianity. No Christian, whether Western or Eastern, was permitted by law to be sold into slavery.\nThe assizes of Jerusalem provided a legal framework for slavery in the Kingdom. The document stipulated that \"villeins, animals or some other chattel\" could be traded. \"Villeins\" were rural semi-free laborers akin to serfs. There were also multiple ways to become chattel slaves. People could be slaves by birth, enslaved by being captured in a raid, or as a penalty for debt or for helping a runaway slave.\nThe nomadic Bedouin tribes were considered to be the property of the king and under his protection. They could be sold or alienated just like any other property, and later in the 12th century, they were often under the protection of a lesser noble or one of the military orders.\nEconomy.\nThe urban composition of the area, combined with the presence of the Italian merchants, led to the development of an economy that was much more commercial than it was agricultural. Palestine had always been a crossroads for trade; now, this trade extended to Europe as well. European goods, such as the woolen textiles of northern Europe, made their way to the Middle East and Asia, while Asian goods were transported back to Europe. Jerusalem was especially involved in the silk, cotton and spice trade; other items that first appeared in Europe through trade with crusader Jerusalem included oranges and sugar, the latter of which chronicler William of Tyre called \"very necessary for the use and health of mankind.\" In the countryside, wheat, barley, legumes, olives, grapes, and dates were grown. The Italian city-states made enormous profits from this trade, thanks to commercial treaties like the , and it influenced their Renaissance in later centuries.\nColonies of Genoa and Venice in Palestine also took on agricultural ventures in their concessions. They especially cultivated Sugar for export to Europe. Sugar cane had been introduced in Palestine by the Arabs. To work on the sugar fields, Italian colonists utilized slaves or serfs of Arab or Syrian origin, or local serfs. Sugar manufacturing began in Tyre. In the 13th century, sugar production continued to increase in Palestine, and merchants could export it duty-free through the port of Acre until its conquest in 1291. The sugar exploitation system pioneered in the Kingdom of Jerusalem is seen as a precursor to the sugar plantations in the Americas.\nJerusalem collected money through tribute payments, first from the coastal cities which had not yet been captured, and later from other neighbouring states such as Damascus and Egypt, which the Crusaders could not conquer directly. After Baldwin I extended his rule over Oultrejordain, Jerusalem gained revenue from the taxation of Muslim caravans passing from Syria to Egypt or Arabia. The money economy of Jerusalem meant that their manpower problem could be partially solved by paying for mercenaries, an uncommon occurrence in medieval Europe. Mercenaries could be fellow European crusaders, or, perhaps more often, Muslim soldiers, including the famous Turcopoles.\nEducation.\nJerusalem was the centre of education in the kingdom. There was a school in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, where the basic skills of reading and writing Latin were taught; The relative wealth of the merchant class meant that their children could be educated there along with the children of nobles \u2013 it is likely that William of Tyre was a classmate of future king Baldwin III. Higher education had to be undertaken at one of the universities in Europe; the development of a university was impossible in the culture of crusader Jerusalem, where warfare was far more important than philosophy or theology. Nonetheless, the nobility and general Frankish population were noted for their high literacy: lawyers and clerks were in abundance, and the study of law, history, and other academic subjects was a beloved pastime of the royal family and the nobility. Jerusalem had an extensive library not only of ancient and medieval Latin works but of Arabic literature, much of which was apparently captured from Usamah ibn Munqidh and his entourage after a shipwreck in 1154. The Holy Sepulchre contained the kingdom's scriptorium and the city had a chancery where royal charters and other documents were produced. Aside from Latin, the standard written language of medieval Europe, the populace of crusader Jerusalem communicated in vernacular forms of French and Italian; Greek, Armenian, and even Arabic were used by Frankish settlers.\nArt and architecture.\nIn Jerusalem itself, the greatest architectural endeavour was the expansion of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in western Gothic style. This expansion consolidated all the separate shrines on the site into one building, and was completed by 1149. Outside of Jerusalem, castles and fortresses were the major focus of construction: Kerak and Montreal in Oultrejordain and Ibelin near Jaffa are among the numerous examples of crusader castles.\nCrusader art was a mix of Western, Byzantine, and Islamic styles. The major cities featured baths, interior plumbing, and other advanced hygienic tools which were lacking in most other cities and towns throughout the world. The foremost examples of crusader art are perhaps the Melisende Psalter, an illuminated manuscript commissioned between 1135 and 1143 and now located in the British Library, and the sculpted Nazareth Capitals. Paintings and mosaics were popular forms of art in the kingdom, but many of these were destroyed by the Mamluks in the 13th century; only the most durable fortresses survived the reconquest.\nGovernment and legal system.\nImmediately after the First Crusade, land was distributed to loyal vassals of Godfrey, forming numerous feudal lordships within the kingdom. This was continued by Godfrey's successors. The number and importance of the lordships varied throughout the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and many cities were part of the royal domain. The king was assisted by a number of officers of state. The king and the royal court were normally located in Jerusalem, but due to the prohibition on Muslim inhabitants, the capital was small and underpopulated. The king just as often held court at Acre, Nablus, Tyre, or wherever else he happened to be. In Jerusalem, the royal family lived firstly on the Temple Mount, before the foundation of the Knights Templar, and later in the palace complex surrounding the Tower of David; there was another palace complex in Acre.\nBecause the nobles tended to live in Jerusalem rather than on estates in the countryside, they had a larger influence on the king than they would have had in Europe. The nobles, along with the bishops, formed the , which was responsible for confirming the election of a new king (or a regent if necessary), collecting taxes, minting coins, allotting money to the king, and raising armies. The was the only judicial body for the nobles of the kingdom, hearing criminal cases such as murder, rape, and treason, and simpler feudal disputes such as the recovery of slaves, sales and purchases of fiefs, and default of service. Punishments included forfeiture of land and exile, or in extreme cases death. The first laws of the kingdom were, according to tradition, established during Godfrey of Bouillon's short reign, but were more probably established by Baldwin II at the Council of Nablus in 1120. Benjamin Z. Kedar argued that the canons of the Council of Nablus were in force in the 12th century but had fallen out of use by the thirteenth. Marwan Nader questions this and suggests that the canons may not have applied to the whole kingdom at all times. The most extensive collection of laws, together known as the Assizes of Jerusalem, were written in the mid-13th century, although many of them are purported to be twelfth-century in origin.\nThere were other, lesser courts for non-nobles and non-Latins; the provided justice for non-noble Latins, dealing with minor criminal offences such as assault and theft, and provided rules for disputes between non-Latins, who had fewer legal rights. Special courts such as the (for commercial disputes in the markets) and the (an admiralty court) existed in the coastal cities. The extent to which native Islamic and Eastern Christian courts continued to function is unknown, but the \"ra'is\" probably exercised some legal authority on a local level. The judged non-criminal matters among the native Christians (the \"Syriacs\"). For criminal matters, non-Latins were to be tried in the (or even the if the crime was sufficiently severe).\nThe Italian communes were granted almost complete autonomy from the very early days of the Kingdom, thanks to their military and naval support in the years following the First Crusade. This autonomy included the right to administer their own justice, although the kinds of cases that fell under their jurisdiction varied at different times.\nThe king was recognised as head of the Haute Cour, although he was legally only .\nLegacy.\nAfter the loss of all territory in the Levant in 1291, there were late attempts at further crusades, nominally proposing to recapture Jerusalem, but with the rise of the Ottoman Empire\ntheir character was more and more that of a desperate defensive war rarely reaching beyond the Balkans (Alexandrian Crusade, Smyrniote crusades).\nHenry IV of England made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem in 1393\u20134, and he later vowed to lead a crusade to recapture the city, but he did not undertake such a campaign before his death in 1413.\nThe Levant remained under Ottoman control from 1517 until the Partition of the Ottoman Empire in 1918.\nWith the Fall of Ruad in 1302, the Kingdom of Jerusalem lost its final outpost on the Levantine coast, its possession closest to the Holy Land now being Cyprus.\nHenry II of Jerusalem retained the title of king of Jerusalem until his death in 1324, and the title continued to be claimed by his successors, the kings of Cyprus.\nThe title of \"king of Jerusalem\" was also continuously used by the Angevin kings of Naples, whose founder, Charles of Anjou, had in 1277 bought a claim to the throne from Mary of Antioch. Thereafter, this claim to the Kingdom of Jerusalem was treated as a tributary of the crown of Naples, which often changed hands by testament or conquest rather than direct inheritance. As Naples was a papal fief, the Popes often endorsed the title of King of Jerusalem as well as of Naples, and the history of these claims is that of the Neapolitan Kingdom.\nIn 1441, control of the Kingdom of Naples was lost to Alfonso V of Aragon and the title thus was claimed by the kings of Spain, and after the War of the Spanish Succession both by the House of Bourbon and the House of Habsburg.\nThe title is still in use by the Spanish Crown, currently held by Felipe VI of Spain. It was also claimed by Otto von Habsburg as Habsburg pretender until 1958, and by the kings of Italy until 1946.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources\nSecondary sources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16824", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16824", "title": "Korfball", "text": "Mixed gender team sport\nKorfball ( ) is a ball sport with similarities to netball, basketball, and ringball. The objective is to throw a ball into a netless basket that is mounted on a pole. Each team is composed of four female players and four male players. The sport was created in the Netherlands in 1902 by schoolteacher Nico Broekhuysen, and has since spread globally.\nHistory.\nIn 1901, Dutch schoolteacher Nico Broekhuysen travelled to the Swedish town of N\u00e4\u00e4s to take an educational course on teaching gymnastics to children. While there, he was introduced to \"ringboll\". The objective of this Swedish game was to score points by throwing a ball through a ring attached to a pole that was in height. The field below was divided into three zones, and each player was confined to his or her assigned zone. Men and women played together. Upon Broekhuysen's return to Amsterdam, he began to teach his students a modified version of \"ringboll\". Broekhuysen replaced the ring with a basket to make it easier to see whether the ball had gone through it and scored a point. With his young students in mind, he also simplified the rules.\nThe name \"korfball\" derives from , a Dutch word meaning 'basket'. \nKorfball was featured as a demonstration sport in the Summer Olympics of 1920 and 1928. It has been included in the World Games since 1985. \nThe International Korfball Federation (IKF) was founded in 1933 in Antwerp, Belgium. IKF World Korfball Championships have been held every four years since 1978. The most successful countries at these competitions have been the Netherlands, Belgium, and Taiwan. The IKF announced in March 2022 that due to Russia's invasion of Ukraine, the Russian Korfball Federation would not be invited to any international competition until further notice, effectively banning Russian athletes from such events. Furthermore, the Russian Korfball Federation would not be eligible to bid to host any IKF event, nor were any IKF events planned to be held in Russia.\nAs of 2022, korfball is played in 69 countries and on every populated continent. In the Netherlands, there are approximately 500 clubs and more than 90,000 players. \nThe oldest korfball club that is still in existence, and has never merged with another, is HKC ALO in The Hague, having been founded on 1 February 1906.\nRules and regulations.\nEquipment.\nKorfball is played inside in winter and outdoors in spring, summer and autumn.\nThe size of the indoor court is , as are most outdoor courts. The court is divided into halves called \"zones\". In each zone is a tall post with a basket at the top. This is positioned two-thirds of the distance between the center line and the back of the zone.\nThe ball is very similar to the one used in association football, with a circumference of 68.0-70.5\u00a0cm (or diameter of 21.75-22.45\u00a0cm), a weight of 445-475 grams, and a bounce height of 1.10-1.30 meters when dropped from a height of 1.80 meters.\nTeam.\nA korfball team consists of eight players: four female and four male.\nMatch.\nAn international korfball match typically consists of two halves or four periods, with the length varying depending on the competition. When the match consists of halves, the duration is typically 25 minutes, with periods typically between 7 and 10 minutes, with a one-minute break between the first and second periods and between the third and fourth periods. At half time the break is five or ten minutes.\nFour players of each team are in one zone and the other four are in the other zone. Within each zone, a player may only defend a member of the opposite team of the same gender.\nAt the beginning of the match, one team chooses a particular half of the court. That half will be that team's defending zone, with \"their\" basket in it. Players score by throwing the ball through the opposing team's basket. After two goals, the teams change zones: defenders become attackers and attackers become defenders. In between those zone-changes, attackers cannot set foot on their defending zone or vice versa. At half time the teams swap halves of the court.\nThe rules prevent physical strength dominating the game. Blocking, tackling, and holding are not allowed, nor is kicking the ball.\nOnce a player has the ball, that player cannot dribble or walk with it; however, the player can move one foot as long as the foot on which the player landed when catching the ball stays in the same spot. Therefore, tactical and efficient teamwork is required, because players need each other in order to keep the ball moving.\nA player may not attempt to score when defended, which occurs when the defender is in between the opponent and the basket, is facing his/her opponent, or is within arm's length and attempting to block the ball. This rule encourages fast movement while also limiting the impact of players' height compared to their opponents.\nInternational tournaments.\nWorld Games.\nThe national teams competition organized by the International World Games Association has been played roughly every four years since 1981.\nIKF World Korfball Championship.\nThe national teams competition organized by the International Korfball Federation has been played roughly every four years since 1978.\nContinental championships.\nIKF promotes four continental championships: European Korfball Championship, All-Africa Korfball Championship, Pan-American Korfball Championship and Asia-Oceania Korfball Championship.\nInternational club competitions.\nThe IKF used to organize the Europa Cup competition for national champions (clubs) every year. The Europa Cup was organized for the first time in 1967, and was won by Ons Eibernest from the Netherlands. The winner of the last edition was Fortuna/Delta Logistiek, which won the 2020 edition.\nPKC from Papendrecht, the Netherlands, have won the championship the most times, a record 12 wins in total.\nUntil now, the winning team was either from the Netherlands or Belgium, with respectively 45 and 6 Europa Cups. The only club from the United Kingdom to reach the final was Mitcham Korfball Club from London. Mitcham lost the final against Catbavrienden from Belgium in 1998.\nOn 25 January 2022 IKF announced the introduction of the IKF Europe Korfball Champions League meant as a replacement for the IKF Europa Cup and IKF Europa Shield competitions. The first edition of the competition was the 2022/2023 edition.\nBeach korfball.\nFor beach korfball, the rules of the game differ slightly from those of regular korfball. Each team has 4 starting players and up to 4 substitutes. The field of play is 20 metres by 10 metres, and goals are to be placed 4 metres from the end line. Matches consist of two halves of 6 minutes with a 1-minute rest.\nEach team has 4 players in the field, two men and two women. Players can be substituted at any time. \nFurthermore, if a goal is scored from a 2-point zone, a two-point goal is awarded. Free shots can both be executed at the standard Free Shot line, or at the spot where the fault was made by the opponent.\nThe current Beach Korfball World Champion is Poland, who won the World Beach Korfball Championship in Nador, Morocco in 2022. 13 teams were represented with Portugal taking silver and Belgium bronze.\nIKF World Beach Korfball Championship 2022.\nIKF Beach Korfball World Cup (Regional)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16826", "revid": "50935842", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16826", "title": "Kabul", "text": "Capital and the largest city of Afghanistan\nKabul is the capital and largest city of Afghanistan. Located in the eastern half of the country, it is also a municipality, forming part of the Kabul Province. The city is divided for administration into 22 municipal districts. Kabul's population was estimated in 2023 at about 4.95\u00a0million. In contemporary times, Kabul has served as Afghanistan's political, cultural and economic centre. Rapid urbanization has made it the country's primate city.\nThe modern-day city of Kabul is located high in a narrow valley in the Hindu Kush mountain range, and is bounded by the Kabul River. At an elevation of , it is one of the highest capital cities in the world. The center of the city contains its old neighborhoods, including the areas of Khashti Bridge, Khabgah, Kahforoshi, Saraji, Chandavel, Shorbazar, Deh-Afghanan and Ghaderdiwane.\nKabul is said to be over 3,500 years old, and was mentioned at the time of the Achaemenid Persian Empire. Located at a crossroads in Asia\u2014roughly halfway between Istanbul, in the west and Hanoi, in the east\u2014the city is situated in a strategic location along the trade routes of Central Asia and South Asia. It was a key destination on the ancient Silk Road and was traditionally seen as the meeting point between Tartary, India and Persia. Over the centuries Kabul has been under the rule of various dynasties and empires, including the Seleucids, Bactrian Greeks, Mauryans, the Kushans, the Hindu Shahis, Western Turks, the Turk Shahis, the Samanids, the Khwarazmians, the Timurids, the Mongols and the Arman Rayamajhis.\nIn the 16th century, the Mughal Empire used Kabul as a summer capital, during which time it prospered and increased in significance. It briefly came under the control of the Afsharids following Nader Shah's invasion of India, until finally coming under local rule by the Afghan Empire in 1747. Kabul became the capital of Afghanistan in 1776 during the reign of Timur Shah Durrani (a son of Ahmad Shah Durrani). In the 19th century the city was occupied by the British: after establishing foreign relations and agreements, they withdrew from Afghanistan and returned to British India.\nKabul is known for its historical gardens, bazaars, and palaces such as the Gardens of Babur, Darul Aman Palace and the Arg. In the second half of the 20th century, the city became a stop on the hippie trail undertaken by many Europeans and gained the nickname \"Paris of Central Asia\". This period of tranquility ended in 1978 with the Saur Revolution and the subsequent Soviet military intervention in 1979, which sparked a 10-year Soviet\u2013Afghan War. The 1990s were marked by civil wars between splinter factions of the disbanded Afghan mujahideen, which destroyed much of the city. In 1996, Kabul was captured by the Taliban. after four years of intermittent fighting, The Taliban-ruled city fell to the United States after the American-led invasion of Afghanistan, which followed the September 11 attacks in the US in 2001. In 2021, Kabul was re-occupied by the Taliban, following the withdrawal of American and NATO-led military forces from Afghanistan.\nToponymy and etymology.\nKabul has been known by different names throughout its history. Its meaning is unknown, but it is believed to originate before the early Muslim conquests, when the city lay on trade routes between India and the Hellenistic world. In Sanskrit, it was known as \"Kubha\", whereas Greek authors of classical antiquity referred to it as \"Kophen\", \"Kophes\" or \"Koa\". The Chinese traveler Xuanzang (fl. 7th century) recorded the city as \"G\u0101of\u00f9\" (). The name \"Kabul\" was first applied to the Kabul River before being applied to the area situated between the Hindu Kush and Sindh (present-day Pakistan). This area was also known as Kabulistan. Alexander Cunningham (died 1893) noted in the 19th century that \"Kaofu,\" as recorded by the Chinese was in all likelihood the name of \"one of the five Yuchi or Tukhari tribes\". Cunningam added that this tribe gave its name to the city after it was occupied by them in the 2nd century BCE. This \"supposition seems likely\" as the Afghan historian Mir Ghulam Mohammad Ghobar (1898\u20131978) wrote that in the Avesta (sacred book of Zoroastrianism), Kabul was known as \"Vaekereta\", whereas the Greeks of antiquity referred to it as \"Ortospana\" (\"High Place\"), which corresponds to the Sanskrit word \"Urddhastana\", which was applied to Kabul. The Greek geographer Ptolemy (died c.\u2009170 CE) recorded Kabul as \u039a\u03b1\u03b2\u03bf\u03c5\u03c1\u03b1 (\"Kabura\").\nAccording to legend, a lake existed in Kabul, in the middle of which the so-called \"Island of Happiness\" was located, where a joyous family of musicians resided. According to this same legend, the island became accessible by the order of a king through the construction of a bridge (i.e. \"pul\" in Persian) made out of straw (i.e. \"kah\" in Persian). According to this legend the name Kabul was thus formed as a result of these two words combined, i.e. \"kah\" + \"pul\". The \"Concise Oxford Dictionary of World Place Names\" argues that the \"suggestion that the name is derived from the Arabic root \"qbl\" 'meeting' or 'receiving' is unlikely\".\nIt remains unknown when the name \"Kabul\" was first applied to the city. It \"came into prominence\" following the destruction of Kapisa and other cities in what is present-day Afghanistan by Genghis Khan (c. 1162\u20131227) in the thirteenth century. The centrality of the city within the region, as well as its cultural importance as a nexus of ethnic groups in the region, caused Kabul to become known as the Paris of Central Asia in the late 20th century.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nThe origin of Kabul, who built it and when, is largely unknown. The Rigveda, composed between 2000 and 1500 BC and one of the four canonical texts of Hinduism, and the Avesta, the primary canon of texts of Zoroastrianism, refer to the Kabul River and to a settlement called \"Kubha\".\nThe Kabul valley was part of the Median Empire (c. 678\u2013549). In 549 BC, the Median Empire was annexed by Cyrus the Great and Kabul became part the Achaemenid Empire (c. 550\u2013330). During that period, Kabul became a center of learning for Zoroastrianism, followed by Buddhism and Hinduism. An inscription on Darius the Great's tombstone lists Kabul as one of the 29 countries of the Achaemenid Empire.\nWhen Alexander the Great annexed the Achaemenid Empire, the Kabul region came under his control. After his death, his empire was seized by his general Seleucus, becoming part of the Seleucid Empire. In 305, the Seleucid Empire was extended to the Indus River, which led to friction with the neighbouring Maurya Empire.\nDuring the Mauryan period, trade flourished due to the use of uniform weights and measures. Irrigation facilities for public use were developed, resulting in an increased crop harvest. People were also employed as artisans, jewelers, and carpenters.\nThe Greco-Bactrian Kingdom took control of Kabul from the Mauryans in the early 2nd century BCE, then lost the city to their successors in the Indo-Greek Kingdom around the mid-2nd century BCE. Buddhism was greatly patronized by these rulers, and the majority of the city's population was adherents of the religion. Indo-Scythians expelled the Indo-Greeks by the mid 1st century BC, but lost the city to the Kushan Empire about 100 years later.\nIt is mentioned as \"Kophes\" or \"Kophene\" in some classical Greek writings. The Chinese Buddhist monk Hsuan Tsang refers to the city as \"Kaofu\" in the 7th century AD, which is the appellation of one of the five tribes of the Yuezhi who had migrated from across the Hindu Kush into the Kabul valley around the beginning of the Common Era. It was conquered by Kushan Emperor Kujula Kadphises in about 45 CE, and remained Kushan territory until at least the 3rd century. The Kushans were Indo-European-speaking peoples related to the Yuezhi and based in Bactria.\nAround 230, the Kushans were defeated by the Sasanian Empire and replaced by vassals known as the Kushano-Sasanian Kingdom. During this period, the city was referred to as \"Kapul\" in Pahlavi scripts. Kapol in New Persian means \"Royal Bridge\", which is due to the main bridge on the Kabul that connected the east and west of the city. In 420, the Kushano-Sasanians were driven out of Afghanistan by the Xionites known as the Kidarites, who were then replaced in the 460s by the Hephthalites. It became part of the surviving Kingdom of Kapisa, also known as \"Kabul-Shahan\". According to \"T\u00e1r\u00edkhu-l Hind\" by al-Biruni, Kabul was governed by princes of Turkic lineage. It was briefly held by the Tibetan Empire between 801 and 815.\nThe Jewish community.\nJews had a presence in Afghanistan from ancient times until 2021. There are records of religious correspondence establishing the presence of Jews in Kabul since the 8th century, though it is believed that they were present centuries or even millennia earlier. The 12th century Arab geographer Muhammad al-Idrisi wrote down his observations of a Jewish quarter in Kabul. In the early 19th century, Kabul and other major Afghan cities became sites of refuge for Jews fleeing persecution in neighbouring Iran.\nJews were generally tolerated for most of their time in Afghanistan, up until the passage of anti-Jewish laws in the 1870s. Jews were given a reprieve under the rule of King Nadir Shah until his assassination in 1933. The influence of Nazi propaganda led to increased violence against Jews and the ghettoization of their communities in Kabul and Herat. Most of Afghanistan's Jews fled the country or congregated in these urban hubs.\nAfter the establishment of the state of Israel, the Jewish community requested permission from King Zahir Shah to migrate there. Afghanistan was the only country that allowed its Jewish residents to migrate to Israel without relinquishing their citizenship. Most of those remaining, approximately 2,000 in number, left after the Soviet invasion in 1979.\nAs of 1992, there were believed to be two Jews remaining in Afghanistan, both living in a synagogue in Kabul. The congregation's Torah scroll was confiscated during the first Islamic Emirate. Zebulon Simontov was believed and widely reported to be Afghanistan's last Jew, until Tova Moradi fled months after him, with her grandchildren. Moradi, who harbored a rabbi in her home throughout the first Islamic Emirate, lived in Morad Khane, Kabul for decades. While she was married to a Muslim man as a child, she still covertly attended synagogue and tried to teach her children what Hebrew prayers she could remember from her childhood. As of her departure in November 2021, there are believed to be no Jews in Afghanistan.\nIslamisation and Mongol invasion.\nThe Islamic conquest reached modern-day Afghanistan in 642\u00a0AD, at a time when Kabul was independent. Until then, Kabul was considered politically and culturally part of the Indian world. A number of failed expeditions were made to Islamise the region. In one of them, Abdur Rahman bin Samara arrived in Kabul from Zaranj in the late 600s and converted 12,000 inhabitants to Islam before abandoning the city. Muslims were a minority until Ya'qub bin Laith as-Saffar of Zaranj conquered Kabul in 870 from the Hindu Shahis and established the first Islamic dynasty in the region. It was reported that the rulers of Kabul were Muslims with non-Muslims living close by. Iranian traveller and geographer Istakhri described it in 921:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOver the following centuries, the city was successively controlled by the Samanids, Ghaznavids, Ghurids, Khwarazmshahs, Qarlughids, and Khaljis. In the 13th century, the invading Mongols caused major destruction in the region. Report of a massacre in the close by Bamiyan is recorded around this period, where the entire population of the valley was annihilated by the Mongol troops as revenge for the death of Genghis Khan's grandson. As a result, many natives of Afghanistan fled south toward the Indian subcontinent where some established dynasties in Delhi. The Chagatai Khanate and Kartids were vassals of Ilkhanate until the dissolution of the latter in 1335.\nFollowing the era of the Khalji dynasty in 1333, the famous Moroccan scholar Ibn Battuta was visiting Kabul and wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We travelled on to Kabul, formerly a vast town, the site of which is now occupied by a village inhabited by a tribe of Persians called Afghans. They hold mountains and defiles and possess considerable strength, and are mostly highwaymen. Their principal mountain is called Kuh Sulayman.\nTimurid and Mughal era.\nIn the 14th century, Kabul became a major trading centre under the kingdom of Timur (\"Tamerlane\"). In 1504, the city fell to Babur from the north and made into his headquarters, which became one of the principal cities of his later Mughal Empire. In 1525, Babur described Kabulistan in his memoirs by writing that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are many differing tribes in the K\u0101bul country; in its dales and plains are Turks and clansmen and 'Arabs; and in its town and in many villages, S\u0101rts; out in the districts and also in villages are the Pash\u0101i, Par\u0101j\u012b, T\u0101jik, B\u012brk\u012b and Afgh\u0101n tribes. In the western mountains are the Haz\u0101ra and Nikd\u012br\u012b tribes, some of whom speak the Mugh\u016bl\u012b tongue. In the north-eastern mountains are the places of the K\u0101firs, such as Kit\u016br and Gibrik. To the south are the places of the Afgh\u0101n tribes.\nMirza Muhammad Haidar Dughlat, a poet from Hindustan who visited at the time wrote: \"Dine and drink in Kabul: it is mountain, desert, city, river and all else.\" It was from here that Babur began his 1526 conquest of Hindustan, which was ruled by the Afghan Lodi dynasty and began east of the Indus River in what is present-day Pakistan. Babur loved Kabul due to the fact that he lived in it for 20 years and the people were loyal to him, including the weather that he was used to. His wish to be buried in Kabul was finally granted. The inscription on his tomb contains the famous Persian couplet, which states:\n\u0627\u06af\u0631\u0641\u0631\u062f\u0648\u0633 \u0631\u0648\u06cc \u0632\u0645\u06cc\u0646 \u0627\u0633\u062a \u0647\u0645\u06cc\u0646 \u0627\u0633\u062a \u0648 \u0647\u0645\u06cc\u0646 \u0627\u0633\u062a \u0648 \u0647\u0645\u06cc\u0646 \u0627\u0633\u062a\nTransliteration:\nAgar fardus rui zameen ast, hameen ast, o hameen ast, o hameen ast.\nKabul remained in Mughal control for the next 200 years. Though Mughal power became centred within the Indian subcontinent, Kabul retained importance as a frontier city for the empire; Abul Fazl, Emperor Akbar's chronicler, described it as one of the two gates to Hindustan (the other being Kandahar). As part of administrative reforms under Akbar, the city was made capital of the eponymous Mughal province, Kabul Subah. Under Mughal governance, Kabul became a prosperous urban centre, endowed with bazaars such as the non-extant Char Chatta. For the first time in its history, Kabul served as a mint centre, producing gold and silver Mughal coins up to the reign of Alamgir II. It acted as a military base for Shah Jahan's campaigns in Balkh and Badakhshan. Kabul was also a recreational retreat for the Mughals, who hunted here and constructed several gardens. Most of the Mughals' architectural contributions to the city (such as gardens, fortifications, and mosques) have not survived. During this time, the population was about 60,000.\nUnder later Mughal Emperors, Kabul became neglected. The empire lost the city when it was captured in 1738 by Nader Shah, who was en route to invade the Indian subcontinent.\nDurrani and Barakzai dynasties.\nNine years after Nader Shah and his forces invaded and occupied the city as part of the more easternmost parts of his Empire, he was assassinated by his own officers, causing its rapid disintegration. Ahmad Shah Durrani, commander of 4,000 Abdali Afghans, asserted Pashtun rule in 1747 and further expanded his new Afghan Empire. His ascension to power marked the beginning of Afghanistan. By this time, Kabul had lost its status as a metropolitan city, and its population had decreased to 10,000. Interest in the city was renewed when Ahmad Shah's son Timur Shah Durrani, after inheriting power, transferred the capital of the Durrani Empire from Kandahar to Kabul in 1776. Kabul experienced considerable urban development during the reigns of Timur Shah and his successor Zaman Shah; several religious and public buildings were constructed, and diverse groups of Sufis, jurists, and literary families were encouraged to settle the city through land grants and stipends. Kabul's first visitor from Europe was Englishman George Forster, who described 18th-century Kabul as \"the best and cleanest city in Asia\".\nIn 1826, the kingdom was claimed by Dost Mohammad Khan, but in 1839 Shah Shuja Durrani was re-installed with the help of the British Empire during the First Anglo-Afghan War. In 1841 a local uprising resulted in the killing of the British resident and loss of mission in Kabul and the 1842 retreat from Kabul to Jalalabad, in which 4,500 regular British troops and 14,000 civilians were killed by Afghan tribesmen. In 1842 the British returned to Kabul, demolishing the city's main \"bazaar\" in revenge during the Kabul Expedition (1842) before returning to British India (now Pakistan). Akbar Khan took to the throne from 1842 to 1845 and was followed by Dost Mohammad Khan.\nThe Second Anglo-Afghan War broke out in 1879 when Kabul was under Sher Ali Khan's rule, as the Afghan king initially refused to accept British diplomatic missions and later the British residents were again massacred. During the war, Bala Hissar was partially destroyed by a fire and an explosion.\n20th century.\nIn Kabul, an established bazaar city, leather and textile industries developed by 1916. The majority of the population was concentrated on the south side of the river.\nThe city was modernised throughout the regime of King Habibullah Khan, with the introduction of electricity, telephone, and a postal service. The first modern high school, Habibia, was established in 1903. In 1919, after the Third Anglo-Afghan War, King Amanullah Khan announced Afghanistan's independence in foreign affairs at Eidgah Mosque in Kabul. Amanullah was reform-minded and he had a plan to build a new capital city on land 6\u00a0km from Kabul. This area, named Darulaman, consisted of the famous Darul Aman Palace, where he later resided. Many educational institutions were founded in Kabul during the 1920s. In 1929 King Amanullah left Kabul after a local uprising orchestrated by Habibullah Kalakani, but he was imprisoned and executed after nine months in power by King Nader Khan. Three years later, in 1933, the new king was assassinated during an award ceremony in a school in Kabul. The throne was left to his 19-year-old son, Zahir Shah, who became the last King of Afghanistan. Unlike Amanullah Khan, Nader Khan and Zahir Shah had no plans to create a new capital city, and thus Kabul remained the country's seat of government.\nDuring the inter-war period, France and Germany helped to develop the country and maintained high schools and lycees in the capital, providing education for the children of the city's elite families. Kabul University opened in 1932, and by the 1960s the majority of teachers were western educated Afghans and the majority of instructors at the university had degrees from Western universities.\nKabul's only railway service, the Kabul\u2013Darulaman Tramway, operated for six years from 1923 to 1929. When Zahir Shah took power in 1933, Kabul had the only of rail and the country had few internal telegraphs, phone lines or roads. Zahir turned to the Japanese, Germans and Italians for help in developing a modern transportation and communications network. A radio tower built in Kabul by the Germans in 1937 provided communication with outlying villages. A national bank and state cartels were organised to allow for economic modernisation. Textile mills, power plants, carpet and furniture factories were built in Kabul, providing much-needed manufacturing and infrastructure.\nDuring the 1940s and 1950s, urbanisation accelerated and the built-up area was increased in size to 68\u00a0km2 by 1962, an almost fourteen-fold increase since 1925. The Serena Hotel opened in 1945 as the first Western-style luxury hotel. In the 1950s, under the premiership of Mohammad Daoud Khan, foreign investment and development increased. In 1955, the Soviet Union forwarded $100\u00a0million in credit to Afghanistan which financed public transportation, airports, a cement factory, a mechanised bakery, a five-lane highway from Kabul to the Soviet border and dams, including the Salang Pass to the north of Kabul. During the 1960s, Soviet-style microrayon housing estates were built, containing sixty blocks. The government also built many ministry buildings in the brutalist architecture style. In the 1960s the first Marks &amp; Spencer store in Central Asia was built in the city. Kabul Zoo was inaugurated in 1967, which was maintained with the help of visiting German zoologists. During this time, Kabul experimented with liberalisation, notably the loosening of restrictions on speech and assembly, which led to student politics in the capital and demonstrations by Socialist, Maoist, liberal or Islamist factions.\nForeigners flocked to Kabul as the nation's tourism industry expanded. To accompany the city's new-found tourism, western-style accommodations were opened in the 1960s, notably the Spinzar Hotel. Western, American and Japanese tourists visited the city's attractions including Chicken Street and the National Museum that contained some of Asia's finest cultural artefact. Lonely Planet called it an upcoming \"tourist trap\" in 1973. Pakistanis visited to watch Indian films that were banned in their own country. Kabul was nicknamed the \"Paris of Central Asia\". According to J. Bruce Amstutz, an American diplomat in Kabul:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Before the 1978 Marxist coup d'etat] Kabul was a pleasant city [..] Though poor economically, it was spared the eyesore slums so visible in other Asian cities. The Afghans themselves were an imposing people, the men tall and self-assured and the women attractive.\nUntil the late 1970s, Kabul was a stop on the Hippie trail from Bamyan to the west towards Peshawar. The city was known for its street sales of hashish and became a major attraction for western hippies.\nOccupations, wars and Taliban rule (1996\u20132001).\nOn 28 April 1978, President Daoud and most of his family were assassinated in Kabul's Presidential Palace in what is called the Saur Revolution. Pro-Soviet PDPA under Nur Muhammad Taraki seized power and slowly began to institute reforms. Private businesses were nationalised in the Soviet manner. Education was modified into the Soviet model, with lessons focusing on teaching Russian, Marxism\u2013Leninism and learning of other countries belonging to the Soviet bloc.\nAmid growing internal chaos and heightened cold war tensions, the U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan, Adolph Dubs, was kidnapped on his way to work at the U.S. Embassy in Kabul on 14 February 1979 and killed during a rescue attempt at the Serena Hotel. There were conflicting reports of who abducted Dubs and what demands were made for his release. Several senior Soviet officials were in the lobby of the hotel during a standoff with the kidnappers, who were holding Dubs in room 117. Afghan police, acting on the advice of Soviet advisors and over the objections of U.S. officials, launched a rescue attempt, during which Dubs was shot in the head from a distance of six inches and killed. Many questions about the killing remain unanswered.\nOn 24 December 1979, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan and Kabul was heavily occupied by Soviet Armed Forces. In Pakistan, Director-General of the ISI Akhtar Abdur Rahman advocated for the idea of covert operation in Afghanistan by arming Islamic extremists who formed the mujahideen. General Rahman was heard loudly saying: \"Kabul must burn! Kabul must burn!\", and mastered the idea of proxy war in Afghanistan. Pakistani President Zia-ul-Haq authorised this operation under General Rahman, which was later merged with Operation Cyclone, a programme funded by the United States and carried out by the Central Intelligence Agency.\nThe Soviets turned the city of Kabul into their command centre during the Soviet\u2013Afghan War, and while fighting was mostly taking place in the countryside, Kabul was widely disturbed. Political crime and guerrilla attacks on military and government targets were common, and the sound of gunfire became commonplace at night in the outskirts. Large numbers of PDPA party members and Soviet troops were kidnapped or assassinated, sometimes in broad daylight, with acts of terrorism committed by civilians, anti-regime militias and also Khalqists. By July 1980, as many as twelve party members were being assassinated on a daily basis, and the Soviet Army stopped patrolling the city in January 1981. A major uprising against the Soviet presence broke out in Kabul in February 1980 in what is called the 3 Hut uprising. It led to a night curfew in the city that would remain in place for seven years. The Soviet Embassy also, was attacked four times with arms fire in the first five years of the war. A Western correspondent revisiting Kabul in December 1983 after a year, said that the city was \"converted into a fortress bristling with weapons\". Contrastingly, that same year American diplomat Charles Dunbar commented that the Soviet troops' presence was \"surprisingly modest\", and an author in a 1983 \"Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists\" article thought that the Soviet soldiers had a \"friendly\" atmosphere.\nThe city's population increased from around 500,000 in 1978 to 1.5\u00a0million in 1988. The large influx were mostly internal refugees who fled other parts of the country for safety in Kabul. During this time, women made up 40% of the workforce. Soviet men and women were very common in the city's shopping roads, with the large availability of Western products. Most Soviet civilians (numbering between 8,000 and 10,000) lived in the northeastern Soviet-style Mikrorayon (\"microraion\") housing complex that was surrounded by barbed-wire and armed tanks. They sometimes received abuse from anti-Soviet civilians on the streets. The mujahideen rebels managed to strike at the city a few times\u2014on 9 October 1987, a car bomb planted by a mujahideen group killed 27 people, and on 27 April 1988, in celebrations of the 10th anniversary of the Saur Revolution, a truck bomb killed six people.\nAfter the fall of Mohammad Najibullah's government in April 1992, different mujahideen factions entered the city and formed a government under the Peshawar Accords, but Gulbuddin Hekmatyar's party refused to sign the accords and started shelling the city for power, which soon escalated into a full-scale conflict. This marked the start of a dark period of the city: at least 30,000 civilians were killed in a period known locally as the \"Kabul Wars.\" About 80 percent of the city was devastated and destroyed by 1996. The old city and western areas were among the worst-hit. A \"New York Times\" analyst said in 1996 that the city was more devastated than Sarajevo, which was similarly damaged during the Bosnian War at the time.\nThe city suffered heavily under a bombardment campaign between rival militias which intensified during the summer of 1992. Its geographic location in a narrow valley made it an easy target from rockets fired by militias who based themselves in the surrounding mountains. Within two years' time, the majority of infrastructure was destroyed, a massive exodus of the population left to the countryside or abroad, and electricity and water was completely out. In late 1994, bombardment of the capital came to a temporary halt. These forces took steps to restore law and order. Courts started to work again, convicting individuals inside government troops who had committed crimes. On 27 September 1996, the hardline Taliban militia seized Kabul and established the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. They imposed a strict form of Sharia (Islamic law), restricting women from work and education, conducting amputations against common thieves, and hit-squads from the infamous \"Ministry for Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice\" watching public beatings of people.\n21st century.\nIn November 2001, the Northern Alliance captured Kabul after the Taliban had abandoned the city following an American invasion. A month later, a new government began to assemble under President Hamid Karzai. A NATO-led International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) was deployed in Afghanistan and many expatriate Afghans returned to the country. Kabul's population grew from about 500,000 in 2001 to over 3\u00a0million. Foreign embassies re-opened. In 2008, responsibility for security began to shift from NATO to Afghan forces. In 2001 rebuilding began and many of the city's damaged landmarks were rebuilt or restored, including the Gardens of Babur in 2005, the arch of Paghman, the Mahmoud Khan Bridge clock tower in 2013 and the Taj Beg Palace in 2021. Local community efforts repaired homes and dwellings.\nWith an increasing population the city experienced rapid urbanisation, and many informal settlements were built. Numerous modern housing complexes were built after the late 2000s, many of them gated and secured, to serve a growing Afghan middle class. These included the Aria City (in District 10) and Golden City (District 8). Complexes were built out of town, such as the Omid-e-Sabz township (District 13), Qasaba/Khwaja Rawash township (District 15), and Sayed Jamaludin township (District 12).\nA high-security \"Green Zone\" was formed in the centre of the city. In 2010, a series of guarded checkpoints called the Ring of Steel was put into operation. Concrete blast walls appeared throughout Kabul in the 2000s.\nThe city continued to develop despite frequent terrorist attacks, mainly by Taliban insurgents, and Kabul was the fifth fastest-growing city in the world in 2012. Until August 2021, the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) were in charge of security in and around the city. Kabul was periodically the scene of deadly bombings, carried out mostly by the Taliban and its wing the Haqqani network. Government employees, soldiers and ordinary civilians were targets of attacks. The Afghan government called the actions of the terrorists war crimes. The deadliest attack was a truck bombing in May 2017. The 2021 Kabul school bombing targeted a girls' school in Dashte Barchi.\nThe city was seized during the 2021 Taliban offensive on 15 August 2021. Under Taliban rule the city and the country experienced relative calm, although terrorist attacks continued to be committed by the regional ISIL branch.\nPakistani airstrike.\nOn 9 October, 2025 Pakistan conducted an airstrike in Kabul targeting the senior leadership of the Pakistani Taliban.\nGeography.\nKabul was situated in the eastern part of the country, above sea level in a narrow valley, wedged between the Hindu Kush mountains along the Kabul River. Immediately to the south of the old city are the ancient city walls and the Sher Darwaza mountain, with the Shuhadayi Salihin cemetery behind it. A bit further east is the ancient Bala Hissar fortress with the Kol-e Hasmat Khan lake behind it.\nIts location has been described as a \"bowl surrounded by mountains\". Some of the mountains (which are called \"koh\") include: Khair Khana-e Shamali, Khwaja Rawash, Shakhi Baran Tey, Chihil Sutun, Qurugh, Khwaja Razaq and Sher Darwaza. There are also two mountains in between urban areas to the west: Koh-e Asamai (locally known as the \"Television hill\") and Ali Abad. Hills within the city (which are called \"tapa\") include Bibi Mahro and Maranjan.\nThe Logar River flows into Kabul from the south, joining the Kabul River not far from the city centre.\nThe city covers an area size of , making it by far the largest in the country. The closest foreign capital cities as the crow flies are Islamabad, Dushanbe, Tashkent, New Delhi and Bishkek. Kabul is roughly equidistant between Istanbul (western Asia) and Hanoi (eastern Asia).\nClimate.\nKabul has a continental, cold semi-arid climate (BSk), with precipitation concentrated in the winter (almost exclusively falling as snow) and spring months. Summers have very low humidity, providing some relief from the heat. Autumns feature warm afternoons and sharply cooler evenings. Winters are very cold by South Asian standards, with a subzero January daily average temperature of , mainly due to the high elevation of the city. Spring is the wettest time of the year. Sunny conditions dominate year-round, and the annual mean temperature is only , much lower than that of Afghanistan's other large cities.\nEnvironment.\nThe Kabul River flows through the heart of the city, dividing the central bazaars. There are several bridges (\"pul\") crossing the river, the major ones being Pul-e Shah-Do Shamshira, Pul-e Bagh-e Omomi, Pul-e Khishti, and Pul-e Mahmoud. Due to climate change, since the 21st century, the river runs dry most of the year, only filling up in the wetter winter and spring seasons.\nA large lake and wetland was located just to the southeast from the old city called \"Kol-e Hashmat Khan\". The marsh provides a critical resting place to thousands of birds who fly between the Indian subcontinent and Siberia. In 2017 the government declared the lake a protected area. Some rare species of birds have been spotted at the lake, such as the Eastern imperial eagle and the Dalmatian pelican. Kabul's other large lake is Qargha, located some 9\u00a0km northwest from the centre. It is a major attraction for locals as well as foreigners.\nAir pollution is a major problem in the city during the winter season, when many residents burn low-quality fuels.\nKabul could be the first major city to run dry, as claimed by a report of the NGO Mercy Corps. The city relies mainly on wells most of which have already fallen dry. \"Up to 80% of Kabul's groundwater is deemed unsafe, with high levels of sewage, salinity and arsenic. [...] Water extraction [as of 2025] exceeds the natural recharge rate by 44 million cubic metres each year. If trends continue, the city could run dry as early as 2030.\nDistricts.\nThe city of Kabul located within Kabul District, one of the 15 districts of Kabul Province. As the provincial capital, it forms a municipality (\"sh\u0101rw\u0101li\") which is further divided into 22 administrative districts called municipal districts or city districts (\"n\u0101hia\"), which coincide with the official Police Districts (PD). The number of city districts increased from 11 to 18 in 2005, and then to 22 by 2010 after the incorporation of Districts 14 and 19\u201322 which were annexed by Kabul Municipality from surrounding rural districts. The city limits have thus substantially increased. Due to demarcation disputes with the provincial administration, some of these new districts are more administered by the provincial districts than the municipality.\nDistrict 1 contains most of the old city. Downtown Kabul mostly consist of Districts 2, 4 and 10. In addition, Districts 3 and 6 house many commercial and governmental points of interests. The city's north and west are the most urbanised, as opposed to the south and east.\nThe table below show the 22 city districts and their settlements, with information about its land size and usage, accurate as of 2011.\nDemographics.\nKabul's population was estimated in 2023 at about 4.95\u00a0million. The city's population has long fluctuated due to the wars. The lack of an up-to-date census means that there are various estimates of the population.\nKabul's population was estimated to have been about 10,000 in 1700, 65,000 by 1878, and 120,000 by 1940. More recently, the population was around 500,000 in 1979, whilst another source claims 337,715 as of 1976. This figure rose to about 1.5\u00a0million by 1988, before dramatically dropping in the 1990s. Kabul became one of the fastest-growing cities in the world, with its population growing fourfold from 2001 to 2014. This was partly due to the return of refugees after the fall of the Taliban regime, and partly due to Afghans moving from other provinces mainly due to war between Taliban insurgents and Afghan government forces in their native areas as well as looking for labor. This resulting rapid urbanisation means that many residents today live in informal settlements. Shanty mud-brick homes on the mountainsides and steep hills have been built by them and these are usually poverty-stricken, not connected to the water and electricity grid. Although the settlements are illegal, they have been tolerated by authorities. In 2017 Kabul Municipality started a project to paint the homes in these settlements in bright colors in an effort to \"cheer up\" residents.\nKabul is and has historically been the most ethnically diverse city in the country, with the population including Afghans from all over the country. Approximately 45% of Kabul's population is Tajik, 25% Hazara, another 25% is Pashtun, and minority ethnic groups include Qizilbash (counted to Tajiks), 1% Baloch, 2% Uzbek, 1% Turkmen, and 1% Afghan Hindu. Almost three-quarters of the population of Kabul follow Sunni Islam, and around Twenty-five percent of residents are Shiites. Other religions in the city include Sikhism and Hinduism.\nIn 1525, Babur described the region in his memoirs by writing that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Eleven or twelve tongues are spoken in K\u0101bul\u2014\u2018Arab\u012b, Persian, Turk\u012b, Mugh\u016bl\u012b, Hind\u012b, Afgh\u0101n\u012b, Pash\u0101\u012b, Par\u0101j\u012b, Gibr\u012b, B\u012brk\u012b, and Lamgh\u0101n\u012b. If there be another country with so many differing tribes and such a diversity of tongues, it is not known.\u2014\u200a\nAlong with Pashtun, Tajik and Hazara communities, who make up the majority of the population of the city, there was a significant population of Uzbek, Turkmen, Kuchi, Qizilbash, Hindu, Sikh and other groups. The broader province of Kabul however, is dominated by Pashtun and Tajik groups. The Dari (Persian) and Pashto languages are widely used in the region, although Dari serves as the lingua franca. Multilingualism is common throughout the area, particularly among the Pashtun people.\nThe term \"Kabuli\" (\u06a9\u0627\u0628\u0644\u06cc) is referred to the urbanites of the city. They were ethnic-neutral, typically speak Dari (Persian), were generally secularly educated, and favor Western fashion. Many Kabulites (especially elites and the upper class) left the country during the civil war and are now outnumbered by rural people who moved in from the countryside, mostly refugees but also labor-seekers.\nAbout 68% of the city's population follow Sunni Islam while 30% are Shiites (mainly the Hazaras and Qizilbash). The remaining 2% are followers of Sikhism and Hinduism, as well as one known Christian resident (First Lady Rula Ghani) and one Jewish resident (Zablon Simintov) in the 2010s. It is estimated that there were 500\u20138,000 Afghan Christians in the country as a whole; due to restrictions on religious freedom, they often worship in secret, rendering it difficult to estimate the number of Christians in Kabul specifically. Hundreds of non-Muslims still remain after the Taliban retakeover Afghanistan. Kabul also has small Sindhi and Punjabi merchant community (which most of the Sikhs and Hindus belong to) and Turkish communities (mostly business-owners and investors), and in the 1980s had a sizable Russian community during the Soviet campaign in the country.\nSports.\nCricket has historically been the dominant sport in Kabul, with two of three sports stadiums reserved for it.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe municipality's administrative structure consisted of 17 departments under a mayor. Like other provincial municipalities in Afghanistan, the municipality of Kabul dealt with city affairs such as construction and infrastructure. The city districts (\"n\u0101hia\") collected certain taxes and issued building licenses. Each city district had a district head appointed by the mayor, and lead six major departments in the district office. The neighbourhood organisation structure at the \"nahia\" level was called a \"gozar\". Kabul has been Divided in to 630 Gozars. A \"wakil-e gozar\" was a person chosen to represent a community within a city district.\nKabul's Chief of Police was Lt. Gen. Abdul Rahman Rahimi. The police were part of the Afghan National Police (ANP) under the Ministry of Interior and were arranged by city districts. The Police Chief was selected by the Interior Minister and is responsible for all law enforcement activities throughout the Kabul province.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nKabul's main products included fresh and dried fruit, nuts, beverages, Afghan rugs, leather and sheep skin products, furniture, antique replicas, and domestic clothes. The World Bank authorised US$25\u00a0million for the Kabul Urban Reconstruction Project which closed in 2011. Over the last decade, the United States has invested approximately $9.1\u00a0billion into urban infrastructure in Afghanistan. The wars since 1978 have limited the city's economic productivity but after the establishment of the Karzai administration since late 2001, local economic developments have included a number of indoor shopping malls. The first of these was the Kabul City Center, opened 2005. Others have also opened in recent years including Gulbahar Center, City Walk Mall and Majid Mall.\nMandawi Road on the south side of the river, located between Murad Khani and Shur Bazaar neighbourhoods, is one of the main bazaars of Kabul. This wholesale market is very popular amongst locals. Nearby is the Sarai Shahzada money exchange market. Chicken Street is perhaps best known to foreigners.\nKabul's largest industrial hub was located in District 9, on the north banks of the River Kabul and near the airport. About from downtown Kabul, in Bagrami, a industrial complex had been completed with modern facilities, which allowed companies to operate businesses there. The park had professional management for the daily maintenance of public roads, internal streets, common areas, parking areas, 24 hours perimeter security, access control for vehicles and people. A number of factories operated there, including the $25\u00a0million Coca-Cola bottling plant and the Omaid Bahar juice factory.\nAccording to Transparency International, the government of Afghanistan was the third most-corrupt in the world, as of 2010. Experts believe that the poor decisions of Afghan politicians contributed to the unrest in the region. This also prevented foreign investment in Afghanistan, especially by Western countries. In 2012, there were reportedly $3.9\u00a0billion paid to public officials in bribes which contributed to these issues.\nDa Afghanistan Bank, the nation's central bank, was headquartered in Kabul. In addition, there are several commercial banks in the city.\nAs of 2016 there were about 20,000 foreign tourists visiting Afghanistan per year.\nDevelopment planning.\nA US$1\u00a0billion contract was signed in 2013 to commence work on the \"Kabul New City\" (sometimes reported as \"New Kabul City\"), which is a major residential scheme that would accommodate 1.5\u00a0million people. Construction was delayed due to instability in the region, but construction broke ground in August 2023 after a new contract was signed between the Ministry of Urban Development and Housing and Khawar Company. The new agreement is expected to modernize the city, address overpopulation, and incentivize the return of expatriates by adding housing to accommodate 3 million people and modern amenities. The construction is planned to occur in two phases over the span of about 30 years.\nAnother development is the Qatar Township in Kabul. Construction was halted for the COVID-19 pandemic, but resumed in May 2023. The township\u2014which is planned to include 12 blocks with 768 flats, three business blocks, one mosque, two schools, and an orphanage\u2014could become operational in 2024.\nCommunications.\nAs of November 2015, there were more than 24 television stations based out of Kabul. Terrestrial TV transmitters were located at the summit of the Koh-e Asamai.\nGSM/GPRS mobile phone services are provided by Afghan Wireless, Etisalat, Roshan, MTN and Salaam. They provide 4G and 3G services. In November 2006, the Afghan Ministry of Communications signed a US$64.5\u00a0million deal with ZTE on the establishment of a countrywide fibre optical cable network to help improve telephone, internet, television and radio broadcast services not just in Kabul but throughout the country.\nMail and delivery services are provided by Afghan Post, FedEx, TNT N.V., and DHL.\nHotels and other lodging.\nKabul has many hotels for domestic and foreign travelers. Guest houses are also found in the city. The better and safer ones are located in the Shahr-e Naw and Wazir Akbar Khan neighbourhoods (the Green Zone). The following are some of the hotels in Kabul (in alphabetical order).\nCulture and landmarks.\nThe old part of Kabul was filled with bazaars nestled along its narrow, crooked streets, examples being the Mandawi and the Bird Market (\"Ka Foroshi\"). Cultural sites included: the National Museum of Afghanistan, notably displaying an impressive statue of Surya excavated at Khair Khana, the ruined Darul Aman Palace, the tomb of Mughal Emperor Babur at Bagh-e Babur, and Chihil Sutun Park, the Minar-i-Istiqlal (Column of Independence) built in 1919 after the Third Afghan War, the tomb of Timur Shah Durrani, the Bagh-e Bala Palace and the imposing Id Gah Mosque (founded 1893). Bala Hissar was a fort which was partially destroyed during the Second Anglo-Afghan War, then restored as a military college. There was also the Kolola Pushta fort, which was garrisoned by the Afghan Army, and the nearby 19th-century Shahrara Tower fort, which was ruined in 1928. The Koh-e Asamai mountain had a temple that was considered important to Hinduism.\nOther places of interest include Kabul City Center, which was Kabul's first shopping mall, the shops around Flower Street and Chicken Street, Wazir Akbar Khan district, Kabul Golf Club, Kabul Zoo, Abdul Rahman Mosque, Shah-Do Shamshira and other famous mosques, the National Gallery of Afghanistan, the National Archives of Afghanistan, Afghan Royal Family Mausoleum, the OMAR Mine Museum, Bibi Mahro Hill, Kabul Cemetery, and Paghman Gardens best known for the famous Taq-e Zafar arch. The Aga Khan Development Network (AKDN) was also involved in the restoration of the Bagh-e Babur (Babur Gardens).\nMaranjan Hill (\"Tappe-i-Maranjan\") was a nearby hill where Buddhist statues and Graeco-Bactrian coins from the 2nd century BC have been found. Outside the city proper lied the Buddhist Guldara stupa and another stupa at Shewaki. Paghman and Jalalabad were interesting valleys west and east of the city. On the latter road, about 16 miles east of the city, was the Tang-e Gharu gorge.\nKabul used to have as many as 23 cinemas, but currently only had four, including the state owned Ariana Cinema. The decline of cinema of Afghanistan since the 1990s, both due to war and oppressive regimes, had meant many of these have closed. The Nandari, or Kabul National Theater, was one of the largest theaters in Asia before it was destroyed in the civil war and has not been restored. The lack of investment meant that the sector did not recover after 2001, and notably the rundown Park Cinema was controversially demolished in 2020.\nArchitecture.\nKabul's various architectural designs reflected the various links it has had with empires and civilisations, particularly being on the ancient trade route connecting India and China with Persia and the West.\nThe Buddhist Chakari minaret was likely built in the Kushan era and had traces of Greco-Bactrian and Gandhara Art. It had Buddhist swastika and both Mahayana and Theravada qualities. Following the Islamic conquest, a new age of architectural realms appeared in the Kabul region. The Gardens of Babur was perhaps the best preserved example of Islamic and Mughal architecture. Emperor Babur had also built seven other big gardens in Kabul at the time. The present Gardens of Babur also reflect Afghanistan's traditional architecture by the wooden carving, pressed stucco, decorative stone masonry and other features. Another fine example of the Babur era is the Id Gah Mosque, using stones from the Punjab and Sindh and designed by Persians.\nAhmad Shah Durrani's rise as the Afghan ruler brought changes to Kabul and the nation, with a more inward-looking and self-protecting society reflecting the architecture that were no different between the rich and poor peoples. mausoleum of Timur Shah Durrani, the Afghan ruler until his death in 1793, was another example of Islamic design, built in an octagonal structure. It followed Central Asian traditions of decorative brick masonries along with a colorless appearance. After the Second Anglo-Afghan War, the country's emir Abdur Rahman Khan brought European styles for the first time. The Bagh-e Bala Palace was designed in a mixed Mughal and British Indian style, the first significant change from traditional Afghan and Islamic styles. However, palaces were still built with Central Asian Islamic design at heart. Numerous lavish buildings were created during this time, combined with large gardens. The Dilkusha Palace within the Arg was the first created by a British architect. Its accompanying clock tower, c.\u20091911, was also a British creation.\nHouses in Kabul during this time were generally made up of walled compounds, built around courtyards and having narrow passageways to places.\nIn the 1920s, new styles were strongly influenced by European architectural styles due to king Amanullah Khan's visits to Europe, particularly Berlin and Paris. Darul Aman Palace was the best known example of modern Western design. The Shah-Do Shamshira Mosque was built in an unusual style for a mosque in Western and Italian style baroque. The Taq-e Zafar in Paghman and other landmarks there were also based on European designs. Houses also became more open, without having many of the walls. Later in the century, several Soviet inspired designs made its way into Kabul. Most notable of these were the various \"microraion\"s built in the city in the 1960s and afterwards. A different flavor of modern style was seen on the Hotel Inter-Continental Kabul and Serena Hotel.\nIn the 21st century, modern designs based on glass facades became popular. Examples of this modern Western style were the Kabul City Centre and Golbahar Centre. The National Assembly building opened in 2015 had elements of modern Islamic Mughal architecture, considered to have the largest dome in Asia. The Indian architecture could also be influenced by the fact it was built by the government of India, but its carving and large porch represent Afghan traditional architectural forms. The new Ministry of Defense building followed traditional, Islamic and Western designs inspired by the Pentagon. Another mix of these designs appeared on the Paghman Hill Castle completed in 2014. Increasing numbers of high rises have been built in this period, with the Kabul Markaz tower in 2020 becoming the city's first to break the tall barrier. The construction boom with modern high-rises throughout the 2010s had led to a major change in the city's skyline.\nTransportation.\nKabul has no train service.\nAir.\nKabul International Airport is located from the centre of Kabul. It is a hub to Ariana Afghan Airlines, the national carrier of Afghanistan, as well as private airlines such as Afghan Jet International, East Horizon Airlines, Kam Air, Pamir Airways, and Safi Airways. Regional airlines such as Air India, SpiceJet, flydubai, Emirates, Gulf Air, Mahan Air, Pakistan International Airlines, Turkish Airlines and others also had regularly scheduled flights to the airport.\nRoad.\nThe AH76 highway (or Kabul-Charikar Highway) connected Kabul north towards Charikar, Pol-e Khomri and Mazar-i-Sharif ( away), with leading roads to Kunduz ( away). The AH77 highway went west towards Bamiyan Province ( away) and Chaghcharan in the central mountains of Afghanistan. To the south-west, the Kabul-Ghazni Highway went to Ghazni ( away) and Kandahar ( away). To the south, the Kabul-Gardez Highway connected it to Gardez ( away) and Khost. To the east, the Kabul-Jalalabad Highway went to Jalalabad ( away) and across the border to Peshawar.\nMuch of the road network in downtown Kabul consisted of square or circle intersections (\"char-rahi\"). The main square in the city was Pashtunistan Square (named after Pashtunistan), which had a large fountain in it and was located adjacent to the presidential palace, the Central Bank, and other landmarks. The Massoud Circle was located by the U.S. Embassy and had the road leading to the airport. In the old city, Sar-e Chawk roundabout was at the center of Maiwand Road (\"Jadayi Maiwand\"). Once all roads led to it, and in the 16th century was called the \"navel of Kabul\". In the Shahr-e Naw district there were several major intersections: Ansari, Haji Yaqub, Quwayi Markaz, Sedarat, and Turabaz Khan. The latter, named after Turabaz Khan, connected Flower Street and Chicken Street. There were also two major intersections in western Kabul: the Deh Mazang Circle and Kote Sangi. Salang Watt was the main road to the north-west, whereas Asamayi Watt and Seh Aqrab (also called Sevom Aqrab) was the main road to western Kabul.\nThe steep population rise in the 21st century had caused major congestion problems for the city's roads. In efforts to tackle this issue, a 95\u00a0km outer ring road costing $110\u00a0million was approved in 2017. Construction would have taken five years and it will run from Char Asiab via Ahmad Shah Baba Mina, Deh Sabz (\"Kabul New City\" development area), the AH76 highway, Paghman and back to Char Asyab. A new bus public transport service was also planned to be opened in 2018 (see below). In September 2017, the head of the Kabul Municipality announced that 286 meters of pedestrian overpass footbridges will be built in eight busy areas \"in the near future\".\nUnder the Kabul Urban Transport Efficiency Improvement Project that was signed in 2014 and backed by the World Bank, the city has seen widespread improvements in road conditions, including the building of new pedestrian sidewalks, drainage systems, lighting and asphalted road surfaces. The project runs until 31 December 2019.\nPrivate vehicles had been on the rise in Kabul since 2002, with about 700,000 cars registered as of 2013 and up to 80% of the cars reported to be Toyota Corollas. The number of dealerships had also increased from 77 in 2003 to over 550 by 2010. Gas stations were mainly private-owned. Bicycles on the road were a common sight in the city.\nPublic transport.\nThe taxicabs in Kabul were painted in a white and yellow livery. The majority of these were older model Toyota Corollas. A few Soviet-era Russian cabs were also still in operation.\nLong-distance road journeys were made by private Mercedes-Benz coach buses or vans, trucks and cars. Although a nationwide bus service was available from Kabul, flying was safer, especially for foreigners. The city's public bus service (Milli Bus / \"National Bus\") was established in the 1960s to take commuters on daily routes to many destinations. The service had about 800 buses. The Kabul bus system had discovered a new source of revenue in whole-bus advertising from MTN similar to \"bus wrap\" advertising on public transit in more developed nations. There was also an express bus that runs from downtown to Hamid Karzai International Airport for Safi Airways passengers.\nAn electric trolleybus system operated in Kabul from February 1979 to 1992 using \u0160koda fleet built by a Czechoslovak company (see Trolleybuses in Kabul for more). The trolleybus service was highly popular mainly due to its low price compared to the Millie Bus conventional bus service. The last trolleybus came to a halt in late 1992 due to warfare \u2013 much of the copper overhead wires were later looted but a few of them, including the steel poles, can still be seen in Kabul today.\nIn June 2017 Kabul Municipality unveiled plans for a new bus rapid transit system, the first major urban public transportation scheme. It was expected to open by 2018, but its construction had been hampered. In March 2021, a new city bus service was launched in Kabul using American vehicles built by IC Bus, and accompanied by newly built bus stops throughout the city. Five buses entered service on one route which is expected to be expanded to a fleet of 200 buses on 16 different routes.\nInternet-based participatory planning.\nIn 2019, the Nagoya Institute of Technology, in partnership with the Kabul city Municipality, jointly agreed to deploy a digital platform, called D-Agree in urban planning to provide support for stakeholders to promote meaningful public participation and help reach consensus in Kabul city planning process.\nFrom September 2019 until the Fall of Kabul (2021) in August 2021, the platform was used on behalf of Kabul Municipality to moderate more than 300 Kabul city-related planning discussions.\nIn these discussions, more than 15,000 citizens participated in planning activities hosted by D-Agree and generated more than 71,000 opinions which catalogued into issue-based information system regarding urban-related thematic areas.\nDespite the Taliban take-over, D-Agree will continue to play an important role in facilitating urban planning and infrastructure-related consultations.\nIn 2022, United Nations reported that D-Agree Afghanistan is used as a digital and smart city solutions in Afghanistan.\nD-Agree, is a discussion support platform with artificial intelligence\u2013based facilitation. The discussion trees in D-Agree, inspired by issue-based information system, contain a combination of four types of elements: issues, ideas, pros, and cons. The software extracts a discussion's structure in real time based on IBIS, automatically classifying all the sentences.\nEducation.\nThe Ministry of Education led by Ghulam Farooq Wardak was responsible for the education system in Afghanistan. Public and private schools in the city have reopened since 2002 after they were shut down or destroyed during fighting in the 1980s to the late 1990s. Boys and girls were strongly encouraged to attend school under the Karzai administration but many more schools were needed not only in Kabul but throughout the country. The Afghan Ministry of Education had plans to build more schools in the coming years so that education was provided to all citizens of the country. High schools in Kabul included:\nUniversities.\nUniversities included:\nHealth care.\nHealth care in Afghanistan has improved in the last two decades. There are over 5,000 hospitals and clinics in the country, with the major ones being in Kabul.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16827", "revid": "45364314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16827", "title": "Kevin Bacon", "text": "American actor (born 1958)\nKevin Norwood Bacon (born July 8, 1958) is an American actor. Known for various roles, including leading man characters, Bacon has received numerous accolades such as a Golden Globe Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award.\nBacon made his feature film debut in \"National Lampoon's Animal House\" (1978) and performed in \"Diner\" (1982) before his breakthrough role in the musical-drama film \"Footloose\" (1984). Since then, he has starred in critically acclaimed films such as \"JFK\" (1991), \"A Few Good Men\" (1992), \"Apollo 13\" (1995), \"Mystic River\" (2003), and \"Frost/Nixon\" (2008). Other credits include \"Friday the 13th\" (1980), \"Tremors\" (1990), \"The River Wild\" (1994), \"Balto\" (1995), \"The Woodsman\" (2004), \"Crazy, Stupid, Love\" (2011), \"\" (2011), and \"Patriots Day\" (2016). Bacon has also directed the films \"Losing Chase\" (1996) and \"Loverboy\" (2005).\nOn television, Bacon received a Golden Globe Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award for his role as Michael Strobl in the HBO original film \"Taking Chance\" (2009). He starred in the Fox drama series \"The Following\" from 2013 to 2015. Bacon played the title role in Amazon Prime Video series \"I Love Dick\" from 2016 to 2017. From 2019 to 2022, he starred in the Showtime series \"City on a Hill\".\nIn 2003, Bacon received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. His prolific career in a variety of genres has led him to become associated with the concept of interconnectedness among people, as evidenced by the trivia game \"Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon\". He is a brand ambassador for British mobile network operator EE and has been featured in advertisements for the company. Bacon is married to actress Kyra Sedgwick.\nEarly life and education.\nBacon was born and raised in a close-knit family in Philadelphia. He is the youngest of six children. His mother, Ruth Hilda (n\u00e9e\u00a0Holmes; 1916\u20131991), taught at an elementary school and was a liberal activist, while his father, Edmund Bacon (1910\u20132005), was an urban planner who served as executive director of the Philadelphia City Planning Commission and authored the seminal text \"Design of Cities\".\nBacon attended Julia R. Masterman School in the Spring Garden section of Philadelphia for middle and high school.\nAt age 16, in 1975, Bacon won a full state-funded scholarship to the Pennsylvania Governor's School for the Arts at Bucknell University in Lewisburg, Pennsylvania, a five-week arts program where he studied theater under Glory Van Scott. The experience solidified Bacon's passion for the arts.\nActing career.\nEarly work.\nBacon left home at age 17 to pursue a theater career in New York City, where he appeared in a production at the Circle in the Square Theater School. \"I wanted life, man, the real thing\", he later recalled to Nancy Mills of \"Cosmopolitan\". \"The message I got was 'The arts are it. Business is the devil's work. Art and creative expression are next to godliness.' Combine that with an immense ego and you wind up with an actor.\"\nBacon's debut in the fraternity comedy \"National Lampoon's Animal House\" (1978) did not lead to the fame he had sought, and Bacon returned to waiting tables and auditioning for small roles in theater. He briefly worked on the television soap operas \"Search for Tomorrow\" (1979) and \"Guiding Light\" (1980\u201381) in New York.\n1980s.\nIn 1980, he appeared in the slasher film \"Friday the 13th\". Some of his early-stage work included \"Getting Out\", performed at New York's Phoenix Theater, and \"Flux\", at Second Stage Theatre during their 1981\u20131982 season.\nIn 1982, he won an Obie Award for his role in \"Forty Deuce\", and soon afterward he made his Broadway debut in \"Slab Boys\", with then-unknowns Sean Penn and Val Kilmer. However, it was not until he portrayed Timothy Fenwick that same year in Barry Levinson's film \"Diner\"\u00a0\u2013 costarring Steve Guttenberg, Daniel Stern, Mickey Rourke, Tim Daly, and Ellen Barkin\u00a0\u2013 that he made an indelible impression on film critics and moviegoers alike.\nBolstered by the attention garnered by his performance in \"Diner\", Bacon starred in \"Footloose\" (1984). Richard Corliss of \"TIME\" likened \"Footloose\" to the James Dean classic \"Rebel Without a Cause\" and the old Mickey Rooney/Judy Garland musicals, commenting that the film includes \"motifs on book burning, mid-life crisis, AWOL parents, fatal car crashes, drug enforcement, and Bible Belt vigilantism.\" To prepare for the role, Bacon enrolled at a high school as a transfer student named \"Ren McCormick\" and studied teenagers before leaving in the middle of the day. Bacon earned strong reviews for \"Footloose\".\nBacon's critical and box office success led to a period of typecasting in roles similar to the two he portrayed in \"Diner\" and \"Footloose\", and he had difficulty shaking this on-screen image. For the next several years he chose films that cast him against either type and experienced, by his own estimation, a career slump.\nAfter a cameo in John Hughes's 1987 comedy \"Planes, Trains and Automobiles\", Bacon starred in John Hughes's 1988 comedy \"She's Having a Baby\", and the following year he was in another comedy called \"The Big Picture\".\n1990s.\nIn 1990, Bacon had two successful roles. He played a character who saved his town from under-the-earth \"graboid\" monsters in the comedy/horror film \"Tremors\", and he portrayed an earnest medical student experimenting with death in Joel Schumacher's \"Flatliners\".\nIn Bacon's next project he starred opposite Elizabeth Perkins in \"He Said, She Said\". Despite lukewarm reviews and low audience turnout, \"He Said, She Said\" was illuminating for Bacon. Required to play a character with sexist attitudes, he admitted that the role was not that large a stretch for him.\nBy 1991, Bacon began to give up the idea of playing leading men in big-budget films and to remake himself as a character actor. \"The only way I was going to be able to work on 'A' projects with really 'A' directors was if I wasn't the guy who was starring\", he confided to \"The New York Times\" writer Trip Gabriel. \"You can't afford to set up a $40\u00a0million movie if you don't have your star.\" He performed that year as gay prostitute Willie O'Keefe in Oliver Stone's \"JFK\" and went on to play a prosecuting attorney in the military courtroom drama \"A Few Good Men\". Later that year he returned to the theater to play in \"Spike Heels\", directed by Michael Greif.\nIn 1994, Bacon earned a Golden Globe nomination for his role in \"The River Wild\", opposite Meryl Streep. He described the film to Chase in \"Cosmopolitan\" as a \"grueling shoot\", in which \"every one of us fell out of the boat at one point or another and had to be saved\".\nHis next film, \"Murder in the First\", earned him the Broadcast Film Critic's Association Award in 1995, the same year that he starred in the blockbuster hit \"Apollo 13\". Bacon played a trademark dark role once again in \"Sleepers\" (1996). This part starkly contrasted with his appearance in the lighthearted romantic comedy, \"Picture Perfect\" (1997).\nBacon made his debut as a director with the television film \"Losing Chase\" (1996), which was nominated for three Golden Globe Awards, and won one. Bacon again resurrected his oddball mystique that year as a mentally-challenged houseguest in \"Digging to China\" and as a disc jockey corrupted by payola in \"Telling Lies in America\". As the executive producer of \"Wild Things\" (1998), Bacon reserved a supporting role for himself and went on to star in \"Stir of Echoes\" (1999), directed by David Koepp.\n2000s.\nIn 2000, he appeared in Paul Verhoeven's \"Hollow Man.\" Bacon, Colin Firth and Rachel Blanchard depict a m\u00e9nage \u00e0 trois in their film, \"Where the Truth Lies\". Bacon and director Atom Egoyan condemned the MPAA ratings board decision to rate the film \"NC-17\" rather than the preferable \"R\". Bacon commented: \"I don't get it, when I see films (that) are extremely violent, extremely objectionable sometimes in terms of the roles that women play, slide by with an R, no problem, because the people happen to have more of their clothes on.\" That same year, he played the gruff father in the family film \"My Dog Skip\".\nIn 2003, Bacon acted with Sean Penn and Tim Robbins in Clint Eastwood's movie \"Mystic River\". He was again acclaimed for a dark starring role playing an offending pedophile on parole in \"The Woodsman\" (2004), for which he was nominated for best actor and received the Independent Spirit Award.\nIn 2005, Bacon was in the comedy film \"Beauty Shop\" with Queen Latifah. He appeared in the HBO Films production of \"Taking Chance\" (2009), based on an eponymous story written by Lieutenant Colonel Michael Strobl, an American Desert Storm war veteran. The film premiered on HBO on February 21, 2009. Bacon won a Golden Globe Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie for his role.\n2010s.\nOn July 15, 2010, it was confirmed that Bacon would appear in Matthew Vaughn's \"\" as mutant villain Sebastian Shaw. The film was released in 2011, the same year as the romantic comedy \"Crazy, Stupid, Love\", in which Kevin portrayed a co-worker involved in an affair.\nIn March 2012, Bacon was featured in a performance of Dustin Lance Black's play, \"8\" \u2013 a staged reenactment of the federal trial that overturned California's Prop 8 ban on same-sex marriage \u2013 as Attorney Charles J. Cooper. The production was held at the Wilshire Ebell Theatre and broadcast on YouTube to raise money for the American Foundation for Equal Rights.\nFrom 2013 to 2015, Bacon starred as Ryan Hardy in the FOX television series \"The Following\". In 2013, he won a Saturn Award for Best Actor on Television for that role. In 2015, he appeared in the crime film \"Black Mass\", which starred Johnny Depp.\nIn 2015, he said in a \"Huffington Post\" interview he would like to return to the \"Tremors\" franchise. However, Bacon did not appear in \"\" (2015). He starred in \"Patriots Day\" in 2016, which was about the 2013 Boston Marathon bombing.\nOther ventures.\nIn 1995, Kevin formed a band called The Bacon Brothers with his brother, Michael. The duo has released seven albums. Bacon also sings in a variety of other media; he has serenaded his goats on Instagram, and sings with the band the Old 97's in his role as himself in \"The Guardians of the Galaxy Holiday Special\".\nBeginning in 2012, Bacon has appeared in a major advertising campaign for EE in the United Kingdom, based on the Six Degrees concept and his various film roles. In 2015, he became a commercial spokesperson for the U.S. egg industry.\nSix Degrees of Kevin Bacon.\nBacon is the subject of the trivia game titled \"Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon\", based on the idea that, due to his prolific screen career covering a diverse range of genres, any Hollywood actor can be linked to another in a handful of steps based on their association with Bacon. The name of the game derives from the idea of six degrees of separation. Initially, Bacon was dismayed by the game but the meme stuck; eventually, he embraced it, forming the charitable initiative SixDegrees.org, a social networking service intended to link people and charities to each other.\nThe measure of proximity to Bacon has been mathematically formalized as the Bacon number and can be referenced at websites including Oracle of Bacon, which is in turn based upon Wikipedia data (and formerly from Internet Movie Database data). In 2012, Google added a feature to their search engine, whereby searching for an actor's name followed by the words \"Bacon Number\" would show the ways in which that actor is connected to Kevin Bacon. This feature is no longer active.\nA similar measurement exists in the mathematics community, where one measures how far one is removed from co-writing a mathematical paper with the prolific and itinerant mathematician Paul Erd\u0151s. This is done by means of the Erd\u0151s number, which is 0 for Paul Erd\u0151s himself, 1 for someone who co-wrote an article with him, 2 for someone who co-wrote with someone who co-wrote with him, etc. People have combined the Bacon number and the Erd\u0151s number to form the Erd\u0151s\u2013Bacon number, which is the sum of the two.\nPersonal life.\nBacon has been married to actress Kyra Sedgwick since September 4, 1988; they met on the set of the PBS version of Lanford Wilson's play \"Lemon Sky\". He has said: \"The time I was hitting what I considered to be bottom was also the time I met my wife, our kids were born, good things were happening. And I was able to keep supporting myself; that always gave me strength.\" Bacon and Sedgwick have starred together in \"Pyrates,\" \"Murder in the First\", \"The Woodsman\", and \"Loverboy\". They have two children, Travis Sedgwick (born 1989) and Sosie Ruth (born 1992). They reside on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. Bacon was previously in a five-year relationship with actress Tracy Pollan, in the 1980s.\nBacon has spoken out for the separation of church and state, and told \"The Times\" in 2005 that he did not \"believe in God.\" He has also said that he is not anti-religion.\nBacon and Sedgwick appeared in will.i.am's video \"It's a New Day\", which was released following Barack Obama's 2008 presidential win.\nThe pair lost part of their savings in the Ponzi scheme of infamous swindler Bernie Madoff.\nBacon and Sedgwick learned in 2011, via their appearance on the PBS TV series \"Finding Your Roots\" with Henry Louis Gates, that they are ninth cousins, once removed. They also appeared in a video promoting the \"Bill of Reproductive Rights\", supporting among other things a woman's right to choose and have access to birth control.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16829", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16829", "title": "Kornilov", "text": "Kornilov () and Kornilova (feminine; ) is a common Russian surname derived from the baptismal name Kornil (). Notable people with this surname include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname . "}
{"id": "16830", "revid": "51023484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16830", "title": "Keyboard technology", "text": "Hardware technology of keyboards\nThe technology of computer keyboards includes many elements. Many different keyboard technologies have been developed to meet consumer demands and optimized for industrial applications. The standard full-size (100%) computer alphanumeric keyboard typically uses 101 to 105 keys; keyboards integrated in laptop computers are typically less comprehensive.\nVirtual keyboards, which are mostly accessed via a touchscreen interface, have no physical switches and provide artificial audio and haptic feedback instead. This variety of keyboard can prove useful, as it is not limited by the rigid nature of physical computer keyboards.\nThe majority of modern keyboards include a control processor and indicator lights to provide feedback to the user (and to the central processor) about what state the keyboard is in. Plug-and-play technology means that its \"out of the box\" layout can be notified to the system, making the keyboard immediately ready to use without the need for further configuration, unless the user so desires. This also enables manufacture of generic keyboards for a variety of language markets, that differ only in the symbols engraved on the keytops.\nKeystroke sensing.\nMembrane.\nA common membrane design consists of three layers. The top and bottom layer have exposed electrical matrix traces, and the middle layer is a spacer to prevent current from passing through the top and bottom conductive traces passively. When pressure is applied to the top membrane, it bridges the top and bottom conductive contact pads, allowing current to transfer.\nTwo of the most common types of membrane keyboards include full-travel rubber dome over membrane and flat-panel membrane keyboards. Flat-panel membrane keyboards are most often found on appliances like microwave ovens or photocopiers.\nRubber dome over membrane.\nFull-travel rubber dome over membrane keyboards are the most common keyboard design manufactured today. In these keyboards, a rubber dome sheet is placed above the membranes, ensuring that the domes align with the contact pads. The rubber dome serves a dual purpose: it acts as a tactile return spring and provides a soft surface to transfer force onto the top membrane. To bridge the connection between the two contact pads, the rubber dome must be fully depressed.\nRubber dome over membrane keyboards became very popular with computer manufacturers as they sought to reduce costs while PC prices declined.\nScissor-switch.\nA common, compact variant of rubber dome over membrane is the scissor-switch, based on the scissors mechanism. Due to the requirement of many notebooks to be slim, they require the keyboards to be low-profile. Therefore, this technology is most commonly featured on notebooks. The keys are attached to the keyboard via two plastic pieces that interlock in a \"scissor\"-like fashion and snap to the keyboard and the keycap. These keyboards are generally quiet and the keys require little force to press.\nScissor-switch keyboards are typically slightly more expensive. They are harder to clean (due to the limited movement of the keys and their multiple attachment points) but also less likely to get debris in them as the gaps between the keys are often smaller (as there is no need for extra room to allow for the 'wiggle' in the key, as typically found on a membrane keyboard).\nFlat-panel membrane.\nFlat-panel membrane keyboards are often used in harsh environments where water or leak-proofing is desirable. They can have non-tactile, polydome tactile and metal dome tactile keys. Polydome tactile membrane switches use polyester, or PET, and is formed to create a stiff plastic dome. When the stiff polydome is pressed, the conductive ink on the back of the polydome connects with the bottom layer of the circuit. Metal dome membrane switches are made of stainless steel and offer enhanced durability and reliability and can feature custom dome designs. Non-tactile flat-panel membrane keyboards have little to no keypress feel and often issue a beep or flash of light on actuation.\nAlthough this keyboard design was commonly used in the early days of the personal computer (on the Sinclair ZX80, ZX81, and Atari 400), they have been supplanted by more responsive and modern designs.\nRoll-up keyboard.\nComputer keyboards made of flexible silicone or polyurethane materials can roll up in a bundle. This type of keyboard can take advantage of the thin flexible plastic membranes, but still pose the risk of damage. When they are completely sealed in rubber, they are water resistant. Roll-up keyboards provide relatively little tactile feedback. Because these keyboards are typically made of silicone, they unfavorably tend to attract dirt, dust, and hair.\nMetal contact.\nKeyboards which have metal contact switches typically use discrete modules for each key. This type of switch are usually composed of a housing, a spring, and a slider, and sometimes other parts such as a separate tactile leaf or clickbar. \nAt rest, the metal contacts inside of the switch are held apart. As the switch is pressed down, the contacts are held together to conduct current for actuation. Many switch designs use gold for contact material to prolong the lifetime of the switch by preventing switch failure from oxidization. Most designs use a metal leaf, where the movable contact is a leaf spring.\nA major producer of discrete metal contact switches is Cherry, who has manufactured the Cherry MX family of switches since the 1980s. Cherry's color-coding system of categorizing switches has been imitated by other switch manufacturers, such as Gateron and Kailh among many others.\nKeyboards which utilize this technology are commonly referred to as \"mechanical keyboards\", but there is not a universally agreed-upon clear-cut definition for this term.\nSince mid-2000s, mechanical keyboards are used by gamers and professionals again.\nHot-swappable keyboard.\nHot-swappable keyboards are keyboards in which switches can be pulled out and replaced without requiring the typical solder connection. Instead of the \"switch\" pins being directly soldered to the keyboard's PCB, hot-swap \"sockets\" are instead soldered on. Hot-swap sockets can allow users to change different switches out of the keyboard without having the tools or knowledge required to solder.\nReed.\nThe reed module in a reed switch consists of two metal contacts inside of a glass bubble usually sealed with some inert gas like nitrogen to help prevent particle build-up. The slider in the housing pushes a magnet down in front of the reed capsule and the magnetic field causes the reed contacts to become attracted to each other and make contact. The reed switch mechanism was originally invented in 1936 by W B Ellwood at Bell Telephone Laboratories.\nAlthough reed switches use metal leaf contacts, they are considered separate from all other forms of metal contact switch because the contacts are operated magnetically instead of using physical force from a slider to be pressed together.\nCapacitive.\nIn a capacitive mechanism, pressing a key changes the capacitance of a pattern of capacitor pads. The pattern consists of two D-shaped capacitor pads for each switch, printed on a printed circuit board (PCB) and covered by a thin, insulating film of soldermask which acts as a dielectric.\nFor the most common, foam and foil implementation of this technology, the movable part ends with a flat foam element about the size of an aspirin tablet, finished with aluminum foil. Opposite the switch is a PCB with the capacitor pads. When the key is pressed, the foil tightly clings to the surface of the PCB, forming a daisy chain of two capacitors between contact pads and itself separated with a thin soldermask, and thus \"shorting\" the contact pads with an easily detectable drop of capacitive reactance between them. Usually, this permits a pulse or pulse train to be sensed.\nAn advantage of the capacitive technology is that the switch is not dependent on the flow of current through metal contacts to actuate. There is no debouncing necessary.\nThe sensor tells enough about the distance of the keypress to allow the user to adjust the actuation point (key sensitivity). This adjustment can be done with the help of the bundled software and individually for each key, if so implemented. A keyboard which utilizes these abilities include the Real Force RGB.\nIBM's Model F keyboard is a design consisting of a buckling spring over a capacitive PCB, similar to the later Model M keyboard, but instead used membrane sensing in place of a PCB.\nThe Topre Corporation design for switches uses a conical spring below a rubber dome. The dome provides resistance, while the spring does the capacitive action.\nHall effect.\nHall effect keyboards use Hall effect sensors to detect the movement of a magnet by the potential difference in voltage. When a key is depressed, it moves a magnet that is detected by a solid-state sensor. Because they require no physical contact for actuation, Hall-effect keyboards are extremely reliable and can accept millions of keystrokes before failing. They are used for ultra-high reliability applications such as nuclear power plants, aircraft cockpits, and critical industrial environments. They can easily be made totally waterproof, and can resist large amounts of dust and contaminants. Because a magnet and sensor are required for each key, as well as custom control electronics, they are expensive to manufacture.\nA hall switch works through magnetic fields. Every switch has a small magnet fixed inside it. When the electricity passes through the main circuit, it creates a magnetic flux. Every time a key is pressed, the magnetic intensity changes. This change is noticed by the circuit and the sensors send the information to the motherboard.\nOptical.\nOptical switch technology was introduced in 1962 by Harley E. Kelchner for use in a typewriter machine with the purpose of reducing the noise generated by typewriter keys.\nAn optical keyboard technology utilizes light-emitting devices and photo sensors to optically detect actuated keys, offering faster response times and eliminating the need for physical contact between moving parts. Most commonly the emitters and sensors are located at the perimeter, mounted on a small PCB. The light is directed from side to side of the keyboard interior, and it can only be blocked by the actuated keys. Most optical keyboards require at least two beams (most commonly a vertical beam and a horizontal beam) to determine the actuated key. Some optical keyboards use a special key structure that blocks the light in a certain pattern, allowing only one beam per row of keys (most commonly a horizontal beam).\nThe mechanism of the optical keyboard is very simple \u2013 a light beam is sent from the emitter to the receiving sensor, and the actuated key blocks, reflects, refracts or otherwise interacts with the beam, resulting in an identified key.\nA major advantage of optical switch technology is that it is very resistant to moisture, dust, and debris because there are no metal contacts that can corrode.\nThe specialist DataHand keyboard uses optical technology to sense keypresses with a single light beam and sensor per key. The keys are held in their rest position by magnets; when the magnetic force is overcome to press a key, the optical path is unblocked and the keypress is registered.\nLaser projection.\nA laser projection device approximately the size of a computer mouse projects the outline of keyboard keys onto a flat surface, such as a table or desk. This type of keyboard is portable enough to be easily used with PDAs and cellphones, and many models have retractable cords and wireless capabilities. However, this design is prone to error, as accidental disruption of the laser will generate unwanted keystrokes. This type of keyboard's inherent lack of tactile feedback makes it often undesirable.\nNotable switch mechanisms.\nBuckling spring.\nThe buckling spring mechanism (now expired https://) atop the switch is responsible for the characteristic clicky response of the keyboard. This mechanism controls a small hammer that strikes a capacitive or membrane switch.\nIBM's Model F keyboard series was the first to employ buckling spring key-switches, which used capacitive sensing to actuate. The original patent was never employed in an actual production keyboard but it establishes the basic premise of a buckling spring.\nThe IBM Model M is a large family of computer keyboards created by IBM that began in late 1983 when IBM patented a membrane buckling spring key-switch design. The main intent of this design was to halve the production cost of the Model F. The most well known full-size Model M is known officially as the IBM Enhanced Keyboard.\nIn 1993, two years after spawning Lexmark, IBM transferred its keyboard operations to the daughter company. New Model M keyboards continued to be manufactured for IBM by Lexmark until 1996, when Unicomp was established and purchased the keyboard patents and tooling equipment to continue their production.\nIBM continued to make Model M's in their Scotland factory until 1999.\nDebouncing.\nWhen a key is pressed, it oscillates (\"bounces\") against its contacts several times before settling. When released, it oscillates again until it comes to rest. Although it happens on a scale too small to be visible to the naked eye, it can be enough to register multiple keystrokes.\nTo resolve this, the processor in a keyboard \"debounces\" the keystrokes, by averaging the signal over time to produce one \"confirmed\" keystroke that (usually) corresponds to a single press or release. Early membrane keyboards had limited typing speed because they had to do significant debouncing. This was a noticeable problem on the ZX81.\nKeycaps.\nKeycaps are used on full-travel keyboards. While modern keycaps are typically surface-printed, they can also be double-shot molded, laser marked, dye sublimation printed, engraved, or made of transparent material with printed paper inserts. There are also keycaps which utilize thin shells that are placed over key bases, which were used on several IBM PC keyboards. A more modern but rare innovation is the OLED key which, on some specialty devices like stream controller keypads, feature a tiny OLED display under each keycap, which can be customized in software to display any icon or glyph the user wishes. Due to high cost most of these devices are not full keyboards for typing but are meant for shortcuts for launching applications or macro commands for other programs.\nSwitches allow for the removal and replacement of keycaps with a common stem type.\nStabilizers.\nAlmost all keyboards which utilize keys two or more units in length (such as the typical space bar or enter key) use stabilizers to ensure consistent movement and prevent key wobble during typing. Various lubricants and padding techniques can be used to reduce the rattle and ticking of components.\nOther parts.\nA modern PC keyboard typically includes a control processor and indicator lights to provide feedback to the user about what state the keyboard is in. Depending on the sophistication of the controller's programming, the keyboard may also offer other special features. The processor is usually a single chip 8048 microcontroller variant. The keyboard switch matrix is wired to its inputs and it processes the incoming keystrokes and sends the results down a serial cable (the keyboard cord) to a receiver in the main computer box. It also controls the illumination of the \"caps lock\", \"num lock\" and \"scroll lock\" lights.\nA common test for whether the computer has crashed is pressing the \"caps lock\" key. The keyboard sends the key code to the keyboard driver running in the main computer; if the main computer is operating, it commands the light to turn on. All the other indicator lights work in a similar way. The keyboard driver also tracks the shift, alt and control state of the keyboard.\nKeyboard switch matrix.\nThe keyboard switch matrix is often drawn with horizontal wires and vertical wires in a grid which is called a matrix circuit. It has a switch at some or all intersections, much like a multiplexed display.\nGhost keys.\nAlmost all keyboards have only the \"switch\" (but no diode) at each intersection, which causes \"ghost keys\" and \"key jamming\" when multiple keys are pressed (rollover). Certain, often more expensive, keyboards have a diode between each intersection, allowing the keyboard microcontroller to accurately sense any number of simultaneous keys being pressed, without generating erroneous ghost keys.\nAlternative text-entering methods.\nOptical character recognition (OCR) is preferable to rekeying for converting existing text that is already written down but not in machine-readable format (for example, a Linotype-composed book from the 1940s). In other words, to convert the text from an image to editable text (that is, a string of character codes), a person could re-type it, or a computer could look at the image and deduce what each character is. OCR technology has already reached an impressive state (for example, Google Book Search) and promises more for the future.\nSpeech recognition converts speech into machine-readable text (that is, a string of character codes). This technology has also reached an advanced state and is implemented in various software products. For certain uses (e.g., transcription of medical or legal dictation; journalism; writing essays or novels) speech recognition is starting to replace the keyboard. However, the lack of privacy when issuing voice commands and dictation makes this kind of input unsuitable for many environments.\nPointing devices can be used to enter text or characters in contexts where using a physical keyboard would be inappropriate or impossible. These accessories typically present characters on a display, in a layout that provides fast access to the more frequently used characters or character combinations. Popular examples of this kind of input are Graffiti, Dasher and on-screen virtual keyboards.\nOther issues.\nKeystroke logging.\nUnencrypted Bluetooth keyboards are known to be vulnerable to signal theft for keylogging by other Bluetooth devices in range. Microsoft wireless keyboards 2011 and earlier are documented to have this vulnerability.\nKeystroke logging (often called keylogging) is a method of capturing and recording user keystrokes. While it can be used legally to measure employee activity, or by law enforcement agencies to investigate suspicious activities, it is also used by hackers for illegal or malicious acts. Hackers use keyloggers to obtain passwords or encryption keys.\nKeystroke logging can be achieved by both hardware and software means. Hardware key loggers are attached to the keyboard cable or installed inside standard keyboards. Software keyloggers work on the target computer's operating system and gain unauthorized access to the hardware, hook into the keyboard with functions provided by the OS, or use remote access software to transmit recorded data out of the target computer to a remote location. Some hackers also use wireless keylogger sniffers to collect packets of data being transferred from a wireless keyboard and its receiver, and then they crack the encryption key being used to secure wireless communications between the two devices.\nAnti-spyware applications are able to detect many keyloggers and remove them. Responsible vendors of monitoring software support detection by anti-spyware programs, thus preventing abuse of the software. Enabling a firewall does not stop keyloggers per se, but can possibly prevent transmission of the logged material over the net if properly configured. Network monitors (also known as reverse-firewalls) can be used to alert the user whenever an application attempts to make a network connection. This gives the user the chance to prevent the keylogger from \"phoning home\" with his or her typed information. Automatic form-filling programs can prevent keylogging entirely by not using the keyboard at all. Most keyloggers can be fooled by alternating between typing the login credentials and typing characters somewhere else in the focus window.\nKeyboards are also known to emit electromagnetic signatures that can be detected using special spying equipment to reconstruct the keys pressed on the keyboard. Neal O'Farrell, executive director of the Identity Theft Council, revealed to InformationWeek that \"More than 25 years ago, a couple of former spooks showed me how they could capture a user's ATM PIN, from a van parked across the street, simply by capturing and decoding the electromagnetic signals generated by every keystroke,\" O'Farrell said. \"They could even capture keystrokes from computers in nearby offices, but the technology wasn't sophisticated enough to focus in on any specific computer.\"\nPhysical injury.\nThe use of a keyboard may cause serious injury (such as carpal tunnel syndrome or other repetitive strain injuries) to the hands, wrists, arms, neck or back. The risks of injuries can be reduced by taking frequent short breaks to get up and walk around a couple of times every hour. Users should also vary tasks throughout the day, to avoid overuse of the hands and wrists. When typing on a keyboard, a person should keep the shoulders relaxed with the elbows at the side, with the keyboard and mouse positioned so that reaching is not necessary. The chair height and keyboard tray should be adjusted so that the wrists are straight, and the wrists should not be rested on sharp table edges. Wrist or palm rests should not be used while typing.\nSome adaptive technology ranging from special keyboards, mouse replacements and pen tablet interfaces to speech recognition software can reduce the risk of injury. Pause software reminds the user to pause frequently. Switching to a much more ergonomic mouse, such as a vertical mouse or joystick mouse may provide relief.\nBy using a touchpad or a stylus pen with a graphic tablet, in place of a mouse, one can lessen the repetitive strain on the arms and hands.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16831", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16831", "title": "Kick", "text": "Physical strike using the leg\nA kick is a physical strike using the leg, in unison usually with an area of the knee or lower using the foot, heel, tibia (shin), ball of the foot, blade of the foot, toes or knee (the latter is also known as a knee strike). This type of attack is used frequently by hooved animals as well as humans in the context of stand-up fighting. Kicks play a significant role in many forms of martial arts, such as capoeira, kalaripayattu, karate, kickboxing, kung fu, wing chun, MMA, Muay Thai, pankration, pradal serey, savate, sikaran, silat, taekwondo, vovinam, and Yaw-Yan. Kicks are a universal act of aggression among humans.\nKicking is also prominent from its use in many sports, especially those called football. The best known of these sports is association football, also known as soccer.\nHistory.\nThe English verb to kick appears in the late 14th century, meaning \"to strike out with the foot\", possibly as a loan from the Old Norse \"kikna\", meaning \"bend backwards, sink at the knees\".\nKicks as an act of human aggression have likely existed worldwide since prehistory. However, the earliest documentation of high kicks, aimed above the waist or to the head, comes from East-Asian martial arts. Such kicks were introduced to the west in the 19th century with early hybrid martial arts inspired by East-Asian styles such as Bartitsu and Savate. Practice of high kicks became more universal in the second half of the 20th century with the more widespread development of hybrid styles such as kickboxing and eventually mixed martial arts.\nThe history of the high kick in Asian martial arts is difficult to trace. One theory was that it was developed in Northern Chinese Martial arts, in which techniques involving the use of the foot to strike the vital points of the head was often used. Another theory was that it was developed in the ancient Korean foot-fighting art of Taekyyon as a form of exercise and self-defense. The high kicks seen in Taekwondo today bear a resemblance to the kicks in Taekyyon. The high kick also seems to be prevalent in all traditional forms of Indochinese kickboxing, but these cannot be traced with any technical detail to pre-modern times. In Muay Boran (\"ancient boxing\" in Thailand) was developed under Rama V (r. 1868\u20131910) and while it is known that earlier forms of \"boxing\" existed during the Ayutthaya Kingdom, the details regarding these techniques are unclear. Some stances that look like low kicks, but not high kicks, are visible in the Shaolin temple frescoes, dated to the 17th century. The \"Mahabharata\" (http://), an Indian epic compiled at some point before the 5th century AD, describes an unarmed hand-to-hand battle, including the sentence \"and they gave each other violent kicks\" (without providing any further detail). Kicks including ones above the waist are commonly depicted in the stone carvings of the Khmer Empire temples in Cambodia.\nApplications.\nAs the human leg is longer and stronger than the arm, kicks are generally used to keep an opponent at a distance, surprise them with their range and inflict substantial damage. Stance is also very important in any combat system and any attempt to deliver a kick will necessarily compromise stability to some degree. The application of kicks is a trade-off between the power and range that can be delivered against the cost incurred to balance. As combat situations are fluid, understanding this trade-off and making the appropriate decision to adjust to each moment is key.\nKicks are commonly directed against helpless or downed targets, while for more general self-defense applications, the consensus is that simple kicks aimed at vulnerable targets below the chest may be highly efficient, but should be executed with a degree of care. Self-defense experts, such as author and teacher Marc Macyoung, claim that kicks should be aimed no higher than the waist/stomach. Thus, the fighter should not compromise their balance while delivering a kick and retract the leg properly to avoid grappling. It is often recommended to build and drill simple combinations that involve attacking different levels of an opponent. A common example would be distracting an opponent's focus via a fake jab, following up with a powerful attack at the opponent's legs and punching.\nFurther, since low kicks are inherently quicker and harder to see and dodge in general they are often emphasized in a street fight scenario.\nPracticality of high kicks.\nThe utility of high kicks (above chest level) has been debated. Proponents have viewed that some high front snap kicks are effective for striking the face or throat, particularly against charging opponents and flying kicks can be effective to scare off attackers. Martial arts systems that utilize high kicks also emphasize training of very efficient and technically perfected forms of kicks, include recovery techniques in the event of a miss or block and will employ a wide repertoire of kicks adapted to specific situations.\nDetractors have asserted that the flying/jumping kicks performed in synthesis styles are primarily performed for conditioning or aesthetic reasons, while the high kicks as practiced in sport martial arts are privileged due to specialized tournament rules, such as limiting the contest to stand-up fighting, or reducing the penalty resulting from a failed attempt at delivering a kick.\nAlthough kicks can result in an easy takedown for the opponent if they are caught or the resulting imbalance is exploited, kicks to all parts of the body are very present in mixed martial arts, with some fighters employing them sporadically, while others, like Lyoto Machida, Edson Barboza and Donald Cerrone rely heavily on their use and have multiple knockouts by kicks on their resume.\nBasic kicks.\nRoundhouse.\nThe attacker swings their leg sideways in a circular motion, kicking the opponent's side with the front of the leg, usually with the instep, ball of the foot, toe, or shin. It can also be performed is a 360-degree kick where the attacker performs a full circle with their leg, in which the striking surface is generally either the instep, shin or ball of the foot.\nThere are many variations of the roundhouse kick based on various chambering of the cocked leg (small, or full, or universal or no chambering) or various footwork possibilities (rear-leg, front-leg, hopping, switch, oblique, dropping, ground spin-back or full 360 spin-back). An important variation is the downward roundhouse kick, nicknamed the \"Brazilian kick\" from recent K-1 use: A more pronounced twist of the hips allows for a downward end of the trajectory of the kick that is very deceiving.\nDue to its power, the roundhouse kick may also be performed at low level against targets, such as the knees, calf, or even thigh, since attacking leg muscles will often cripple an opponent's mobility. It is the most commonly used kick in kickboxing due to its power and ease of use. In most Karate styles, the instep is used to strike, though use of the shin as an official technique for a street fight would mostly be allowed.\nFront.\nDelivering a front kick involves raising the knee and foot of the striking leg to the desired height and extending the leg to contact the target. The strike is usually delivered by the ball of the foot for a forward kick or the top of the toes for an upward kick. Taekwondo practitioners utilize both the heel and ball of the foot for striking. Various combat systems teach \"general\" front kicks using the heel or whole foot when footwear is on. Depending on the fighter's tactical needs, a front kick may involve more or less body motion and thrusting with the hips is a common method of increasing both reach and power of the kick. The front kick is typically executed with the upper body straight and balanced. Front kicks are typically aimed at targets below the chest: stomach, thighs, groin, knees or lower. Highly skilled martial artists are often capable of striking head-level targets with front kicks.\nSide.\nThis kick is native to traditional Chinese martial arts, along with Taekyyon, Taekwondo and Karate. A side kick is delivered sideways in relation to the body of the person kicking. A standard side kick is performed by first \"chambering\" by raising the kicking leg diagonally across the body, then extending the leg in a linear fashion toward the target, while flexing the abdominals. The two common impact points in sidekicks are the heel or the outer edge of the foot, with the heel is more suited to hard targets such as the ribs, stomach, jaw, temple and chest. When executing a side kick with the heel, the toes should be pulled back so that they only make contact the heel and not with the whole foot as striking with the arch or the ball of the foot can injure the foot or break an ankle.\nAnother way of doing the side kick is to make it a result of a faked roundhouse. This technique is considered antiquated and used only after an opponent is persuaded to believe it is a roundhouse (a feint) and then led to believe that closing the distance is best for an upper body attack, which plays into the tactical position and relative requirement of this version of the side kick. In Chinese, this is known as c\"\u00e8 chu\u00e0i(\"\u4fa7\u8e39). In Korean, it is known as \"yeop chagi\" and in Okinawan fighting, it is sometimes called a \"dragon kick\". Some have called this side kick a \"twist kick\" due to its roundhouse like origins. This side kick begins as would a roundhouse kick however the practitioner allows the heel to move towards the center of the body. The kick is then directed outward from a cross-leg chamber so that the final destination of the kick is a target to the side, rather than one that is directly ahead.\nBack.\nAlso referred to as a donkey kick, mule kick, horse kick or turning back kick. This kick is directed backwards, keeping the kicking leg close to the standing leg and using the heel as a striking surface. In wushu, this kick is called the \"half-moon\" kick but involves the slight arching of the back and a higher lift of the leg to give a larger curvature. It is often used to strike opponents by surprise when facing away from them.\nAdvanced kicks.\nThese are often complicated variations of basic kicks, either with a different target or combined with another move, such as jumping.\nAxe.\nIn Japanese, \"kakato-geri\" or \"kakato-otoshi\"; in Korean, \"doki bal chagi\" or \"naeryeo chagi\" or \"chikka chagi\". In Chinese, \"pigua tui\" or \"xiapi tui\".\nAn axe kick, also known as a \"hammer kick\" or \"stretch kick\", is characterized by a straightened leg with the heel descending onto an opponent like the blade of an axe. It begins with one foot rising upward as in a crescent kick then the upward arc motion is stopped and then the attacking foot is lowered to strike the target from above. The arc can be performed in either an inward (counter-clockwise) or outward (clockwise) fashion.\nA well-known proponent of the axe kick was Andy Hug, the Swiss Kyokushinkai Karateka who won the 1996 K-1 Grand Prix.\nButterfly.\nA butterfly kick is done by doing a large circular motion with both feet in succession, making the combatant airborne. There are many variations of this kick. The kick may look like a slanted aerial cartwheeland at the same time, the body spins horizontally in a circle. It begins as a jump with one leg while kicking with the other, then move the kicking leg down and the jumping leg up into a kick, landing with the first kicking leg, all while spinning. This kick involves arching the back when airborne to give a horizontal body with high angled legs striking horizontally. It may also resemble a jumping spin roundhouse kick (developed by James \"Two Screens\" Perkins) into a spinning hook kick, all in one jump and one spin although the difference is that both legs remain in the air at the same time for a considerable amount of time.\nFirst practiced in Chinese martial arts, the butterfly kick, or \"xuan zi\", is widely viewed as ineffective for actual combat. However, its original purpose was to evade an opponent's floor sweep and flip to the antagonist's exposed side or it may be used as a double aerial kick to an opponent standing off to the side. It is now widely used in demonstrative \"wushu\" forms (\"taolu\") as a symbol of difficulty. Also note the similarity in execution when compared to an ice skating maneuver known as a flying camel spin (aka Button camel).\nCalf.\nThis strike is a low roundhouse kick that hits the backside of the calf with the shin. While a calf kick sacrifices range in comparison to a standard low roundhouse kick to the thigh, it can not be checked with a knee or grabbed with an arm making it a safer kick for a striker in MMA matches versus opponents capable of checking low kicks or grapplers looking for takedown opportunities. The kick was popularized by former UFC lightweight champion Benson Henderson.\nCrescent.\nThe crescent kick, also referred to as a \"swing\" kick and \"bandal chagi\" (\ubc18\ub2ec \ucc28\uae30) in Korean, has some similarities to a hook kick and is sometimes practised as an off-target front snap kick. The leg is bent like the front kick, but the knee is pointed at a target to the left or right of the true target. The energy from the snap is then redirected, whipping the leg into an arc and hitting the target from the side. This is useful for getting inside defenses and striking the side of the head or for knocking down hands to follow up with a close attack. In many styles of tai chi and Kalaripayattu, crescent kicks are taught as tripping techniques. When training for crescent kicks, it is common to keep the knee extended to increase the difficulty. This also increases the momentum of the foot and can generate more force, though it takes longer to build up the speed.\nThe inward, inner, or inside crescent hits with the inside edge of the foot. Its arch is clockwise for the left leg and counter-clockwise for the right leg with force generated by both legs' movement towards from the midline of the body. The inward variant has also been called a \"hangetsu geri\" (half-moon kick) in karate and is employed to \"wipe\" an opponent's hand off of the wrist. It can quickly be followed up by a low side-blade kick to the knee of the offender.\nThe outward, outer, or outside crescent hits with the \"blade\", the outside edge of the foot. Its path is counter-clockwise for the left leg and clockwise for the right leg and force is generated by both legs' hip abduction. This is similar to a rising side kick, only with the kicking leg's hip flexed so that the line of force travels parallel to the ground from front to side rather than straight up, beginning and ending at the side.\nHook.\nA hook kick or () or in Korean, strikes with the heel from the side. It is executed similar to a side kick. However, the kick is intentionally aimed slightly off target in the direction of the kicking foot's toes. At full extension, the knee is bent and the foot snapped to the side, impacting the target with the heel. In taekwondo it is often used at the resulting miss of a short slide side kick to the head, but is considered a very high level technique in said circumstance. Practitioners of jeet kune do frequently use the term \"heel hook kick\" or \"sweep kick\". It is known as \"gancho\" in capoeira.\nThere are many variations of the hook kick, generally based on different foot work: rear- or front-leg, oblique or half-pivot, dropping, spin-back and more. The hook kick can be delivered with a near-straight leg at impact, or with a hooked finish (\"kake\" in Japanese karate) where the leg bends before impact to catch the target from behind. An important variation is the downward hook kick, delivered as a regular or a spin-back kick, in which the end of the trajectory is diagonally downwards for a surprise effect or following an evading opponent. Another important variation is the whip kick, which strikes with the flat of the foot instead of heel.\nThe hook kick is mainly used to strike the jaw area of an opponent, but is also highly effective in the temple region.\nL.\nAn L-kick, also called \"a\u00fa batido\", is a movement in breakdancing, capoeira and other martial arts and dance forms. It is executed by throwing the body into a cartwheel motion, but rather than completing the wheel, the body flexes while supported by one hand on the ground. One leg is brought downwards and forwards in a kicking motion while the other remains in the air (giving rise to the name).\nReverse roundhouse/wheel.\nIn Japanese, ; in Korean, (), , or .\nThis kick is also known as a \"heel kick\", \"turning kick\", \"reverse round kick\", \"spinning hook kick\", \"spin kick\", or \"wheel kick\". A low reverse roundhouse is also known as a \"sweep kick\" or \"sitting spin kick\", however, in some martial arts circles, when aimed at a downward angle to the anterior side of the knee it is commonly referred to as a \"shark kick\" due to its tendency to tear the anterior cruciate ligament. \nA reverse roundhouse kick traditionally uses the protruding point on the backside of the heel to strike with, the kicking leg coming from around the kicker's back as they pivot and the knee remaining relatively straight on the follow through, unlike the leg position in a reverse hooking kick, despite the spinning motion and the part of the heel being roughly the same. Variations exist for low, middle and high heights. Spinning and leaping variations of the kick are also popular and are often showcased in film and television media. At UFC 142, Edson Barboza knocked out Terry Etim using a wheel kick in the third round of their fight, the first such in the Ultimate Fighting Championship.\nA similarly named but technically different kick, is the roundhouse kick performed by turning as if for a back straight kick and executing a roundhouse kick. It is known as a \"reverse roundhouse kick\" because the kicker turns in the opposite, or \"reverse\", direction before the kick is executed. This kick strikes with the ball of the foot for power or the top of the foot for range. This was exhibited by Bruce Lee on numerous occasions in his films \"Enter the Dragon\", \"Fist of Fury\" and \"The Big Boss\". Bill Wallace was also a great user of this kick, as seen in his fight with Bill Briggs, where he knocked his opponent out with the clocked 60\u00a0mph kick. The jump spin hook kick was popularized in the mid-eighties by Steven Ho in open martial art competitions.\nIn Olympic format (sport) taekwondo, this technique is performed using the balls of the feet and in a manner similar to a back thrust, rather than the circular technique adopted in other styles of martial arts.\nFlying.\nA flying kick, in martial arts, is a general description of kicks that involve a running start, jump, then a kick in mid-air. Compared to a regular kick, the user is able to achieve greater momentum from the run at the start. Flying kicks are not to be mistaken for jumping kicks, which are similar maneuvers. A jumping kick is very similar to a flying kick, except that it lacks the running start and the user simply jumps and kicks from a stationary position. Flying kicks are often derived from the basic kicks. Some of the more commonly known flying kicks are the: flying side kick, flying back kick and the flying roundhouse kick, as well as the flying reverse roundhouse kick. Flying kicks are commonly practiced in Taekwondo, Karate, Wushu and Muay Thai for fitness, exhibitions and competition. It is known as in Japanese martial arts and in Taekwondo.\nShowtime.\nThe showtime kick gained notability after being used by mixed martial artist Anthony Pettis, during his fight against Benson Henderson on December 16, at WEC 53 for the WEC Lightweight Championship. In the fifth round Pettis ran up the cage, jumped off the cage, then landed a switch kick while airborne. Sports reporters later named this the \"showtime kick\". The kick was also used by mixed martial artists: Zabit Magomedsharipov and others. The kick was featured in the movie \"Here Comes the Boom\".\nScissor.\nSeveral kicks may be called a scissor kick, involving swinging out the legs to kick multiple targets or using the legs to take down an opponent.\nThe popularized version of a scissor kick is, while lying down, or jumping, the kicker brings both legs to both sides of the opponent's legs or to their body and head, then brings both in as a take down (as the name states, leg motions are like that of a pair of scissors).\nThe scissor kick in Taekwondo is called \"kawi chagi\". In capoeira it is called \"tesoura\" (scissors).\nScissor kicks and other variants are also commonly applied in Vovinam.\nSpinning heel.\nA spinning heel kick is where the artist turns their body 360 degrees before landing the heel or the ball of their foot on the target. It is found in Muay Thai and is known in Capoeira as armada.\nVertical (thrust, push, and side).\nA vertical kick involves bringing the knee forward and across the chest, then swinging the hip while extending the kicking leg outward, striking with the outside (\"sword\") edge of the foot. In karate this is called a \"yoko geri keage,\" in Taekwondo it is referred to as \"sewo chagi\" and can be performed as either an inward (\"anuro\") or outward (\"bakuro\") kick.\nMultiple/machine gun.\nIn Japanese karate, the term \"ren geri\" is used for several kicks performed in succession. Old karate did not promote the use of the legs for weapons as much as modern karate does, seeing them as being too open for countering, in modern sport karate (non-traditional) competitions, however, the ability to use multiple kicks without setting the foot down has become a viable option, not only for effectiveness but also for stylish aesthetics.\nIn taekwondo, three types of multiple kick are distinguished:\nOne such multiple kick commonly seen in taekwondo, is a somewhat complex side kick where a high side kick is followed by a low side kick which is in turn followed by a more powerful side kick. This combination is done rapidly and is meant not for multiple targets but for a single one. A multiple kick usually targets the face, thigh and chest, but in turn can be a multiple chest attack which is useful for knocking the breath out of an attacker. A multiple kick is usually involves shooting the leg forward as in a front kick and then pivoting and turning so as to actually deliver a side kick. That style has far less power but is much faster and more deceptive, which is what the multiple kick was designed for. The multiple kick, unlike some side or side blade kicks, never uses the outer edge of the foot; it is intended solely for the heel to be used as the impact point. Depending on the strength and skill of the attacker and the attacked, the combination can be highly effective or highly ineffective when compared to more pragmatic attacks. In some encounters with highly trained and conditioned fighters, multiple side-kicks have seen disastrous results against the abs of their target.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16837", "revid": "40613867", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16837", "title": "Khalid Almihdhar", "text": ""}
{"id": "16838", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16838", "title": "Khalid al-Mihdhar", "text": "Saudi terrorist and 9/11 hijacker (1975\u20132001)\nKhalid Muhammad Abdallah al-Mihdhar (; also transliterated as AL Mihdhar; 16 May 1975 \u2013 11 September 2001) was a Saudi terrorist hijacker. He was one of the five hijackers of American Airlines Flight 77, which was flown into the Pentagon as part of the September 11 attacks.\nAl-Mihdhar was born in Saudi Arabia. In early 1999, he traveled to Afghanistan where, as an experienced and respected jihadist, he was selected by Osama bin Laden to participate in the attacks. Al-Mihdhar arrived in California with fellow hijacker Nawaf al-Hazmi in January 2000, after traveling to Malaysia for the Kuala Lumpur al-Qaeda Summit. At this point, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) was aware of al-Mihdhar, and he was photographed in Malaysia with another al-Qaeda member who was involved in the bombing of the USS \"Cole\". The CIA did not inform the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) when it learned that al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi had entered the United States, and al-Mihdhar was not placed on any watchlists until late August 2001.\nUpon arriving in San Diego County, California, al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi were to train as pilots, but spoke English poorly and did not do well with flight lessons. In June 2000, al-Mihdhar left the United States for Yemen, leaving al-Hazmi behind in San Diego. Al-Mihdhar spent some time in Afghanistan in early 2001 and returned to the United States in early July 2001. He stayed in New Jersey in July and August, before arriving in the Washington, D.C., area at the beginning of September.\nOn the morning of 11 September 2001, al-Mihdhar boarded American Airlines Flight 77, and assisted in the hijacking of the plane which was hijacked approximately 30 minutes after takeoff. Al-Mihdhar and his team of hijackers then deliberately crashed the plane into the Pentagon, killing all 64 people aboard the flight, along with 125 on the ground.\nBackground.\nAl-Mihdhar was born on 16 May 1975, in Mecca, Saudi Arabia, to a prominent family that belonged to the Quraysh tribe of Mecca. Little is known about his life before the age of 20, when he and childhood friend Nawaf al-Hazmi went to Bosnia and Herzegovina to fight with the mujahideen in the Bosnian War. After the war, al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi went to Afghanistan where they fought alongside the Taliban against the Northern Alliance, and al-Qaeda would later dub al-Hazmi his \"second in command\". In 1997, al-Mihdhar told his family that he was leaving to fight in Chechnya, though it is not certain that he actually went to Chechnya. The same year, both men attracted the attention of Saudi Intelligence, who believed they were involved in arms smuggling, and the following year they were eyed as possible collaborators in the 1998 United States embassy bombings in East Africa after it emerged that Mohamed Rashed Daoud Al-Owhali had given the FBI the phone number of al-Mihdhar's father-in-law; 967-1-200578, which turned out to be a key communications hub for al-Qaeda militants, and eventually tipped off the Americans about the upcoming Kuala Lumpur al-Qaeda Summit.\nIn the late 1990s, al-Mihdhar married Hoda al-Hada, who was the sister of a comrade from Yemen, and they had two daughters. Through marriage, al-Mihdhar was related to a number of individuals involved with al-Qaeda in some way. Al-Mihdhar's father-in-law, Ahmad Mohammad Ali al-Hada, helped facilitate al-Qaeda communications in Yemen, and in late 2001, al-Mihdhar's brother-in-law, Ahmed al-Darbi, was captured in Azerbaijan and sent to Guantanamo Bay on charges of supporting a plot to bomb ships in the Strait of Hormuz.\nSelection for the attacks.\nIn Spring 1999, al-Qaeda founder Osama bin Laden committed to support the 9/11 attacks plot, which was largely organized by prominent al-Qaeda member Khalid Sheikh Mohammed. Al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi were among the first group of participants selected for the operation, along with Tawfiq bin Attash and Abu Bara al Yemeni, al-Qaeda members from Yemen. Al-Mihdhar, who had spent time in al-Qaeda camps in the 1990s, was known and highly regarded by Bin Laden. Al-Mihdhar was so eager to participate in jihad operations in the United States that he had already obtained a one-year B-1/B-2 (tourist/business) multiple-entry visa from the consulate in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, on 7 April 1999, one day after obtaining a new passport. Al-Mihdhar listed the Los Angeles Sheraton as his intended destination.\nOnce selected, al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi were sent to the Mes Aynak training camp in Afghanistan. In late 1999, al-Hazmi, bin Attash and al Yemeni went to Karachi, Pakistan to see Mohammed, who instructed them on Western culture and travel; however, al-Mihdhar did not go to Karachi, instead returning to Yemen. He was known as \"Sinaan\" during the preparations.\n2000.\nMalaysia summit.\nThe CIA was aware of al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi's involvement with al-Qaeda, having been informed by Saudi intelligence during a 1999 meeting in Riyadh. Based on information uncovered by the FBI in the 1998 United States embassy bombings case, the National Security Agency (NSA) began tracking the communications of Hada, al-Mihdhar's father-in-law. In late 1999, the NSA informed the CIA of an upcoming meeting in Malaysia, which Hada mentioned would involve \"Khalid\", \"Nawaf\", and \"Salem\", who was al-Hazmi's younger brother, Salem al-Hazmi.\nOn 4 January 2000, al-Mihdhar left Yemen and flew to Dubai, United Arab Emirates, where he spent the night. The CIA broke into his hotel room and photocopied his passport, which gave them his full name, birth information and passport number for the first time, and alerted them that he held an entry visa to the United States. The photocopy was sent to the CIA's Alec Station, which was tracking al-Qaeda.\nOn 5 January 2000, al-Mihdhar traveled to Kuala Lumpur, where he joined al-Hazmi, bin Attash, and al-Yemeni, who were all arriving from Pakistan. Hamburg cell member Ramzi bin al-Shibh was also at the summit, and Mohammed possibly attended. The group was in Malaysia to meet with Hambali, the leader of Jemaah Islamiyah, an Asian al-Qaeda affiliate. During the Kuala Lumpur al-Qaeda Summit, many key details of the 9/11 attacks may have been arranged. At the time, the attacks plot had an additional component involving hijacking aircraft in Asia, as well as in the United States. Bin Attash and al-Yemeni were slated for this part of the plot. However, it was later canceled by bin Laden for being too difficult to coordinate with United States operations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n'[W]e've got to tell the Bureau about this. These guys clearly are bad. One of them, at least, has a multiple-entry visa to the U.S. We've got to tell the FBI.' And then [the CIA officer] said to me, 'No, it's not the FBI's case, not the FBI's jurisdiction.'\nMark Rossini , \"The Spy Factory\"\nIn Malaysia, the group stayed with Yazid Sufaat, a local Jemaah Islamiyah member, who provided accommodation at Hambali's request. Both al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi were secretly photographed at the meeting by Malaysian authorities, whom the CIA had asked to provide surveillance. The Malaysians reported that al-Mihdhar spoke at length with bin Attash, and he met with Fahd al-Quso and others who were later involved in the USS \"Cole\" bombing. After the meeting, al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi traveled to Bangkok, Thailand, on 8 January and left a week later on 15 January for the United States.\nUnited States entry.\nOn 15 January 2000, al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi arrived at Los Angeles International Airport from Bangkok and were admitted as tourists for a period of six months. On 1 February 2000\u201417 days upon entering the United States\u2014the two men encountered Omar al-Bayoumi and Caysan Bin Don at a halal food restaurant on Venice Boulevard in Culver City. Al-Bayoumi claimed he was merely being charitable in assisting the two seemingly out-of-place Muslims with moving to San Diego, where he helped them find an apartment near his own, co-signed their lease, and gave them $1,500 to help pay their rent. Mohammed later claimed that he suggested San Diego as their destination, based on information gleaned from a San Diego phone book that listed language and flight schools. Mohammed also recommended that the two seek assistance from the local Muslim community, since neither spoke English nor had experience with Western culture.\nWhile in San Diego, witnesses told the FBI he and al-Hazmi had a close relationship with Anwar al-Awlaki, an imam who served as their spiritual advisor. Authorities say the two regularly attended the Masjid Ar-Ribat al-Islami mosque al-Awlaki led in San Diego, and al-Awlaki had many closed-door meetings with them, which led investigators to believe al-Awlaki knew about the 9/11 attacks in advance.\nIn early February 2000, al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi rented an apartment at the Parkwood Apartments complex in the Clairemont Mesa area of San Diego, and al-Mihdhar purchased a used 1988 Toyota Corolla. Neighbors thought that al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi were odd because months passed without the men getting any furniture, and they slept on mattresses on the floor, yet they carried briefcases, were frequently on their mobile phones, and were occasionally picked up by a limousine. Those who met al-Mihdhar in San Diego described him as \"dark and brooding, with a disdain for American culture\". Neighbors also said that the pair constantly played flight simulator games.\nAl-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi took flight lessons on 5 May 2000, at the Sorbi Flying Club in San Diego, with al-Mihdhar flying an aircraft for 42 minutes. They took additional lessons on 10 May; however, with poor English skills, they did not do well with flight lessons. Al-Mihdhar and Al-Hazmi raised some suspicion when they offered extra money to their flight instructor, Rick Garza, if he would train them to fly jets. Garza refused the offer but did not report them to authorities. After the 9/11 attacks, Garza described the two men as \"impatient students\" who \"wanted to learn to fly jets, specifically Boeings\".\nReturn to Yemen.\nAl-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi moved out of the Parkwood Apartments at the end of May 2000, and al-Mihdhar transferred registration for the Toyota Corolla to al-Hazmi. On 10 June 2000, al-Mihdhar left the United States and returned to Yemen to visit his wife, against the wishes of Mohammed who wanted him to remain in the United States to help al-Hazmi adapt. Mohammed was so angered by this that he decided to remove al-Mihdhar from the 9/11 plot, but he was overruled by bin Laden. Al-Mihdhar remained part of the plot as a muscle hijacker, who would help take over the aircraft. On 12 October 2000, the USS \"Cole\" was bombed by a small boat loaded with explosives. After the bombing, Yemeni Prime Minister Abdul Karim al-Iryani reported that al-Mihdhar had been one of the key planners of the attack and had been in the country at the time of the attacks. In late 2000, al-Mihdhar was back in Saudi Arabia, staying with a cousin in Mecca.\n2001.\nIn February 2001, al-Mihdhar returned to Afghanistan for several months, possibly entering across the Iranian border after a flight from Syria. FBI director Robert Mueller later stated his belief that al-Mihdhar served as the coordinator and organizer for the muscle hijackers. He was the last of the muscle hijackers to return to the United States. On 10 June, he returned to Saudi Arabia for a month, where he applied to re-enter the United States through the Visa Express program, indicating that he intended to stay at a Marriott hotel in New York City. On his visa application, al-Mihdhar falsely stated that he had never previously traveled to the United States.\nOn 4 July, al-Mihdhar returned to the United States, arriving at New York City's John F. Kennedy International Airport, using a new passport obtained the previous month. A digital copy of one of al-Mihdhar's passports was later recovered during a search of an al-Qaeda safe house in Afghanistan, which held indicators, such as fake or altered passport stamps, that al-Mihdhar was a member of a known terrorist group. At the time when al-Mihdhar was admitted to the United States, immigration inspectors had not been trained to look for such indicators. Upon arriving, al-Mihdhar did not check into the Marriott but instead spent a night at another hotel in the city.\nAl-Mihdhar bought a fake ID on 10 July from All Services Plus in Passaic County, New Jersey, which was in the business of selling counterfeit documents, including another ID to Flight 11 hijacker Abdulaziz al-Omari. On 1 August, al-Mihdhar and fellow Flight 77 hijacker Hani Hanjour drove to Virginia in order to obtain driver's licenses. Once they arrived, they scouted out a 7-Eleven convenience store and a dollar store in Falls Church, and found two Salvadoran immigrants who, for $50 each, were willing to vouch for al-Mihdhar and Hanjour as being Virginian residents. With notarized residency forms, al-Mihdhar and Hanjour were able to obtain driver's licenses at a Virginian motor vehicle office. Flight 77 hijackers Salem al-Hazmi and Majed Moqed, and United Airlines Flight 93 hijacker Ziad Jarrah used the same addresses obtained from the Salvadorans to obtain Virginian driver's licenses.\nIn August 2001, al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi made several visits to the library at William Paterson University in Wayne, New Jersey, where they used computers to look up travel information and book flights. On 22 August, al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi tried to purchase flight tickets from the American Airlines online ticket-merchant, but had technical difficulties and gave up. Al-Mihdhar and Moqed were able to make flight reservations for Flight 77 on 25 August, using Moqed's credit card; however, the transaction did not fully go through because the billing address and the shipment address for the tickets did not match.\nOn 31 August, al-Mihdhar closed an account at Hudson United Bank in New Jersey, having opened the account when he arrived in July, and was with Hanjour when he made a withdrawal from an ATM in Paterson on 1 September. The next day, al-Mihdhar, Moqed, and Hanjour traveled to Maryland, where they stayed at budget motels in Laurel. Al-Mihdhar was among the muscle hijackers who worked out at a Gold's Gym in Greenbelt in early September. On 5 September, al-Mihdhar and Moqed went to the American Airlines ticket counter at Baltimore-Washington International Airport to pick up their tickets for Flight 77, paying $2,300 in cash.\nIntelligence leads.\nDespite knowledge of his entry into the United States for over a year, al-Mihdhar was not placed on a CIA watchlist until 21 August 2001, and a note was sent on 23 August to the Department of State and the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) suggesting that al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi be added to their watchlists. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) was not notified about the two men. On 23 August, the CIA informed the FBI that al-Mihdhar had obtained a U.S. visa in Jeddah. The FBI headquarters received a copy of the Visa Express application from the Jeddah embassy on 24 August, showing the New York Marriott as al-Mihdhar's destination. On 23 August, the Mossad gave al-Mihdhar's name to the CIA as one of 19 belonging to US residents they suspected would imminently attack the country; only four of these names are known publicly, the others belonging to fellow 9/11 hijackers Mohamed Atta, Nawaf al-Hazmi, and Marwan al-Shehhi. It is not known if the list contained the names of all the 9/11 hijackers or if it were only coincidence that the list had as many names as there were hijackers in the 9/11 attacks.\nOn 28 August, the FBI New York field office requested that a criminal case be opened to determine whether al-Mihdhar was still in the United States, but the request was refused. The FBI ended up treating al-Mihdhar as an intelligence case, which meant that the FBI's criminal investigators could not work on the case, due to the barrier separating intelligence and criminal case operations. An agent in the New York office sent an e-mail to FBI headquarters saying, \"Whatever has happened to this, someday someone will die, and the public will not understand why we were not more effective and throwing every resource we had at certain 'problems.'\" The reply from headquarters was, \"we [at headquarters] are all frustrated with this issue ... [t]hese are the rules. NSLU does not make them up.\"\nThe FBI contacted Marriott on 30 August, requesting that they check guest records, and on 5 September, they reported that no Marriott hotels had any record of al-Mihdhar checking in. The day before the attacks, Robert Fuller of the New York office requested that the Los Angeles FBI office check all local Sheraton Hotels, as well as Lufthansa and United Airlines bookings, because those were the two airlines al-Mihdhar had used to enter the country. Neither the Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network nor the FBI's Financial Review Group, which have access to credit card and other private financial records, were notified about al-Mihdhar prior to 11 September.\nRegarding the CIA's refusal to inform the FBI about al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi, author Lawrence Wright suggests the CIA wanted to protect its turf and was concerned about giving sensitive intelligence to FBI Agent John P. O'Neill, whom Alec Station chief Michael Scheuer described as duplicitous. Wright also speculates that the CIA may have been protecting intelligence operations overseas, and might have been eying al-Mihdhar and al-Hazmi as recruitment targets to obtain intelligence on al-Qaeda, although the CIA was not authorized to operate in the United States and might have been leaving them for Saudi intelligence to recruit.\n9/11 attacks.\nOn 10 September 2001, al-Mihdhar and the other hijackers checked into the Marriott Residence Inn in Herndon, Virginia, near Washington Dulles International Airport. Saleh Ibn Abdul Rahman Hussayen, a prominent Saudi Arabian government official, was staying at the same hotel that night, although there is no evidence that they met or knew of each other's presence.\nAt 6:22\u00a0a.m. on 11 September 2001, the group checked out of the hotel and headed to Dulles airport. At 7:15\u00a0a.m., al-Mihdhar and Moqed checked in at the American Airlines ticket counter and arrived at the passenger security checkpoint at 7:20\u00a0a.m. Both men set off the metal detector and were put through secondary screening. Security video footage later released shows that Moqed was wanded, but the screener did not identify what set off the alarm, and both Moqed and al-Mihdhar were able to proceed without further hindrance. Al-Mihdhar was also selected by the Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening System (CAPPS), which involved extra screening of his luggage; however, because al-Mihdhar did not check any luggage, this had no effect. By 7:50\u00a0a.m., al-Mihdhar and the other hijackers, carrying knives and box cutters, had made it through the airport security checkpoint and boarded Flight\u00a077 to Los Angeles. Al-Mihdhar was seated in seat 12B, next to Moqed.\nThe flight was scheduled to depart from Gate D26 at 8:10\u00a0a.m. but was delayed by 10 minutes. The last routine radio communication from the plane to air traffic control occurred at 8:50:51\u00a0a.m. At 8:54\u00a0a.m., Flight\u00a077 deviated from its assigned flight path and began to turn south, at which point the hijackers set the flight's autopilot setting for Washington, D.C. Passenger Barbara Olson called her husband, United States Solicitor General Ted Olson, and reported that the plane had been hijacked. At 9:37:45 a.m, Flight 77 crashed into the west facade of the Pentagon, killing all 64 people aboard, along with 125 in the Pentagon. In the recovery process, remains of the five hijackers were identified through a process of elimination, since their DNA did not match any from the victims, and put into the custody of the FBI.\nAftermath.\nAfter the attacks, the identification of al-Mihdhar was one of the first links suggesting that bin Laden had played a role in their organization, since al-Mihdhar had been seen at the Malaysian conference speaking to bin Laden's associates. The FBI interrogated Quso, who was arrested following the USS \"Cole\" bombing and in custody in Yemen. Quso was able to identify al-Mihdhar, al-Hazmi and bin Attash in photos provided by the FBI, and he also knew Marwan al-Shehhi, a hijacker aboard United Airlines Flight 175. From Quso, the FBI was able to establish an al-Qaeda link to the attacks.\nOn 12 September 2001, the Toyota Corolla purchased by al-Mihdhar was found in Dulles International Airport's hourly parking lot. Inside the vehicle, authorities found a letter written by Mohamed Atta, a hijacker aboard American Airlines Flight 11; maps of Washington, D.C. and New York City; a cashier's check made out to a Phoenix, Arizona, flight school; four drawings of a Boeing 757 cockpit; a box cutter; and a page with notes and phone numbers, which contained evidence that led investigators to San Diego.\nOn 19 September 2001, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) distributed a special alert that listed al-Mihdhar as still alive, and other reports began suggesting that a number of the alleged hijackers were likewise still alive. For instance, on 23 September 2001, the BBC published an article that suggested al-Mihdhar and others named as hijackers were still at large. The German magazine \"Der Spiegel\" later investigated the BBC's claims of \"living\" hijackers and reported they were cases of mistaken identities. In 2002, Saudi Arabian officials stated that the names of the hijackers were correct and that 15 of the 19 hijackers were Saudi Arabian. In 2006, in response to 9/11 conspiracy theories surrounding its original news story, the BBC said that confusion had arisen with the common Arabic names, and that its later reports on the hijackers superseded its original story.\nIn 2005, U.S. Army Lt. Col. Anthony Shaffer and Congressman Curt Weldon alleged that the Defense Department data mining project Able Danger identified al-Mihdhar, al-Hazmi, al-Shehri, and Atta as members of a Brooklyn-based al-Qaeda cell in early 2000. Shaffer largely based his allegations on the recollections of Navy Captain Scott Phillpott, who later recanted his recollection, telling investigators that he was \"convinced that Atta was not on the chart that we had\". Phillpott said that Shaffer was \"relying on my recollection 100 percent\", and the Defense Department Inspector General's report indicated that Philpott strongly supported the social network analysis techniques used in Able Danger, and might have exaggerated claims of identifying the hijackers.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16839", "revid": "69412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16839", "title": "Kilo-", "text": "Decimal unit prefix in the metric system\nKilo is a unit prefix in the metric system of measurement, denoting multiplication by one thousand (103). The International System of Units reserves the lowercase symbol k.\n\"Kilo\" is derived from the Greek word (), meaning \"thousand\". \nIn 19th century English the prefix was sometimes spelled chilio, in line with a puristic opinion by Thomas Young. As an opponent of suggestions to introduce the metric system in Britain, he qualified the nomenclature adopted in France as barbarous.\nExamples.\nBy extension, currencies are sometimes also preceded by the prefix:\nkilobyte.\nFor multiples of the byte in some fields of computer science and information technology, another definition has been in common use, in which the \"kilobyte\" measures 1024 bytes (210 bytes), because 210 is approximately 103. The reason for this application is that digital hardware natively use base 2 exponentiation.\nThe National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) comments on the confusion caused by these contrasting definitions: \"Faced with this reality, the \"IEEE Standards Board\" decided that IEEE standards will use the conventional, internationally adopted, definitions of the SI prefixes.\" A new set of binary prefixes, based on powers of 2, was introduced by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), which defines 1024 bytes as one kibibyte (1 KiB).\nExponentiation.\nWhen units occur in exponentiation, such as in square and cubic forms, any multiplier prefix is part of the unit, and thus included in the exponentiation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16843", "revid": "998182", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16843", "title": "Utamaro", "text": "Japanese artist (1753\u20131806)\n was a Japanese artist. He is one of the most highly regarded designers of ukiyo-e woodblock prints and paintings, and is best known for his \"bijin \u014dkubi-e\" \"large-headed pictures of beautiful women\" of the 1790s. He also produced nature studies, particularly illustrated books of insects.\nLittle is known of Utamaro's life. His work began to appear in the 1770s, and he rose to prominence in the early 1790s with his portraits of beauties with exaggerated, elongated features. He produced over 2000 known prints and was one of the few ukiyo-e artists to achieve fame throughout Japan in his lifetime. In 1804 he was arrested and manacled for fifty days for making illegal prints depicting the 16th-century military ruler Toyotomi Hideyoshi, and died two years later.\nUtamaro's work reached Europe in the mid-nineteenth century, where it was very popular, enjoying particular acclaim in France. He influenced the European Impressionists, particularly with his use of partial views and his emphasis on light and shade, which they imitated. The reference to the \"Japanese influence\" among these artists often refers to the work of Utamaro.\nBackground.\nUkiyo-e art flourished in Japan during the Edo period from the seventeenth to nineteenth centuries. The art form took as its primary subjects courtesans, kabuki actors, and others associated with the \"ukiyo\" \"floating world\" lifestyle of the pleasure districts. Alongside paintings, mass-produced woodblock prints were a major form of the genre. Ukiyo-e art was aimed at the common townspeople at the bottom of the social scale, especially of the administrative capital of Edo. Its audience, themes, aesthetics, and mass-produced nature kept it from consideration as serious art.\nIn the mid-eighteenth century, full-colour ' prints became common. They were printed by using a large number of woodblocks, one for each colour. Towards the close of the eighteenth century there was a peak in both quality and quantity of the work. Kiyonaga was the pre-eminent portraitist of beauties during the 1780s, and the tall, graceful beauties in his work had a great influence on Utamaro, who was to succeed him in fame. Shunsh\u014d of the Katsukawa school introduced the ' \"large-headed picture\" in the 1760s. He and other members of the Katsukawa school, such as Shunk\u014d, popularized the form for \"\" actor prints, and popularized the dusting of mica in the backgrounds to produce a glittering effect.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nUtamaro was born Kitagawa Ichitar\u014d in c.\u20091753. As an adult, he was known by the given names Y\u016bsuke, and later Y\u016bki. Early accounts cite his birthplace as Kyoto, Osaka, Yoshiwara in Edo (modern Tokyo), or Kawagoe in Musashi Province (modern Saitama Prefecture); none of these places has been verified. The names of his parents are not known; it has been suggested his father may have been a Yoshiwara teahouse owner, or Toriyama Sekien, an artist who tutored him and who wrote of Utamaro playing in his garden as a child.\nUtamaro was married although little is known about his wife and there is no record of their having had children. However, his works include many prints of tender and intimate domestic scenes featuring the same woman and child over several years.\nApprenticeship and early work.\nSometime during his childhood Utamaro came under the tutelage of Sekien, who described his pupil as bright and devoted to art. Sekien, although trained in the upper-class Kan\u014d school of Japanese painting, had become in middle age a practitioner of ukiyo-e and his art was aimed at the townspeople in Edo. His students included haiku poets and ukiyo-e artists such as Eish\u014dsai Ch\u014dki.\nUtamaro's first published work may be an illustration of eggplants in the \"haikai\" poetry anthology \"Chiyo no Haru\" published in 1770. His next known works appear in 1775 under the name Kitagawa Toyoaki,\u2014the cover to a kabuki playbook entitled \"Forty-eight Famous Love Scenes\" which was distributed at the Edo playhouse Nakamura-za. As Toyoaki, Utamaro continued as an illustrator of popular literature for the rest of the decade, and occasionally produced single-sheet \"\" portraits of kabuki actors.\nThe young publisher Tsutaya J\u016bzabur\u014d enlisted Utamaro and in the autumn of 1782 the artist hosted a lavish banquet whose list of guests included artists such as Kiyonaga, Kitao Shigemasa, and Katsukawa Shunsh\u014d, as well as writers such as \u014cta Nanpo (1749\u20131823)and H\u014dseid\u014d Kisanji. It was at this banquet that it is believed the artist first announced his new art name, \"Utamaro\". Per custom, he distributed a specially made print for the occasion, in which, before a screen bearing the names of his guests, is a self-portrait of Utamaro making a deep bow.\nUtamaro's first work for Tsutaya appeared in a publication dated as 1783: \"The Fantastic Travels of a Playboy in the Land of Giants\", a \"\" picture book created in collaboration with his friend Shimizu Enj\u016b, a writer. In the book, Tsutaya described the pair as making their debuts.\nAt some point in the mid-1780s, probably 1783, he went to live with Tsutaya J\u016bzabur\u014d. It is estimated that he lived there for approximately five years. He seems to have become a principal artist for the Tsutaya firm. Evidence of his prints for the next few years is sporadic, as he mostly produced illustrations for books of \"ky\u014dka\" (\"crazy verse\"), a parody of the classical \"waka\" form. None of his work produced during the period 1790\u20131792 has survived.\nHeight of fame.\nIn about 1791 Utamaro gave up designing prints for books and concentrated on making single portraits of women displayed in half-length, rather than the prints of women in groups favoured by other ukiyo-e artists.\nIn 1793 he achieved recognition as an artist, and his semi-exclusive arrangement with the publisher Tsutaya J\u016bzabur\u014d ended. Utamaro then went on to produce several series of well-known works, all featuring women of the Yoshiwara district.\nOver the years, he also created a number of volumes of animal, insect, and nature studies and \"shunga\", or erotica. Shunga prints were quite acceptable in Japanese culture, not associated with a negative concept of pornography as found in western cultures, but considered rather as a natural aspect of human behavior and circulated among all levels of Japanese society.\nLater life.\nTsutaya J\u016bzabur\u014d died in 1797, and Utamaro thereafter lived in Ky\u016bemon-ch\u014d, then Bakuro-ch\u014d, and finally near the Benkei Bridge. Utamaro was apparently very upset by the loss of his long-time friend and supporter. Some commentators feel that after this event, his work never reached the heights previously attained.\nA law went into effect in 1790 requiring prints to bear a censor's seal of approval to be sold. Censorship increased in strictness over the following decades, and violators could receive harsh punishments. From 1799 even preliminary drafts required approval. A group of Utagawa-school offenders including Toyokuni had their works repressed in 1801. In 1804, Utamaro ran into legal trouble over a series of prints of samurai warriors, with their names slightly disguised; the depiction of warriors, their names, and their crests was forbidden at the time. Records have not survived of what sort of punishment Utamaro received.\nArrest of 1804.\nThe \"Ehon Taik\u014dki\", published from 1797 to 1802, detailed the life of the 16th-century military ruler, Toyotomi Hideyoshi. The work was widely adapted, such as for kabuki and bunraku theatre. When artists and writers put out prints and books based on the \"Ehon Taik\u014dki\" in the disparaged \"ukiyo-e\" style, it attracted reprisals from the government. In probably the most famous case of censorship of the Edo period, Utamaro was imprisoned in 1804, after which he was manacled along with Tsukimaro, Toyokuni, Shuntei, Shun'ei, and Jippensha Ikku for fifty days and their publishers subjected to heavy fines.\nGovernment documents of the case are no longer extant, and there are few other documents relating to the incident. It appears that Utamaro was most prominent of the group. The artists might have offended the authorities by identifying the historical figures by name and with their identifying crests and other symbols, which was prohibited, and by depicting Hideyoshi with prostitutes of the pleasure quarters. Utamaro's censored prints include one of the \"daimy\u014d\" Kat\u014d Kiyomasa lustily gazing at a Korean dancer at a party, another of Hideyoshi holding the hand of his page Ishida Mitsunari in a sexually suggestive manner, and another of Hideyoshi with his five consorts viewing the cherry blossoms at the temple Daigo-ji in Kyoto, a historical event famous for displaying Hideyoshi's extravagance. This last displays the names of each consort while placing them in the typical poses of courtesans at a Yoshiwara party.\nDeath.\nRecords give Utamaro's death date as the 20th day of the 9th month of the year Bunka, which equates to 31 October 1806. He was given the Buddhist posthumous name Sh\u014den Ry\u014dk\u014d Shinshi. Apparently with no heirs, his tomb at the temple Senk\u014dji was left untended. A century later, in 1917, admirers of Utamaro had the decayed grave repaired.\nPupils.\nUtamaro had a number of pupils, who took names such as Kikumaro (later Tsukimaro), Hidemaro, and Takemaro. These artists produced works in the master's style, though none are considered of Utamaro's quality. Sometimes he allowed them to sign his name. Of his students, Koikawa Shunch\u014d married Utamaro's widow on the master's death and took on the name Utamaro II. After 1820 he produced his work under the name \"Kitagawa Tetsugor\u014d\".\nAnalysis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Utamaro] created an absolutely new type of female beauty. At first he was content to draw the head in normal proportions and quite definitely round in shape; only the neck on which this head was posed was already notably slender ... Towards the middle of the tenth decade these exaggerated proportions of the body had reached such an extreme that the heads were twice as long as they were broad, set upon slim long necks, which in turn swayed upon very slim shoulders; the upper coiffure bulged out to such a degree that it almost surpassed the head itself in extent; the eyes were indicated by short slits, and were separated by an inordinately long nose from an infinitesimally small mouth; the soft robes hung loosely about figures of an almost unearthly thinness.\u2014\u200a\nWhat little information about Utamaro's life that has been passed down is often contradictory, so analysis of his development as an artist relies chiefly on his work itself. Utamaro is known primarily for his \"bijin-ga\" portraits of female beauties, though his work ranges from \"kach\u014d-e\" \"flower-and-bird pictures\" to landscapes to book illustrations.\nUtamaro's early \"bijin-ga\" follow closely the example of Kiyonaga. In the 1790s his figures became more exaggerated, with thin bodies and long faces with small features. Utamaro experimented with line, colour, and printing techniques to bring out subtle differences in the features, expressions, and backdrops of subjects from a wide variety of class and background. Utamaro's individuated beauties were in sharp contrast to the stereotyped, idealized images that had been the norm.\nBy the end of the 1790s, especially following the death of his patron Tsutaya J\u016bzabur\u014d in 1797, Utamaro's prodigious output declined in quality. By 1800 his exaggerations had become more extreme, with faces three times as long as they are wide and body proportions of eight heads length to the body. By this point, critics such as Basil Stewart consider Utamaro's figures to \"lose much of their grace. \nUtamaro produced more than two thousand prints during his working career, amongst which are over 120 \"bijin-ga\" print series. He made illustrations for nearly 100 books and about 30 paintings. He also created a number of paintings and \"surimono\", as well as many illustrated books, including more than thirty \"shunga\" books, albums, and related publications. Among his best-known works are the series \"Ten Studies in Female Physiognomy\", \"A Collection of Reigning Beauties\", \"Great Love Themes of Classical Poetry\" (sometimes called \"Women in Love\" containing individual prints such as \"Revealed Love\" and \"Pensive Love\"), and \"Twelve Hours in the Pleasure Quarters\". His work appeared from at least 60 publishers, of which Tsutaya J\u016bzabur\u014d and Izumiya Ichibei were the most important.\nHe alone, of his contemporary \"ukiyo-e\" artists, achieved a national reputation during his lifetime. His sensuous beauties generally are considered the finest and most evocative \"bijinga\" in all of \"ukiyo-e\".\nHe succeeded in capturing the subtle aspects of personality and the transient moods of women of all classes, ages, and circumstances. His reputation has remained undiminished since. Kitagawa Utamaro's work is known worldwide, and he generally is regarded as one of the half-dozen greatest \"ukiyo-e\" artists of all time.\nLegacy.\nUtamaro was recognized as a master in his own age. He appears to have achieved a national reputation at a time when even the most popular Edo ukiyo-e artists were little known outside the city. Due to his popularity Utamaro had many imitators, some of whom likely signed their work with his name; this is believed to include students of his and his successor, Utamaro\u00a0II. On rare occasions Utamaro signed his work \"the genuine Utamaro\" to distinguish himself from these imitators. Forgeries and reprints of Utamaro's work are common; he produced a large body of work, but his earlier, more popular works are difficult to find in good condition.\nA wave of interest in Japanese art swept France from the mid-19th century, called \"Japonisme\". Exhibitions in Paris of Japanese art began to be staged in the 1880s, include an Utamaro exhibition in 1888 by the German-French art dealer Siegfried Bing. The French Impressionists regarded Utamaro's work on a level akin with Hokusai and Hiroshige. French artist-collectors of Utamaro's work included Monet, Degas, Gauguin, and Toulouse-Lautrec\nUtamaro had an influence on the compositional, colour, and sense of tranquility of the American painter Mary Cassatt's work. The \"shin-hanga\" (\"new prints\") artist Goy\u014d Hashiguchi (1880\u20131921) was called the \"Utamaro of the Taish\u014d period\" (1912\u20131926) for his manner of depicting women. The painter character Seiji Moriyama in the British novelist Kazuo Ishiguro's \"An Artist of the Floating World\" (1986) has a reputation as a \"modern Utamaro\" for his combination of Western techniques Utamaro-like feminine subjects.\nIn 2016 Utamaro's \"Fukaku Shinobu Koi\" set the record price for an ukiyo-e print sold at auction at \u20ac.\nThe 2016 role-playing game \"Persona 5\" has a character named Yusuke Kitagawa after Utamaro's surname.\nHistoriography.\nThe only surviving official record of Utamaro is a stele at Senk\u014d-ji Temple, which gives his death date as the 20th day of the 9th month of the year Bunka, which equates to 31 October 1806. The record states he was 54 by East Asian age reckoning, by which age begins at 1 rather than 0. From this a birth year of c.\u20091753 is deduced.\nUtamaro has gained general acceptance as one of the form's greatest masters. The earliest document of ukiyo-e artists, \"Ukiyo-e Ruik\u014d\", was first compiled while Utamaro was active. The work was not printed, but exists in various manuscripts that different writers altered and expanded. The earliest surviving copy, the \"Ukiyo-e K\u014dsh\u014d\", wrote of Utamaro:\n Kitagawa Utamaro, personal name Y\u016bsuke\n At the start entered the studio of Toriyama Sekien and studied pictures in the Kan\u014d school. Later drew pictures of the styles and manners of men and women and resided temporarily with \"ez\u014dshiya\" Tsutaya J\u016bzabur\u014d. Now lives in Benkeibashi. Many \"nishiki-e\".\nThe earliest comprehensive historical and critical works on ukiyo-e came from the West, and often denied Utamaro a place in the ukiyo-e canon. Ernest Fenollosa's \"Masters of Ukioye\" of 1896 was the first such overview of ukiyo-e. The book posited ukiyo-e as having evolved towards a late-18th-century golden age that began to decline with the advent of Utamaro, which he condemned for his \"gradual elongation of the figure, and an adoption of violent emotion and extravagant attitudes\". Fenollosa had harsher criticism for Utamaro's pupils, who he considered to have \"carried the extravagances of their teacher to a point of ugliness\". In his \"Chats on Japanese Prints\" of 1915, Arthur Davison Ficke concurred that with Utamaro ukiyo-e entered a period of exaggerated, manneristic decadence.\nLaurence Binyon, the Keeper of Oriental Prints and Drawings at the British Museum, wrote an account in \"Painting in the Far East\" in 1908 that was similar to Fenollosa's, considering the 1790s a period of decline, but placing Utamaro amongst the masters. He called Utamaro \"one of the world's artists for the intrinsic qualities of his genius\" and \"the greatest of all the figure-designers\" in ukiyo-e, with a \"far greater resource of composition\" than his peers and an \"endless\" capacity for \"unexpected invention\". James A. Michener re-evaluated the development of ukiyo-e in \"The Floating World\" of 1954, in which he places the 1790s as \"the culminating years of ukiyo-e\", when \"Utamaro brought the grace of Sukenobu to its apex\". Seiichir\u014d Takahashi's \"Traditional Woodblock Prints of Japan\" of 1964 set the golden age of ukiyo-e at the period of Kiyonaga, Utamaro, and Sharaku, followed by a period of decline with the declaration beginning in the 1790s of strict sumptuary laws that dictated what could be depicted in artworks.\nThe French art critic Edmond de Goncourt published \"Outamaro\", the first monograph on Utamaro, in 1891, with help from the Japanese art dealer Tadamasa Hayashi. British ukiyo-e scholar Jack Hillier had the monograph \"Utamaro: Colour Prints and Paintings\" published in 1961.\nPrint series.\nA partial list of his print series and their dates includes:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16844", "revid": "50591083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16844", "title": "Kofi Annan", "text": "UN Secretary-General from 1997 to 2006\nKofi Atta Annan (8 April 1938\u00a0\u2013 18 August 2018) was a Ghanaian diplomat and statesman who served as the seventh secretary-general of the United Nations from 1997 to 2006. Annan and the UN were the co-recipients of the 2001 Nobel Peace Prize. He was the founder and chairman of the Kofi Annan Foundation, as well as chairman of The Elders, an international organisation founded by Nelson Mandela.\nAnnan joined the United Nations in 1962, working for the World Health Organization's Geneva office. He went on to work in several capacities at the UN Headquarters, including serving as the under-secretary-general for peacekeeping between March 1992 and December 1996. He was appointed secretary-general on 13 December 1996 by the Security Council and later confirmed by the General Assembly, making him the first officeholder to be elected from the UN staff itself. He was re-elected for a second term in 2001 and was succeeded as secretary-general by Ban Ki-moon in 2007.\nAs secretary-general, Annan reformed the UN bureaucracy, worked to combat HIV/AIDS (especially in Africa) and launched the UN Global Compact. He was criticised for not expanding the Security Council and faced calls for his resignation after an investigation into the Oil-for-Food Programme, but was largely exonerated of personal corruption. After the end of his term as secretary-general, he founded the Kofi Annan Foundation in 2007 to work on international development. In 2012, Annan was the UN\u2013Arab League Joint Special Representative for Syria to help find a resolution to the Syrian civil war. Annan quit after becoming frustrated with the UN's lack of progress with regards to conflict resolution. In September 2016, Annan was appointed to lead a UN commission to investigate the Rohingya crisis. He died in 2018 and was given a state funeral.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and education.\nKofi Annan was born in Fante New Town, an ethnic Fante community in Kumasi in the Gold Coast (now Ghana) on 8 April 1938. His twin sister Efua Atta, who died in 1991, shared the middle name \"Atta\", which in the Akan language means \"twin\". Annan and his sister were born into one of the country's Fante aristocratic families; both of their grandfathers and their uncle were Fante paramount chiefs, and their brother Kobina would go on to become Ghana's ambassador to Morocco.\nIn the Akan names tradition, some children are named according to the day of the week they were born, sometimes in relation to how many children precede them. \"Kofi\" in Akan is the name that corresponds with Friday, the day on which Annan was born. The last name Annan in Asante means fourth-born child. Annan said that his surname rhymes with \"cannon\" in English.\nFrom 1954 to 1957, Annan attended the elite Mfantsipim, an all-boys Methodist boarding school in Cape Coast founded in the 1870s. Annan said that the school taught him that \"suffering anywhere, concerns people everywhere\". In 1957, the year Annan graduated from Mfantsipim, the Gold Coast gained independence from the UK and began using the name \"Ghana\".\nIn 1958, Annan began studying economics at the Kumasi College of Science and Technology, now the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology of Ghana. He received a Ford Foundation grant, enabling him to complete his undergraduate studies in economics at Macalester College in Saint Paul, Minnesota, US, in 1961. During his time at Macalester, Annan was known for his quiet leadership and cross-cultural perspective, qualities that later defined his diplomatic career. Annan then completed a DEA degree in International Relations at the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies in Geneva, Switzerland, from 1961 to 1962. After some years of work experience, he studied at the MIT Sloan School of Management (1971\u201372) in the Sloan Fellows program and earned a master's degree in management.\nDiplomatic career.\nIn 1962, Annan started working as a budget officer for the World Health Organization, an agency of the United Nations (UN). From 1974 to 1976, he worked as a manager of the state-owned Ghana Tourist Development Company in Accra. In 1980 he became the head of personnel for the office of the UN High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) in Geneva. Between 1981 and 1983, he was a member of the Governing Board of the International School of Geneva. In 1983 he became the director of administrative management services of the UN Secretariat in New York. In 1987, Annan was appointed as an assistant secretary-general for Human Resources Management and Security Coordinator for the UN system. In 1990, he became Assistant Secretary-General for Program Planning, Budget and Finance, and Control.\nWhen Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali established the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) in 1992, Annan was appointed to the new department as Deputy to then Under-Secretary-General Marrack Goulding. Annan replaced Goulding in March 1993 as Under-Secretary-General of that department after American officials persuaded Boutros-Ghali that Annan was more flexible and more aligned with the role that the Pentagon expected of UN peacekeepers in Somalia. On 29 August 1995, while Boutros-Ghali was unreachable on an aeroplane, Annan instructed United Nations officials to \"relinquish for a limited period of time their authority to veto air strikes in Bosnia\". This move allowed NATO forces to conduct Operation Deliberate Force and made him a favourite of the United States. According to Richard Holbrooke, Annan's \"gutsy performance\" convinced the United States that he would be a good replacement for Boutros-Ghali.\nHe was appointed a special representative of the Secretary-General to the former Yugoslavia, serving from November 1995 to March 1996.\nCriticism.\nIn 2003, retired Canadian general Rom\u00e9o Dallaire, who was force commander of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR), claimed that Annan was overly passive in his response to the imminent genocide. In his book \"\" (2003), Dallaire asserted that Annan held back UN troops from intervening to settle the conflict and from providing more logistical and material support. Dallaire claimed that Annan failed to respond to his repeated faxes asking for access to a weapons depository; such weapons could have helped Dallaire defend the endangered Tutsis. In 2004, ten years after the genocide in which an estimated 800,000 people were killed, Annan said: \"I could and should have done more to sound the alarm and rally support.\"\nIn his book \"\", Annan again argued that the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations could have made better use of the media to raise awareness of the violence in Rwanda and put pressure on governments to provide the troops necessary for an intervention. Annan explained that the events in Somalia and the collapse of the UNOSOM II mission fostered a hesitation among UN member states to approve robust peacekeeping operations. As a result, when the UNAMIR mission was approved just days after the battle, the resulting force lacked the troop levels, resources and mandate to operate effectively.\nUnited Nations Secretary-General (1997\u20132006).\nAppointment.\nIn 1996, Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali ran unopposed for a second term. Although he won 14 of the 15 votes on the Security Council, he was vetoed by the United States. After four deadlocked meetings of the Security Council, Boutros-Ghali suspended his candidacy, becoming the only secretary-general ever to be denied a second term. Annan was the leading candidate to replace him, beating Amara Essy by one vote in the first round. However, France vetoed Annan four times before finally abstaining. The UN Security Council recommended Annan on 13 December 1996. Confirmed four days later by the vote of the General Assembly, he started his first term as secretary-general on 1 January 1997.\nDue to Boutros-Ghali's overthrow, a second Annan term would give Africa the office of Secretary-General for three consecutive terms. In 2001, the Asia-Pacific Group agreed to support Annan for a second term in return for the African Group's support for an Asian secretary-general in the 2006 selection. The Security Council recommended Annan for a second term on 27 June 2001, and the General Assembly approved his reappointment on 29 June 2001.\nActivities.\nRecommendations for UN reform.\nSoon after taking office in 1997, Annan released two reports on management reform. On 17 March 1997, the report \"Management and Organisational Measures\" (A/51/829) introduced new management mechanisms through the establishment of a cabinet-style body to assist him and the UN's activities in accordance with four core missions. A comprehensive reform agenda was issued on 14 July 1997 titled \"Renewing the United Nations: A Programme for Reform\" (A/51/950). Key proposals included the introduction of strategic management to strengthen unity of purpose, the establishment of the position of deputy secretary-general, a 10-per cent reduction in posts, a reduction in administrative costs, the consolidation of the UN at the country level, and reaching out to civil society and the private sector as partners. Annan also proposed to hold a Millennium Summit in 2000.\nAfter years of research, Annan presented a progress report, \"In Larger Freedom\", to the UN General Assembly on 21 March 2005. Annan recommended Security Council expansion and a host of other UN reforms.\nOn 31 January 2006, Annan outlined his vision for a comprehensive and extensive reform of the UN in a policy speech to the United Nations Association UK. The speech, delivered at Central Hall, Westminster, also marked the 60th anniversary of the first meetings of the General Assembly and Security Council.\nOn 7 March 2006, he presented to the General Assembly his proposals for a fundamental overhaul of the United Nations Secretariat. The reform report is titled \"Investing in the United Nations, For a Stronger Organization Worldwide\".\nOn 30 March 2006, he presented to the General Assembly his analysis and recommendations for updating the entire work programme of the United Nations Secretariat. The reform report is titled \"Mandating and Delivering: Analysis and Recommendations to Facilitate the Review of Mandates\".\nRegarding the UN Human Rights Council, Annan said \"declining credibility\" had \"cast a shadow on the reputation of the United Nations system. Unless we re-make our human rights machinery, we may be unable to renew public confidence in the United Nations itself.\" He believed that, despite its flaws, the council could do good.\nIn March 2000, Annan appointed the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations to assess the shortcomings of the then existing system and to make specific and realistic recommendations for change. The panel was composed of individuals experienced in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The report it produced, which became known as the Brahimi Report, after the chair of the Panel Lakhdar Brahimi, called for \"renewed political commitment on the part of Member States, significant institutional change, and increased financial support\". The Panel further noted that to be effective, UN peacekeeping operations must be adequately resourced and equipped, and operate under clear, credible and achievable mandates. In a letter transmitting the report to the General Assembly and Security Council, Annan stated that the Panel's recommendations were essential to making the United Nations truly credible as a force for peace. Later that same year, the Security Council adopted several provisions relating to peacekeeping following the report, in Resolution 1327.\nMillennium Development Goals.\nIn 2000, Annan issued a report titled \"We the Peoples: the Role of the United Nations in the 21st Century\". The report called for member states to \"put people at the centre of everything we do\": \"No calling is more noble, and no responsibility greater, than that of enabling men, women and children, in cities and villages around the world, to make their lives better.\"\nIn the final chapter of the report, Annan called to \"free our fellow men and women from the abject and dehumanizing poverty in which more than 1\u00a0billion of them are currently confined\".77\nAt the Millennium Summit in September 2000, national leaders adopted the Millennium Declaration, which the United Nations Secretariat subsequently implemented as the Millennium Development Goals in 2001.\nUnited Nations Information Technology Service.\nWithin the \"We the Peoples\" document, Annan suggested the establishment of a United Nations Information Technology Service (UNITeS), a consortium of high-tech volunteer corps, including NetCorps Canada and Net Corps America, which United Nations Volunteers (UNV) would coordinate. In the \"Report of the high-level panel of experts on information and communication technology\", suggesting a UN ICT Task Force, the panel welcomed the establishment of UNITeS. It made suggestions on its configuration and implementation strategy, including that ICT4D volunteering opportunities make mobilising \"national human resources\" (local ICT experts) within developing countries a priority for both men and women. The initiative was launched at the UNV and was active from February 2001 to February 2005. Initiative staff and volunteers participated in the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) in Geneva in December 2003.\nUnited Nations Global Compact.\nIn an address to the World Economic Forum on 31 January 1999, Annan argued that the \"goals of the United Nations and those of business can, indeed, be mutually supportive\" and proposed that the private sector and the United Nations initiate \"a global compact of shared values and principles, which will give a human face to the global market\".\nOn 26 July 2000, the United Nations Global Compact was officially launched at UN headquarters in New York. It is a principle-based framework for businesses which aims to \"[c]atalyse actions in support of broader UN goals, such as the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)\". The Compact established ten core principles in the areas of human rights, labour, the environment and anti-corruption. Under the Compact, companies commit to the ten principles and are brought together with UN agencies, labour groups and civil society to implement them effectively.\nEstablishment of The Global Fund.\nTowards the end of the 1990s, increased awareness of the destructive potential of epidemics such as HIV/AIDS pushed public health issues to the top of the global development agenda. In April 2001, Annan issued a five-point \"Call to Action\" to address the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Stating it was a \"personal priority\", Annan proposed the establishment of a Global AIDS and Health Fund, \"dedicated to the battle against HIV/AIDS and other infectious diseases\", to stimulate the increased international spending needed to help developing countries confront the HIV/AIDS crisis. In June of that year, the General Assembly of the United Nations committed to creating such a fund during a special session on AIDS, and the permanent secretariat of the Global Fund was subsequently established in January 2002.\nResponsibility to Protect.\nFollowing the failure of Annan and the international community to intervene in the genocide in Rwanda and in Srebrenica, Annan asked whether the international community had an obligation in such situations to intervene to protect civilian populations. In a speech to the General Assembly on 20 September 1999, \"to address the prospects for human security and intervention in the next century\", Annan argued that individual sovereignty\u2014the protections afforded by the Declaration of Human Rights and the Charter of the UN\u2014was being strengthened, while the notion of state sovereignty was being redefined by globalisation and international co-operation. As a result, the UN and its member states had to consider a willingness to act to prevent conflict and civilian suffering, a dilemma between \"two concepts of sovereignty\" that Annan also presented in a preceding article in \"The Economist\" on 16 September 1999.\nIn the March 2000 \"Millennium Report\" to the UN, Annan asked: \"If humanitarian intervention is, indeed, an unacceptable assault on sovereignty, how should we respond to a Rwanda, to a Srebrenica \u2013 to gross and systematic violations of human rights that affect every precept of our common humanity?\"\nIn September 2001, the Canadian government established an ad hoc committee to address this balance between state sovereignty and humanitarian intervention. The International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty published its final report in 2001, which focused not on the right of states to intervene but on a responsibility to protect populations at risk. The report moved beyond military intervention, arguing that various diplomatic and humanitarian actions could also be utilised to protect civilian populations.\nIn 2005, Annan included the doctrine of \"Responsibility to Protect\" (RtoP) in his report \"In Larger Freedom\". When the UN General Assembly endorsed that report, it amounted to the first formal endorsement by UN member states of the doctrine of RtoP.\nIraq.\nIn the years after 1998, when UNSCOM was expelled by the government of Saddam Hussein, and during the Iraq disarmament crisis, in which the United States blamed UNSCOM and former IAEA director Hans Blix for failing to disarm Iraq properly, former UNSCOM chief weapons inspector Scott Ritter blamed Annan for being slow and ineffective in enforcing Security Council resolutions on Iraq and being overtly submissive to the demands of the Clinton administration for regime removal and inspection of sites, often presidential palaces, that were not mandated in any resolution and were of questionable intelligence value, severely hampering UNSCOM's ability to co-operate with the Iraqi government and contributing to their expulsion from the country. Ritter also claimed that Annan regularly interfered with the work of the inspectors and diluted the chain of command by trying to micromanage all of the activities of UNSCOM, which caused intelligence processing (and the resulting inspections) to be backed up and caused confusion with the Iraqis as to who was in charge and as a result, they generally refused to take orders from Ritter or Rolf Ek\u00e9us without explicit approval from Annan, which could have taken days, if not weeks. He later believed Annan was oblivious that the Iraqis took advantage of this to delay inspections. He claimed that on one occasion, Annan refused to implement a no-notice inspection of the Iraqi Special Security Organization (SSO) headquarters and instead tried to negotiate access. Still, the negotiation took nearly six weeks, giving the Iraqis more than enough time to clean the site.\nDuring the build-up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq, Annan called on the United States and the United Kingdom not to invade without the support of the United Nations. In a September 2004 interview on the BBC, when questioned about the legal authority for the invasion, Annan said he believed it was not in conformity with the UN charter and was illegal.\nOther diplomatic activities.\nIn 1998, Annan was deeply involved in supporting the transition from military to civilian rule in Nigeria. The following year, he supported the efforts of East Timor to secure independence from Indonesia. In 2000, he was responsible for certifying Israel's withdrawal from Lebanon, and in 2006, he led talks in New York between the presidents of Cameroon and Nigeria, which led to a settlement of the dispute between the two countries over the Bakassi peninsula.\nAnnan and Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad disagreed sharply on Iran's nuclear program, on an Iranian exhibition of cartoons mocking the Holocaust, and on the then-upcoming International Conference to Review the Global Vision of the Holocaust, an Iranian Holocaust denial conference in 2006. During a visit to Iran instigated by continued Iranian uranium enrichment, Annan said: \"I think the tragedy of the Holocaust is an undeniable historical fact and we should really accept that fact and teach people what happened in World War II and ensure it is never repeated\".\nAnnan supported sending a UN peacekeeping mission to Darfur, Sudan. He worked with the government of Sudan to accept a transfer of power from the African Union peacekeeping mission to a UN one. Annan also worked with several Arab and Muslim countries on women's rights and other topics.\nBeginning in 1998, Annan convened an annual UN \"Security Council Retreat\" with the 15 states' council representatives. It was held at the Rockefeller Brothers Fund (RBF) Conference Center at the Rockefeller family estate in Pocantico Hills, New York, and was sponsored by both the RBF and the UN.\nLubbers sexual-harassment investigation.\nIn June 2004, Annan was given a copy of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) report on the complaint brought by four female workers against Ruud Lubbers, UN High Commissioner for Refugees, for sexual harassment, abuse of authority, and retaliation. The report also reviewed a long-serving staff member's allegations of sexual harassment and misconduct against Werner Blatter, director of UNHCR personnel. The investigation found Lubbers guilty of sexual harassment; no mention was made publicly of the other charge against a senior official or two subsequent complaints filed later that year. During the official investigation, Lubbers wrote a letter which some considered a threat to the female worker who had brought the charges. On 15 July 2004, Annan cleared Lubbers of the accusations, saying they were not substantial enough legally. The internal UN\u2013OIOS report on Lubbers was leaked, and sections accompanied by an article by Kate Holt were published in a British newspaper. In February 2005, Lubbers resigned as head of the UN refugee agency, saying he wanted to relieve political pressure on Annan.\nOil-for-Food scandal.\nIn December 2004, reports surfaced that the Secretary-General's son Kojo Annan received payments from the Swiss company Cotecna Inspection SA, which had won a lucrative contract under the UN Oil-for-Food Programme. Kofi Annan called for an investigation to look into the allegations. On 11 November 2005, \"The Sunday Times\" agreed to apologise and pay a substantial sum in damages to Kojo Annan, accepting that the allegations were untrue.\nAnnan appointed the Independent Inquiry Committee, which was led by former US Federal Reserve chairman Paul Volcker, then the director of the United Nations Association of the US. In his first interview with the Inquiry Committee, Annan denied meeting with Cotecna. Later in the inquiry, he recalled having met with Cotecna's chief executive Elie-Georges Massey twice. In a final report issued on 27 October, the committee found insufficient evidence to indict Annan on any illegal actions but did find fault with Benon Sevan, an Armenian-Cypriot national who had worked for the UN for about 40 years. Appointed by Annan to the Oil-For-Food role, Sevan repeatedly asked Iraqis for allocations of oil to the African Middle East Petroleum Company. Sevan's behaviour was \"ethically improper\", Volcker said to reporters. Sevan repeatedly denied the charges and argued that he was being made a \"scapegoat\". The Volcker report was highly critical of the UN management structure and the Security Council oversight. It strongly recommended a new chief operating officer (COO) position to handle the fiscal and administrative responsibilities then under the Secretary-General's office. The report listed the Western and Middle Eastern companies that had benefited illegally from the program.\nNobel Peace Prize.\nIn 2001, its centennial year, the Nobel Committee decided that the Peace Prize was to be divided between the UN and Annan. They were awarded the Peace Prize \"for their work for a better organized and more peaceful world\", having revitalised the UN and prioritised human rights. The Nobel Committee also recognised his commitment to the struggle to contain the spread of HIV in Africa and his declared opposition to international terrorism.\nSoon after Annan was awarded the Peace Prize, he was given a chieftaincy title by the Asantehene of Asanteman. The honour was conferred upon him for his \"[selfless] contributions to humanity and promotion of peace throughout the world\".\nRelations between the United States and the UN.\nAnnan defended his deputy secretary-general Mark Malloch Brown, who openly criticised the United States in a speech on 6 June 2006: \"[T]he prevailing practice of seeking to use the UN almost by stealth as a diplomatic tool while failing to stand up for it against its domestic critics is simply not sustainable. You will lose the UN one way or another. [...] [That] the US is constructively engaged with the UN [...] is not well known or understood, in part because much of the public discourse that reaches the US heartland has been largely abandoned to its loudest detractors such as Rush Limbaugh and Fox News.\" Malloch later said his talk was a \"sincere and constructive critique of U.S. policy toward the U.N. by a friend and admirer\".\nThe talk was unusual because it violated the unofficial policy of not having top officials publicly criticise member nations. The interim US ambassador John Bolton, appointed by President George W. Bush, was reported to have told Annan on the phone: \"I've known you since 1989 and I'm telling you this is the worst mistake by a senior UN official that I have seen in that entire time.\" Observers from other nations supported Malloch's view that conservative politicians in the US prevented many citizens from understanding the benefits of US involvement in the UN.\nFarewell addresses.\nOn 19 September 2006, Annan gave a farewell address to world leaders gathered at the UN headquarters in New York in anticipation of his retirement on 31 December. In the speech, he outlined three major problems of \"an unjust world economy, world disorder, and widespread contempt for human rights and the rule of law\", which he believed \"have not resolved, but sharpened\" during his time as secretary-general. He also pointed to violence in Africa and the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict as two major issues warranting attention.\nOn 11 December 2006, in , delivered at the Harry S. Truman Presidential Library in Independence, Missouri, Annan recalled President Truman's leadership in the founding of the United Nations. He called for the United States to return to Truman's multilateralist foreign policies and to follow Truman's doctrine that \"the responsibility of the great states is to serve and not dominate the peoples of the world\". He also said that the United States must maintain its commitment to human rights, \"including in the struggle against terrorism\".\nPost-UN career.\nAfter he served as UN secretary-general, Annan took up residence in Geneva and worked in a leading capacity on various international humanitarian endeavours.\nKofi Annan Foundation.\nIn 2007, Annan established the Kofi Annan Foundation, an independent, not-for-profit organisation that \"works to promote better global governance and strengthen the capacities of people and countries to achieve a fairer, more secure world\".\nThe organisation was founded on the principles that fair and peaceful societies rest on three pillars: peace and security, sustainable development, and human rights and the rule of law, and they have made it their mission to mobilise the leadership and the political resolve needed to tackle threats to these three pillars ranging from violent conflict to flawed elections and climate change, to achieve \"a fairer, more peaceful world\".\nThe Foundation provides the analytical, communication and co-ordination capacities needed to ensure that these objectives are achieved. Annan's contribution to peace worldwide is delivered through mediation, political mentoring, advocacy and advice. Through his engagement, Annan aimed to strengthen local and international conflict resolution capabilities. The Foundation provides the analytical and logistical support to facilitate this in cooperation with relevant local, regional and international actors. The Foundation works mainly through private diplomacy, with Annan providing informal counsel and participating in discreet diplomatic initiatives to avert or resolve crises. He was often asked to intercede in crises, sometimes as an impartial, independent mediator, sometimes as a special envoy of the international community. In recent years he had provided such counsel to Burkina Faso, Kenya, Myanmar, Senegal, Iraq and Colombia.\nKenya National Dialogue and Reconciliation Process.\nFollowing the outbreak of violence after the 2007 presidential elections in Kenya, the African Union (AU) established the Panel of Eminent African Personalities to assist in finding a peaceful solution to the crisis. Annan was appointed as chair of the panel, to lead it with Benjamin Mkapa, former president of Tanzania; and humanitarian Gra\u00e7a Machel, the former first lady of Mozambique and South Africa.\nThe panel managed to convince the two principal parties to the conflict, Kenyan president Mwai Kibaki's Party of National Unity (PNU) and Raila Odinga's Orange Democratic Movement (ODM), to participate in the Kenya National Dialogue and Reconciliation Process (KNDR). Over the course of 41 days of negotiations, several agreements regarding taking actions to stop the violence and to remedy its consequences were signed. On 28 February, President Kibaki and Prime Minister Odinga signed a coalition government agreement.\nJoint Special Envoy for Syria.\nOn 23 February 2012, Annan was appointed as the UN and Arab League joint special envoy to Syria in an attempt to end the civil war taking place. He developed a six-point plan for peace:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;# commit to work with the Envoy in an inclusive Syrian-led political process to address the legitimate aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people, and, to this end, commit to appoint an empowered interlocutor when invited to do so by the Envoy;\nOn 2 August, he resigned as envoy to Syria, citing the intransigence of both the Assad government and the rebels, as well as the stalemate on the Security Council as preventing any peaceful resolution of the situation. Annan also stated that the lack of international unity and ineffective diplomacy among world leaders had made the peaceful resolution in Syria an impossible task.\nGlobal Commission on Elections, Democracy and Security.\nAnnan served as the chair of the Global Commission on Elections, Democracy and Security. The commission was launched in May 2011 as a joint initiative of the Kofi Annan Foundation and the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance. It comprised 12 eminent individuals from around the world, including Ernesto Zedillo, Martti Ahtisaari, Madeleine Albright and Amartya Sen, and aimed to highlight the importance of the integrity of elections to achieving a more secure, prosperous and stable world. The Commission released its final report, \"Deepening Democracy, a Strategy to Improve the Integrity of Elections Worldwide\", in September 2012.\nRakhine Commission (Myanmar).\nIn September 2016, Annan was asked to lead the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, Myanmar, an impoverished region beset by ethnic conflict and extreme sectarian violence, particularly by Myanmar's Buddhist majority against the Rohingya Muslim minority, further targeted by government forces. The commission, widely known simply as the \"Annan Commission\", was opposed by many Myanmar Buddhists as unwelcome interference in their relations with the Rohingya.\nWhen the Annan Commission released its final report, the week of 24 August 2017, with recommendations unpopular with all sides, violence exploded in the Rohingya conflict \u2013 the largest and bloodiest humanitarian disaster in the region in decades \u2013 driving most of the Rohingya from Myanmar. Annan attempted to engage the United Nations to resolve the matter, but failed.\nAnnan died a week before the first anniversary of the report, shortly after an announcement by a replacement commission that it would not \"point fingers\" at the guilty parties \u2013 leading to widespread concern that the new commission was just a sham to protect culpable Myanmar government officials and citizens from accountability.\nIn 2018, before Annan's death, Myanmar's civilian government, under the direction of State Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi, made a gesture of acceptance of the Annan commission's recommendations by convening another board \u2013 the advisory board for the Committee for Implementation of the Recommendations on Rakhine State \u2013 ostensibly to implement the Annan commission's proposed reforms, but never actually implemented them. Some of the international representatives resigned \u2013 notably the panel's secretary, Thailand's former foreign minister Surakiart Sathirathai, and former US ambassador to the UN Bill Richardson \u2013 decrying the \"implementation\" committee as ineffective, or a \"whitewash\".\nOther activities.\nCorporate boards.\nIn March 2011, Annan became a member of the advisory board for Investcorp Bank B. S. C. Europe, an international private equity firm and sovereign wealth fund owned by the United Arab Emirates. He held the position until 2018.\nAnnan became a member of the Global Advisory Board of Macro Advisory Partners LLP, a risk and strategic consulting firm based in London and New York City for business, finance and government decision-makers, with some operations related to Investcorp.\nNon-profit organisations.\nIn addition to the above, Annan also became involved with several organisations with both global and African focuses, including the following:\nAnnan served as chair of The Elders, a group of independent global leaders who work together on peace and human rights issues. In November 2008, Annan and fellow elders Jimmy Carter and Gra\u00e7a Machel attempted to travel to Zimbabwe to make a first-hand assessment of the humanitarian situation in the country. Refused entry, the Elders instead carried out their assessment from Johannesburg, where they met Zimbabwe- and South Africa-based leaders from politics, business, international organisations, and civil society. In May 2011, following months of political violence in C\u00f4te d'Ivoire, Annan travelled to the country with elders Desmond Tutu and Mary Robinson to encourage national reconciliation. On 16 October 2014, Annan attended the One Young World Summit in Dublin. During a session with fellow elder Mary Robinson, Annan encouraged 1,300 young leaders from 191 countries to lead on intergenerational issues such as climate change and the need for action to take place now, not tomorrow:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We don't have to wait to act. The action must be now. You will come across people who think we should start tomorrow. Even for those who believe action should begin tomorrow, remind them tomorrow begins now, tomorrow begins today, so let's all move forward.\nAnnan chaired the Africa Progress Panel (APP), a group of ten distinguished individuals who advocate at the highest levels for equitable and sustainable development in Africa. As chair, he facilitated coalition building to leverage and broker knowledge, in addition to convening decision-makers to influence policy and create lasting change in Africa. Every year, the Panel releases a report, the Africa Progress Report, which outlines an issue of immediate importance to the continent and suggests a set of associated policies. In 2014, the Report highlighted the potential of African fisheries, agriculture, and forests to drive economic development. The 2015 report explores the role of climate change and the potential of renewable energy investments in determining Africa's economic future.\nPrioritisation of snakebite in the WHO\nKofi Annan played a pivotal role in getting a WHO resolution on halving the burden of snakebite in late 2020's.\nMemoir.\nOn 4 September 2012, Annan with Nader Mousavizadeh wrote a memoir, \"Interventions: A Life in War and Peace\". Published by Penguin Press, the book has been described as a \"personal biography of global statecraft\".\nPersonal life.\nIn 1965, Annan married Titi Alakija, a Nigerian woman from an aristocratic family. Several years later, they had a daughter, Ama, and a son, Kojo. The couple separated in the late 1970s, and divorced in 1983.\nIn 1984, Annan married Nane Lagergren, a Swedish lawyer at the UN and a maternal half-niece of diplomat Raoul Wallenberg. She has a daughter, Nina, from a previous marriage.\nAnnan was fluent in English, French, Akan, and some Kru languages as well as other African languages.\nIn 2002, Annan was enstooled by Otumfuo Nana Osei Tutu II, the Asantehene of Asanteman, as the Busumuru of the Ashanti people - a Ghanaian chief. He was the first person to hold this title.\nDeath and state funeral.\nAnnan died on the morning of 18 August 2018 in Bern, Switzerland, at the age of 80, after a short illness. Ant\u00f3nio Guterres, the UN secretary-general, said that Annan was \"a global champion for peace\" and \"a guiding force for good\". Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad also said he was saddened by the death of Annan. His body was returned to his native Ghana from Geneva in a brief and solemn ceremony at the Kotoka International Airport in Accra, on 10 September. His coffin, draped in the blue UN flag, was accompanied by his widow Nane, his children and senior diplomats from the international organisation.\nOn 13 September, a state funeral was held for Annan in Ghana at the Accra International Conference Centre. The ceremony was attended by several political leaders from across Africa as well as Ghanaian traditional rulers, European royalty and dignitaries from the international community, including the UN secretary-general Ant\u00f3nio Guterres. Prior to the funeral service, his body lay in state in the foyer of the same venue, from 11 to 12 September. A private burial followed the funeral service at the new Military Cemetery at Burma Camp, with full military honours and the sounding of the Last Post by army buglers and a .\nHonours and awards.\nAnnan received numerous awards and accolades including the Nobel Peace Prize in 2001, which he shared with the UN \"for their work for a better organized and more peaceful world.\" He was also awarded the Four Freedoms Award in 2004. Annan declined the U Thant Peace Award in 2006. In 2010, he received the Norman E. Borlaug Medallion from the World Food Prize Foundation for his leadership in global food security. Additionally, he was honored with the Max Schmidheiny Foundation Freedom Prize in 2006.\nMemorials and legacy.\nThe United Nations Postal Administration released a new stamp in memory of Annan on 31 May 2019. His portrait on the stamp was designed by artist Martin M\u00f6rck. The Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre and the Ghana-India Kofi Annan Centre of Excellence in ICT, both in Accra, are named in his honour. The Kofi Annan University of Guinea is named after him. The Kofi Annan Institute for Global Citizenship at Macalester College is named after him as well.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nSpeeches\nLectures"}
{"id": "16846", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16846", "title": "Kentucky", "text": "U.S. state\nKentucky (, ), officially the Commonwealth of Kentucky, is a landlocked state in the Southeastern region of the United States. It borders Illinois, Indiana, and Ohio to the north, West Virginia to the northeast, Virginia to the east, Tennessee to the south, and Missouri to the west. Its northern border is defined by the Ohio River. Its capital is Frankfort and its most populous city is Louisville. As of 2024, the state's population was approximately 4.6 million.\nPreviously a part of colonial Virginia, Kentucky was admitted into the Union as the fifteenth state on June 1, 1792. It is known as the \"Bluegrass State\" in reference to Kentucky bluegrass, a species of grass introduced by European settlers, which has long supported the state's thoroughbred horse industry.\nThe fertile soil in the central and western parts of the state led to the development of large tobacco plantations similar to those in Virginia and North Carolina, which utilized enslaved labor prior to the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment. Kentucky ranks fifth nationally in goat farming, eighth in beef cattle production, and fourteenth in corn production. While Kentucky has been a long-standing center for the tobacco industry, its economy has diversified into non-agricultural sectors including auto manufacturing, energy production, and medicine. Kentucky ranks fourth among US states in the number of automobiles and trucks assembled. It is one of several states considered part of the Upland South.\nThe state is home to the world's longest known cave system in Mammoth Cave National Park, the greatest length of navigable waterways and streams in the contiguous United States, and the nation's two largest artificial lakes east of the Mississippi River. Cultural aspects of Kentucky include horse racing, bourbon, moonshine, coal mining, My Old Kentucky Home State Park, automobile manufacturing, tobacco, Southern cuisine, barbecue, bluegrass music, college basketball, Louisville Slugger baseball bats, and Kentucky Fried Chicken.\nEtymology.\nPrior to 1769, Botetourt County and successor counties in the Colony of Virginia, whose geographical extent was south of the Ohio and Allegheny Rivers beyond the Appalachian Mountains, became known to European Americans as \"Kentucky (or Kentucke) country\". It was named for the Kentucky River, a tributary of the Ohio.\nThe precise etymology of the name is uncertain. One theory sees the word based on an Iroquoian name meaning \"(on) the meadow\" or \"(on) the prairie\" (cf. Mohawk ', Seneca ' (phonemic ), \"at the field\"). Another theory suggests a derivation from the term ', which could have come from an Algonquian language, in particular from Shawnee. Folk etymology translates this as \"Land of Our Fathers\". The closest approximation in another Algonquian language, Ojibwe, translates as \"Land of Our In-Laws\", thus making a fairer English translation \"The Land of Those Who Became Our Fathers\". In any case, the word ' means \"land\" in most Algonquian languages.\nHistory.\nNative American settlement.\nThe first archaeological evidence of human occupation of Kentucky is approximately 9500 BCE, and it was Clovis culture, primitive hunter-gatherers with stone tools. Around 1800 BCE, a gradual transition began from a hunter-gatherer economy to agriculturalism. Around 900 CE, a Mississippian culture took root in western and central Kentucky and a Fort Ancient culture appeared in eastern Kentucky. While the two had many similarities, the distinctive ceremonial earthwork mounds constructed in the former's centers were not part of the culture of the latter. Fort Ancient settlements depended largely on corn, beans, and squash, and practiced a system of agriculture that prevented ecological degradation by rotating crops, burning sections of forest to create ideal habitat for wild game, relocating villages every 10\u201330 years, and continually shifting the location of fields to maintain plots of land in various stages of ecological succession.\nIn about the 10th century, the Kentucky native people's variety of corn became highly productive, supplanting the Eastern Agricultural Complex and replacing it with maize-based agriculture in the Mississippian era. As of the 16th century, what became Kentucky was home to tribes from diverse linguistic groups. The Kispoko, an Algonquian-speaking tribe, controlled much of the interior of the state.\nFrench explorers in the 17th century documented numerous tribes living in Kentucky until the Beaver Wars in the 1670s; however, by the time that European colonial explorers and settlers began entering Kentucky in greater numbers in the mid-18th century, there were no major Native American settlements in the region.\nThe Chickasaw had territory up to the confluence of Mississippi and Ohio rivers. During a period known as the Beaver Wars (1640\u20131680), another Algonquian tribe called the Maumee, or Mascouten was chased out of southern Michigan. The vast majority of them moved to Kentucky, pushing the Kispoko east and war broke out with the Tutelo of North Carolina and Virginia that pushed them further north and east. The Maumee were closely related to the Miami from Indiana. Later, the Kispoko merged with the Shawnee, who migrated from the east and the Ohio River valley.\nA persistent myth, perpetuated in many popular and scholarly works, alleges that Native Americans never lived permanently in Kentucky, but rather used it only as a \"hunting ground\". According to early Kentucky historians, early European settlers encountered extensive evidence of permanent, advanced settlements, including numerous burial mounds, copper and stone artifacts, and what early historians describe as \"fortifications:\" large sites consisting of extensive walls enclosing the flat tops of bluffs, cliffs or mountains, constructed from stone that was quarried in the surrounding valleys and brought up to the summit. These sites and artifacts were sometimes explained as being the remnants of a \"lost\" white race, or some variously identified ethnic group predating and distinct from the Native Americans. More recent scholarship identifies the mound builders as the Mississippian and Fort Ancient peoples, which were distinct from the indigenous cultures encountered by settlers, although sharing the same origin in Paleoindian groups that inhabited the area for at least 12,000 years.\nBeginning in the seventeenth century, before indigenous groups in Kentucky made direct contact with Europeans, articles of European origin such as glass beads entered the region via trade routes, and the appearance of mass graves suggests that European diseases were also introduced. By the eighteenth century, epidemics of disease had destabilized and changed the indigenous groups that inhabited Kentucky, causing some to reassemble into multi-tribal towns, and others to disperse further from the sphere of European influence. Around the end of the French and Indian War, as European settlers began to claim parts of the Bluegrass State, Native Americans abandoned their larger, more permanent villages south of the Ohio River and continued to maintain only small or transient settlements. This upheaval likely led the settlers to believe that Kentucky was a hunting ground contested by multiple tribes but not permanently inhabited, when in reality it had only recently been abandoned due to social and political turmoil.\nEarly explorations: the discovery of Kentucky.\nEuropean explorers arrived in Kentucky possibly as early as 1671. While French explorers surely spied Kentucky during expeditions on the Mississippi, there is no evidence French or Spanish explorers set foot in the lands south of the Ohio, notwithstanding speculations about Hernando de Soto and Robert de la Salle. The terrain in those days was not surveyed, so there is some uncertainty whether and to what extent the early English explorers out of Virginia set foot on the land. Confounding the issue is that the region south of the Ohio/Allegheny later known as \"Kentucky country\" was larger than the state of Kentucky today, encompassing most of today's West Virginia and (vaguely) part of southwestern Pennsylvania. Notable expeditions were Batts and Fallam 1671, Needham and Arthur 1673. Thomas Walker and surveyor Christopher Gist surveyed the area now known as Kentucky in 1750 and 1751.\nEuropean settlement: The Treaty of Fort Stanwix 1768.\nAs more settlers entered the area, warfare broke out with the Native Americans over their traditional hunting grounds.\nJune 16, 1774, James Harrod founded Harrod's Town (modern Harrodsburg). The settlement was abandoned during the conflict period of Dunmore's War, and resettled in March 1775, becoming the first permanent European settlement in Kentucky. It was followed within months by Boone's Station, Logan's Fort and Lexington before Kentucky was organized.\nThis period was the time of Daniel Boone's legendary expeditions starting in 1767 through the Cumberland Gap and down the Kentucky River to reach the bluegrass heartland of Kentucky.\nWhile the Cherokee did not settle in Kentucky, they hunted there. They relinquished their hunting rights there in an extra-legal private contract with speculator Richard Henderson called \"Treaty of Sycamore Shoals\" in 1775.\nKentucky County and the Cherokee-American wars.\nOn December 31, 1776, by an act of the Virginia General Assembly, the portion of Fincastle County west of the Big Sandy River (including today's Tug Fork tributary) terminating at the North Carolina border (today Tennessee) extending to the Mississippi River, previously most of what was known as \"Kentucky (or Kentucke) country\", was split off into its own county of Kentucky. Harrod's Town (Oldtown as it was known at the time) was named the county seat.\nA 1790 U.S. government report states that 1,500Kentucky settlers had been killed by Native Americans since the end of the Revolutionary War.\nStatehood.\nThe county was subdivided into Jefferson, Lincoln and Fayette Counties in 1780, but continued to be administered as the District of Kentucky even as new counties were split off.\nOn several occasions the region's residents petitioned the General Assembly and the Confederation Congress for separation from Virginia and statehood. Ten constitutional conventions were held in Danville between 1784 and 1792.\nOne petition, which had Virginia's assent, came before the Confederation Congress in early July 1788. Unfortunately, its consideration came up a day after word of New Hampshire's all-important ninth ratification of the proposed Constitution, thus establishing it as the new framework of governance for the United States. In light of this development, Congress thought that it would be \"unadvisable\" to admit Kentucky into the Union, as it could do so \"under the Articles of Confederation\" only, but not \"under the Constitution\", and so declined to take action.\nOn December 18, 1789, Virginia again gave its consent to Kentucky statehood. The United States Congress gave its approval on February 4, 1791. (This occurred two weeks before Congress approved Vermont's petition for statehood.) Kentucky officially became the fifteenth state in the Union on June 1, 1792. Isaac Shelby, a military veteran from Virginia, was elected its first Governor.\nPost-colonial plantation economy.\nThe central Bluegrass region and the western portion of the state were the areas with the most slave owners. Planters cultivated tobacco and hemp on plantations with the use of slave labor, and were noted for their quality livestock. During the 19th century, Kentucky slaveholders began to sell unneeded slaves to the Deep South, with Louisville becoming a major slave market and departure port for slaves being transported down the Ohio River.\nThe Civil War.\nKentucky was a heavily divided slave state during the American Civil War. Though the state had dueling Union and Confederate state governments, Kentucky was never an official component of the Confederacy. Kentucky was one of the Southern border states during the war, and it remained neutral within the Union. Despite this, representatives from 68 of 110 counties met at Russellville calling themselves the \"Convention of the People of Kentucky\" and passed an Ordinance of Secession on November 20, 1861. They established a Confederate government of Kentucky with its capital in Bowling Green, and Kentucky was officially admitted into the Confederacy on December 10, 1861, as the 13th Confederate state with full recognition in Richmond. The Confederate shadow government was never popularly elected statewide, though 116 delegates were sent representing 68 Kentucky counties which at the time made up a little over half the territory of the commonwealth to the Russellville Convention in 1861, and were occupied and governed by the Confederacy at some point in the duration of the war, and Kentucky had full representation within the Confederate Government. Although Confederate forces briefly controlled Frankfort, they were expelled by Union forces before a Confederate government could be installed in the state capital. After the expulsion of Confederate forces after the Battle of Perryville, this government operated in-exile. Though it existed throughout the war, Kentucky's provisional government only had governing authority in areas of Kentucky under direct Confederate control and had very little effect on the events in the commonwealth or in the war once they were driven out of the state.\nKentucky remained officially \"neutral\" throughout the war due to the Southern Unionists sympathies of a majority of the commonwealth's citizens who were split between the struggle of Kentucky's sister Southern States fully in the Confederate States of America and a continued loyalty to the Unionist cause that was prevalent in other areas of the South such as in East Tennessee, West Virginia, Western North Carolina, and others. Despite this, some 21st-century Kentuckians observe Confederate Memorial Day on Confederate leader Jefferson Davis' birthday, June 3, and participate in Confederate battle re-enactments. Both Davis and U.S. president Abraham Lincoln were born in Kentucky. John C. Breckinridge, the 14th and youngest-ever Vice President was born in Lexington, Kentucky at Cabell's Dale Farm. Breckenridge was expelled from the U. S. Senate for his support of the Confederacy.\nHenry W. Grady, editor of the Atlanta Constitution, coined the term \"New South\" in 1874, urging transformation from an agrarian economy to a modern industrial one.\nReconstruction and the \"New South\".\nOn January 30, 1900, Governor William Goebel, flanked by two bodyguards, was mortally wounded by an assassin while walking to the State Capitol in downtown Frankfort. Goebel was contesting the Kentucky gubernatorial election of 1899, which William S. Taylor was initially believed to have won. For several months, J. C. W. Beckham, Goebel's running mate, and Taylor fought over who was the legal governor until the Supreme Court of the United States ruled in May in favor of Beckham. After fleeing to Indiana, Taylor was indicted as a co-conspirator in Goebel's assassination. Goebel is the only governor of a U.S. state to have been assassinated while in office.\nThe Black Patch Tobacco Wars, a vigilante action, occurred in Western Kentucky in the early 20th century. As a result of the tobacco industry monopoly, tobacco farmers in the area were forced to sell their crops at prices that were too low. Many local farmers and activists united in a refusal to sell their crops to the major tobacco companies.\nAn Association meeting occurred in downtown Guthrie, where a vigilante wing of \"Night Riders\", formed. The riders terrorized farmers who sold their tobacco at the low prices demanded by the tobacco corporations. They burned several tobacco warehouses throughout the area, stretching as far west as Hopkinsville to Princeton. In the later period of their operation, they were known to physically assault farmers who broke the boycott. Governor Augustus E. Willson declared martial law and deployed the Kentucky National Guard to end the wars.\nGeography.\nKentucky is situated in the Upland South. A significant portion of eastern Kentucky is part of Appalachia.\nKentucky borders seven states, from the Midwest and the Southeast. West Virginia lies to the northeast, Virginia to the east, Tennessee to the south, Missouri to the west, Illinois to the northwest, and Indiana and Ohio to the north. Only Missouri and Tennessee, both of which border eight states, touch more.\nKentucky's northern border is formed by the north shore of the Ohio River and its western border by the Mississippi River; however, the official border is based on the courses of the rivers as they existed when Kentucky became a state in 1792. For instance, northbound travelers on U.S. 41 from Henderson, after crossing the Ohio River, will be in Kentucky for about . Ellis Park, a thoroughbred racetrack, is located in this small piece of Kentucky. Waterworks Road is part of the only land border between Indiana and Kentucky.\nKentucky has a non-contiguous part known as Kentucky Bend, at the far west corner of the state. It exists as an exclave surrounded completely by Missouri and Tennessee, and is included in the boundaries of Fulton County. Road access to this small part of Kentucky on the Mississippi River (populated by 18 people as of 2010[ [update]]) requires traveling through Tennessee.\nThe epicenter of the 1811\u201312 New Madrid earthquakes was near this area, causing the Mississippi River to flow backwards in some places. Though the series of quakes changed the area geologically and affected the small number of inhabitants of the area at the time, the Kentucky Bend is the result of a surveying error, not the New Madrid earthquake.\nRegions.\nKentucky can be divided into five primary regions: the Cumberland Plateau in the east, which is wholly underlain by coal and constitutes the Eastern Coal Field; the north-central Bluegrass region, where the major cities and the capital are located; the south-central and western Pennyroyal Plateau (a Mississippian-age plateau that is divided into eastern, central and western sub-regions, the latter known as the Pennyrile); the Western Coal Field; and the far-western Jackson Purchase, the northernmost extension of the Mississippian Embayment, west and south of the Tennessee River.\nThe Bluegrass region is commonly divided into two regions, the Inner Bluegrass encircling around Lexington, and the Outer Bluegrass that contains most of the northern portion of the state, above the Knobs. Much of the outer Bluegrass is in the Eden Shale Hills sub-region, made up of short, steep, and very narrow hills. The alluvial plain of the Ohio River is another geological region, as is the area south and east of Pine Mountain, part of the Ridge and Valley Belt of Appalachia.\nClimate.\nMost of Kentucky has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfa\"), with small Appalachian highland areas of the southeast of the state having an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\"). Temperatures in Kentucky usually range from daytime summer highs of to the winter low of . The average precipitation is a year. Kentucky has four distinct seasons, with substantial variations in the severity of summer and winter. The state's highest recorded temperature was in Greensburg on July 28, 1930, while its lowest recorded temperature was in Shelbyville on January 19, 1994. The state seldom experiences the extreme cold of far northern states or the high heat of the states in the Deep South; temperatures rarely drop below zero degrees Fahrenheit or rise above 100 degrees. Rain and snowfall averages about 45 inches per year.\nThe climate varies markedly within the state. The northern parts tend to be about five degrees cooler than those in the western parts of the state. Somerset in the south-central part receives ten more inches of rain per year than Covington to the north. Average temperatures for the entire state range from the low 30s in January to the high 80s in mid-July. The annual average temperature varies from : of in the far north as an average annual temperature and of in the extreme southwest.\nIn general, Kentucky has relatively hot, humid, rainy summers, and moderately cold and rainy winters. Mean maximum temperatures in July vary from ; the mean minimum July temperatures are . In January the mean maximum temperatures range from ; the mean minimum temperatures range from . Temperature means vary with northern and far-eastern mountain regions averaging five degrees cooler year-round, compared to the relatively warmer areas of the southern and western regions of the state. Precipitation varies north to south with the north averaging of , and the south averaging of . Days per year below the freezing point vary from about sixty days in the southwest to more than a hundred days in the far-north and far-east.\nLakes and rivers.\nKentucky has the second-most navigable miles of water among U.S. states, second to Alaska.\nKentucky is the only state to have a continuous border of rivers running along three of its sides\u00a0\u2013 the Mississippi River to the west, the Ohio River to the north, and the Big Sandy River and Tug Fork to the east. Its major internal rivers include the Kentucky River, Tennessee River, Cumberland River, Green River, and Licking River.\nThough it has only three major natural lakes, Kentucky is home to many artificial lakes. It has the largest artificial lakes east of the Mississippi in both water volume (Lake Cumberland) and surface area (Kentucky Lake). Kentucky Lake's of shoreline, of water surface, and of flood storage are the most of any lake in the Tennessee Valley Authority system.\nKentucky's of streams provides one of the most expansive and complex stream systems in the nation.\nNatural environment and conservation.\nKentucky hosts multiple habitats with a high number of endemic species, including some of the most extensive cave systems in the world. 102 known species are endemic to the state. The Bluegrass region, which is believed to have once been a lush open woodland environment similar to oak savanna with abundant thickets of river cane, a species of bamboo, was once described by E. Lucy Braun as having the most \"anomalous\" plant life of the whole Eastern United States. Kentucky's natural environment has suffered greatly from destructive human activities that began after European colonization, particularly the conversion of natural habitat to farmland and coal mining.\nKentucky has an expansive park system, which includes one national park, two National Recreation Areas, two National Historic Parks, two national forests, two National Wildlife Refuges, 45 state parks, of state forest, and 82 wildlife management areas.\nKentucky has been part of two of the most successful wildlife reintroduction projects in United States history. In the winter of 1997, the Kentucky Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources began to re-stock elk in the state's eastern counties, which had been extirpated from the area for over 150 years. As of 2009[ [update]], the herd had reached the project goal of 10,000 animals, making it the largest herd east of the Mississippi River.\nThe state stocked wild turkeys in the 1950s, after reportedly having fewer than 900. Once nearly extinct, wild turkeys thrive throughout Kentucky. Hunters reported a record 29,006 birds taken during the 23-day season in spring 2009.\nIn 1991 the Land Between the Lakes partnered with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service for the Red Wolf Recovery Program, a captive breeding program.\nAdministrative divisions.\nCounties.\nKentucky is subdivided into 120 counties, the largest being Pike County at , and the most populous being Jefferson County (which coincides with the Louisville Metro governmental area) with 772,144 residents as of 2023[ [update]].\nCounty government, under the Kentucky Constitution of 1891, is vested in the County Judge/Executive, (formerly called the County Judge) who serves as the executive head of the county, and a legislature called a Fiscal Court. Despite the unusual name, the Fiscal Court no longer has judicial functions.\nConsolidated city-county governments.\nKentucky's two most populous counties, Jefferson and Fayette, have their governments consolidated with the governments of their largest cities. \"Louisville-Jefferson County Government\" (Louisville Metro) and \"Lexington-Fayette Urban County Government\" (Lexington Metro) are unique in that their city councils and county Fiscal Court structures have been merged into a single entity with a single chief executive, the Metro Mayor and Urban County Mayor, respectively. Although the counties still exist as subdivisions of the state, in reference the names Louisville and Lexington are used to refer to the entire area coextensive with the former cities and counties.\nMajor cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Metro Louisville government area has a 2018 population of 1,298,990. Under United States Census Bureau methodology, the population of Louisville was 623,867. The latter figure is the population of the so-called \"balance\"\u00a0\u2013 the parts of Jefferson County that were either unincorporated or within the City of Louisville before the formation of the merged government in 2003. In 2018 the Louisville Combined Statistical Area (CSA) had a population of 1,569,112; including 1,209,191 in Kentucky, which means more than 25% of the state's population now lives in the Louisville CSA. Since 2000, over one-third of the state's population growth has occurred in the Louisville CSA. In addition, the top 28 wealthiest places in Kentucky are in Jefferson County and seven of the 15 wealthiest counties in the state are located in the Louisville CSA.\nThe state's second-largest city is Lexington with a 2018 census population of 323,780, its metro had a population of 516,697, and its CSA, which includes the Frankfort and Richmond statistical areas, having a population of 746,310. The Northern Kentucky area, which comprises the seven Kentucky counties in the Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky metropolitan area, had a population of 447,457 in 2018. The metropolitan areas of Louisville, Lexington, and Northern Kentucky have a combined population of 2,402,958 as of 2018[ [update]], which is 54% of the state's total population on only about 19% of the state's land. This area is often referred to as the Golden triangle as it contains a majority of the state's wealth, population, population growth, and economic growth, it is where most of the state's largest cities by population are located. It is referred to as the Golden triangle as the metro areas of Lexington, Louisville, and Northern Kentucky/Cincinnati outline a triangle shape. Interstates I-71, I-75, and I-64 form the triangle shape. Additionally, all counties in Kentucky that are part of an MSA or CSA have a total population of 2,970,694, which is 67% of the state's population.\nAs of 2017[ [update]] Bowling Green had a population of 67,067, making it the third most populous city in the state. The Bowling Green metropolitan area had an estimated population of 174,835; and the combined statistical area it shares with Glasgow has an estimated population of 228,743.\nThe two other fast-growing urban areas in Kentucky are the Bowling Green area and the \"Tri-Cities Region\" of southeastern Kentucky, comprising Somerset, London and Corbin.\nAlthough only one town in the \"Tri-Cities\" (Somerset) currently has more than 12,000 people, the area has been experiencing heightened population and job growth since the 1990s. Growth has been especially rapid in Laurel County, which outgrew areas such as Scott and Jessamine counties around Lexington or Shelby and Nelson Counties around Louisville. London significantly grew in population in the 2000s, from 5,692 in 2000 to 7,993 in 2010. London landed a Wal-Mart distribution center in 1997, bringing thousands of jobs to the community.\nIn northeast Kentucky, the greater Ashland area is an important transportation, manufacturing, and medical center. Iron and petroleum production, as well as the transport of coal by rail and barge, have been historical pillars of the region's economy. Due to a decline in the area's industrial base, Ashland has seen a sizable reduction in its population since 1990; however, the population of the area has since stabilized with the medical service industry taking a greater role in the local economy. The Ashland area, including the counties of Boyd and Greenup, is part of the Huntington-Ashland, WV-KY-OH, Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). As of the 2000 census, the MSA had a population of 288,649. More than 21,000 of those people (as of 2010[ [update]]) reside within the city limits of Ashland.\nThe largest county in Kentucky by area is Pike, which contains Pikeville and suburb Coal Run Village. The county and surrounding area is the most populated region in the state that is not part of a Micropolitan Statistical Area or a Metropolitan Statistical Area containing nearly 200,000 people in five counties: Floyd County, Martin County, Letcher County, and neighboring Mingo County, West Virginia. Pike County contains slightly more than 68,000 people.\nOnly three U.S. states have capitals with smaller populations than Kentucky's Frankfort (pop. 25,527): Augusta, Maine (pop. 18,560), Pierre, South Dakota (pop. 13,876), and Montpelier, Vermont (pop. 8,035).\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe United States Census Bureau determined that the population of Kentucky was 4,505,836 in 2020, increasing since the 2010 United States census.\nAs of July 1, 2016, Kentucky had an estimated population of 4,436,974, which is an increase of 12,363 from the prior year and an increase of 97,607, or 2.2%, since the year 2010. This includes a natural increase since the last census of 73,541 people (that is 346,968 births minus 273,427 deaths) and an increase due to net migration of 26,135 people into the state. Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 40,051 people, and migration within the country produced a net decrease of 13,916 people. As of 2015[ [update]], Kentucky's population included about 149,016 foreign-born persons (3.4%). In 2016 the population density of the state was . Mexico, India, Cuba, China, and Guatemala are the top five countries of origin for Kentucky's immigrants.\nKentucky's population has grown every decade since records began, though during most decades of the 20th century there was net out-migration from the state. Since 1900, rural Kentucky counties have suffered a net loss of more than a million people to migration, while urban areas have experienced a slight net gain.\nKentucky's center of population is in Washington County, in the city of Willisburg.\nAccording to HUD's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 3,984 homeless people in Kentucky.\nLife expectancy in Kentucky was 72.5 years in 2021.\nRace and ancestry.\nAccording to U.S. Census Bureau official statistics, the state's largest ancestry in 2013 was American, totalling 20.2%. In 1980, before the status of ethnic American was an available option on the official census, the largest claimed ancestries in the commonwealth were English (49.6%), Irish (26.3%), and German (24.2%). In the urban counties of Jefferson, Oldham, Fayette, Boone, Kenton, and Campbell, German is the largest reported ancestry. Americans of Scotch-Irish and English ancestry are present throughout the entire state. Many residents claim Irish ancestry on account of Scotch-Irish (Ulster Scots) descent. In the 1980s, the only counties in the United States where over half of the population cited \"English\" as their only ancestry group were in eastern Kentucky.\nIn the 2000 census, some 20,000 people (0.49%) in the state self-identified as Native American. The state has no federally recognized tribes or state-recognized tribes.\nAfrican-Americans, who were mostly enslaved at the time, made up 25% of Kentucky's population before the Civil War; they were held and worked primarily in the central Bluegrass region, an area of hemp and tobacco cultivation, as well as raising blooded livestock. The number of African Americans living in Kentucky declined during the 20th century amid the Great Migration; today, 8% of the state's total population is African-American. The state's African-American population is highly urbanized, with 44.2% living in Jefferson County and 52% living in the broader Louisville metropolitan area. Other areas with high concentrations include Christian and Fulton counties and the cities of Paducah and Lexington.\nThe Hispanic and Asian populations in Kentucky are small but have grown significantly since the late 20th century. Most of Kentucky's Hispanic residents are of Mexican ancestry, while most of Kentucky's Asian residents are of Chinese and Indian heritage. There is also a Vietnamese community in Lexington and Louisville, and Vietnamese, Cambodian, and Lao populations in Bowling Green.\nLanguage.\nIn 2000, 96% of all residents of the state five years old and older spoke only English at home, a small decrease from 98% in 1990. Speech patterns in the state generally reflect the first settlers' Virginia backgrounds. South Midland features are best preserved in the mountains, with Southern in most other areas of Kentucky, but some common to Midland and Southern are widespread. After a vowel, the /r/ may be weak or missing. For instance, \"Coop\" has the vowel of \"put\", but the root rhymes with \"boot\". In southern Kentucky, earthworms are called \"redworms\", a burlap bag is known as a \"tow sack\" or the \"Southern grass sack\", and green beans are called \"snap beans\". In Kentucky English, a young man may \"carry\", not escort, his girlfriend to a party.\nSpanish is the second-most-spoken language in Kentucky, after English.\nReligion.\nAs of 2010[ [update]], the Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA) reported the following groupings of Kentucky's 4,339,367 residents:\nBeing a Southern state in the Bible Belt, Kentucky is predominantly Christian and is home to several seminaries. Southern Baptist Theological Seminary in Louisville is the principal seminary for the Southern Baptist Convention. Louisville is the home of the Louisville Presbyterian Theological Seminary, an institution of the Presbyterian Church (USA). Lexington has one seminary, Lexington Theological Seminary (affiliated with the Disciples of Christ). The Baptist Seminary of Kentucky is located on the campus of Georgetown College in Georgetown. Asbury Theological Seminary, a multi-denominational seminary in the Methodist tradition, is located in nearby Wilmore.\nIn addition to seminaries, there are several colleges affiliated with denominations:\nLouisville is home to the Cathedral of the Assumption, the third-oldest Catholic cathedral in continuous use in the United States. The city holds the headquarters of the Presbyterian Church (USA) and their printing press. Reflecting late 19th, 20th and 21st-century immigration from different countries, Louisville also has Jewish, Muslim, and Hindu communities.\nIn 1996 the Center for Interfaith Relations established the Festival of Faiths, the first and oldest annual interfaith festival to be held in the United States.\nThe Christian creationist apologetics group, Answers in Genesis, along with its Creation Museum, is headquartered in Petersburg, Kentucky.\nEconomy.\nEarly in its history, Kentucky gained recognition for its excellent farming conditions. It was the site of the first commercial winery in the United States (started in present-day Jessamine County in 1799) and due to the high calcium content of the soil in the Bluegrass region quickly became a major horse breeding (and later racing) area.\nIn 2006, Kentucky ranked 5th nationally in goat farming, 8th in beef cattle production, and 14th in corn production. Kentucky has been a long-standing major center of the tobacco industry\u00a0\u2013 both as a center of business and tobacco farming.\nKentucky's economy has expanded to in non-agricultural terms as well, especially auto manufacturing, energy fuel production, and medical facilities.\nKentucky ranked 4th among U.S. states in the number of automobiles and trucks assembled in 2003.\nKentucky has historically been a major coal producer, but the industry has been in decline since the 1980s, and the number employed dropped by more than half between 2011 and 2015.\nAs of 2010[ [update]], 24% of electricity produced in the U.S. depended on either enriched uranium rods coming from the Paducah Gaseous Diffusion Plant (the only domestic site of low-grade uranium enrichment), or from the 107,000 tons of coal extracted from the state's two coal fields (which combined produce 4% percent of the electricity in the US).\nKentucky produces 95% of the world's supply of bourbon whiskey, and the number of barrels of bourbon being aged in Kentucky (more than 5.7million) exceeds the state's population. Bourbon has been a growing market\u00a0\u2013 with production of Kentucky bourbon rising 170 percent between 1999 and 2015. In 2019 the state had more than fifty distilleries for bourbon production.\nKentucky exports reached $22.1billion in 2012, with products and services going to 199 countries.\nFort Knox, a United States Army post best known as the site of the United States Bullion Depository, which is used to house a large portion of the United States official gold reserves, is located in Kentucky between Louisville and Elizabethtown. In May 2010, the Army Human Resource Center of Excellence, the largest office building in the state at nearly opened at Fort Knox. The complex employs nearly 4,300 soldiers and civilians.\nKentucky contains two of the twenty U.S. Federal Penitentiaries: USP Big Sandy (in the east in Martin County near Inez) and USP McCreary (in the south in McCreary County in the Daniel Boone National Forest).\nThe total gross state product for 2020 was $213billion. In 2023, the per capita personal income in Kentucky was 55,360 U.S. dollars. As of March 2024, the state's unemployment rate is 4.5%.\nTaxation.\nTax is collected by the Kentucky Department of Revenue. Kentucky has a flat 4% individual income tax rate. The sales tax rate in Kentucky is 6%.\nKentucky has a broadly based classified property tax system. All classes of property, unless exempted by the Constitution, are taxed by the state, although at widely varying rates. Many of these classes are exempted from taxation by local government. Of the classes that are subject to local taxation, three have special rates set by the General Assembly, one by the Kentucky Supreme Court and the remaining classes are subject to the full local rate, which includes the tax rate set by the local taxing bodies plus all voted levies. Real property is assessed on 100% of the fair market value and property taxes are due by December 31. Once the primary source of state and local government revenue, property taxes now account for only about 6% of the Kentucky's annual General Fund revenues.\nUntil January 1, 2006, Kentucky imposed a tax on intangible personal property held by a taxpayer on January1 of each year. The Kentucky intangible tax was repealed under House Bill 272. Intangible property consisted of any property or investment that represents evidence of value or the right to value. Some types of intangible property included: bonds, notes, retail repurchase agreements, accounts receivable, trusts, enforceable contracts sale of real estate (land contracts), money in hand, money in safe deposit boxes, annuities, interests in estates, loans to stockholders, and commercial paper.\nIn 2023, Kentucky launched a regulated local and online sports betting industry. Taxing sportsbooks at 9.75% (in person) and 14.25% (online), the first two months of action saw the state collect $7.94 million.\nTourism.\nTourism has become an increasingly important part of the Kentucky economy. In 2019 tourism grew to $7.6billion in economic impact. Key attractions include horse racing with events like the Kentucky Derby and the Keeneland Fall and Spring Meets, bourbon distillery tours, including along the Kentucky Bourbon Trail and Louisville Urban Bourbon Trail, and natural attractions such as the state's many lakes and parks to include Mammoth Cave, Lake Cumberland and Red River Gorge.\nThe state also has several religious destinations such as the Creation Museum and Ark Encounter of Answers in Genesis.\nIn December 2002, the Kentucky governor Paul E. Patton unveiled the state slogan \"It's that friendly\", in the hope of drawing more people into the state based on the idea of southern hospitality. Though it was meant to embrace southern values, many Kentuckians rejected the slogan as cheesy and generic. It was seen that the slogan did not encourage tourism as much as initially hoped for.\nIn 2004, then Governor Ernie Fletcher launched a comprehensive branding campaign with the hope of making the state's $12\u201314million advertising budget more effective. The resulting \"Unbridled Spirit\" brand was the result of a $500,000 contract with New West, a Kentucky-based public relations advertising and marketing firm, to develop a viable brand and tag line. The Fletcher administration aggressively marketed the brand in both the public and private sectors. Since that time, the \"Welcome to Kentucky\" signs at border areas have an \"Unbridled Spirit\" symbol on them.\nHorse industry.\nHorse racing has long been associated with Kentucky. Churchill Downs, the home of the Derby, is a large venue with a capacity exceeding 165,000. The track hosts multiple events throughout the year and is a significant draw to the city of Louisville. Keeneland Race Course, in Lexington, hosts two major meets, the Spring and Fall running. Beyond hosting races Keeneland also hosts a significant horse auction drawing buyers from around the world. In 2019 $360million was spent on the September Yearling sale. The Kentucky Horse Park in Georgetown hosts multiple events throughout the year, including international equestrian competitions and also offers horseback riding from April to October.\nEducation.\nKentucky maintains eight public four-year universities. There are two general tiers: major research institutions (the University of Kentucky and the University of Louisville) and regional universities, which encompass the remaining six schools. The regional schools have specific target counties that many of their programs are targeted towards (such as Forestry at Eastern Kentucky University or Cave Management at Western Kentucky University), however, most of their curriculum varies little from any other public university.\nThe University of Kentucky (UK) and the University of Louisville (UofL) have the highest academic rankings and admissions standards although the regional schools are not without their national recognized departments\u00a0\u2013 examples being Western Kentucky University's nationally ranked Journalism Department or Morehead State University offering one of the nation's only Space Science degrees. UK is the flagship and land grant of the system and has agriculture extension services in every county. The two research schools split duties related to the medical field, UK handles all medical outreach programs in the eastern half of the state while UofL does all medical outreach in the state's western half.\nThe state's sixteen public two-year colleges have been governed by the Kentucky Community and Technical College System since the passage of the Postsecondary Education Improvement Act of 1997, commonly referred to as House Bill 1. Before the passage of House Bill 1, most of these colleges were under the control of the University of Kentucky.\nTransylvania University, a liberal arts university located in Lexington, was founded in 1780 as the oldest university west of the Allegheny Mountains.\nBerea College, located at the extreme southern edge of the Bluegrass below the Cumberland Plateau, was the first coeducational college in the South to admit both Black and white students, doing so from its very establishment in 1855. A state law in 1904 ended integration, and the law was upheld by the United States Supreme Court in the case of \"Berea College v. Kentucky\" in 1908.The state law was repealed in 1950 and Berea resumed integration.\nThere are 173 school districts and 1,233 public schools in Kentucky. For the 2010 to 2011 school year, there were approximately 647,827 students enrolled in public school.\nKentucky has been the site of much educational reform over the past two decades. In 1989 the Kentucky Supreme Court ruled the state's education system was unconstitutional. The response of the General Assembly was passage of the Kentucky Education Reform Act (KERA) the following year. Years later, Kentucky has shown progress, but most agree that further reform is needed.\nThe West Virginia teachers' strike in 2018 inspired teachers in other states, including Kentucky, to take similar action.\nTransportation.\nRoads.\nKentucky is served by six major Interstate highways (I-24, I-64, I-65, I-69, I-71, and I-75), seven , and six bypasses and spurs (I-165, I-169, I-264, I-265, I-275, and I-471). The parkways were originally toll roads, but on November 22, 2006, Governor Ernie Fletcher ended the toll charges on the William H. Natcher Parkway and the Audubon Parkway, the last two parkways in Kentucky to charge tolls for access. The related toll booths have been demolished.\nEnding the tolls some seven months ahead of schedule was generally agreed to have been a positive economic development for transportation in Kentucky. In June 2007, a law went into effect raising the speed limit on rural portions of Kentucky Interstates and parkways from .\nRoad tunnels include the interstate Cumberland Gap Tunnel and the rural Nada Tunnel.\nRails.\nAmtrak, the national passenger rail system, provides service to Ashland, South Portsmouth, Maysville and Fulton. The \"Cardinal\" (trains 50 and 51) is the line that offers Amtrak service to Ashland, South Shore, Maysville and South Portsmouth. The \"City of New Orleans\" (trains 58 and 59) serve Fulton. The Northern Kentucky area is served by the \"Cardinal\" at Cincinnati Union Terminal. The terminal is just across the Ohio River in Cincinnati.\nNorfolk Southern Railway passes through the Central and Southern parts of the commonwealth, via its Cincinnati, New Orleans, and Texas Pacific (CNO&amp;TP) subsidiary. The line originates in Cincinnati and terminates 338 miles south in Chattanooga, Tennessee.\nAs of 2004[ [update]], there were approximately of railways in Kentucky, with about 65% of those being operated by CSX Transportation. Coal was by far the most common cargo, accounting for 76% of cargo loaded and 61% of cargo delivered.\nBardstown features a tourist attraction known as \"My Old Kentucky Dinner Train\". Run along a stretch of rail purchased from CSX in 1987, guests are served a four-course meal as they make a two-and-a-half-hour round-trip between Bardstown and Limestone Springs. The Kentucky Railway Museum is located in nearby New Haven.\nOther areas in Kentucky are reclaiming old railways in rail trail projects. One such project is Louisville's Big Four Bridge. When the bridge's Indiana approach ramps opened in 2014, completing the pedestrian connection across the Ohio River, the Big Four Bridge rail trail became the second-longest pedestrian-only bridge in the world. The longest pedestrian-only bridge is also found in Kentucky\u00a0\u2013 the Newport Southbank Bridge, popularly known as the \"Purple People Bridge\", connecting Newport to Cincinnati, Ohio.\nAir.\nKentucky's primary airports include Louisville International Airport (Standiford Field (SDF)) of Louisville, Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport (CVG) of Cincinnati/Covington, and Blue Grass Airport (LEX) in Lexington. Louisville International Airport is home to UPS's Worldport, its international air-sorting hub. Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport is the largest airport in the state, and is a focus city for passenger airline Delta Air Lines and headquarters of its Delta Private Jets. The airport is one of DHL Aviation's three super-hubs, serving destinations throughout the Americas, Europe, Africa, and Asia, making it the 7th busiest airport in the U.S. and 36th in the world based on passenger and cargo operations. CVG is also a focus city for Frontier Airlines and is the largest O&amp;D airport and base for Allegiant Air, along with home to a maintenance for American Airlines subsidiary PSA Airlines and Delta Air Lines subsidiary Endeavor Air. There are also a number of regional airports scattered across the state.\nOn August 27, 2006, Blue Grass Airport was the site of a crash that killed 47 passengers and 2crew members aboard a Bombardier CRJ designated Comair Flight 191, or Delta Air Lines Flight 5191, sometimes mistakenly identified by the press as Comair Flight 5191. The lone survivor was the flight's first officer, James Polehinke, who doctors determined to be brain damaged and unable to recall the crash at all.\nWater.\nAs the state is bounded by two of the largest rivers in North America, water transportation has historically played a major role in Kentucky's economy. Louisville was a major port for steamships in the nineteenth century. Today, most barge traffic on Kentucky waterways consists of coal that is shipped from both the Eastern and Western Coalfields, about half of which is used locally to power many power plants located directly off the Ohio River, with the rest being exported to other countries, most notably Japan.\nMany of the largest ports in the United States are located in or adjacent to Kentucky, including:\nAs a state, Kentucky ranks 10th overall in port tonnage.\nThe only natural obstacle along the entire length of the Ohio River is the Falls of the Ohio, located just west of Downtown Louisville.\nLaw and government.\nKentucky is one of four U.S. states to officially use the term \"commonwealth.\" The term was used for Kentucky as it had also been used by Virginia, from which Kentucky was created. The term has no particular significance in its meaning and was chosen to emphasize the distinction from the status of royal colonies as a place governed for the general welfare of the populace. Kentucky was originally styled as the \"State of Kentucky\" in the act admitting it to the Union and its first constitution.\nThe \"Commonwealth\" term was used in citizen petitions submitted between 1786 and 1792 for the creation of the state. It was also used in the title of a history of the state that was published in 1834 and was used in various places within that book in references to Virginia and Kentucky. The other three states officially called \"commonwealths\" are Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and Virginia; the territories of Puerto Rico and the Northern Mariana Islands are also formally commonwealths.\nKentucky is one of only five states that elect their state officials in odd-numbered years (the others being Louisiana, Mississippi, New Jersey, and Virginia). Kentucky holds elections for these offices every four years in the years preceding Presidential election years. Thus, Kentucky held gubernatorial elections in 2015, 2019 and 2023.\nExecutive branch.\nThe executive branch is headed by the governor, who serves as both head of state and head of government. The lieutenant governor may or may not have executive authority depending on whether the person is a member of the governor's cabinet. Under the current Kentucky Constitution, the lieutenant governor assumes the duties of the governor only if the governor is incapacitated. (Before 1992 the lieutenant governor assumed power any time the governor was out of the state.) The governor and lieutenant governor usually run on a single ticket (also per a 1992 constitutional amendment) and are elected to four-year terms. The current governor is Andy Beshear, and the lieutenant governor is Jacqueline Coleman. Both are Democrats.\nThe executive branch is organized into the following \"cabinets\", each headed by a secretary who is also a member of the governor's cabinet:\nThe cabinet system was introduced in 1972 by Governor Wendell Ford to consolidate hundreds of government entities that reported directly to the governor's office.\nOther elected constitutional offices include the secretary of state, attorney general, auditor of public accounts, state treasurer, and commissioner of agriculture. Currently, Republican Michael G. Adams serves as the secretary of state. The commonwealth's chief prosecutor, law enforcement officer, and law officer is the attorney general, currently Republican Russell Coleman. The auditor of public accounts is Republican Allison Ball. Republican Mark Metcalf is the current treasurer. Republican Jonathan Shell is the current commissioner of agriculture.\nLegislative branch.\nKentucky's legislative branch consists of a bicameral body known as the Kentucky General Assembly. The Senate is considered the upper house. It has 38 members and is led by the president of the Senate, currently Robert Stivers (R). The House of Representatives has 100 members, and is led by the speaker of the House, currently David Osborne of the Republican Party.\nIn 2016, Republicans won control of the House for the first time since 1922. The party currently holds supermajorities in both chambers.\nJudicial branch.\nThe judicial branch of Kentucky is called the Kentucky Court of Justice and comprises courts of limited jurisdiction called District Courts; courts of general jurisdiction called Circuit Courts; specialty courts such as Drug Court and Family Court; an intermediate appellate court, the Kentucky Court of Appeals; and a court of last resort, the Kentucky Supreme Court.\nThe Kentucky Court of Justice is headed by the chief justice of the Commonwealth. The chief justice is appointed by, and is an elected member of, the Supreme Court of Kentucky. The current chief justice is Laurance VanMeter.\nUnlike federal judges, who are usually appointed, justices serving on Kentucky state courts are chosen by the state's populace in non-partisan elections.\nFederal representation.\nKentucky's two U.S. senators are Mitch McConnell and Rand Paul, both Republicans. The state is divided into six congressional districts, represented by Republicans James Comer (1st), Brett Guthrie (2nd), Thomas Massie (4th), Hal Rogers (5th) and Andy Barr (6th) and Democrat Morgan McGarvey (3rd).\nIn the federal judiciary, Kentucky is served by two United States district courts: the Eastern District of Kentucky, with its primary seat in Lexington, and the Western District of Kentucky, with its primary seat in Louisville. Appeals are heard in the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, based in Cincinnati, Ohio.\nLaw.\nKentucky's body of laws, known as the Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS), were enacted in 1942 to better organize and clarify the whole of Kentucky law. The statutes are enforced by local police, sheriffs and deputy sheriffs, and constables and deputy constables. Unless they have completed a police academy elsewhere, these officers are required to complete Police Officer Professional Standards (POPS) training at the Kentucky Department of Criminal Justice Training Center on the campus of Eastern Kentucky University in Richmond. Additionally, in 1948, the Kentucky General Assembly established the Kentucky State Police, making it the 38th state to create a force whose jurisdiction extends throughout the given state.\nKentucky is one of the 32 states in the United States that sanctions the death penalty for certain murders defined as heinous. Those convicted of capital crimes after March 31, 1998, are always executed by lethal injection; those convicted on or before this date may opt for the electric chair. Only three people have been executed in Kentucky since the U.S. Supreme Court re-instituted the practice in 1976. The most notable execution in Kentucky was that of Rainey Bethea on August 14, 1936. Bethea was publicly hanged in Owensboro for the rape and murder of Lischia Edwards. Irregularities with the execution led to this becoming the last public execution in the United States.\nKentucky has been on the front lines of the debate over displaying the Ten Commandments on public property. In the 2005 case of \"McCreary County v. ACLU of Kentucky\", the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the decision of the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals that a display of the Ten Commandments in the Whitley City courthouse of McCreary County was unconstitutional. Later that year, Judge Richard Fred Suhrheinrich, writing for the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals in the case of \"ACLU of Kentucky v. Mercer County\", wrote that a display including the Mayflower Compact, the Declaration of Independence, the Ten Commandments, Magna Carta, \"The Star-Spangled Banner\", and the national motto could be erected in the Mercer County courthouse.\nKentucky has been known to have unusually high political candidacy age laws, especially compared to surrounding states. The origin of this is unknown.\nPolitics.\nSince the late 1990s, Kentucky has supported Republican candidates for most federal political offices, and, more recently, for state-level office as well. The state leaned toward the Democratic Party from 1860 through the 1990s, and was considered a swing state at the presidential level for most of the latter half of the 20th century.\nThe southeastern region of the state aligned with the Union during the war and has consistently supported Republican candidates. The central and western portions of the state were heavily Democratic in the years leading to the Civil War, were pro-secessionist and pro-Confederate during the Civil War, and in the decades following the war. Kentucky was part of the Democratic Solid South in the second half of the nineteenth century and through the majority of the twentieth century.\nMirroring a broader national reversal of party composition, the Kentucky Democratic Party of the twenty-first century primarily consists of liberal whites, African Americans, and other minorities. Although most of the state's voters have reliably elected Republican candidates for federal office since the late 1990s, Democrats held an advantage in party registration until 2022. On July 15, 2022, the Kentucky secretary of state's office announced that for the first time in its history, the commonwealth had more registered Republicans than registered Democrats, with 45.19% of the state's voters registered as Republicans, 45.12% registered as Democrats, and 9.69% registered with another political party or as independents.\nFrom 1964 through 2004, Kentucky voted for the eventual winner of the election for President of the United States; however, in the 2008 election the state lost its bellwether status. Republican John McCain won Kentucky, but he lost the national popular and electoral vote to Democrat Barack Obama (McCain carried Kentucky 57% to 41%). 116 of Kentucky's 120 counties supported former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney in the 2012 election while he lost to Barack Obama nationwide.\nVoters in the commonwealth have supported the previous three Democratic candidates elected to the White House in the late 20th century, all from Southern states: Lyndon B. Johnson (Texas) in 1964, Jimmy Carter (Georgia) in 1976, and Bill Clinton (Arkansas) in 1992 and 1996. In the twenty-first century presidential elections, the state has become a Republican stronghold, supporting that party's presidential candidates by double-digit margins from 2000 through 2020. At the same time, voters have continued to elect Democratic candidates to state and local offices in many jurisdictions.\nElliott County, Kentucky is notable for having held the longest streak of any county in the United States voting Democratic. Founded in 1869, Elliott County supported the Democratic nominee in every presidential election from 1872 (the first in which it participated) until 2012. In 2016, Donald Trump became the first Republican to ever carry the county, and he did so in a 44-point landslide, highlighting the modern Republican Party's dominance among rural whites and many ancestrally Democratic, socially-conservative voters.\nKentucky is one of the most anti-abortion states in the United States. A 2014 poll conducted by Pew Research Center found that 57% of Kentucky's population thought that abortion should be illegal in all/most cases, while only 36% thought that abortion should be legal in all/most cases.\nIn a 2020 study, Kentucky was ranked as the 8th hardest state for citizens to vote in.\nCulture.\nKentucky culture is firmly Southern, and influenced by that of Appalachia. The state is known for bourbon and whiskey distilling, tobacco, horse racing, and college basketball. Kentucky is more similar to the Upland South in terms of ancestry that is predominantly American.\nNevertheless, during the 19th century, Kentucky did receive a substantial number of German immigrants, who settled mostly in the Midwest and parts of the Upper South, along the Ohio River primarily in Louisville, Covington and Newport. Only Maryland, Delaware and West Virginia have higher German ancestry percentages than Kentucky among Census-defined Southern states, although Kentucky's percentage is closer to Arkansas and Virginia's than the previously named state's percentages. Scottish Americans, English Americans and Scotch-Irish Americans have heavily influenced Kentucky culture, and are present in every part of the state. As of the 1980s the only counties in the United States where more than half the population cited \"English\" as their only ancestry group were all in the hills of eastern Kentucky (and made up virtually every county in this region).\nKentucky was a slave state, and Black people once composed over one-quarter of its population; however, it lacked the cotton plantation system though it did support significant and large scale tobacco plantation systems in the western and central parts of the state more similar to the plantations developed in Virginia and North Carolina than those in the Deep South, and never had the same high percentage of African Americans as most other slave states. While less than 8% of the total population is Black, Kentucky has a relatively significant rural African American population in the Central and Western areas of the state.\nKentucky adopted the Jim Crow system of racial segregation in most public spheres after the Civil War. Louisville's 1914 ordinance for residential racial segregation was struck down by the Supreme Court in 1917. However, in 1908 Kentucky enacted the Day Law, \"An Act to Prohibit White and Colored Persons from Attending the Same School\", which Berea College unsuccessfully challenged at the US Supreme Court in 1908. In 1948, Lyman T. Johnson filed suit for admission to the University of Kentucky; as a result, nearly thirty African American students entered UK graduate and professional programs in the summer of 1949. Kentucky integrated its schools after the 1954 \"Brown v. Board of Education\" verdict, later adopting the first state civil rights act in the South in 1966.\nKentucky commemorates Confederate Memorial Day but added Juneteenth as a holiday by proclamation of Governor Andy Beshear in 2024. The biggest day in American horse racing, the Kentucky Derby, is preceded by the two-week Derby Festival in Louisville. The Derby Festival features many events, including Thunder Over Louisville, the Pegasus Parade, the Great Steamboat Race, Fest-a-Ville, the Chow Wagon, BalloonFest, BourbonVille, and many others leading up to the big race.\nLouisville also plays host to the Kentucky State Fair and the Kentucky Shakespeare Festival. Bowling Green, the state's third-largest city and home to the only assembly plant in the world that manufactures the Chevrolet Corvette, opened the National Corvette Museum in 1994. The fourth-largest city, Owensboro, gives credence to its nickname of \"Barbecue Capital of the World\" by hosting the annual International Bar-B-Q Festival.\nOld Louisville, the largest historic preservation district in the United States featuring Victorian architecture and the third largest overall, hosts the St. James Court Art Show, the largest outdoor art show in the United States. The neighborhood was also home to the Southern Exposition (1883\u20131887), which featured the first public display of Thomas Edison's light bulb, and was the setting of Alice Hegan Rice's novel, \"Mrs. Wiggs of the Cabbage Patch\".\nFairview was the birthplace of Jefferson Davis, who would become President of the Confederate States of America; the town had the Jefferson Davis Memorial, a 351-foot concrete obelisk, built in 1917. Hodgenville, the birthplace of Abraham Lincoln, hosts the annual Lincoln Days Celebration, and also hosted the kick-off for the National Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Celebration in February 2008. Bardstown celebrates its heritage as a major bourbon-producing region with the Kentucky Bourbon Festival. Glasgow mimics Glasgow, Scotland by hosting the Glasgow Highland Games, its own version of the Highland Games, and Sturgis hosts \"Little Sturgis\", a mini version of Sturgis, South Dakota's annual Sturgis Motorcycle Rally.\nThe state is famous for quilts. The National Quilt Museum is in Paducah. It hosts QuiltWeek, an annual competition and celebration of that attracts artists and hobbyists from the world of quilting.\nWinchester celebrates an original Kentucky creation, Beer Cheese, with its Beer Cheese Festival held annually in June. Beer Cheese was developed in Clark County at some point in the 1940s along the Kentucky River.\nThe residents of tiny Benton pay tribute to their favorite tuber, the sweet potato, by hosting Tater Day. Residents of Clarkson in Grayson County celebrate their city's ties to the honey industry by celebrating the Clarkson Honeyfest. The Clarkson Honeyfest is held the last Thursday, Friday and Saturday in September, and is the \"Official State Honey Festival of Kentucky\".\nMusic.\nRenfro Valley, Kentucky is home to Renfro Valley Entertainment Center and the Kentucky Music Hall of Fame and is known as \"Kentucky's Country Music Capital\", a designation given it by the Kentucky State Legislature in the late 1980s. The Renfro Valley Barn Dance was where Renfro Valley's musical heritage began, in 1939, and influential country music luminaries like Red Foley, Homer &amp;\u00a0Jethro, Lily May Ledford &amp;the Original Coon Creek Girls, Martha Carson and many others have performed as regular members of the shows there over the years. The Renfro Valley Gatherin' is today America's second-oldest continually broadcast radio program of any kind. It is broadcast on local radio station WRVK and a syndicated network of nearly 200 other stations across the United States and Canada every week.\nContemporary Christian music star Steven Curtis Chapman is a Paducah native, and Rock and Roll Hall of Famers the Everly Brothers are closely connected with Muhlenberg County, where older brother Don was born. Merle Travis, Country andWestern artist known for both his signature \"Travis picking\" guitar playing style, as well as his hit song \"Sixteen Tons\", was also born in Muhlenberg County. Kentucky was also home to Mildred and Patty Hill, the Louisville sisters credited with composing the tune to the ditty Happy Birthday to You in 1893; Loretta Lynn (Johnson County), Brian Littrell and Kevin Richardson of the Backstreet Boys, and Billy Ray Cyrus (Flatwoods).\nHowever, its depth lies in its signature sound\u00a0\u2013 Bluegrass music. Bill Monroe, \"The Father of Bluegrass\", was born in the small Ohio County town of Rosine, while Ricky Skaggs, Keith Whitley, David \"Stringbean\" Akeman, Louis Marshall \"Grandpa\" Jones, Sonny and Bobby Osborne, and Sam Bush (who has been compared to Monroe) all hail from Kentucky. The Bluegrass Music Hall of Fame &amp; Museum is located in Owensboro, while the annual Festival of the Bluegrass is held in Lexington.\nKentucky was also home to famed jazz musician Lionel Hampton. Blues legend W. C. Handy and R&amp;B singer Wilson Pickett also spent considerable time in Kentucky. The R&amp;B group Midnight Star and Hip-Hop group Nappy Roots were both formed in Kentucky, as were country acts the Kentucky Headhunters, Montgomery Gentry, Halfway to Hazard, the Judds, and Dove Award-winning Christian groups Audio Adrenaline and Bride. Black Stone Cherry hails from rural Edmonton. Indie rock bands Slint, My Morning Jacket, Wax Fang, White Reaper, and Tantric formed in Louisville; indie rock bands Cage the Elephant, Sleeper Agent, and Morning Teleportation are from Bowling Green. The bluegrass groups Driftwood and Kentucky Rain, along with Nick Lachey of the pop band 98 Degrees are also from Kentucky. King Crimson guitarist Adrian Belew is from Covington. Noted singer and actress Rosemary Clooney was a native of Maysville, her legacy being celebrated at the annual music festival bearing her name. Noted songwriter and actor Will Oldham is from Louisville. More recently in the limelight are country artists Chris Stapleton, Sturgill Simpson, Tyler Childers, and Chris Knight.\nIn eastern Kentucky, old-time music carries on the tradition of ancient ballads and reels developed in historical Appalachia.\nLiterature.\nKentucky has played a major role in Southern and American literature, producing works that often celebrate the working class, rural life, nature, and explore issues of class, extractive economy, and family. Major works from the state include \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\" (1852) by Harriet Beecher Stowe, widely seen as one of the impetuses for the American Civil War; \"The Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come\" (1908) by John Fox Jr., which was the first novel to sell a million copies in the United States; \"All the King's Men\" by Robert Penn Warren (1946), rated as the 36th best English-language novel of the 20th century; \"The Dollmaker\" (1954) by Harriette Arnow; \"Night Comes to the Cumberlands\" (1962) by Harry Caudill, which contributed to initiating the U.S. Government's war on poverty, and others.\nAuthor Thomas Merton lived most of his life and wrote most of his books\u00a0\u2013 including \"The Seven Storey Mountain\" (1948), ranked on \"National Review\"'s list of the 100 best non-fiction books of the century\u00a0\u2013 during his time as a monk at the Abbey of Our Lady of Gethsemani near Bardstown, Kentucky. Author Hunter S. Thompson is also a native of the state. Since the later part of the 20th century, several writers from Kentucky have published widely read and critically acclaimed books, including: Wendell Berry (fl. 1960\u2013), Silas House (fl. 2001\u2013), Barbara Kingsolver (fl. 1988\u2013), poet Maurice Manning (fl. 2001\u2013), and Bobbie Ann Mason (fl. 1988\u2013).\nWell-known playwrights from Kentucky include Marsha Norman (works include \"'night, Mother\", 1983), Naomi Wallace (works include \"One Flea Spare\", 1995), and George C. Wolfe (works include \"Jelly's Last Jam\", 1992).\nCuisine.\nKentucky's cuisine is generally similar to and is a part of traditional southern cooking, although in some areas of the state it can blend elements of both the South and Appalachia, mixing Appalachian with the native Southern cuisine of the area. One original Kentucky dish is called the Hot Brown, a dish normally layered in this order: toasted bread, turkey, bacon, tomatoes and topped with mornay sauce. It was developed at the Brown Hotel in Louisville. The Pendennis Club in Louisville is the birthplace of the Old Fashioned cocktail. Also, Western Kentucky is known for its own regional style of Southern barbecue. Central Kentucky is the birthplace of Beer Cheese.\nHarland Sanders, a Kentucky colonel, originated Kentucky Fried Chicken at his service station in North Corbin, though the first franchised KFC was located in South Salt Lake, Utah.\nSports.\nKentucky is the home of sports teams such as Minor League Baseball's Triple-A Louisville Bats and High-A Bowling Green Hot Rods. It is home to the independent Atlantic League of Professional Baseball's Lexington Legends and the Frontier League's Florence Y'alls. The Lexington Horsemen and Louisville Fire of the now-defunct af2 had been interested in making a move up to the \"major league\" Arena Football League, but nothing has come of those plans.\nThe northern part of the state lies across the Ohio River from Cincinnati, which is home to the National Football League's Cincinnati Bengals, Major League Baseball's Cincinnati Reds. It is not uncommon for fans to park in the city of Newport and use the Newport Southbank Pedestrian Bridge, locally known as the \"Purple People Bridge\", to walk to these games in Cincinnati. Georgetown College in Georgetown was the location for the Bengals' summer training camp, until it was announced in 2012 that the Bengals would no longer use the facilities.\nAs in many states, especially those without major league professional sports teams, college athletics are prominent. This is especially true of the state's three DivisionI Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) programs, including the Kentucky Wildcats, the Western Kentucky Hilltoppers, and the Louisville Cardinals. The Wildcats, Hilltoppers, and Cardinals are among the most tradition-rich college men's basketball teams in the United States, combining for 11 National Championships and 24 NCAA Final Fours; all three are high on the lists of total all-time wins, wins per season, and average wins per season. \nThe Kentucky Wildcats are particularly notable, leading all DivisionI programs in all-time wins, win percentage, NCAA tournament appearances, and being second only to UCLA in NCAA championships. Louisville has stepped onto the football scene, including winning the 2007 Orange Bowl as well as the 2013 Sugar Bowl, and producing 2016 Heisman Trophy winner Lamar Jackson. Western Kentucky, the 2002 national champion in DivisionI-AA football (now Football Championship Subdivision (FCS)), completed its transition to DivisionI FBS football in 2009.\nThe Kentucky Derby is a horse race held annually in Louisville on the first Saturday in May. The Valhalla Golf Club in Louisville has hosted several editions of the PGA Championship, Senior PGA Championship and Ryder Cup since the 1990s.\nThe NASCAR Cup Series held a race at the Kentucky Speedway in Sparta, Kentucky from 2011 to 2020. The NASCAR Nationwide Series and the Camping World Truck Series raced there through 2020. The IndyCar Series previously raced there as well.\nOhio Valley Wrestling in Louisville was the primary location for training and rehab for WWE professional wrestlers from 2000 until 2008, when WWE moved its contracted talent to Florida Championship Wrestling. OVW later became the primary developmental territory for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) from 2011 to 2013.\nIn 2014 Louisville City FC, a professional soccer team in the league then known as USL Pro and now as the United Soccer League, was announced. The team made its debut in 2015, playing home games at Louisville Slugger Field. In its first season, Louisville City was the official reserve side for Orlando City SC, who made its debut in Major League Soccer at the same time. That arrangement ended in 2016 when Orlando City established a directly controlled reserve side in the USL. In 2021, Lexington SC was founded as a professional soccer team out of Lexington, competing in USL League One. They played their home games at Toyota Stadium until construction on Lexington SC Stadium was completed in 2024. In 2025, they joined the USL Championship league. The club has companion women's teams that compete in the USL W League and USL Super League.\nKentucky colonel.\nThe distinction of being named a Kentucky colonel is the highest title of honor bestowed by the Commonwealth of Kentucky. Commissions for Kentucky colonels are given by the Governor and the Secretary of State to individuals in recognition of noteworthy accomplishments and outstanding service to a community, state or the nation. The sitting governor of the Commonwealth of Kentucky bestows the honor of a colonel's commission, by issuance of letters patent. Kentucky colonels are commissioned for life and act officially as the state's goodwill ambassadors.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16848", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16848", "title": "Kurtosis", "text": "Fourth standardized moment in statistics\nKurtosis (from ( or ), meaning 'curved, arching') refers to the degree of \"tailedness\" in the probability distribution of a real-valued, random variable in probability theory and statistics. Similar to skewness, kurtosis provides insight into specific characteristics of a distribution. Various methods exist for quantifying kurtosis in theoretical distributions, and corresponding techniques allow estimation based on sample data from a population. It is important to note that different measures of kurtosis can yield varying interpretations.\nThe standard measure of a distribution's kurtosis, originating with Karl Pearson, is a scaled version of the fourth moment of the distribution. This number is related to the tails of the distribution, not its peak; hence, the sometimes-seen characterization of kurtosis as peakedness is incorrect. For this measure, higher kurtosis corresponds to greater extremity of deviations (or outliers), and not the configuration of data near the mean.\nExcess kurtosis, typically compared to a value of 0, characterizes the \"tailedness\" of a distribution. A univariate normal distribution has an excess kurtosis of 0. Negative excess kurtosis indicates a \"platykurtic\" distribution, which does not necessarily have a flat top but produces fewer or less extreme outliers than the normal distribution. For instance, the uniform distribution (i.e. one that is uniformly finite over some bound and zero elsewhere) is platykurtic. On the other hand, positive excess kurtosis signifies a \"leptokurtic\" distribution. The Laplace distribution for example, has tails that decay more slowly than a normal one, resulting in more outliers. To simplify comparison with the normal distribution, excess kurtosis is calculated as Pearson's kurtosis minus 3. Some authors and software packages use \"kurtosis\" to refer specifically to excess kurtosis, but this article distinguishes between the two for clarity.\nAlternative measures of kurtosis are: the L-kurtosis, which is a scaled version of the fourth L-moment; measures based on four population or sample quantiles. These are analogous to the alternative measures of skewness that are not based on ordinary moments.\nPearson moments.\nThe kurtosis is the fourth standardized moment, defined as\nformula_1\nwhere \"\u03bc\"4 is the fourth central moment and \u03c3 is the standard deviation. Several letters are used in the literature to denote the kurtosis. A very common choice is \u03ba, which is fine as long as it is clear that it does not refer to a cumulant. Other choices include \"\u03b3\"2, to be similar to the notation for skewness, although sometimes this is instead reserved for the excess kurtosis.\nThe kurtosis is bounded below by the squared skewness plus 1:432\nformula_2\nwhere \"\u03bc\"3 is the third central moment. The lower bound is realized by the Bernoulli distribution. There is no upper limit to the kurtosis of a general probability distribution, and it may be infinite.\nA reason why some authors favor the excess kurtosis is that cumulants are extensive. Formulas related to the extensive property are more naturally expressed in terms of the excess kurtosis. For example, let \"X\"1, ..., \"X\"\"n\" be independent random variables for which the fourth moment exists, and let Y be the random variable defined by the sum of the \"X\"\"i\". The excess kurtosis of Y isformula_3where formula_4 is the standard deviation of \"X\"\"i\". In particular if all of the \"X\"\"i\" have the same variance, then this simplifies toformula_5\nThe reason not to subtract 3 is that the bare moment better generalizes to multivariate distributions, especially when independence is not assumed. The cokurtosis between pairs of variables is an order four tensor. For a bivariate normal distribution, the cokurtosis tensor has off-diagonal terms that are neither 0 nor 3 in general, so attempting to \"correct\" for an excess becomes confusing. It is true, however, that the joint cumulants of degree greater than two for any multivariate normal distribution are zero.\nFor two random variables, X and Y, not necessarily independent, the kurtosis of the sum, \"X\" + \"Y\", is\nformula_6\nNote that the fourth-power binomial coefficients (1, 4, 6, 4, 1) appear in the above equation.\nInterpretation.\nThe interpretation of the Pearson measure of kurtosis (or excess kurtosis) was once debated, but it is now well-established. As noted by Westfall in 2014, \"...\u00a0its unambiguous interpretation relates to tail extremity\". Specifically, it reflects either the presence of existing outliers (for sample kurtosis) or the tendency to produce outliers (for the kurtosis of a probability distribution). The underlying logic is straightforward: kurtosis represents the average (or expected value) of standardized data raised to the fourth power. Standardized values less than 1\u2014corresponding to data within one standard deviation of the mean (where the peak occurs)\u2014contribute minimally to kurtosis. This is because raising a number less than 1 to the fourth power brings it closer to zero. The meaningful contributors to kurtosis are data values outside the peak region, i.e., the outliers. Therefore, kurtosis primarily measures outliers and provides no information about the central peak.\nNumerous misconceptions about kurtosis relate to notions of peakedness. One such misconception is that kurtosis measures both the peakedness of a distribution and the heaviness of its tail. Other incorrect interpretations include notions like \"lack of shoulders\" (where the \"shoulder\" refers vaguely to the area between the peak and the tail, or more specifically, the region about one standard deviation from the mean) or bimodality. Balanda and MacGillivray argue that the standard definition of kurtosis \"poorly captures the kurtosis, peakedness, or tail weight of a distribution.\" Instead, they propose a vague definition of kurtosis as the location- and scale-free movement of probability mass from the distribution's shoulders into its center and tails.\nMoors' interpretation.\nIn 1986, Moors gave an interpretation of kurtosis. Let formula_7 where X is a random variable, \u03bc is the mean and \u03c3 is the standard deviation.\nNow by definition of the kurtosis formula_8, and by the well-known identity formula_9\nformula_10\nThe kurtosis can now be seen as a measure of the dispersion of \"Z\"2 around its expectation. Alternatively it can be seen to be a measure of the dispersion of Z around +1 and\u00a0\u22121. \u03ba attains its minimal value in a symmetric two-point distribution. In terms of the original variable X, the kurtosis is a measure of the dispersion of X around the two values \"\u03bc\" \u00b1 \"\u03c3\".\nHigh values of \u03ba arise where the probability mass is concentrated around the mean and the data-generating process produces occasional values far from the mean, or where the probability mass is concentrated in the tails of the distribution.\nMaximal entropy.\nThe entropy of a distribution is formula_11\nFor any formula_12 with formula_13 positive definite, among all probability distributions on formula_14 with mean formula_15 and covariance formula_13, the normal distribution formula_17 has the largest entropy.\nSince mean formula_15 and covariance formula_13 are the first two moments, it is natural to consider extension to higher moments. In fact, by Lagrange multiplier method, for any prescribed first n moments, if there exists some probability distribution of form formula_20 that has the prescribed moments (if it is feasible), then it is the maximal entropy distribution under the given constraints.\nBy serial expansion,\nformula_21\nso if a random variable has probability distribution formula_22, where formula_23 is a normalization constant, then its kurtosis is formula_24.\nExcess kurtosis.\nThe \"excess kurtosis\" is defined as kurtosis minus 3. There are three distinct regimes as described below.\nMesokurtic.\nDistributions with zero excess kurtosis are called mesokurtic, or mesokurtotic. The most prominent example of a mesokurtic distribution is the normal distribution family, regardless of the values of its parameters. A few other well-known distributions can be mesokurtic, depending on parameter values: for example, the binomial distribution is mesokurtic for formula_25.\nLeptokurtic.\nA distribution with positive excess kurtosis is called leptokurtic, or leptokurtotic. A leptokurtic distribution has \"fatter tails\". ( means 'slender', originally referring to the peak.) Examples of leptokurtic distributions include the Student's t-distribution, Rayleigh distribution, Laplace distribution, exponential distribution, Poisson distribution and the logistic distribution. Such distributions are sometimes termed \"super-Gaussian\".\nPlatykurtic.\nA distribution with negative excess kurtosis is called platykurtic, or platykurtotic. A platykurtic distribution has \"thinner tails\" ( means 'broad', originally referring to the peak). Examples of platykurtic distributions include the continuous and discrete uniform distributions, and the raised cosine distribution. The most platykurtic distribution of all is the Bernoulli distribution with \"p\" = 1/2 (for example the number of times one obtains heads when flipping a coin once, a coin toss), for which the excess kurtosis is \u22122.\nGraphical examples.\nThe Pearson type VII family.\nThe effects of kurtosis are illustrated using a parametric family of distributions whose kurtosis can be adjusted while their lower-order moments and cumulants remain constant. Consider the Pearson type VII family, which is a special case of the Pearson type IV family restricted to symmetric densities. The probability density function (PDF) is given by\nformula_26\nwhere a is a scale parameter and m is a shape parameter.\nAll densities in this family are symmetric. The k-th moment exists provided \"m\" &gt; (\"k\" + 1)/2. For the kurtosis to exist, we require \"m\" &gt; 5/2. Then the mean and skewness exist and are both identically zero. Setting \"a\"2 = 2\"m\" \u2212 3 makes the variance equal to unity. Then the only free parameter is m, which controls the fourth moment (and cumulant) and hence the kurtosis. One can reparameterize with formula_27, where formula_28 is the excess kurtosis as defined above. This yields a one-parameter leptokurtic family with zero mean, unit variance, zero skewness, and arbitrary non-negative excess kurtosis. The reparameterized density is\nformula_29\nIn the limit as formula_30, one obtains the density\nformula_31\nwhich is shown as the red curve in the images on the right.\nIn the other direction as formula_32 one obtains the standard normal density as the limiting distribution, shown as the black curve.\nIn the images on the right, the blue curve represents the density formula_33 with excess kurtosis of 2. The top image shows that leptokurtic densities in this family have a higher peak than the mesokurtic normal density, although this conclusion is only valid for this select family of distributions. The comparatively fatter tails of the leptokurtic densities are illustrated in the second image, which plots the natural logarithm of the Pearson type VII densities: the black curve is the logarithm of the standard normal density, which is a parabola. One can see that the normal density allocates little probability mass to the regions far from the mean (has \"thin tails\"), compared with the blue curve of the leptokurtic Pearson type VII density with excess kurtosis of 2. Between the blue curve and the black are other Pearson type VII densities with \"\u03b3\"2\u00a0=\u00a01, 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, and 1/16. The red curve again shows the upper limit of the Pearson type VII family, with formula_34 (which, strictly speaking, means that the fourth moment does not exist). The red curve decreases the slowest as one moves outward from the origin (has \"fat tails\").\nOther well-known distributions.\nSeveral well-known, unimodal, and symmetric distributions from different parametric families are compared here. Each has a mean and skewness of zero. The parameters have been chosen to result in a variance equal to 1 in each case. The images on the right show curves for the following seven densities, on a linear scale and logarithmic scale:\nNote that in these cases the platykurtic densities have bounded support, whereas the densities with positive or zero excess kurtosis are supported on the whole real line.\nOne cannot infer that high or low kurtosis distributions have the characteristics indicated by these examples. There exist platykurtic densities with infinite support, e.g., exponential power distributions with sufficiently large shape parameter \"b\", and there exist leptokurtic densities with finite support. An example of the latter is a distribution that is uniform between \u22123 and \u22120.3, between \u22120.3 and 0.3, and between 0.3 and 3, with the same density in the (\u22123, \u22120.3) and (0.3, 3) intervals, but with 20 times more density in the (\u22120.3, 0.3) interval.\nAlso, one cannot infer from the graphs that higher kurtosis distributions are more \"peaked\" and that lower kurtosis distributions are more \"flat\". There exist platykurtic densities with infinite peakedness; e.g., an equal mixture of the beta distribution with parameters 0.5 and 1 with its reflection about 0.0, and there exist leptokurtic densities that appear flat-topped; e.g., a mixture of distribution that is uniform between \u22121 and 1 with a T(4.0000001) Student's t-distribution, with mixing probabilities 0.999 and 0.001.\nGraphs of the standardized versions of these distributions are given to the right.\nSample kurtosis.\nDefinitions.\nA natural but biased estimator.\nFor a sample of \"n\" values, a method of moments estimator of the population excess kurtosis can be defined as\nformula_35\nwhere \"m\"4 is the fourth sample moment about the mean, \"m\"2 is the second sample moment about the mean (that is, the sample variance), \"x\"\"i\" is the i-th value, and formula_36 is the sample mean.\nThis formula has the simpler representation,formula_37where the formula_38 values are the standardized data values using the standard deviation defined using n rather than \"n\" \u2212 1 in the denominator.\nFor example, suppose the data values are 0, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 0, 2, 1, 3, 2, 0, 2, 2, 3, 2, 5, 2, 3, 999.\nThen the \"z\"i values are \u22120.239, \u22120.225, \u22120.221, \u22120.234, \u22120.230, \u22120.225, \u22120.239, \u22120.230, \u22120.234, \u22120.225, \u22120.230, \u22120.239, \u22120.230, \u22120.230, \u22120.225, \u22120.230, \u22120.216, \u22120.230, \u22120.225, 4.359\nand the \"z\"\"i\"4 values are 0.003, 0.003, 0.002, 0.003, 0.003, 0.003, 0.003, 0.003, 0.003, 0.003, 0.003, 0.003, 0.003, 0.003, 0.003, 0.003, 0.002, 0.003, 0.003, 360.976.\nThe average of these values is 18.05 and the excess kurtosis is thus 18.05 \u2212 3 = 15.05. This example makes it clear that data near the \"middle\" or \"peak\" of the distribution do not contribute to the kurtosis statistic, hence kurtosis does not measure \"peakedness\". It is simply a measure of the outlier, 999 in this example.\nStandard unbiased estimator.\nGiven a sub-set of samples from a population, the sample excess kurtosis formula_39 above is a biased estimator of the population excess kurtosis. An alternative estimator of the population excess kurtosis, which is unbiased in random samples of a normal distribution, is defined as follows:\nformula_40\nwhere \"k\"4 is the unique symmetric unbiased estimator of the fourth cumulant, \"k\"2 is the unbiased estimate of the second cumulant (identical to the unbiased estimate of the sample variance), \"m\"4 is the fourth sample moment about the mean, \"m\"2 is the second sample moment about the mean, \"x\"\"i\" is the i-th value, and formula_41 is the sample mean. This adjusted Fisher\u2013Pearson standardized moment coefficient formula_42 is the version found in Excel and several statistical packages including Minitab, SAS, and SPSS.\nUnfortunately, in non-normal samples formula_42 is itself generally biased.\nUpper bound.\nAn upper bound for the sample kurtosis of n (\"n\" &gt; 2) real numbers is\nformula_44\nwhere formula_45 is the corresponding sample skewness.\nVariance under normality.\nThe variance of the sample kurtosis of a sample of size n from the normal distribution isformula_46\nStated differently, under the assumption that the underlying random variable formula_47 is normally distributed, it can be shown that formula_48.Page number needed\nApplications.\nThe sample kurtosis is a useful measure of whether there is a problem with outliers in a data set. Larger kurtosis indicates a more serious outlier problem, and may lead the researcher to choose alternative statistical methods.\nD'Agostino's K-squared test is a goodness-of-fit normality test based on a combination of the sample skewness and sample kurtosis, as is the Jarque\u2013Bera test for normality.\nFor non-normal samples, the variance of the sample variance depends on the kurtosis; for details, please see variance.\nPearson's definition of kurtosis is used as an indicator of intermittency in turbulence. It is also used in magnetic resonance imaging to quantify non-Gaussian diffusion.\nA concrete example is the following lemma by He, Zhang, and Zhang:\nAssume a random variable X has expectation formula_49, variance formula_50 and kurtosis formula_51\nAssume we sample formula_52 many independent copies. Then\nformula_53\nThis shows that with formula_54 many samples, we will see one that is above the expectation with probability at least formula_55. In other words: If the kurtosis is large, there may be a lot of values either all below or above the mean.\nKurtosis convergence.\nApplying band-pass filters to digital images, kurtosis values tend to be uniform, independent of the range of the filter. This behavior, termed \"kurtosis convergence\", can be used to detect image splicing in forensic analysis.\nSeismic signal analysis.\nKurtosis can be used in geophysics to distinguish different types of seismic signals. It is particularly effective in differentiating seismic signals generated by human footsteps from other signals. This is useful in security and surveillance systems that rely on seismic detection.\nWeather prediction.\nIn meteorology, kurtosis is used to analyze weather data distributions. It helps predict extreme weather events by assessing the probability of outlier values in historical data, which is valuable for long-term climate studies and short-term weather forecasting.\nOther measures.\nA different measure of kurtosis is provided by using L-moments instead of the ordinary moments."}
{"id": "16849", "revid": "41046791", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16849", "title": "Kon Ichikawa", "text": "Japanese film director and screenwriter (1915\u20132008)\n was a Japanese film director and screenwriter. His work displays a vast range in genre and style, from the anti-war films \"The Burmese Harp\" (1956) and \"Fires on the Plain\" (1959), to the documentary \"Tokyo Olympiad\" (1965), which won two BAFTA Film Awards, and the 19th-century revenge drama \"An Actor's Revenge\" (1963). His film \"Odd Obsession\" (1959) won the Jury Prize at the 1960 Cannes Film Festival. \nAt his death in 2008, \"The New York Times\" recalled that \"\"The Globe and Mail\", the Canadian newspaper, called him in 2001 \u201cthe last living link between the golden age of Japanese cinema, the spunky New Wave that followed and contemporary Japanese film.\u201d\"\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nIchikawa was born in Ise, Mie Prefecture as Giichi Ichikawa (\u5e02\u5ddd\u5100\u4e00). His father died when he was four years old, and the family kimono shop went bankrupt, so he went to live with his sister. He was given the name Kon by an uncle who thought the characters in the kanji \u5d11 signified good luck, because the two halves of the Chinese character look the same when it is split in half vertically. \nAs a child, Ichikawa loved drawing and his ambition was to become an artist. He also loved films and was a fan of \"chambara\" or samurai films. In his teens he was fascinated by Walt Disney's \"Silly Symphonies\" and decided to become an animator. He attended a technical school in Osaka. Upon graduation, in 1933, he found a job with a local rental film studio, J.O Studio, in their animation department. Decades later, he told the American writer on Japanese film Donald Richie, \"I'm still a cartoonist and I think that the greatest influence on my films (besides Chaplin, particularly \"The Gold Rush\") is probably Disney.\"\nFilm career.\nHe moved to the feature film department as an assistant director when the company closed its animation department, working under directors including Yutaka Abe and Nobuo Aoyagi.\nIn the early 1940s J.O Studio merged with P.C.L. and Toho Film Distribution to form the Toho Film Company. Ichikawa moved to Tokyo. His first film was the puppet play \"A Girl at Dojo Temple\" (\"Musume Dojoji\" 1946), which was confiscated by the interim U.S. Occupation authorities under the pretext that it was too \"feudal\", but some sources suggest the script had not been approved by the occupying authorities. Thought lost for many years, it is now archived at the Cin\u00e9math\u00e8que Fran\u00e7aise.\nIt was at Toho that he met Natto Wada. Wada was a translator for Toho. They agreed to marry sometime after Ichikawa completed his first film as director. Natto Wada's original name was Yumiko Mogi (born 13 September 1920 in Himeji, Hy\u014dgo Prefecture, Japan); the couple both had failed marriages behind them. She graduated with a degree in English literature from Tokyo Woman's Christian University. She married Kon Ichikawa on 10 April 1948, and died on 18 February 1983 of breast cancer.\nIchikawa was among the first group of Toho staff that broke from the labor union during the Toho strikes, which became part of Shintoho. Due to a shortage of directorial talent at the new company, he made his debut as director with \"A Thousand and One Nights with Toho\".\nIt was after Ichikawa's marriage to Wada that the two began collaborating, first on \"Design of a Human Being\" (\"Ningen moyo\") and \"Endless Passion\" (\"Hateshinaki jonetsu\") in 1949. The period 1950\u20131965 is often referred to as Ichikawa's Natto Wada period. It's the period that contains the majority of Ichikawa's most highly respected works, such as \"Tokyo Olympiad\" (\"T\u014dky\u014d Orinpikku\"), for which he was awarded the Olympic Diploma of Merit, as well as the BAFTA United Nations Award and the Robert Flaherty Award (now known as the BAFTA Award for Best Documentary). It is also during this period that Wada wrote 34 screenplays, most of which were adaptations.\nHe gained Western recognition during the 1950s and 1960s with two anti-war films, \"The Burmese Harp\" and \"Fires on the Plain\", and the technically formidable period-piece \"An Actor's Revenge\" (\"Yukinojo henge\") about a kabuki actor.\nAmong his many literary adaptations were Jun'ichir\u014d Tanizaki's \"The Key\" (\"Kagi\"), Natsume S\u014dseki's \"The Heart\" (Kokoro) and \"I Am a Cat\" (\"Wagahai wa neko de aru\"), in which a teacher's cat critiques the foibles of the humans surrounding him, and Yukio Mishima's \"Conflagration\" (\"Enjo\"), in which a priest burns down his temple to save it from spiritual pollution. \"The Key\", released in the United States as \"Odd Obsession\", was entered in the 1960 Cannes Film Festival, and won the Jury Prize with Antonioni's \"L'Avventura\".\nAfter \"Tokyo Olympiad\" Wada retired from screenwriting, and it marked a significant change in Ichikawa's films from that point onward. Concerning her retirement, he said \"She doesn't like the new film grammar, the method of presentation of the material; she says there's no heart in it anymore, that people no longer take human love seriously.\"\nIn 1969, he along with Akira Kurosawa , Masaki Kobayashi, and Keisuke Kinoshita formed the Yonki-no-kai Productions company. \nHis final film, 2006's \"Inugamis\", a remake of Ichikawa's own 1976 film \"The Inugami Family\", was entered into the 29th Moscow International Film Festival.\nAlso in 2006, Ichikawa was the subject of a feature-length documentary, \"The Kon Ichikawa Story\", directed by Shunji Iwai.\nIchikawa died of pneumonia on 13 February 2008 in a Tokyo hospital. He was 92 years old.\n\"The Magic Hour\" marked Ichikawa's last appearance and was dedicated to his memory. (This message can be seen in the end of this film.) In this film, a movie director played by Ichikawa is shooting \"Kuroi Hyaku-ichi-nin no Onna\" ('A hundred and one dark women'), a parody of \"Ten Dark Women\".\nFilmography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStyle and themes.\nIchikawa's films are marked with a certain darkness and bleakness, punctuated with sparks of humanity.\nIt can be said that his main trait is technical expertise, irony, detachment and a drive for realism married with a complete spectrum of genres. Some critics class him with Akira Kurosawa, Kenji Mizoguchi and Yasujir\u014d Ozu as one of the masters of Japanese cinema.\nLegacy.\nThe Kon Ichikawa Memorial Room, a small museum dedicated to him and his wife Natto Wada displaying materials from his personal collection, was opened in Shibuya in 2015, on the site of his former home.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16850", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16850", "title": "Karel van het Reve", "text": "Karel van het Reve (19 May 1921 \u2013 4 March 1999) was a Dutch writer, translator and literary historian, teaching and writing on Russian literature.\nHe was born in Amsterdam and was raised as a communist. He lost his 'faith' in his twenties and became an active critic and opponent of the Soviet regime. With his help, work of dissident Andrei Sakharov was smuggled to the west, and his Alexander Herzen Foundation published dissident Soviet literature.\nHe is considered to be one of the finest Dutch essayists, his interests ranging from the fallacies of Marxism to nude beach etiquette. His works include a history of Russian literature, 2 novels and several collections of essays. In 1978, Karel van het Reve delivered the Huizinga Lecture, under the title: \"Literatuurwetenschap: het raadsel der onleesbaarheid\" (Literary studies: the enigma of unreadability).\nHis brother, Gerard Reve, was a prominent prose writer.\nThe main-belt asteroid 12174 van het Reve, discovered by the Palomar\u2013Leiden Survey in 1977, was named in his honor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16851", "revid": "50575659", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16851", "title": "Katakana", "text": "Japanese syllabary\n is a Japanese syllabary, one component of the Japanese writing system along with hiragana, kanji and in some cases the Latin script (known as r\u014dmaji).\nThe word \"katakana\" means \"fragmentary kana\", as the katakana characters are derived from components or fragments of more complex kanji. Katakana and hiragana are both kana systems. With one or two minor exceptions, each syllable (strictly mora) in the Japanese language is represented by one character or \"kana\" in each system. Each kana represents either a vowel such as \"\"a\" (katakana \u30a2); a consonant followed by a vowel such as \"ka\" (katakana \u30ab); or \"n\"\" (katakana \u30f3), a nasal sonorant which, depending on the context, sounds like English \"m\", \"n\" or \"ng\" () or like the nasal vowels of Portuguese or Galician.\nIn contrast to the hiragana syllabary, which is used for Japanese words not covered by kanji and for grammatical inflections, the katakana syllabary usage is comparable to italics in English; specifically, it is used for transcription of foreign-language words into Japanese and the writing of loan words (collectively \"gairaigo\"); for emphasis; to represent onomatopoeia; for technical and scientific terms; and for names of plants, animals, minerals and often Japanese companies.\nKatakana evolved from Japanese Buddhist monks transliterating Chinese texts into Japanese.\nWriting system.\nOverview.\nThe complete katakana script consists of 48 characters, not counting functional and diacritic marks:\nThese are conceived as a 5\u00d710 grid (, \u4e94\u5341\u97f3, literally \"fifty sounds\"), as shown in the adjacent table, read \u30a2 (\"a\"), \u30a4 (\"i\"), \u30a6 (\"u\"), \u30a8 (\"e\"), \u30aa (\"o\"), \u30ab (\"ka\"), \u30ad (\"ki\"), \u30af (\"ku\"), \u30b1 (\"ke\"), \u30b3 (\"ko\") and so on. The inherits its vowel and consonant order from Sanskrit practice. In vertical text contexts, which used to be the default case, the grid is usually presented as 10 columns by 5 rows, with vowels on the right hand side and \u30a2 (\"a\") on top. Katakana glyphs in the same row or column do not share common graphic characteristics. Three of the syllabograms to be expected, \"yi\", \"ye\" and \"wu\", may have been used idiosyncratically with varying glyphs, but never became conventional in any language and are not present at all in modern Japanese.\nThe 50-sound table is often amended with an extra character, the nasal \u30f3 (\"n\"). This can appear in several positions, most often next to the \"N\" signs or, because it developed from one of many \"mu\" hentaigana, below the \"u\" column. It may also be appended to the vowel row or the \"a\" column. Here, it is shown in a table of its own.\nThe script includes two diacritic marks placed at the upper right of the base character that change the initial sound of a syllabogram. A double dot, called \"dakuten\", indicates a primary alteration; most often it voices the consonant: \"k\"\u2192\"g\", \"s\"\u2192\"z\", \"t\"\u2192\"d\" and \"h\"\u2192\"b\"; for example, \u30ab (\"ka\") becomes \u30ac (\"ga\"). Secondary alteration, where possible, is shown by a circular \"handakuten\": \"h\"\u2192\"p\"; For example; \u30cf (\"ha\") becomes \u30d1 (\"pa\"). Diacritics, though used for over a thousand years, only became mandatory in the Japanese writing system in the second half of the 20th century. Their application is strictly limited in proper writing systems, but may be more extensive in academic transcriptions.\nFurthermore, some characters have different readings when printed at a smaller size after a full-sized kana or kanji (see below), but this is not a case of being bicameral.\nThe layout of the table promotes a systematic view of kana syllabograms as being always pronounced with the same single consonant followed by a vowel, but this is not exactly the case (and never has been). Existing schemes for the romanization of Japanese either are based on the systematic nature of the script, e.g. nihon-shiki \u30c1 \"ti\", or they apply some Western graphotactics, usually the English one, to the common Japanese pronunciation of the kana signs, e.g. Hepburn-shiki \u30c1 \"chi\". Both approaches conceal the fact, though, that many consonant-based katakana signs, especially those canonically ending in \"u\", can be used in coda position, too, where the vowel is unvoiced and therefore barely perceptible.\nJapanese.\nSyllabary and orthography.\nOf the 48 katakana syllabograms described above, only 46 are used in modern Japanese, and one of these is preserved for only a single use:\nA small version of the katakana for \"ya\", \"yu\" or \"yo\" (\u30e3, \u30e5 or \u30e7, respectively) may be added to katakana ending in \"i\". This changes the \"i\" vowel sound to a glide (palatalization) to \"a\", \"u\" or \"o\", e.g. \u30ad\u30e3 (\"ki + ya\") /kja/. Addition of the small \"y\" kana is called y\u014don.\nA character called a \"sokuon\", which is visually identical to a small \"tsu\" \u30c3, indicates that the following consonant is geminated (doubled). This is represented in r\u014dmaji by doubling the consonant that follows the \"sokuon\". In Japanese this is an important distinction in pronunciation; for example, compare \u30b5\u30ab \"saka\" \"hill\" with \u30b5\u30c3\u30ab \"sakka\" \"author\". Geminated consonants are common in transliterations of foreign loanwords; for example, English \"bed\" is represented as \u30d9\u30c3\u30c9 (\"beddo\"). The sokuon also sometimes appears at the end of utterances, where it denotes a glottal stop. However, it cannot be used to double the \"na\", \"ni\", \"nu\", \"ne\", \"no\" syllables' consonants; to double these, the singular \"n\" (\u30f3) is added in front of the syllable. The \"sokuon\" may also be used to approximate a non-native sound: Bach is written (\"Bahha\"); Mach as (\"Mahha\").\nBoth katakana and hiragana usually spell native long vowels with the addition of a second vowel kana. However, in foreign loanwords, katakana instead uses a vowel extender mark, called a \"ch\u014donpu\" (\"long vowel mark\"). This is a short line (\u30fc) following the direction of the text, horizontal for \"yokogaki\" (horizontal text), and vertical for \"tategaki\" (vertical text). For example, \u30e1\u30fc\u30eb \"m\u0113ru\" is the \"gairaigo\" for e-mail taken from the English word \"mail\"; the \u30fc lengthens the \"e\". There are some exceptions, such as () or (), where Japanese words written in katakana use the elongation mark, too.\nStandard and voiced iteration marks are written in katakana as \u30fd and \u30fe, respectively.\nExtensions.\nSmall versions of the five vowel kana are sometimes used to represent trailing off sounds (\u30cf\u30a1 \"haa\", \u30cd\u30a7 \"nee\"). More often, they are used in katakana as Y\u014don-like extended digraphs, for transcribing into Japanese a syllable (or mora) that cannot be written with standard katakana. This is especially common for transcribing loanwords such as \u30c1\u30a7 (\"che\") in \u30c1\u30a7\u30f3\u30b8 \"chenji\" (\"change\"), \u30d5\u30a1 (\"fa\") in \u30d5\u30a1\u30df\u30ea\u30fc \"famir\u012b\" (\"family\") and \u30a6\u30a3 (\"wi\") and \u30c7\u30a3 (\"di\") in \u30a6\u30a3\u30ad\u30da\u30c7\u30a3\u30a2 \"Wikipedia\"; see below for the full list.\nUsage.\nIn modern Japanese, katakana is most often used for transcription of words from foreign languages or loanwords (other than words historically imported from Chinese), called \"gairaigo\". For example, \"ice cream\" is written . Similarly, katakana is usually used for country names, foreign places, and foreign personal names. For example, the United States is usually referred to as , rather than in its ateji kanji spelling of .\nKatakana are also used for onomatopoeia, words used to represent sounds \u2013 for example, , the \"ding-dong\" sound of a doorbell.\nTechnical and scientific terms, such as the names of animal and plant species and minerals, are also commonly written in katakana. \"Homo sapiens\", as a species, is written , rather than its kanji .\nKatakana are often (but not always) used for transcription of Japanese company names. For example, Suzuki is written , and Toyota is written . As these are common family names, Suzuki being the second most common in Japan, using katakana helps distinguish company names from surnames in writing. Katakana are commonly used on signs, advertisements, and hoardings (i.e., billboards), for example, , , or . Words the writer wishes to emphasize in a sentence are also sometimes written in katakana, mirroring the usage of italics in European languages.\nPre\u2013World War II official documents mix katakana and kanji in the same way that hiragana and kanji are mixed in modern Japanese texts, that is, katakana were used for \"okurigana\" and particles such as \"wa\" or \"o\".\nKatakana was also used for telegrams in Japan before 1988, and for computer systems \u2013 before the introduction of multibyte characters \u2013 in the 1980s. Most computers of that era used katakana instead of kanji or hiragana for output.\nAlthough words borrowed from ancient Chinese are usually written in kanji, loanwords from modern Chinese varieties that are borrowed directly use katakana instead.\nThe very common Chinese loanword \"r\u0101men\", written in katakana as , is rarely written with its kanji ().\nThere are rare instances where the opposite has occurred, with kanji forms created from words originally written in katakana. An example of this is \"k\u014dh\u012b\", (\"coffee\"), which can alternatively be written as . This kanji usage is occasionally employed by coffee manufacturers or coffee shops for novelty.\nKatakana is used to indicate the \"on'yomi\" (Chinese-derived readings) of a kanji in a kanji dictionary. For instance, the kanji \u4eba has a Japanese pronunciation, written in hiragana as \"hito\" (person), as well as a Chinese derived pronunciation, written in katakana as \"jin\" (used to denote groups of people). Katakana is sometimes used instead of hiragana as furigana to give the pronunciation of a word written in Roman characters, or for a foreign word, which is written as kanji for the meaning, but intended to be pronounced as the original.\nKatakana are also sometimes used to indicate words being spoken in a foreign or otherwise unusual accent. For example, in a manga, the speech of a foreign character or a robot may be represented by \"konnichiwa\" (\"hello\") instead of the more typical hiragana . Some Japanese personal names are written in katakana. This was more common in the past, hence elderly women often have katakana names. This was particularly common among women in the Meiji and Taish\u014d periods, when many poor, illiterate parents were unwilling to pay a scholar to give their daughters names in kanji. Katakana is also used to denote the fact that a character is speaking a foreign language, and what is displayed in katakana is only the Japanese \"translation\" of their words.\nSome frequently used words may also be written in katakana in dialogs to convey an informal, conversational tone. Some examples include (\"manga\"), \"aitsu\" (\"that guy or girl; he/him; she/her\"), \"baka\" (\"fool\"), etc.\nWords with difficult-to-read kanji are sometimes written in katakana (hiragana is also used for this purpose). This phenomenon is often seen with medical terminology. For example, in the word \"hifuka\" (\"dermatology\"), the second kanji, , is considered difficult to read, and thus the word \"hifuka\" is commonly written or , mixing kanji and katakana. Similarly, difficult-to-read kanji such as \"gan\" (\"cancer\") are often written in katakana or hiragana.\nKatakana is also used for traditional musical notations, as in the \"Tozan-ry\u016b\" of \"shakuhachi\", and in \"sankyoku\" ensembles with \"koto\", \"shamisen\" and \"shakuhachi\".\nSome instructors teaching Japanese as a foreign language \"introduce \"katakana\" after the students have learned to read and write sentences in \"hiragana\" without difficulty and know the rules.\" Most students who have learned hiragana \"do not have great difficulty in memorizing\" katakana as well. Other instructors introduce katakana first, because these are used with loanwords. This gives students a chance to practice reading and writing kana with meaningful words. This was the approach taken by the influential American linguistics scholar Eleanor Harz Jorden in ' (parallel to ').\nAinu.\nKatakana is commonly used by Japanese linguists to write the Ainu language. In Ainu katakana usage, the consonant that comes at the end of a syllable is represented by a small version of a katakana that corresponds to that final consonant followed by a vowel (for details of which vowel, please see the table at Ainu language \u00a7 Special katakana for the Ainu language). For instance, the Ainu word is represented by ( [\"u\" followed by small \"pu\"]). Ainu also uses three handakuten modified katakana: () and either or (). In Unicode, the Katakana Phonetic Extensions block (https://) exists for Ainu language support. These characters are used for the Ainu language only.\nTaiwanese.\nTaiwanese kana (\u30bf\u30a4 \u30f2\u30a1\u30cc \u30ae\u30a4 \u30ab\u30a2 \u30d3\u30a7\u30f3) is a katakana-based writing system once used to write Taiwanese Hokkien while Taiwan was under Japanese rule. It functioned as a phonetic guide for Chinese characters, much like furigana in Japanese or pinyin in Mandarin. There were similar systems for other languages in Taiwan as well, including Hakka and Formosan languages.\nUnlike Japanese or Ainu, Taiwanese kana uses a methodology similar to bopomofo, with kana serving as initials, vowel medials and consonant finals, marked with tonal marks. A dot below the initial kana represents aspirated consonants, and \u30c1, \u30c4, \u30b5, \u30bb, \u30bd, \u30a6 and \u30aa with a superpositional bar represent sounds found only in Taiwanese.\nOkinawan.\nKatakana is used as a phonetic guide for the Okinawan language, unlike the various other systems to represent Okinawan, which use hiragana with extensions. The system was devised by the Okinawa Center of Language Study of the University of the Ryukyus. It uses many extensions and y\u014don to show the many non-Japanese sounds of Okinawan.\nTable of katakana.\nThis is a table of katakana together with their Hepburn romanization and rough IPA transcription for their use in Japanese. Katakana with \"dakuten\" or \"handakuten\" follow the \"goj\u016bon\" kana without them.\nCharacters , , , and look very similar in print except for the slant and stroke shape. These differences in slant and shape are more prominent when written with an ink brush.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Katakana table/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes\nExtended katakana.\nUsing small versions of the five vowel kana, many digraphs have been devised, mainly to represent the sounds in words of other languages. \nDigraphs with orange backgrounds are the general ones used for loanwords or foreign places or names, and those with blue backgrounds are used for more accurate transliterations of foreign sounds, both suggested by the Cabinet of Japan's Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. Katakana combinations with beige backgrounds are suggested by the American National Standards Institute and the British Standards Institution as possible uses. Ones with purple backgrounds appear on the 1974 version of the Hy\u014djun-shiki formatting.\nPronunciations are shown in Hepburn romanization.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nKatakana was developed in the 9th century (during the early Heian period) by Buddhist monks in Nara in order to transliterate texts and works of arts from India, by taking parts of \"man'y\u014dgana\" characters as a form of shorthand, hence this kana is so-called . For example, comes from the left side of . The adjacent table shows the origins of each katakana: the red markings of the original Chinese character (used as \"man'y\u014dgana\") eventually became each corresponding symbol.\nOfficial documents of the Empire of Japan were written exclusively with ky\u016bjitai and katakana.\nObsolete kana.\nVariant forms.\nKatakana have variant forms. For example, (\u30cd) and (\u30f0). However, katakana's variant forms are fewer than hiragana's. Katakana's choices of \"man'y\u014dgana\" segments had stabilized early on and established \u2013 with few exceptions \u2013 an unambiguous phonemic orthography (one symbol per sound) long before the 1900 script regularization.\nStroke order.\nThe following table shows the method for writing each katakana character. It is arranged in a traditional manner, where characters are organized by the sounds that make them up. The numbers and arrows indicate the stroke order and direction, respectively.\nComputer encoding.\nIn addition to fonts intended for Japanese text and Unicode catch-all fonts (like Arial Unicode MS), many fonts intended for Chinese (such as MS Song) and Korean (such as Batang) also include katakana.\nHiragana and katakana.\nIn addition to the usual display forms of characters, katakana has a second form, . The half-width forms were originally associated with the JIS X 0201 encoding. Although their display form is not specified in the standard, in practice they were designed to fit into the same rectangle of pixels as Roman letters to enable easy implementation on the computer equipment of the day. This space is narrower than the square space traditionally occupied by Japanese characters, hence the name \"half-width\". In this scheme, diacritics (dakuten and handakuten) are separate characters. When originally devised, the half-width katakana were represented by a single byte each, as in JIS X 0201, again in line with the capabilities of contemporary computer technology.\nIn the late 1970s, two-byte character sets such as JIS X 0208 were introduced to support the full range of Japanese characters, including katakana, hiragana and kanji. Their display forms were designed to fit into an approximately square array of pixels, hence the name \"full-width\". For backward compatibility, separate support for half-width katakana has continued to be available in modern multi-byte encoding schemes such as Unicode, by having two separate blocks of characters \u2013 one displayed as usual (full-width) katakana, the other displayed as half-width katakana.\nAlthough often said to be obsolete, the half-width katakana are still used in many systems and encodings. For example, the titles of mini discs can only be entered in ASCII or half-width katakana, and half-width katakana are commonly used in computerized cash register displays, on shop receipts, and Japanese digital television and DVD subtitles. Several popular Japanese encodings such as EUC-JP, Unicode and Shift JIS have half-width katakana code as well as full-width. By contrast, ISO-2022-JP has no half-width katakana, and is mainly used over SMTP and NNTP.\nUnicode.\nKatakana was added to the Unicode Standard in October, 1991 with the release of version 1.0.\nThe Unicode block for (full-width) katakana is U+30A0\u2013U+30FF.\nEncoded in this block along with the katakana are the \"nakaguro\" word-separation middle dot, the \"ch\u014don\" vowel extender, the katakana iteration marks, and a ligature of \u30b3\u30c8 sometimes used in vertical writing.\nHalf-width equivalents to the usual full-width katakana also exist in Unicode. These are encoded within the Halfwidth and Fullwidth Forms block (U+FF00\u2013U+FFEF) (which also includes full-width forms of Latin characters, for instance), starting at U+FF65 and ending at U+FF9F (characters U+FF61\u2013U+FF64 are half-width punctuation marks). This block also includes the half-width dakuten and handakuten. The full-width versions of these characters are found in the Hiragana block.\nCircled katakana are code points U+32D0\u2013U+32FE in the Enclosed CJK Letters and Months block (U+3200\u2013U+32FF). A circled \u30f3 (n) is not included.\nExtensions to Katakana for phonetic transcription of Ainu and other languages were added to the Unicode standard in March 2002 with the release of version 3.2.\nThe Unicode block for Katakana Phonetic Extensions is U+31F0\u2013U+31FF:\nHistoric and variant forms of Japanese kana characters were added to the Unicode standard in October 2010 with the release of version 6.0.\nThe Unicode block for Kana Supplement is U+1B000\u2013U+1B0FF:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unicode chart Kana Supplement/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Unicode block for Small Kana Extension is U+1B130\u2013U+1B16F:\nThe Kana Extended-A Unicode block is U+1B100\u20131B12F. It contains hentaigana (non-standard hiragana) and historic kana characters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unicode chart Kana Extended-A/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Kana Extended-B Unicode block is U+1AFF0\u20131AFFF. It contains kana originally created by Japanese linguists to write Taiwanese Hokkien known as Taiwanese kana.\nThe CJK Compatibility block contains in the range U+3330-3357 square versions of katakana words, usually measure units or abbreviations of loanwords:\nKatakana in other Unicode blocks:\nFurthermore, as of Unicode 17.0, the following combinatory sequences have been explicitly named, despite having no precomposed symbols in the katakana block. Font designers may want to optimize the display of these composed glyphs. Some of them are mostly used for writing the Ainu language, the others are called \"bidakuon\" in Japanese. Other, arbitrary combinations with U+309A handakuten are also possible.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16852", "revid": "42905582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16852", "title": "Kia Asamiya", "text": "Japanese character designer and manga artist\n, best known by the pen name , is a Japanese manga artist whose work spans multiple genres and appeals to diverse audiences.\nBiography.\nBefore becoming a manga artist, Asamiya graduated from the Tokyo Designer School, then worked as a character designer for a number of anime series, and even designed models for some of the later Godzilla films (1980s). For this career, he used his real name, and maintained the two professional identities separately for many years. Several of the anime series that he worked on were very popular inside and outside Japan, most notably \"Sonic Soldier Borgman\" and \"Project A-ko\". Even after focusing primarily on his manga career, Asamiya continued to do character designs and creative consultation on anime series based on his stories, occasionally under the Kikuchi name.\nIn the early 2000s, Asamiya shifted his focus from teenage and young-adult stories to stories designed for children and for an American audience. In the former case, he credits his children as a motivation but, in the latter case, he points to a long-standing desire to work with his favorite American characters. To that end, he has worked on projects with Image Comics, Marvel Comics, and DC Comics, with projects such as ', as well as developing a manga adaptation of the film '.\nHe is well known for using influences from American comics, television, and films in his work, and describes himself as a big fan of Batman and \"Star Wars\". One of the most widely published Japanese manga artist, nearly all of his stories have been translated into other languages, including English. His two most successful and popular manga series to-date are \"Martian Successor Nadesico\" and \"Silent M\u00f6bius\".\nWhile many Japanese artists (and artists in general) are quite reclusive, Asamiya often makes an effort to be available to his fans. He maintains a website with news and information about his studio, TRON (named after the Disney film \"Tron\"). He aids and assists his official fan club by sending them regular announcements and limited-edition merchandise. Despite these actions, he shunned all public photography and had the habit of depicting himself with a placeholder sign for a face. It has become a trademark feature of his books that instead of a picture of the artist, there is an elaborately decorated rectangle sporting the words \"Now Printing\" (a message used in Japan for placeholder images).\nWorks.\nManga.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16853", "revid": "9127245", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16853", "title": "Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas", "text": "1873 Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed religious text by Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h\nThe Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas (lit.\u2009'The Most Holy Book') is the central religious text of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, written by Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h, the founder of the religion, in 1873. Though it is the main source of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed laws and practices, much of the content deals with other matters, like foundational principles of the religion, the establishment of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed institutions, mysticism, ethics, social principles, and prophecies. In Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed literature it is described as \"the Mother-Book\" of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings, and the \"Charter of the Future World Civilization\".\nBah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h had manuscript copies sent to Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds in Iran some years after its writing in 1873, and in 1890\u201391 (1308 AH, 47 BE) he arranged for its first publication in Bombay, India. Parts of the text were translated into English by Shoghi Effendi, which, along with a \"Synopsis and Codification,\" were published in 1973 by the Universal House of Justice on the centennial anniversary of its writing. The full authoritative English translation, along with clarifying texts from Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h and detailed explanatory notes from the Universal House of Justice, was first published in 1992.\nEtymology.\nThe work was written in Arabic under the Arabic title (), but in English it is commonly known by its Persian pronunciation \"Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas\" (), and is subtitled with the translation of \"the Most Holy Book\". The word \"Aqdas\" is a superlative form derived from the triconsonantal root Q-D-\u0160, denoting holiness or sanctity in Semitic languages. It is sometimes called \"The Aqdas\" for short.\nHistory.\nThe Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas was written by Bah\u00e1\u2019u\u2019ll\u00e1h in Acre at about the midpoint of his ministry around 1873. Bah\u00e1'\u00eds regard it as divinely revealed, and it forms a central part of the scriptures of the Baha'i Faith.\u00a0It was written as a response to inquiries from the believers about the laws of God for the new religion and guidance on how to arrange their affairs. Bah\u00e1\u2019u\u2019ll\u00e1h later wrote that after the initial composition in the House of \u2018Abb\u00fad, he waited for some time before sending it to the believers in Iran.\nThe \"Questions and Answers\" portion, which is included in most publications of the Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas is a compilation of answers written by Bah\u00e1\u2019u\u2019ll\u00e1h to questions put to him by various believers. It was organized by Zaynu\u2019l-Muqarrab\u00edn, a respected transcriber of Bah\u00e1\u2019u\u2019ll\u00e1h\u2019s writings and one of the nineteen Apostles of Bah\u00e1\u2019u\u2019ll\u00e1h.\nAt the instruction of Bah\u00e1\u2019u\u2019ll\u00e1h, the Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas was first published in Bombay in 1891.\nA copy of the Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas, dated January 1887, in the handwriting of Zaynu'l-Muqarrab\u00edn, is housed at the British Library. The library's description states, \"His copies are highly regarded for their accuracy.\"\nOverview.\nRather than a narrative, the book is written as a series of short teachings or principles. A summary lends itself to a bullet-point list of the various ideas shared throughout the text. Main themes cover the appointment of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's successor, who remains unnamed in the text; the layout of the future Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed administration, including the mention of the Universal House of Justice and allusions to what would later be known as the Guardian; certain laws, particularly around prayer, fasting, marriage, divorce, and inheritance; admonitions toward certain individuals; and a variety of specific laws, ordinances, and prohibitions, ranging from tithes, to the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed calendar, to prohibitions on opium, slave trading, and gossip.\nBesides the main themes above, the \"Synopsis and Codification\" lists the last of six themes as \"Miscellaneous Subjects\" and lists 33 topics:\nLaws.\nWhile it is the core text on laws of the religion, it is not the exclusive source.\nBah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h stated that the observance of the laws that he prescribed should be subject to \"tact and wisdom\", and that they do not cause \"disturbance and dissension.\" He left for the progressive application of the laws to be decided by the Universal House of Justice; for example certain Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed laws are currently only applicable to Iranian Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds such as the limit to the period of engagement, while any Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed may practice the laws if they so decide. Shoghi Effendi also stated that certain other laws, such as criminal laws, that are dependent upon the existence of a predominantly Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed society would only be applicable in a possible future Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed society. He also stated that if the laws were in conflict with the civil law of the country where a Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed lives the laws could not be practiced. Baha'is believe the Aqdas supersedes and succeeds previous revelations such as the Quran and the Bible.\nForm and style.\nThe text of the Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas consists of several hundred verses, which have been grouped in 190 numbered paragraphs in the English translation most of which are just a few sentences. The style combines elements of both poetry (\"shi'r\") and rhymed prose (\"saj'\") and the text contains instances of literary devices like alliteration, assonance, repetition, onomatopoeia, juxtaposition and antithesis, metaphors, alternation of person and personification.\nIt is written to the individual reader, as there are no clergy in the religion. The text also moves between statements said to be plain and statements suggesting the key to understanding the book is to look at the text for clues to itself.\nTranslations.\nThe Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas was completed by Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h in 1873. It was published in the Arabic for circulation among Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds speaking the language circa 1890. A Russian translation was undertaken by Alexander Tumansky in 1899 and was his most important contribution to Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed studies. Around 1900 an informal English translation was made by Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Anton Haddad, which circulated among the early American Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community in a typewritten form. In 1961, an English scholar of Arabic, Dr. Earl E. Elder, and William McElwee Miller, published an English translation, \"Al-Kitab Al-Aqdas\", through the Royal Asiatic Society, however its translation of the notes section was problematic and overall lacked \"poetic sensibility, and skill in Arabic translation\". Miller only ever used it to further his polemical agenda. In 1973 a \"Synopsis and Codification\" of the book was published in English by the Universal House of Justice, with 21 passages of the Aqdas that had already been translated into English by Shoghi Effendi with additional terse lists of laws and ordinances contained in the book outside of any contextual prose. Finally, in 1992, a full and authorized Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed translation in English was published. This version is used as the basis of translation into many other languages highlighting the practice of an indirect translation and how the purpose of the translation affects the act of translation. The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Library Online provides a side-by-side comparison of the authorized translation with earlier translations by Anton Haddad and Earl Elder.\nContent.\nThe \"Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas\" is supplemented by the \nThe book was divided into six main themes in the \"Synopsis and Codification\" by Shoghi Effendi:\nFurther, the laws were divided into four categories:\nA. Prayer\nB. Fasting\nC. Laws of personal status\nD. Miscellaneous laws, ordinances and exhortations\nThemes.\nA scholarly review finds the Aqdas has themes of laws of worship, societal relations and administrative organization, or governance, of the religion. Through the authority vested in \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 in the Aqdas there is material on internationalism related to the law in works like \"The Secret of Divine Civilization\" and through his extended authority to Shoghi Effendi works like his \"World Order of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h\" further elaborates on the theme of internationalism. This stands in some distinction from other scriptures by not using triumphal tones as the voice of God is given to be viewed but rather one of progressive development, social context, and outright delay in application until another day. It insists that divine law is applicable only in situations with requisite conditions, where it is likely to have certain social effects. The goal of application of the law and its methods are not to cause disturbance and dissension and requires an appreciation for context and intention. Additionally one is to eschew emphasis in the development of textualist and intentionalist arguments about the law though some of this is visible in scholarship on the Aqdas. Such methods of application of law in a religious context are, in the opinion of Roshan Danish, common in Islam and Judaism.\nThe Aqdas is understood by Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds to be a factor in the process of ongoing developments in world order. This can be seen comparing the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed approach to history and the future to that of the theory of the Clash of Civilizations on the one hand and the development of a posthegemony system on the other (compared with work of Robert Cox, for example, in \"Approaches to World Order\", (Robert Cox &amp; Timonthy Sinclair eds, Cambridge University Press, 1996).)\nCertain possible sources of law are specifically abrogated: laws of the B\u00e1b\u00ed religion, notably in the \"Persian Bay\u00e1n\", oral traditions (linked with pilgrim notes, and natural law, (that is to say God's sovereign will through revelation is the independent authority.) Divine revelation's law-making is both unconditioned in terms of the divine right to choose, and conditioned in the sense of the progress of history from one revelation to the next.\nMarriage and divorce.\nBaha'u'llah's statements about marriage in the \"Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas\" are brief. Marriage is highly recommended but is stated to not be obligatory. Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h states that the maximum number of wives is two, but also states that having only one wife would add more tranquility to both partners. These statements were later interpreted by \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 that having a second wife is conditional upon treating both wives with justice and equality and was not possible in practice, thus establishing monogamy.\nThat Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h had three wives, while his religion teaches monogamy, has been the subject of criticism. The writing of the Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings on gender equality and monogamy post-date Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's marriages and are understood to be evolutionary in nature, slowly leading Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds away from what had been a deeply rooted cultural practice.\nAdministration.\nThe institutional status of the authority of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 and a House of Justice are specifically delineated. On the basis of the authority granted \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 he extended forms of the authority vested in him to the Guardianship, whose sole member was Shoghi Effendi, and the Universal, or International, House of Justice through his Will and Testament. This was confirmed and amplified in other texts, notably the Kit\u00e1b-i-'Ahd. The Universal House of Justice is specifically empowered to write and rescind any laws it is felt necessary aside from those of the text of scripture and actual application of the laws of the Aqdas among Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds are dependent on the choice of the Universal House of Justice.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16854", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16854", "title": "Kuala Lumpur", "text": "Capital of Malaysia\nKuala Lumpur (KL), officially the Federal Territory of Kuala Lumpur, is the capital city and a federal territory of Malaysia. It is the most populous city in the country, covering an area of with a census population of 2,075,600 as of 2024[ [update]]. Greater Kuala Lumpur, also known as the Klang Valley, is an urban agglomeration of 8.8 million people as of 2024. It is among the fastest growing metropolitan regions in Southeast Asia, both in population and economic development.\nThe city serves as the cultural, financial, tourism, political and economic centre of Malaysia. It is also home to the Malaysian parliament (consisting of the Dewan Rakyat and the Dewan Negara) and the Istana Negara, the official residence of the monarch (\"Yang di-Pertuan Agong\"). Kuala Lumpur was first developed around 1857 as a town serving the tin mines of the region, and important figures such as Yap Ah Loy and Frank Swettenham were instrumental in the early development of the city during the late 19th century. It served as the capital of Selangor from 1880 until 1978. Kuala Lumpur was the founding capital of the Federation of Malaya and its successor, Malaysia. The city remained the seat of the executive and judicial branches of the Malaysian federal government until these were relocated to Putrajaya in early 1999. However, some sections of the political bodies still remain in Kuala Lumpur. The city is one of the three Federal Territories of Malaysia, enclaved within the state of Selangor, on the central west coast of Peninsular Malaysia.\nSince the 1990s, the city has played host to many international sporting, political and cultural events, including the 1998 Commonwealth Games, 2001 Southeast Asian Games, 2017 Southeast Asian Games, Formula One, Moto GP and 1997 FIFA World Youth Championships. Kuala Lumpur has undergone rapid development in recent decades and is home to the tallest twin buildings in the world, the Petronas Towers, which have since become an iconic symbol of Malaysian development. Kuala Lumpur is well connected with neighbouring urban metro regions such as Petaling Jaya via the rapidly expanding Klang Valley Integrated Transit System. Residents of the city can also travel to other parts of Peninsular Malaysia as well as to Kuala Lumpur International Airport (KLIA) via rail through Kuala Lumpur Sentral station.\nKuala Lumpur was ranked the 6th most-visited city in the world on the Mastercard Destination Cities Index in 2019. The city houses three of the world's ten largest shopping malls. Kuala Lumpur ranks 70th in the world and the second in Southeast Asia after Singapore for the Economist Intelligence Unit's Global Liveability Ranking and ninth in ASPAC and second in Southeast Asia after Singapore for KPMG's Leading Technology Innovation Hub 2021. Kuala Lumpur was named World Book Capital 2020 by UNESCO. In 2025, Kuala Lumpur was ranked second for the best outstanding city in Southeast Asia, after Singapore, and 79th in the world by the \"Oxford Economic Papers\"' Global Cities Index.\nEtymology.\nKuala Lumpur means \"muddy confluence\" in Malay: \"kuala\" is the point where two rivers join, or an estuary, and \"lumpur\" means \"mud\". One suggestion is that it was named after Sungai Lumpur (\"muddy river\"); in the 1820s, a place named \"Sungei Lumpoor\" was said to be the most important tin-producing settlement on the Klang River. However, Kuala Lumpur lies at the confluence of the Gombak and Klang rivers and therefore should be called Kuala Gombak, since the \"kuala\" is typically named after the river that joins a larger river or the sea. Some have argued that Sungai Lumpur extended to the confluence, therefore, the point where it joined the Klang River would be Kuala Lumpur, although this Sungai Lumpur is said to be another river joining the Klang River upstream from the Gombak confluence, or perhaps located to the north of the Batu Caves area.\nIt has also been proposed that Kuala Lumpur was originally named Pengkalan Lumpur (\"muddy landing place\"), in the same way that Klang was once called Pengkalan Batu (\"stone landing place\"), but became corrupted into Kuala Lumpur. Another theory says that it was initially a Cantonese word, \"lam-pa\", meaning \"flooded jungle\" or \"decayed jungle\". There is no firm contemporary evidence for these suggestions other than anecdotes, however. The name may also be a corrupted form of an earlier forgotten name.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n Sultanate of Selangor 1857\u20131974&lt;br&gt;\n Federated Malay States 1895\u20131942; 1945\u20131946&lt;br&gt;\n Empire of Japan 1942\u20131945&lt;br&gt;\n Malayan Union 1946\u20131948&lt;br&gt;\n Federation of Malaya 1948\u20131963&lt;br&gt;\n Malaysia 1963\u2013present\nOfficial account considers Kuala Lumpur to have been founded by the Malay Chief of Klang, Raja Abdullah, who sent Chinese miners into the region to open tin mines in 1857, although it is unclear who the first settlers were since there were likely settlements at the Gombak-Klang river confluence before that in the 1820s. Chinese miners were known to be involved in tin mining up the Selangor River in the 1840s about north of present-day Kuala Lumpur, and Mandailing Sumatrans led by Raja Asal and Sutan Puasa were also involved in tin mining and trade in the Ulu Klang region before 1860, and Sumatrans may have settled in the upper reaches of Klang River in the first quarter of the 19th century, or possibly earlier. Kuala Lumpur was originally a small hamlet of just a few houses and shops at the confluence of the Sungai Gombak and Sungai Klang (Klang River). Kuala Lumpur became established as a town c.\u20091857, when Raja Abdullah bin Raja Jaafar, aided by his brother Raja Juma'at of Lukut, raised funds from Malaccan Chinese businessmen to hire Chinese miners from Lukut to open new tin mines there. The miners landed at Kuala Lumpur and continued on foot to Ampang, where they opened the first mine. Kuala Lumpur was the furthest point up the Klang River to which supplies could conveniently be brought by boat and therefore became a collection and dispersal point serving the tin mines.\nDespite a high death toll from the malarial conditions of the jungle, the Ampang mines succeeded and exported the first tin in 1859. At that time, Sutan Puasa was already trading near Ampang. Two traders from Lukut, Hiu Siew and Yap Ah Sze, arrived in Kuala Lumpur and set up shops to sell provisions to miners in exchange for tin. The town, spurred on by tin-mining, started to develop around Old Market Square (Medan Pasar), with roads radiating out towards Ampang as well as Pudu and Batu (the destinations became the names of these roads: Ampang Road, Pudu Road, and Batu Road), where miners had also begun to settle in, and Petaling and Damansara. The miners formed gangs and the gangs frequently fought in this period, particularly factions of Kuala Lumpur and Kanching, mainly over control of the best tin mines. Leaders of the Chinese community were conferred the title of Kapitan Cina (Chinese headman) by the Malay chief, and Hiu Siew, the early Chinese trader, became the first Kapitan of Kuala Lumpur. The third Chinese Kapitan of Kuala Lumpur, Yap Ah Loy, was appointed in 1868.\nAfter the mines were opened, Raja Abdullah then sent a garrison under the command of a Bugis lieutenant to man a stockade built at Bukit Nanas. Important Malay figures of early Kuala Lumpur also included Haji Mohamed Tahir, who became the Dato Dagang (\"chief of traders\"). The Minangkabaus of Sumatra became another important group who traded and established tobacco plantations in the area. Notable Minangkabaus included their headman, Dato' Sati, Utsman Abdullah, and Haji Mohamed Taib, who was involved in the early development of Kampung Baru. The Minangkabaus were also significant socio-religious figures, for example Utsman bin Abdullah was the first kadi of Kuala Lumpur, as well as Muhammad Nur bin Ismail.\nBeginning of modern Kuala Lumpur.\nEarly Kuala Lumpur was a small town that suffered from many social and political problems \u2013 the buildings were mostly made of wood and 'atap' (palm frond thatching). The buildings were prone to catching fire, and due to a lack of proper sanitation, the town was plagued with diseases. It also suffered from a constant threat of flooding due to its location. The town became embroiled in the Selangor Civil War in part over control of revenue from the tin mines. Yap Ah Loy allied himself with Tengku Kudin and the Hai San secret society, they fought against a rival secret society, Ghee Hin, who allied themselves with Raja Mahdi. Raja Asal and Sutan Puasa switched sides to Raja Mahdi, and Kuala Lumpur was captured in 1872 and burnt to the ground. Yap escaped to Klang where he assembled another fighting force and recaptured Kuala Lumpur in March 1873, defeating Raja Mahdi's forces with the help of fighters from Pahang. The war and other setbacks, such as dropping tin prices, led to a slump. A major outbreak of cholera caused many to flee. The slump lasted until late 1879, when rising prices for tin allowed the town to recover. In late 1881, the town was severely flooded, after a fire that had destroyed the entire town in January. With the town being rebuilt a few times and having thrived, this was due in large to Yap Ah Loy. Yap, together with Frank Swettenham who was appointed the Resident in 1882, were the two most important figures of early Kuala Lumpur with Swettenham credited with its rapid growth and development and its transformation into a major urban centre.\nThe early Chinese and Malay settled along the east bank of the Klang River. The Chinese mainly settled around the commercial centre of Market Square. The Malays, and later Indian Chettiars and Muslims, resided in the Java Street area, now Jalan Tun Perak. In 1880, the colonial administration moved the state capital of Selangor from Klang to the more strategically advantageous Kuala Lumpur, and British Resident William Bloomfield Douglas decided to locate the government buildings and living quarters to the west of the river. Government offices and a new police headquarters were built on Bukit Aman, and the Padang was initially created for police training. The Padang, now known as Independence Square, would later become the centre of the British administrative offices when the colonial government offices moved to the Sultan Abdul Samad Building in 1897.\nFrank Swettenham, on becoming the British Resident, began improving the town by cleaning up the streets. He also stipulated in 1884 that buildings should be constructed of brick and tile so that they would be less flammable, and that the town be rebuilt with wider streets to reduce fire risk. Kapitan Yap Ah Loy bought a sprawling piece of real estate to set up a brick factory for the rebuilding of Kuala Lumpur, the eponymous Brickfields. Demolished \"atap\" buildings were replaced with brick and tile buildings, and many of the new brick buildings had \"five-foot ways\" and Chinese carpentry work. This resulted in a distinct eclectic shop house architecture typical to this region. Kapitan Yap Ah Loy expanded road access, linking tin mines with the city with the main arterial routes of the present Ampang Road, Pudu Road and Petaling Street. As Chinese Kapitan, he held wide powers on a par with Malay community leaders. Law reforms were implemented and new legal measures were introduced to the assembly. Yap also presided over a small claims court. With a police force of six, he was able to uphold the rule of law, constructing a prison that could accommodate sixty prisoners at a time. Yap Ah Loy also built Kuala Lumpur's first school and a major tapioca mill in Petaling Street, in which the Selangor's Sultan Abdul Samad held an interest.\nA railway line between Kuala Lumpur and Klang, initiated by Swettenham and completed in 1886, increased access and resulted in rapid growth. The population grew from 4,500 in 1884 to 20,000 in 1890. As development intensified in the 1880s, putting pressure on sanitation, waste disposal and other health measures. A Sanitary Board created on 14 May 1890 was responsible for sanitation, road upkeep, street lighting, and other functions. This would eventually become the Kuala Lumpur Municipal Council in 1948. In 1896, Kuala Lumpur was chosen as the capital of the newly formed Federated Malay States.\n20th century\u2013present.\nKuala Lumpur expanded considerably in the 20th century. It was in 1895, but was extended to encompass in 1903, and to by 1924. By the time it became a municipality in 1948 it had expanded to , and then to in 1974 as a Federal Territory.\nUntil 1974, Kuala Lumpur was one of the seven districts of Selangor (six before 1960). The Kuala Lumpur district comprises eight (later nine) mukims \u2013 Sungai Buloh, Batu, Petaling, Ampang, Ulu Klang, Kuala Lumpur (city and suburban), Setapak and (since 1953) Petaling Jaya.\nThe development of a rubber industry in Selangor fuelled by the demand for car tyres in the early 20th century led to a boom, and the population of Kuala Lumpur increased from 30,000 in 1900 to 80,000 in 1920. The commercial activities of Kuala Lumpur had been run to a large extent by Chinese businessmen such as Loke Yew, who was then the richest and most influential Chinese in Kuala Lumpur. The growth of the rubber industry led to an influx of foreign capital and planters, with new companies and industries becoming established in Kuala Lumpur, and other companies previously based elsewhere also found a presence here.\nDuring World War II, Kuala Lumpur was captured by the Imperial Japanese Army on 11 January 1942. Despite suffering little damage during the battle, the wartime occupation of the city resulted in significant loss of lives; at least 5,000 Chinese were killed in Kuala Lumpur in just a few weeks of occupation by Japanese forces, and thousands of Indians were sent as forced labour to work on the Burma Railway where many died. They occupied the city until 15 August 1945, when the commander in chief of the Japanese Seventh Area Army in Singapore and Malaysia, Seishir\u014d Itagaki, surrendered to the British administration following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Kuala Lumpur grew during the war, and continued after the war during the Malayan Emergency (1948\u20131960), during which Malaya was preoccupied with a communist insurgency and New Villages were established on the outskirts of the city.\nThe first municipal election in Kuala Lumpur was held on 16 February 1952. An \"ad hoc\" alliance between the Malay UMNO and Chinese MCA party candidates won a majority of the seats, and this led to the formation of the Alliance Party (later the Barisan Nasional). On 31 August 1957, the Federation of Malaya gained its independence from British rule. The British flag was lowered and the Malayan flag raised for the first time at the Padang at midnight on 30 August 1957, and on the morning of 31 August, the ceremony for the Declaration of Independence was held at the Merdeka Stadium by the first Prime Minister of Malaya, Tunku Abdul Rahman. Kuala Lumpur officially became the capital of the Malayan federation under the Federal Capital Act 1960 remained still after the formation of Malaysia on 16 September 1963. The Malaysian Houses of Parliament were completed at the edge of the Lake Gardens in 1963. The population of Kuala Lumpur expanded considerably from 1960 to 2018, doubling in size every 13 years.\nKuala Lumpur has seen several civil disturbances over the years. A riot in 1897 was a relatively minor affair that began with the confiscation of faulty \"dacing\" (a scale used by traders), and in 1912, a more serious disturbance called the \"tauchang\" riot began during the Chinese New Year with the cutting of pigtails and ended with rioting and factional fighting lasting several days. The worst rioting on record in Malaysia, however, occurred on 13 May 1969, when race riots broke out in Kuala Lumpur. The so-called 13 May Incident included violent conflicts between members of the Malay and the Chinese communities, the result of Malays' dissatisfaction with their socio-political status. The riots caused the deaths of 196 people, according to official figures, and led to major changes in the country's economic policy to promote and prioritise Malay economic development over that of other ethnicities.\nCity, Federal Territory, Greater Kuala Lumpur.\nKuala Lumpur achieved city status on 1 February 1972, becoming the first settlement in Malaysia to be granted the status after independence. Later, on 1 February 1974, Kuala Lumpur became a federal territory. The territory of Kuala Lumpur expanded to 96 square miles by absorbing the surrounding areas. Kuala Lumpur was ceded by Selangor to be directly controlled by the central government, and it ceased to be capital of Selangor in 1978 after the city of Shah Alam was declared the new state capital.\nOn 14 May 1990, Kuala Lumpur celebrated the centennial of the local council. The new federal territory Kuala Lumpur flag and anthem were introduced. Putrajaya was declared a Federal Territory on 1 February 2001, as well as the seat of the federal government. The administrative and judicial functions of the government were shifted from Kuala Lumpur to Putrajaya. Kuala Lumpur however still retained its legislative function, and remained the home of the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (Constitutional King).\nFrom the 1990s onwards, major urban developments in the Klang Valley extended the Kuala Lumpur metropolitan area. This area, known as Greater Kuala Lumpur, extends from the Federal Territory of Kuala Lumpur westward to Port Klang, east to the edge of the Titiwangsa Mountains as well as to the north and south. The area covers other administratively separate towns and cities such as Klang, Shah Alam, Putrajaya and others, and is served by the Klang Valley Integrated Transit System. Notable projects undertaken within Kuala Lumpur itself included the development of a new Kuala Lumpur City Centre around Jalan Ampang and the Petronas Towers, once the world's tallest buildings. The Petronas Towers has since been superseded as the tallest buildings in Kuala Lumpur by The Exchange 106 and Merdeka 118, which is the second tallest building in the world after the Burj Khalifa in Dubai.\nGeography.\nThe geography of Kuala Lumpur is characterised by the huge Klang Valley, bordered by the Titiwangsa Mountains in the east, several minor ranges in the north and the south, and the Strait of Malacca in the west. Kuala Lumpur is a Malay term that translates to \"muddy confluence\" and is located at the confluence of the Klang and Gombak rivers which flow into the Selangor River.\nLocated in the centre of Selangor state, Kuala Lumpur was a territory of Selangor State Government. In 1974, Kuala Lumpur was split off from Selangor to form the first Federal Territory governed directly by the Malaysian federal government. Its location in the most developed state on the west coast of peninsular Malaysia, which has a wider stretch of flat land than the east coast, has helped it develop faster than other cities in Malaysia. The municipality covers an area of , with an average elevation of highest point being Bukit Nanas at 94 meters above sea level.\nClimate.\nProtected by the Titiwangsa Range in the east and Indonesia's Sumatra Island in the west, Kuala Lumpur is sheltered from strong winds and has a tropical rainforest climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Af\"), hot, humid and sunny, with abundant rainfall, especially during the northeast monsoon season from October to March. Temperatures tend to remain constant. Maximums hover between and sometimes topping , while minimums hover between and have never fallen below . Kuala Lumpur typically receives at least of rain annually; June to August are relatively dry, but even then rainfall typically exceeds a month. Kuala Lumpur is highly prone to severe thunderstorms and lightning strikes. The Klang Valley, including Kuala Lumpur, is one of the places where thunderstorms are most frequently observed on Earth.\nFloods are frequent in Kuala Lumpur after heavy downpours, especially in the city centre, because irrigation structure lags behind the intense development in the city. Smoke from forest fires in nearby Sumatra and Kalimantan sometimes casts a haze over the region, and is a major source of pollution, along with open burning, motor vehicle emissions, and construction.\nGovernance.\nKuala Lumpur was administered by a corporation sole called the Federal Capital Commissioner from 1 April 1961, until it was awarded city status in 1972, after which executive power transferred to the Lord Mayor (\"Datuk Bandar\"). 15 mayors have been appointed since then. The current mayor is Maimunah Mohd Sharif, who has been in office since 15 August 2024.\nLocal government.\nThe local administration is carried out by the Kuala Lumpur City Hall, an agency under the Federal Territories Ministry of Malaysia. It is responsible for public health and sanitation, waste removal and management, town planning, environmental protection and building control, social and economic development, and general maintenance functions of urban infrastructure. Executive power lies with the mayor in the city hall, who is appointed for three years by the Federal Territories Minister. This system of appointing the mayor has been in place ever since the local government elections were suspended in 1970.\nDistricts.\nKuala Lumpur's eleven parliamentary constituencies, with 2020 population, area, density and percentage of the total are congruent with administrative subdivisions under the authority of the Kuala Lumpur City Hall authority.\nMukims.\nFor land administration purposes, the Federal Territory of Kuala Lumpur is divided into eight mukims, and several mukim-level \"towns\" (\"pekan\"/\"bandar\"):\nPolitics.\nKuala Lumpur is home to the Parliament of Malaysia. The federal Constitution stipulates the three branches of the Malaysian government: the Executive, Judiciary and Legislative branches. The Parliament consists of the Dewan Negara (Upper House / House of Senate) and Dewan Rakyat (Lower House / House of Representatives).\nList of Kuala Lumpur representatives in the Federal Parliament (Dewan Rakyat)\nThe Kuala Lumpur City Hall (DBKL) acts as the sole local government in Kuala Lumpur.\nEconomy.\nKuala Lumpur and its surrounding urban areas form the most industrialised and economically fastest-growing region in Malaysia. \nDespite the relocation of federal government administration to Putrajaya, certain government institutions such as Bank Negara Malaysia (\"National Bank of Malaysia\"), Companies Commission of Malaysia and Securities Commission as well as most embassies and diplomatic missions have remained in the city. The city remains the economic and business hub of the country. Kuala Lumpur is a centre for finance, insurance, real estate, media and the arts of Malaysia. Kuala Lumpur is rated the only global city in Malaysia, according to the Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network (GaWC).\nBursa Malaysia, or the Malaysia Exchange, is based in the city and forms one of its core economic activities. As of 5 July 2013, the market capitalisation stood at US$505.67\u00a0billion.\nThe gross domestic product (GDP) for Kuala Lumpur is estimated at RM73,536\u00a0million in 2008 with an average annual growth rate of 5.9 per cent. By 2015, the GDP had reached RM160,388\u00a0million, representing 15.1% of the total GDP of Malaysia. The per capita GDP for Kuala Lumpur in 2013 was RM79,752 with an average annual growth rate of 5.6 per cent, and RM94,722 in 2015. Average monthly household income is RM9,073 (~$2,200) as of 2016, growing at a pace of approximately 6% a year. The service sector, comprising finance, insurance, real estate, business services, wholesale and retail trade, restaurants and hotels, transport, storage and communication, utilities, personal services and government services form the largest component of employment, representing about 83.0 per cent of the total. The remaining 17 per cent comes from manufacturing and construction.\nThe large service sector is evident in the number of local and foreign banks and insurance companies operating in the city. Kuala Lumpur is poised to become the global Islamic financing hub with an increasing number of financial institutions providing Islamic financing and the strong presence of Gulf financial institutions such as the world's largest Islamic bank, the Al-Rajhi Bank and Kuwait Finance House. Apart from that, the Dow Jones &amp; Company is keen to work with Bursa Malaysia to set up Islamic Exchange Trade Funds (ETFs), which would help raise Malaysia's profile in the Gulf. The city has a large number of foreign corporations and is also host to many multi national companies' regional offices or support centres, particularly for finance and accounting, and information technology functions. Most of the country's largest companies have their headquarters here, and as of December 2007 and excluding Petronas, there are 14 companies that are listed in Forbes 2000 based in Kuala Lumpur.\nThere has been growing emphasis on expanding the economic scope of the city in other service activities, such as research and development, which support the rest of the economy of Malaysia. Kuala Lumpur has been home for years to important research centres such as the Rubber Research Institute of Malaysia, the Forest Research Institute Malaysia and the Institute of Medical Research. A new financial district for Kuala Lumpur is currently under construction: the Tun Razak Exchange (TRX), formerly known as Kuala Lumpur International Financial District (KLIFD). The TRX's landmark and prominent building is The Exchange 106 tower. The 70-acre development will be situated in the heart of Kuala Lumpur and will serve international finance and business opportunities. The new financial hub is a strategic enabler of the Malaysian government's Economic Transformation Programme (ETP), an initiative by the Malaysian government to turn Malaysia into a high income economy nation.\nTourism.\nTourism plays an important role in the city's service-driven economy. Many large worldwide hotel chains have a presence in the city. One of the oldest hotels is the Hotel Majestic. Kuala Lumpur is the sixth most visited city in the world, with 8.9\u00a0million tourists per year. \nTourism here is driven by the city's cultural diversity, relatively low costs, and wide gastronomic and shopping variety. MICE tourism, which mainly encompasses conventions\u2014 has expanded in recent years to become a vital component of the industry, and is expected to grow further once the Malaysian government's Economic Transformation Programme kicks in, and with the completion of a new 93,000 square meter-size MATRADE Centre in 2014. The MATRADE agency is also the owner of the Malaysia International Trade And Exhibition Centre (MITEC), the largest trade and exhibition centre of Malaysia, which is a component of the larger KL Metropolis development situated in the suburb of Segambut. Another notable trend is the increased presence of budget hotels in the city.\nThe major tourist destinations in Kuala Lumpur include the Petronas Towers, the Bukit Bintang shopping district, the Kuala Lumpur Tower, Petaling Street (Chinatown), the Merdeka Square, the Kuala Lumpur railway station, the House of Parliament building, the National Palace (\"Istana Negara\"), the National Planetarium, the National Science Centre, the National Art Gallery (\"Balai Seni Negara\"), the National Theatre (\"Istana Budaya\"), the National Museum, the Royal Museum, the National Textile Museum, Islamic Arts Museum, Telekom Museum, Royal Malaysian Police Museum, the National Mosque of Malaysia (\"Masjid Negara\"), Federal Territory Mosque (\"Masjid Wilayah\"), Sultan Abdul Samad Building, DBKL City Theatre (\"Panggung Bandaraya\"), Medan Pasar, Central Market, KL Bird Park, KL Butterfly Park, Aquaria KLCC, Saloma Link (\"Pintasan Saloma\"), the National Monument, and religious sites such as the Sultan Abdul Samad Jamek Mosque, Thean Hou Temple and Buddhist Maha Vihara in Brickfields.\nKuala Lumpur plays host to many cultural festivals such as the Thaipusam procession at the Sri Mahamariamman Temple. Every year during the Thaipusam celebration, a silver chariot carrying the statue of Lord Muruga together with his consort Valli and Teivayanni would be paraded through the city beginning at the temple all the way to Batu Caves in the neighbouring Gombak, Selangor. The primary entertainment and shopping district of the city is mainly centred in the Golden Triangle encompassing\" Jalan P. Ramlee\", \"Jalan Sultan Ismail\", \"Jalan Bukit Bintang\", Ampang Road and Bintang Walk.\nRetail.\nKuala Lumpur alone has 66 shopping malls and is the retail and fashion hub of both Malaysia and Southeast Asia. Shopping in Malaysia contributed RM7.7\u00a0billion (US$2.26\u00a0billion) or 20.8 per cent of the RM31.9\u00a0billion tourism receipts in 2006.\nSuria KLCC is one of Malaysia's premier upscale shopping destinations due to its location beneath the Petronas Towers. Apart from Suria KLCC, the Bukit Bintang district has the highest concentration of shopping malls in Kuala Lumpur. It includes: Pavilion KL, Fahrenheit 88, Plaza Low Yat, Berjaya Times Square, Lot 10, Sungei Wang Plaza, Starhill Gallery, Lalaport BBCC, Quill City Mall and Avenue K. Changkat area of Bukit Bintang hosts various cafes, alfresco dining outlets, illegal activities such as prostitution and more. It is best known as one of the red-light districts in Kuala Lumpur. Bangsar district also has a few shopping complexes, including Bangsar Village, Bangsar Shopping Centre, KL Gateway Mall, Bangsar South, KL Eco City Mall, The Gardens, and Mid Valley Megamall.\nApart from shopping complexes, Kuala Lumpur has designated numerous zones in the city to market locally manufactured products such as textiles, fabrics and handicrafts especially at Jalan Tuanku Abdul Rahman. Traditional clothing of ethnic Malays such as baju Kurung and baju kebaya can be found here. The Chinatown of Kuala Lumpur, commonly known as Petaling Street, is one of them. Chinatown features many pre-independence buildings with Straits Chinese and colonial architectural influences.\nSince 2000, the Malaysian Ministry of Tourism introduced a mega sale event for shopping in Malaysia. The mega sale event is held three times a year \u2013 in March, May and December \u2013 in which all shopping malls are encouraged to participate to boost Kuala Lumpur as a leading shopping destination in Asia which has been maintained until present with new mega sales.\nDemographics.\nKuala Lumpur is the most populous city in Malaysia, with a population of 2.076\u00a0million in the city proper as of 2024[ [update]]. It has a population density of , and is the most densely populated administrative district in Malaysia. Residents of the city are colloquially known as KLites. Kuala Lumpur is also the centre of the wider Klang Valley metropolitan area covering Petaling Jaya, Klang, Subang Jaya, Puchong, Shah Alam, and Gombak, with an estimated metropolitan population of 7.25 million as of 2017[ [update]].\nKuala Lumpur's heterogeneous populace includes the country's three major ethnic groups: the Malays, the Chinese, and the Indians, although the city also has a mix of different cultures including Eurasians, Kadazans, Ibans and other Indigenous races from around Malaysia.\nHistorical demographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistorically Kuala Lumpur was a predominantly Chinese city, although more recently the Bumiputera component of the city has grown substantially and they are now the dominant group. The Kuala Lumpur of 1872 beside the Klang River was described by Frank Swettenham as a \"purely Chinese village\", although a Malay stockade already existed at Bukit Nanas at that time. \nBy 1875, after participation in the Selangor Civil War by Pahang Malays had ended, Swettenham noted Malay quarters near the Chinese area in a sketch map he had drawn. There were said to be 1,000 Chinese and 700 Malays in the town in this period. Many of the Malays may have settled in Kuala Lumpur after the war. The population of Kuala Lumpur had increased to around three thousand in 1880 when it was made the capital of Selangor. A significant component of the Malay population in Kuala Lumpur of this period consisted of Malays recruited by the British in 1880, mostly from rural Malacca, to establish a police force of 2\u2013300, many of whom brought their families. Many of the Malays were originally from the other islands of Malay Archipelago i.e. Sumatra and Java. The Mandailings, the Minangkabaus, Javanese, and Buginese began arriving in Kuala Lumpur in the 19th century, while the Acehnese arrived in the late 20th century. In the following decades that saw the rebuilding of the town, it grew considerably with a large influx of immigrants, due in large part to the construction of a railway line in 1886 connecting Kuala Lumpur and Klang.\nA census in 1891 of uncertain accuracy gave a figure of 43,796 inhabitants, 79% of whom were Chinese (71% of the Chinese were Hakka, but possibly over-counted), 14% Malay, and 6% Indian. Another perhaps more accurate survey put the population of Kuala Lumpur in 1891 at around 19,000, with 73% Chinese and 12% each for both Malays and Indians. The rubber boom in the early 20th century led to a further increase in population, from 30,000 in 1900 to 80,000 in 1920. \nIn 1931, 61% of Kuala Lumpur's 111,418 inhabitants were Chinese, and in 1947 63.5%. The Malays however began to settle in Kuala Lumpur in significant numbers, in part due to government employment, as well as the expansion of the city that absorbed the surrounding rural areas where many Malays lived. Between 1947 and 1957 the population of Malays in Kuala Lumpur increased from 12.5 to 15%, while the proportion of Chinese dropped. The process continued after Malayan independence with the growth of a largely Malay civil service, and later the implementation of the New Economic Policy which encouraged Malay participation in urban industries and business. In 1980 the population of Kuala Lumpur had reached over a million, with 52% Chinese, 33% Malay, and 15% Indian. From 1980 to 2000 the number of Bumiputeras increased by 77%, but the Chinese still outnumbered the Bumiputeras in Kuala Lumpur in the 2000 census at 43% compared to 38%. By the 2010 census, according to the Department of Statistics and excluding non-citizens, the Malay population in Kuala Lumpur had increased to 44.7% (45.9% Bumiputera), exceeding the Chinese population of 43.2%. In the 2020 census, the percentage of the Bumiputera population in Kuala Lumpur had reached around 47.7%, with the Chinese population at 41.6% and Indians 10.0%.\nA notable phenomenon in recent times has been the increased portion of foreign residents in Kuala Lumpur, which rose from 1% of the city's population in 1980 to about 8% in the 2000 census, 9.4% in 2010, and 10.5% in the 2020 census. These figures also do not include a significant number of illegal immigrants. Kuala Lumpur's rapid development has triggered a huge influx of low-skilled foreign workers from Indonesia, Nepal, Myanmar, Thailand, Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Philippines, Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia into Malaysia, many of whom enter the country illegally or without proper permits.\nBirth rates in Kuala Lumpur have declined and resulted in a lower proportion of young people \u2013 the proportion of those below 15 years old fell from 33% in 1980 to slightly less than 27% in 2000. On the other hand, the working age group of 15\u201359 increased from 63% in 1980 to 67% in 2000. The elderly age group, 60 years old and above has increased from 4% in 1980 and 1991 to 6% in 2000.\nLanguages and religions.\nKuala Lumpur is pluralistic and religiously diverse. The city has many places of worship catering to the multi-religious population. Islam is practised primarily by the Malays, the Indian Muslim communities, and a small number of Chinese Muslims. Buddhism, Confucianism and Taoism are practised mainly among the Chinese. Indians traditionally adhere to Hinduism. Some Chinese and Indians also subscribe to Christianity. Kuala Lumpur is one of the three states where less than 50% of the population are self-identified Muslims, the other two being Penang and Sarawak. As of the 2020 Census, the population of Kuala Lumpur was 45.3% Muslim, 32.3% Buddhist, 8.2% Hindu, 6.4% Christian, 1.8% of other religions, and 6.0% non-religious.\nStatistics from the 2010 Census indicate that 87.4% of the Chinese population identify as Buddhists, with significant minorities of adherents identifying as Christians (7.9%), Chinese folk religions (2.7%) and Muslims (0.6%). The majority of the Indian population identifies as Hindus (81.1%), with significant minorities of identifying as Christians (7.8%), Muslims (4.9%) and Buddhists (2.1%). The non-Malay \"bumiputera\" community are predominantly Christians (44.9%), with significant minorities identifying as Muslims (31.2%) and Buddhists (13.5%). All bumiputera Malays are Muslim due to the criterion in the definition of a Malay in the Malaysian constitution that they should adhere to Islam.\nBahasa Malaysia is the principal language in Kuala Lumpur. Majority of local Malays speak Selangor dialect (read as Johor-Riau dialect) but Malays from other parts of the state such as Kedah, Kelantan and Terengganu, as well as Sarawak and also Brunei Malay that was spoken by those from Sabah/Labuan, are significantly using their respective dialect varieties of Malay.\nKuala Lumpur residents are generally literate in English, with a large proportion adopting it as their first language, especially among younger and certain adult generations. Malaysian English is widely used. It has a strong presence, especially in business, and is taught as a compulsory language in schools.\nIn addition, the Cantonese dialect group forms the majority among the local Chinese population, Hokkien and Mandarin are prominent, as they are also widely spoken among the Chinese communities. Another major Chinese dialect spoken is Hakka.\nWhile Tamil is dominant among the local Indian population, other Indian languages spoken by minorities include Telugu, Malayalam, Punjabi, and Hindi.\nBesides Malay, there are a variety of languages spoken by people of Indonesian descent, such as Minangkabau and Javanese.\nThere are also various foreign speakers of Arabic, Japanese, Korean, Thai, Spanish etc, as well as diverse indigenous languages of Semai, Iban, Kadazandusun, Bidayuh and other languages.\nCityscape.\nArchitecture.\nThe architecture of Kuala Lumpur is a mixture of old colonial influences, Asian traditions, Malay Islamic inspirations, modern, and postmodern architecture. A relatively young city compared with other Southeast Asian capitals such as Bangkok, Jakarta and Manila, most of Kuala Lumpur's notable colonial-era buildings were built toward the end of the 19th and early 20th centuries. These buildings were designed in a number of styles \u2013 Mughal/Moorish Revival, Mock Tudor, Neo-Gothic or Grecian-Spanish style or architecture. Most of the styling has been modified to use local resources and adapted to the local climate, which is hot and humid all year around. A significant architect of the early period is Arthur Benison Hubback who designed a number of the colonial-era buildings including the Kuala Lumpur Railway Station and Jamek Mosque.\nBefore the World War II, many shophouses, usually two stories with functional shops on the ground floor and separate residential spaces upstairs, were built around the old city centre. These shop-houses drew inspiration from Straits Chinese and European traditions. Some of these shophouses have made way for new developments but there are still many standing today in the Medan Pasar Besar (Old Market Square), Chinatown, Jalan Tuanku Abdul Rahman, Jalan Doraisamy, Bukit Bintang and Tengkat Tong Shin areas.\nIndependence coupled with rapid economic growth from the 1970s to the 1990s and with Islam being the official religion in the country, has resulted in the construction of buildings with a more local and Islamic flavour around the city. Many of these buildings derive their design from traditional Malay items such as the songkok and the keris. Some of these buildings have Islamic geometric motifs integrated into the designs of the building, due to Islamic restrictions on imitating nature through drawings. Examples of these buildings are Telekom Tower, Maybank Tower, Dayabumi Complex, and the Islamic Centre. Some buildings such as the Islamic Arts Museum Malaysia and National Planetarium have been built to masquerade as a place of worship, complete with dome and minaret, when in fact they are places of science and knowledge. The Petronas Towers are the tallest twin buildings in the world and were the tallest buildings in the country until being surpassed by The Exchange 106 by 1.7 meters in 2019. They were designed to resemble motifs found in Islamic art.\nLate modern and postmodern architecture began to appear in the late-1990s and early-2000s. With economic development, old buildings such as Bok House have been razed to make way for new ones. Buildings with all-glass shells exist throughout the city, with the most prominent examples being the Petronas Towers and Kuala Lumpur Convention Centre. Kuala Lumpur's central business district today has shifted to the Kuala Lumpur city centre (KLCC) where many new and tall buildings with modern and postmodern architecture fill the skyline. According to the World Tallest 50 Urban Agglomeration 2010 Projection by the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat, Kuala Lumpur ranks 10th among cities that have most buildings above 100 metres with a combined height of 34,035 metres from its 244 high-rise buildings.\nParks.\nThe Perdana Botanical Garden or Lake Gardens, a botanical garden, was the first recreational park created in Kuala Lumpur. The Malaysian Parliament building is located close by, and Carcosa Seri Negara, which was once the official residence of the British colonial administration, is also sited here. The park includes a butterfly park, deer park, orchid garden, a hibiscus garden, and the Kuala Lumpur Bird Park, which is the world's largest aviary bird park. Other parks in the city include the ASEAN Sculpture Garden, KLCC Park, Titiwangsa Lake Gardens, Metropolitan Lake Gardens in Kepong, Taman Tasik Permaisuri (Queen's Lake Gardens), Bukit Kiara Botanical Gardens, the equestrian park and West Valley Park near Taman Tun Dr Ismail (TTDI), and Bukit Jalil International Park.\nThere are three forest reserves within the city, the Bukit Nanas Forest Reserve in the city centre, the oldest gazetted forest reserve in the country , Bukit Sungai Putih Forest Reserve () and Bukit Sungai Besi Forest Reserve (). Bukit Nanas, in the heart of the city centre, is one of the oldest virgin forests in the world within a city. These residual forest areas are home to a number of fauna species, particularly monkeys, treeshrews, pygmy goats, budgerigars, squirrels and birds.\nEducation.\nAccording to government statistics, Kuala Lumpur had a literacy rate of 97.5% in 2000, the highest rate in any state or territory in Malaysia. In Malaysia, Malay is the language of instruction for most subjects while English is a compulsory subject, but as of 2012[ [update]], English was still the language of instruction for mathematics and the natural sciences for certain schools. Some schools provide instruction in Mandarin and Tamil for certain subjects.\nKuala Lumpur contains 14 tertiary education institutions, 79 high schools, 155 elementary schools, and 136 kindergartens.\nKuala Lumpur is home to the University of Malaya (UM). Established in 1949, it is the oldest university in Malaysia, and one of the oldest in the region. It was ranked the best university in Malaysia, the 22nd-best in Asia, and third in Southeast Asia in QS World University Rankings 2019. In recent years, the number of international students at the University of Malaya has risen, as a result of increasing efforts made to attract them.\nOther universities located in Kuala Lumpur include Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman (UTAR), University of Malaya-Wales (UM-Wales), International Islamic University Malaysia (IIUM), Tunku Abdul Rahman University College (TARUC), UCSI University (UCSI), Taylor's University (TULC), International Medical University (IMU), Open University Malaysia (OUM), Kuala Lumpur University (UniKL), Perdana University (PU), Wawasan Open University (WOU), HELP University and the branch campus of the National University of Malaysia (UKM) and University of Technology Malaysia (UTM). The National Defence University of Malaysia is located at Sungai Besi Army Base, in the southern part of central Kuala Lumpur. It was established to be a major centre for military and defence technology studies. This institution covers studies for the army, navy, and air force.\nGreater Kuala Lumpur covers an even more extensive selection of universities including several international branches such as Monash University Malaysia Campus, University of Nottingham Malaysia Campus and Xiamen University Malaysia.\nCulture.\nArts.\nKuala Lumpur is a hub for cultural activities and events in Malaysia. Among the centres is the National Museum, which is situated along the Mahameru Highway. Its collection comprises artefacts and paintings collected throughout the country. The Islamic Arts Museum, which houses more than seven thousand Islamic artefacts including rare exhibits and a library of Islamic art books, is the largest Islamic art collection in Southeast Asia. The museum's collection not only concentrates on works from the Middle East but also includes work from elsewhere in Asia, such as China and Southeast Asia. Kuala Lumpur has a craft complex coupled with a museum that displays a variety of textile, ceramic, metal craft, and weaved products. Information on the production process is portrayed in diorama format complete with historical facts, techniques, and traditionally engineered equipment. Among the processes shown are pottery making, intricate wood carving, silver-smithing, weaving songket cloth, stamping batik patterns on cloth, and boat-making.\nThe premier performing arts venue is the Petronas Philharmonic Hall located underneath the Petronas Towers. The resident orchestra is the Malaysian Philharmonic Orchestra (MPO), consisting of musicians from all over the world, and features regular concerts, chamber concerts, and traditional cultural performances. The Kuala Lumpur Performing Arts Centre (KLPac) in Sentul West and Damansara Performing Arts Centre (DPac) in Damansara Perdana are two of the most established centres in the country for the performing arts, notably theatre, plays, music, and film screening. It has housed many local productions and has been a supporter of local and regional independent performance artists. The Future Music Festival Asia has been held in the city since 2012, featuring local and international artists.\nThe National Art Gallery of Malaysia is located on Jalan Temerloh, off Jalan Tun Razak on a site neighbouring the National Theatre (Istana Budaya) and National Library. The architecture of the gallery incorporates elements of traditional Malay architecture, as well as contemporary modern architecture. The National Art Gallery serves as a centre of excellence and is a trustee of the national art heritage. The Ilham Tower Gallery near Ampang Park houses exhibitions of works by local and foreign artists.\nKuala Lumpur holds the Malaysia International Gourmet Festival annually. Another event hosted annually by the city is the Kuala Lumpur Fashion Week, which includes international brands and local designers. Also, Kuala Lumpur was designated as the World Book Capital for 2020 by UNESCO.\nSports and recreation.\nKuala Lumpur has numerous parks, gardens and open spaces for recreational purposes. Total open space for recreational and sports facilities land use in the city has increased significantly by 169.6 per cent from in 1984 to in 2000.\nKuala Lumpur was touted as one of the host cities for the Formula One World Championship from 1999 to 2017. The open-wheel auto racing A1 Grand Prix was held until the series folded in 2009. The Motorcycle Grand Prix races are held at the Sepang International Circuit in Sepang in the neighbouring state of Selangor. The Formula One event contributed significantly to tourist arrivals and tourism income to Kuala Lumpur. This was evident during the Asian financial crisis in 1998. Despite cities around Asia suffering declining tourist arrivals, in Kuala Lumpur tourist arrivals increased from 6,210,900 in 1997 to 10,221,600 in 2000, or 64.6%. In 2015, the Kuala Lumpur Street Circuit was constructed to host the Kuala Lumpur City Grand Prix motor racing event.\nFootball is one of the most popular sports in Kuala Lumpur. The Merdeka Tournament is mainly held at Stadium Merdeka. The Stadium Negara is also located right next to it which is also one of the oldest indoor stadiums in the country. The city is also the home of Kuala Lumpur City, which plays in the Malaysia Super League. Kuala Lumpur hosted the official Asian Basketball Championship in 1965, 1977 and 1985. The city's basketball supporters cheered Malaysia's national basketball team to a Final Four finish in 1985, the team's best performance to date. Further, the city is home to the Kuala Lumpur Dragons, 2016 Champions of the ASEAN Basketball League. The team plays its home games in the MABA Stadium.\nKL Grand Prix CSI 5*, a five-star international showjumping equestrian event, is held annually in the city. Other annual sport events hosted by the city include the KL Tower Run, the KL Tower International BASE Jump Merdeka Circuit and the Kuala Lumpur International Marathon. Kuala Lumpur is also one of the stages of the Tour de Langkawi cycling race. The annual Malaysia Open Super Series badminton tournament is held in Kuala Lumpur.\nKuala Lumpur is also the birthplace of Hashing, which began in December 1938 when a group of British colonial officers and expatriates, some from the Selangor Club, began meeting on Monday evenings to run, in a fashion patterned after the traditional British Paper Chase or \"Hare and Hounds\".\nKuala Lumpur hosted the 128th IOC Session in 2015 where the IOC elected Beijing as the host city of the 2022 Winter Olympics and Lausanne as the host city of the 2020 Winter Youth Olympics.\nTransportation.\nAs in most other Asian cities, driving is the main commuting choice in Kuala Lumpur. Every part of the city is well connected with highways. Kuala Lumpur has a comprehensive road network with more transportation development planned. Public transportation covers a variety of transport modes such as bus, rail and taxi. Despite efforts to promote public transport, utilisation rates are low, 16 per cent of the population in 2006. However, public transport utilisation will increase with the expansion of the rail network, operated by Prasarana Malaysia in Kuala Lumpur and the Klang Valley via its subsidiaries Rapid Rail and Rapid Bus, using the Rapid KL brand name. Since the take over from Intrakota Komposit Sdn Bhd, Prasarana Malaysia has redrawn the entire bus network of Kuala Lumpur and the Klang Valley metropolitan area to increase passenger numbers and improve Kuala Lumpur's public transport system. Prasarana Malaysia has adopted the hub and spoke system to provide greater connectivity, and reduce the need for more buses. KL Sentral was added on 16 April 2001 and served as the new transport hub of the Klang Valley Integrated Transit System.\nUrban rail.\nThe KTM Komuter, a commuter rail service, was introduced in 1995 as the first rail transit system to provide local rail services in Kuala Lumpur and the surrounding Klang Valley suburban areas. Services were later expanded to other parts of Malaysia with the introduction of the Northern and Southern sectors. KTM Komuter's 175\u00a0km (109\u00a0mi) network in the Central Sector has 53 stations. It consists of two cross-city routes, namely the Port Klang Line (Tanjung Malim to Port Klang) and Seremban Line (Batu Caves to Pulau Sebang/Tampin). Transfers between the two main lines can be made at any of the four stations on the central core: KL Sentral, Kuala Lumpur, Bank Negara and Putra.\nLight Rapid Transit (LRT) Malaysia is the medium-capacity rail lines in the Klang Valley, Malaysia. The first LRT line was opened in 1996 and the system has since expanded to three lines, which opened in 1998 and 1999. Along with the MRT, the LRT is constructed and owned by the Prasarana, with operating concessions currently run by Rapid KL and Rapid Rail. In 2006, the government announced the Sri Petaling Line and Kelana Jaya line extension projects. Unlike the original line, which used the fixed-block signalling block system, the extension uses the communications-based train control (CBTC) signalling system.\nMass Rapid Transit (MRT) Malaysia is a heavy rail rapid transit system that constitutes the bulk of the railway network in Kuala Lumpur and the rest of the Klang Valley. The first section of the MRT opened on 16 December 2016, and the network has since grown rapidly following Malaysia's aim of developing a comprehensive rail network as the backbone of the country's public transportation system. The network consists of three lines \u2013 the \n}} MRT Circle Line, looping around Kuala Lumpur, the \n}} MRT Kajang Line and the \n}} MRT Putrajaya Line, covering a 20\u00a0km radius in the southeast\u2013northwest direction from the city centre, will integrate the current rapid transit system and serve high-density areas which are currently not serviced by any rapid transit system. About 90 new stations are planned in this \"wheel and spoke\" concept, out of which 26 in the city centre will be underground. Ridership capacity will be two million passengers per day.\nThe KL Monorail opened on 31 August 2003 with 11 stations running on two parallel elevated tracks. The line is numbered \n}} and coloured light green on official transit maps. It connects the KL Sentral transport hub in the south and Titiwangsa in the north with the \"Golden Triangle\", a commercial, shopping, and entertainment area comprising Bukit Bintang, Imbi, Sultan Ismail, and Raja Chulan.\nKuala Lumpur is served by two airports. The main airport, Kuala Lumpur International Airport (KLIA) at Sepang, Selangor, which is also the aviation hub of Malaysia, is located about south of city. The other airport is Sultan Abdul Aziz Shah Airport, also known as Subang Skypark, and served as the main international gateway to Kuala Lumpur from 1965 until KLIA opened in 1998.\nKLIA connects the city with direct flights to destinations on four continents around the world, and is the main hub for the national carrier, Malaysia Airlines and low-cost carrier, AirAsia. KLIA can be reached using the KLIA Ekspres, an airport rail link service from KL Sentral, which takes twenty-eight\u00a0minutes and costs RM 55 (roughly US$13.50), while travelling by car or bus via highway will take about an hour but cost a lot less. Direct buses from KLIA to the city centre are plentiful (every 10 to 15 minutes during peak hours), air-conditioned and comfortable with fares ranging from RM 11 (roughly US$2.70) to RM 15 (roughly US$3.70). Air Asia and other low-cost carrier flights do not fly out of KLIA main terminal, but from KLIA2, which is two kilometres from KLIA. KLIA2 is served by an extension of the KLIA Ekspres and by a free shuttle bus service from KLIA. As of 2018[ [update]], Sultan Abdul Aziz Shah Airport is only used for chartered and turboprop flights by airlines such as Firefly and Malindo Air.\nBuses.\n\"Bas Mini KL\" or Kuala Lumpur Mini-Bus Service was one of the oldest and most popular Malaysia public bus service, having served Kuala Lumpur and the Klang Valley region. The buses were primarily painted pink with a white stripe on the sides, and had a capacity of only 20\u201330 passengers, due to their smaller size. The buses operated on a commission basis, with service operators paid according to the fares they collected. The mini-bus service was from 23 September 1975 and discontinued on 1 July 1998, to be replaced by the Intrakota bus service and later, Rapid Bus in 2005.\nRapid Bus began the first phase of the revamp of its bus network in January 2006, introducing 15 City Shuttle bus routes which serve major areas in the Central Business District (CBD) of Kuala Lumpur. In 2008, Rapid Bus operated 167 routes with 1,400 buses covering 980 residential areas with a ridership of about 400,000 per day. The buses run between four hubs at the edge of the central business district, namely KL Sentral, Titiwangsa, Kuala Lumpur City Centre, Maluri, and Medan Pasar in the city centre. These bus hubs also serve as rail interchanges, with the exception of Medan Pasar, although it is at a walking distance from Masjid Jamek LRT station. On 18 June 2020, Rapid Bus released a new feature: real-time location of bus in Google Maps, via collaboration with Google Transit.\nEffective 10 April 2019, all RapidKL buses are implementing a fully cashless journey for all routes by stages, in which the bus accepts Touch n Go cards only for user convenience. These systems were fully implemented by 27 May 2019. Almost 170 RapidKL bus routes are covered with the real-time feature, which was expanded to the MRT feeder bus service. Rapid Bus is however not the only bus operator in Kuala Lumpur and the Klang Valley. Other bus operators are Selangor Omnibus, Setara Jaya Bus, and Causeway Link.\nTaxis.\nIn Kuala Lumpur, most taxis have distinctive white and red liveries. Many companies operate and maintain pools of different model of cars in their brands. Before local car production began, the Mercedes-Benz 200, Mazda 323/Ford Laser, Toyota Mark II X80 series and the Opel Kadett were used. Most were scrapped and replaced by Protons, but there are still a large number of these models running the roads. Kuala Lumpur is one of the major ASEAN cities with taxis extensively running on natural gas. Taxis can be hailed from taxi stands or from the streets. Taxis may be flagged down at any time of the day along any public road outside of the Central Business District (CBD). However, increased usage of ridesharing services like Grab, MyCar and JomRides has resulted in a decrease in taxi use.\nNevertheless, the London-based website, LondonCabs.co.uk has claimed that taxis in the city charge passengers high rates, refusing to turn on their meters and offering instead over-priced flat-rate fares, although other passengers contradict such claims. The heads of some taxi associations came out and distanced themselves from taxi drivers who had given the taxi industry a bad name, promising the public that not all taxi drivers were like that.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nKuala Lumpur is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nstyle=\"width:100%\" class=\"wraplinks\""}
{"id": "16855", "revid": "19376353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16855", "title": "Kansas State University", "text": "Public university in Manhattan, Kansas, US\nKansas State University (KSU, Kansas State, or K-State) is a public land-grant research university with its main campus in Manhattan, Kansas, United States. It was opened as the state's land-grant college in 1863 and was the first public institution of higher learning in the state of Kansas.\nThe university is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\". Kansas State's academic offerings are administered through nine colleges, including the College of Veterinary Medicine and the College of Technology and Aviation in Salina. Graduate degrees offered include 65 master's degree programs and 45 doctoral degrees.\nBranch campuses are in Salina and Olathe. The Kansas State University Salina Aerospace and Technology Campus is home to the College of Technology and Aviation. The Olathe Innovation Campus has a focus on graduate work in research bioenergy, animal health, plant science and food safety and security.\nHistory.\nKansas State University, originally named Kansas State Agricultural College, was founded in Manhattan on February 16, 1863, during the American Civil War, as a land-grant institution under the Morrill Act. The school was the first land-grant college created under the Morrill Act. K-State is the third-oldest school in the Big 12 Conference and the oldest public institution of higher learning in the state of Kansas.\nThe effort to establish the school began in 1861, the year that Kansas was admitted to the United States. One of the new state legislature's top priorities involved establishing a state university. That year, the delegation from Manhattan, led by New England abolitionist, Isaac Goodnow, introduced a bill to convert the private Blue Mont Central College in Manhattan, incorporated in 1858, into the state university. But the bill establishing the university in Manhattan was controversially vetoed by Governor Charles L. Robinson of Lawrence, and an attempt to override the veto in the Legislature failed by two votes. In 1862, another bill to make Manhattan the site of the state university failed by one vote. Finally, upon the third attempt on February 16, 1863, the state accepted Manhattan's offer to donate the Blue Mont College building and grounds and established the state's land-grant college at the site \u2013 the institution that would become Kansas State University.\nWhen the college opened for its first session on September 2, 1863, it became only the second public institution of higher learning to admit women and men equally in the United States. Enrollment for the first session totaled 52 students: 26 men and 26 women. Twelve years after opening, the university moved its main campus from the location of Blue Mont Central College to its present site in 1875. The original site is now occupied by Central National Bank of Manhattan and Founders Hill Apartments.\nThe early years of the institution witnessed debate over whether the college should provide a focused agricultural education or a full liberal arts education. During this era, the tenor of the school shifted with the tenure of college presidents. For example, President John A. Anderson (1873\u20131879) favored a limited education and President George T. Fairchild (1879\u20131897) favored a classic liberal education. Fairchild was credited with saying, \"Our college exists not so much to make men farmers as to make farmers men.\"\nDuring this era, in 1873, Kansas State helped pioneer the academic teaching of home economics for women, becoming one of the first two colleges to offer the program of study.\nIn November 1928, the school was accredited by the Association of American Universities (AAU) as a school whose graduates were deemed capable of advanced graduate work. The name of the school was changed in 1931 to Kansas State College of Agriculture and Applied Science. In 1959, the Kansas legislature changed the name again to Kansas State University of Agriculture and Applied Science to reflect a growing number of graduate programs. However, in modern practice, the \"Agriculture and Applied Science\" portion has usually been omitted even from official documents such as state statutes.\nMilton S. Eisenhower was president from 1943 to 1950. Eisenhower was a leading UNESCO delegate and served as the first chairman of the U.S. National Commission for UNESCO. Influenced by his work with UNESCO, he pursued a number of progressive reforms at Kansas State College to promote democracy, citizenship, and global peacebuilding. These curricular reforms led to a subsequent peace-building movement on the campus that agitated for civic participation, humanitarian action, and desegregation from 1947 to 1950.\nOn June 15, 2009, Kirk Schulz became the 13th president of Kansas State University. In March 2010 he announced his K-State 2025 plan. The initiative is designed to elevate K-State to a top 50 nationally recognized research university by 2025. In 2011, during Schulz's tenure, the Olathe branch opened. His last day was April 22, 2016, as he was selected as Washington State University's next president.\nIn late April 2016, Ret. General Richard Myers began serving as the interim president of Kansas State University and was announced as the permanent 14th president on November 15, 2016. He was succeeded by Richard Linton, a former dean of the College of Agriculture and Life Science at North Carolina State University (2012\u20132022).\nOldest public university in Kansas.\nThe state legislature established the state's land-grant college in Manhattan on January 13, 1863. A commission to establish a state university in Lawrence was called for later in the same legislative session, provided that town could meet certain requirements, and finalized later that year. Kansas State was the first public institution of higher learning founded in the state and began teaching college-level classes in 1863. By comparison, the University of Kansas opened in 1866, and offered only preparatory-level classes until college-level classes began in 1869.\nKansas State was founded with an agricultural and scientific college consistent with the land-grant college mandate, as well as departments for military science and literature. It was formally renamed as \"Kansas State University\" in 1959.\nCampus.\nThe main campus of Kansas State University in Manhattan now covers . The campus is historic, featuring more buildings built before 1910 than any other campus in Kansas. Holtz Hall, built in 1876, is the oldest free-standing building on campus. However, the oldest building on campus is the original section of Seaton Hall, which now forms Seaton Court, facing the courtyard of Hale Library and Eisenhower Hall. Originally named the Industrial Workshop, this section of Seaton Hall is the oldest remaining education building on the Manhattan campus.\nThe predominant architectural feature of the Manhattan campus is its use of native limestone. This includes the signature building at Kansas State University, Anderson Hall, developed in three stages between 1877 and 1885. Anderson Hall, now listed on the National Register of Historic Places, has housed the university's administrative offices for more than a century. Dickens Hall was constructed in 1908 and currently houses the statistics and philosophy departments. Although there are many historic building on the campus, since 1986 Kansas State has also added over two million square feet (186,000\u00a0m2) of new buildings to the campus, including an expanded library, new art museum, and plant sciences building.\nSeveral of the buildings on campus were heavily damaged by an EF4 tornado on June 11, 2008. Damage estimates totaled more than $20 million.\nSince 2014, the Main campus has been under significant renovation to accommodate infrastructure changes. The campus is also adopting a more walking friendly atmosphere by closing off many small access roads to vehicles.\nAcademics.\nSince 1986, Kansas State ranks first nationally among public universities in its total of Rhodes, Marshall, Truman, Goldwater, and Udall scholars with 147 recipients. The school is a member of the Midwestern Association of Graduate Schools, and is home to the Kansas Beta chapter of the Phi Beta Kappa honor society. The institution petitioned in 1925, and three years later received, a charter of Mortar Board National College Senior Honor Society.\nKansas State University has 65 academic departments in nine colleges: Agriculture; Architecture, Planning and Design; Arts and Sciences; Business Administration; Education; Engineering; Health and Human Sciences; Technology and Aviation; and Veterinary Medicine. The graduate school offers 65 master's degree programs and nearly 50 doctoral programs.\nIn 1991, the former Kansas Technical Institute in Salina, Kansas was merged with Kansas State University by an act of the Kansas legislature. The College of Technology and Aviation is at the Salina campus. Initially, this campus was referred to as Kansas State University \u2013 Salina, but on October 14, 2014, the Kansas Board of Regents approved a name change to Kansas State University Polytechnic Campus. The campus was again renamed in 2021 to Kansas State University Salina Aerospace and Technology Campus.\nIn 2018, the Kansas Board of Regents approved that the name of the College of Engineering should be changed to the Carl R. Ice College of Engineering in Ice's honor.\nResearch.\nAgriculture.\nThe university has had a long-standing interest in agriculture, particularly native Great Plains plant and animal life. The Kansas State University Gardens is an on-campus horticulture display garden that serves as an educational resource and learning laboratory for K-State students and the public. The Konza Prairie is a native tallgrass prairie preserve south of Manhattan, which is co-owned by The Nature Conservancy and Kansas State University and operated as a field research station by the department of biology. The university also owns an additional in cities across the state that it operates as Agricultural Experiment Stations in research centers in Hays, Garden City, Colby, and Parsons.\nIn 2006, K-State dedicated the Biosecurity Research Institute. The BRI, in Pat Roberts Hall, is a safe and secure location in which scientists and their collaborators can study high-consequence pathogens. It was designed and constructed for biosafety level 3 (BSL-3) and biosafety level 3 agriculture (BSL-3Ag) research.\nThe university's research facilities include the James R. Macdonald Laboratory for research in atomic, molecular and optical physics and the NASA Center for Gravitational Studies in Cellular and Developmental Biology. The excimer laser, which made LASIK eye surgery possible, is a technology developed by Kansas State researchers.\nRadio &amp; television.\nKansas State was involved in early experimentation with television and radio broadcasts. The first radio station licensed in Manhattan was Kansas State's experimental station 9YV. In 1912 the station began a daily broadcast (in morse code) of the weather forecast, becoming the first radio station in the U.S. to air a regularly scheduled forecast. After a series of efforts to secure a more high-powered signal for the university \u2013 including a brief cooperation with John R. Brinkley's notorious KFKB \u2013 Kansas State was granted a license for KSAC, which began broadcasting with 500 watts of power on December 1, 1924. The station was reassigned to the frequency of AM 580 in 1928, and continued broadcasting on that frequency until November 27, 2002, when it made its last broadcast after the frequency was bought out by WIBW in Topeka, Kansas.\nOn March 9, 1932, the Federal Radio Commission granted Kansas State a license to operate the television station W9XAK. It was the first television station in Kansas. Activity on the station peaked in 1933 and 1934, with original programs being produced three nights a week. On October 28, 1939, the station broadcast the Homecoming football game in Manhattan between Kansas State and Nebraska, which was the second college football game ever televised. The station went off the air in 1939.\nK-State Research Exchange.\nK-State Research Exchange, referred to as K-REx, is a local branding of Kansas State University's implementation of DSpace.\nKansas State University graduate students are required to submit an electronic version of their thesis, dissertation, or report, which is then made openly available through the K-State Research Exchange (K-REx), and become indexed by search engines.\nCampus life.\nThe university is home to several museums, including the Marianna Kistler Beach Museum of Art, the KSU Historic Costume and Textiles Museum, the K-State Insect Zoo, and the Chang, Chapman, and Kemper galleries, which feature faculty and student artwork. The university also offers an annual cycle of performance art at McCain Auditorium, including concerts, plays and dance.\nThe former All-University Convocation lecture series \u2013 which began with a speech by Harry Golden on April 3, 1963, and ended in 1997 \u2013 brought to campus prominent leaders such as Martin Luther King Jr., Supreme Court Justices Byron White and William O. Douglas, Senate Minority Leader Everett Dirksen, Rep. Shirley Chisholm, and thinkers such as Arthur C. Clarke, Benjamin Spock, Betty Friedan, Buckminster Fuller, and Saul Alinsky.\nStudent life.\nK-State has twelve residence halls on campus: Boyd Hall, Ford Hall, Goodnow Hall, Haymaker Hall, Marlatt Hall, Moore Hall, West Hall, Putnam Hall, Van Zile Hall, and the new Wefald hall, completed in 2016. The Living Community at Jardine, and Smurthwaite, as well as Jardine Apartments. Smurthwaite, Ford, and Boyd Halls are all female. Haymaker and Marlatt Halls were all-male residence halls until the fall semesters of 2002 and 2009 respectively, when they became co-educational. The residence halls are divided into three complexes: Derby, Kramer, and Strong.\nK-State implemented an academic honor code in 1999. When students are admitted, it is implied that they will adhere to the Honor Pledge: \"On my honor, as a student, I have neither given nor received unauthorized aid on this academic work.\"\nKansas State has more than 400 student organizations.\nStudent media include KSDB-FM \"Wildcat 91.9\", KKSU-LD \"Channel 8\", the \"Kansas State Collegian\", and the \"Royal Purple Yearbook.\"\n\"Alma Mater\" is the name of the official school song of Kansas State University. In 1888, when the university was still Kansas State Agricultural College, H.W. Jones submitted the song as part of a school-wide contest. It was originally a four-stanza song and, over the years, some lyrics have changed. The song is sung at most K-State sporting events by fans, students and alumni. Wildcat Victory and Wabash Cannonball are both commonly used as fight songs. Wildcat Victory is used by many high schools as their fight song. Since the early 2010s, K-State students have chanted obscenities at sporting events toward their rival, the University of Kansas, to Darude's Sandstorm and the Wabash Cannonball. This tradition has continued despite the efforts of Hall of Fame Football Coach Bill Snyder, Kansas State Basketball Coach, Jerome Tang, and Band Director, Frank Tracz.\nFraternities and sororities.\nThere are dozens of national and international fraternities and sororities at Kansas State University.\nAthletics.\nIntercollegiate sports began at Kansas State in the 1890s. The school's sports teams are called the Wildcats, and they participate in the NCAA Division I and the Big 12 Conference. The official school color is Royal Purple, making Kansas State one of very few schools (alongside Syracuse and Harvard) that have only one official color. White and silver are commonly used as complementary colors; white is mentioned with purple in the university's fight song \"Wildcat Victory\". The athletics logo is a stylized Wildcat head in profile usually featured in the school color, called the \"Powercat\".\nSports sponsored by the school include football, basketball, cross country and track, baseball, golf, tennis, rowing, women's soccer, and volleyball. The head football coach is Chris Klieman, the head men's basketball coach is Jerome Tang, the head women's basketball coach is Jeff Mittie, and the head baseball coach is Pete Hughes. In 2012\u22122013, Kansas State became only the second Big 12 school to win conference titles in football, men's basketball, and baseball in the same school year.\nHistorically, African-American athletes at Kansas State were responsible for breaking the modern \"color barrier\" in Big Seven Conference athletics. Harold Robinson became the first African-American athlete in the conference in more than two decades and the first ever to receive a scholarship, playing football for Kansas State in 1949. In the spring of 1951 the conference's baseball color barrier was broken by Kansas State's Earl Woods, and in the winter of 1951\u20131952 Kansas State's Gene Wilson broke the conference color barrier in basketball (together with LaVannes Squires at the University of Kansas).\nNotable people.\nAlumni.\nBeginning with the first graduating class in 1867, a number of Kansas State alumni have gone on to distinguished careers. The 46th Governor of Kansas, Sam Brownback, and one U.S. Senator from Kansas, Pat Roberts, are graduates of Kansas State University. Other graduates currently serve as the vice-president of Liberia, the president of the Georgia Institute of Technology, and the president of the University of the Virgin Islands. Kansas State alumni have been enshrined in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and the College Football Hall of Fame, served as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and have earned Emmy Awards and Olympic gold medals. Geraldine L. Richmond, the National Medal of Science laureate (2013) and Priestley Medalist (2018), received a B.S. in chemistry in 1975.\nFaculty.\nIn line with its roots as a land grant college, a number of Kansas State's most eminent faculty in its earliest years were in the areas of agriculture, science and military. For example, famed geologist Benjamin Franklin Mudge was chair of the geology department, while famed Army officer Andrew Summers Rowan, the subject of the essay \"A Message to Garcia\", served as professor of military tactics.\nKansas State faculty have received a number of awards. Fred Albert Shannon was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for History in 1929, while teaching history at Kansas State. In 2008, CASE and the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching honored Michael Wesch as national Professor of the Year. At least eight Kansas State faculty members have gone on to serve as university presidents, including Naomi B. Lynn, the first Hispanic female president of an American public university.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "16857", "revid": "1384218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16857", "title": "Sporting Kansas City", "text": "American professional soccer club based in Kansas City metropolitan area\nSoccer club\nSporting Kansas City is an American professional soccer club based in the Kansas City metropolitan area. The club competes in Major League Soccer (MLS) as a member of the Western Conference. The administrative offices are located in downtown Kansas City, Missouri, and the team clubhouse and practice facilities are located in Kansas City, Kansas. The team has played its home matches at Children's Mercy Park since 2011.\nSporting Kansas City began play in 1996 as a charter team in the league, then named Kansas City Wiz. The team was founded by Lamar Hunt in 1995. Starting in 1997, the franchise was named Kansas City Wizards. The team rebranded in November 2010, coinciding with its move to its new home stadium, Children's Mercy Park. Since moving across the state line, they have been the only major professional sports league franchise to play their home games in Kansas. The franchise has won the MLS Cup in 2000 and 2013, the Supporters' Shield in 2000, and the U.S. Open Cup in 2004, 2012, 2015, and 2017.\nThe club also has a reserve team, Sporting Kansas City II, that began play in the second-tier USL Championship in 2016 before switching to MLS Next Pro in 2022.\nHistory.\nEarly years (1996\u20131999).\nThe Kansas City MLS franchise was founded by Lamar Hunt, who was also the founder of the American Football League, the Kansas City Chiefs, the United Soccer Association (which merged with the NPSL to form the North American Soccer League or NASL), and Major League Soccer. The Kansas City Wiz played their first game on April 13, 1996, defeating the Colorado Rapids at Arrowhead Stadium with a score of 3\u20130. The Wiz players included Preki, Mo Johnston, and Digital Takawira, and were coached by Ron Newman. The team finished third in the Western Conference (fifth overall) in 1996 regular season with a 17\u201315 record, qualifying for the first ever MLS Playoffs. In the 1996 conference semi-finals, the Wiz beat the Dallas Burn in three games, won the final game in a shootout, and lost the conference final to the LA Galaxy.\nFollowing the 1996 season, the Wiz changed names, becoming the \"Wizards\", following legal action from the now defunct electronics retailer The Wiz. For the 1997 MLS season, their record was 21\u201311, sufficient for the Western Conference regular season championship. Preki was named 1997 MLS MVP. In the first round of the playoffs, the Wizards lost to the last-seeded Colorado Rapids. The Wizards had losing records for the 1998 and 1999 seasons, finishing last in the Western Conference both years. The Wizards fired Ron Newman early during the 1999 season, and replaced him with Bob Gansler. The Wizards finished the 1999 season with a record of 8\u201324, which put them in last place in the Western Conference once again.\nSupporters' Shield and MLS Cup (2000).\nIn 2000, their first full season under Bob Gansler, the Wizards opened the season on a 12-game unbeaten streak. Goalkeeper Tony Meola recorded an MLS record shutout streak at 681 minutes and 16 shutouts, and won MLS Goalkeeper of the Year and MLS MVP. Peter Vermes was named 2000 MLS Defender of the Year. The Wizards finished the 2000 regular season 16\u20137\u20139, the best record in the league, winning the MLS Supporters' Shield.\nIn the 2000 playoffs, fell behind 4 to 1 to the LA Galaxy, but Miklos Molnar scored a penalty kick in game three to send the series into a tiebreaker, where he scored again to send the Wizards to their first MLS Cup. At RFK Stadium in Washington, D.C., the Wizards, with the league's best defense, faced the team with the league's best offense, the Chicago Fire. The Wizards took the lead on an 11th-minute goal by Miklos Molnar. The Fire put ten shots on goal, but Tony Meola and the defense held, and the Wizards claimed their first MLS Cup Championship. Tony Meola was named 2000 MLS Cup MVP.\nPost-championship struggles (2001\u20132002).\nAfter the loss of Preki to the Miami Fusion, the team struggled to defend their championship in 2001, making the playoffs as the 8th seed with a record of 11\u201313\u20133. In the first round, the Wizards reign as champion ended with a 6 points to 3 loss to Preki and the Miami Fusion. Despite getting back Preki, the Wizards sat in last place in the Western Conference in 2002. They made the playoffs with a record of 9\u201310\u20139. The last two teams in the East, the MetroStars and D.C. United missed the playoffs, which propelled the Wizards into the playoffs. In the first round, the team would fall, 6 points to 3 to eventual champions, Los Angeles Galaxy.\nMore success (2003\u20132004).\nThe Wizards returned to the top half of the West in 2003 with a record of 11\u201310\u20139. In the first round of the playoffs, the Wizards defeated the Colorado Rapids in the aggregate goal series, 3\u20131. That set up a one-game showdown with the San Jose Earthquakes the winner would advance to the 2003 MLS Cup. The Wizards took the lead, but the Earthquakes battled back and forced golden goal in overtime by Landon Donovan in the 117th minute, which sent his team to the 2003 MLS Cup and the Wizards home.\nThe Wizards started 2004 mediocre, and improved mid-year. The Wizards finished the season on a six-game unbeaten streak to finish 14\u20139\u20139 for the Western Conference regular season championship. Goalkeeper Tony Meola went down with injury and backup Bo Oshoniyi filled as a replacement.\nIn the first round of the 2004 playoffs, the Wizards lost the first game to San Jose Earthquakes, 2\u20130. In the second game, however, the Wizards scored 2 goals before Jack Jewsbury scored in stoppage time to move KC onto the conference final. In the conference final, the Wizards held off the Los Angeles Galaxy to reach their second MLS Cup. In the 2004 MLS Cup final, the Wizards went up against D.C. United at the Home Depot Center in Carson, California. The Wizards Jose Burciaga scored in the sixth minute, but D.C. United replied with three goals in the first half. KC was given a lifeline in the 58th minute as Josh Wolff scored the first penalty kick in MLS Cup history, but KC lost the 2004 MLS Cup final 3\u20132.\nMove east (2005\u20132010).\nFollowing MLS expansion, the Wizards moved to the Eastern Conference in 2005. By the end of the 2005 season, despite the solid play of 2005 MLS Defender of the Year Jimmy Conrad, the Wizards found themselves outside the playoffs with a record of 11\u20139\u201312. After the season, the team's veteran leader, Preki announced his retirement.\nIn the 2006 season, the Wizards just missed out on a playoff berth with a loss to the New York Red Bulls on the final day of the regular season, finishing with a 10\u201314\u20138 record. Lamar Hunt sold the club in August 2006 to OnGoal, LLC, a six-man ownership group led by Cerner Corporation co-founders Neal Patterson and Cliff Illig, a local group committed to keeping the Wizards in Kansas City.\nThe club dedicated its 2007 season to Lamar Hunt, who had died in December 2006. A good start earned them four wins in the first seven weeks of the season. The club picked up goalkeeper Kevin Hartman from the LA Galaxy to help with that position. Despite winning just four games after the All-Star break, Kansas City managed to finish fifth in the East at 11\u201312\u20137 and qualify for the playoffs. The club shifted over to the West as a result of a playoff format change, the Wizards played against Chivas USA. With the Wizards Davy Arnaud's goal in the first game to win the series, the defense and Kevin Hartman did the rest and kept Chivas USA off the scoreboard. In the conference final, the Wizards came up short to the Houston Dynamo, 2\u20130.\nIn 2008, the Wizards played their home games at CommunityAmerica Ballpark in Kansas, and ended a four-year playoff drought by posting an 11\u201310\u20139 record, good enough for fourth place in the Eastern Conference. Facing the Columbus Crew, the Wizards earned a 1\u20131 tie in Game 1 of the first round series, but with a 2\u20130 loss in Game 2 the Wizards lost the aggregate series 3\u20131.\nIn the 2009 season, the Wizards remained at CommunityAmerica Ballpark, but struggled to score. They went 426 minutes without scoring a goal, the longest streak of the season. In August 2009, with the team holding a 5\u20137\u20136 record, KC fired Head Coach Curt Onalfo, and named general manager Peter Vermes the head coach. The Wizards finished with the worst home record in the league, and at 8\u201313\u20139 were third to last in the league standings. Top players were Claudio L\u00f3pez (8 goals &amp; 7 assists) and Josh Wolff (11 goals), who sparked the Wizards offense.\nThe Wizards hosted Manchester United F.C. in a friendly on July 25, 2010, and won the match by a score of 2\u20131. The announced attendance of 52,342 was a record for a professional soccer match in the Kansas City area In the 2010 regular season, the Wizards finished third in the Eastern Conference and narrowly missed qualifying for the playoffs.\nSporting rebrand (2011\u20132012).\nWith the rebranding (of Wizards to Sporting) the team followed a recent trend in MLS of adopting European-style names, such as Toronto FC, D.C. United, and Real Salt Lake. The title \"Sporting\" has its origins in Iberia where it is used only by multi-sports clubs with a history of having multiple departments fielding teams across different sports, the most notable being Portugal's Sporting CP. Kansas City's use of the term has been criticized for inaccuracy and cultural appropriation. At the rebrand announcement, the Kansas City's president announced they had planned to add a rugby club and lacrosse club. Since then, a partnership with the Kansas City Blues Rugby Club has been announced, but the two sides are not part of one \"Sporting Club\" and no lacrosse team has been established. The rebranding was met with a mixture of both excitement and disdain by fans when originally announced.\nWith the opening of the new Children's Mercy Park in Kansas City, Kansas, Sporting became the first major-league team to have played in stadiums on both sides of the state line in Kansas City, while Kansas City became the only U.S. metropolitan area other than New York City to have major professional sports teams playing in different states.\nBecause Children's Mercy Park was not ready for the beginning of the 2011 season, Sporting Kansas City played its first ten games on the road, only winning one game. Once the road trip was over, the team found more success and ended the regular season with the most points of any Eastern Conference team. After defeating the Colorado Rapids on a 4\u20130 aggregate in the Eastern Conference semifinals, Sporting lost to the Houston Dynamo 2\u20130 in the Eastern Conference finals.\nKC began the 2012 season with seven consecutive wins, in the process setting an MLS record for 335 minutes without allowing a shot on goal. The team finished the regular season first in the East with an 18\u20137\u20139 record. KC was led by Graham Zusi, who delivered a league-leading 15 assists and was named finalist for 2012 MLS MVP, Jimmy Nielsen, who notched a league leading 15 shutouts and was named 2012 MLS Goalkeeper of the Year, and Matt Besler, who was named MLS Defender of the Year. KC lost to the Houston Dynamo in the conference semifinals. KC won the 2012 U.S. Open Cup, defeating Seattle Sounders FC in the finals, to qualify for the 2013\u201314 CONCACAF Champions League.\nMLS Cup champions (2013).\nIn 2013, Kansas City took advantage of MLS's newly created retention funds to renew contracts with U.S. national team players Graham Zusi and Matt Besler. Sporting had finished second in the Eastern Conference and overall with 17 wins, 10 losses, and tied 7 times in the regular season. In the 2013 MLS Playoffs, Sporting KC defeated NE Revolution in the conference semifinals and Houston Dynamo in the conference finals, advancing to MLS Cup 2013. SKC defeated Real Salt Lake on penalties (7\u20136) after the match was tied 1\u20131 in regulation and overtime. It was the coldest MLS Cup game on record.\nReturn west (2014\u2013present).\nIn the 2014 MLS Cup Playoffs, Sporting were eliminated in the East Knockout Round by the New York Red Bulls.\nOn October 27, 2014, the league announced that Sporting, along with the Houston Dynamo, would move from the Eastern Conference to the Western Conference when two teams from East Coast states, New York City FC and Orlando City SC, joined the league in 2015. Sporting finished sixth in the Western Conference that year, again qualifying for postseason play due to the expanded twelve-club field in the 2015 MLS Cup Playoffs. They were eliminated in the Western Knockout Round by the Portland Timbers, 6\u20137 in a Penalty Shootout.\nSporting's co-owner Neal Patterson died due to soft tissue cancer in July 2017. Kansas City unveiled wordmarks on the team's jerseys and on Children's Mercy Park to commemorate their late owner. Later that month, the club traded Dom Dwyer to Orlando City in exchange for $1.6\u00a0million (in general and targeted allocation money with additional incentives), setting the record for the most expensive internal trade in league history.\nThe team won the 2017 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup, defeating the New York Red Bulls 2\u20131 in the final. The win gave Sporting their fourth Open Cup title, and their third in the last six years. The victory extended head coach Peter Vermes's record to 4\u20130 in cup finals and championship games with the club. In Open Cup history, Kansas City became just the second franchise in the single elimination tournament to have won four Open Cup finals in the same number of appearances.\nPat Curran, one of the club's ownership partners, died in October 2024. Peter Vermes ended his 15-year tenure as the team's head coach in March 2025 after a winless start to the season.\nColors and badge.\nSporting Kansas City's official colors are \"sporting blue\" and \"dark indigo\" with \"lead\" as a tertiary color. The primary logo is composed of a teardrop-shaped shield containing a stylized representation of the Kansas\u2013Missouri state line with \"sporting blue\" stripes on the \"Kansas\" side and an interlocking \"SC\" on the \"Missouri\" side. The shield's contour alludes to the team's former logo while under the \"Kansas City Wizards\" appellation. The stateline represents Sporting's fanbase in both of the Kansas and Missouri portions of the Kansas City metropolitan area. The eleven alternating horizontal stripes of \"sporting blue\" and \"dark indigo\" forming the state line are a nod to the number of players a team fields. The \"SC\" (for \"Sporting Club\") is inspired by Asclepius' rod representing health and fitness, a Greek statue called the \"Winged Victory of Samothrace\" \u2013 alluding to strength and movement, and to the Spanish architecture of Kansas City's Country Club Plaza. Beginning in 2013, Ivy Funds became the club's first uniform sponsor, and a new home and away jersey design was unveiled, and an alternate argyle design.\nUniform evolution.\nHome: 1996\u20132010\nHome: 2011\u2013present\nThird\nStadiums.\nArrowhead Stadium.\nFrom 1996 through 2007, the Wizards played home games in Arrowhead Stadium, the American football stadium mainly used by the Kansas City Chiefs. Wizards management kept the west end of Arrowhead tarped off for the first 10 years of play, limiting seating near the field. In 2006, fans could sit all the way around the field, but, in 2007, seating was [again] only available along the sidelines. After the 2007 final season at Arrowhead, the Wizards continued to use the stadium for select large events. In 2008, the club played a regular season home game against the Los Angeles Galaxy at the stadium to accommodate the large crowd expected for David Beckham's Galaxy debut. Again in 2010, the Wizards played a friendly here against English club Manchester United, winning 2\u20131. Once again the club had to use the stadium for their game against Inter Miami to accommodate the large crowd for Lionel Messi's first appearance in Kansas City. Inter Miami won the game 3-2.\nCommunityAmerica Ballpark.\nThe Wizards entered an agreement with the Kansas City T-Bones to use their home stadium, CommunityAmerica Ballpark, during the 2008 and 2009 seasons. The deal was later extended to include 2010. The stadium, located across the state line in Kansas City, Kansas, built a new bleacher section financed by the Wizards to increase its capacity to 10,385. This move made the Wizards the third MLS team to share their home ground with a baseball team. D.C. United had been sharing RFK Stadium with Major League Baseball's Washington Nationals in Washington, D.C., before the latter's move into Nationals Park. The San Jose Earthquakes used Oakland\u2013Alameda County Coliseum in Oakland, home of the Oakland A's (and Oakland Raiders), for certain games during the 2008 and 2009 seasons.\nThe Wizards originally planned to return to Kansas City, Missouri, and build a new stadium there \u2013 tentatively called Trails Stadium \u2013 as part of a major mixed-use development. The team had received all required approvals and was awaiting site demolition; however, the 2008\u201309 financial crisis ultimately led to the scrapping of the Trails Stadium project.\nChildren's Mercy Park.\nThe team sought a new site for its stadium, quickly settling on a development in Kansas City, Kansas, known as Village West, near CommunityAmerica Ballpark and the Kansas Speedway.\nIn September 2009, the developer asked Wyandotte County (in Kansas) and Kansas state officials for permission to use revenues from existing tax increment financing in the Village West area to help finance the soccer complex. On December 17, Wizards president Robb Heineman provided an update on the stadium situation, identifying the Kansas City, Kansas, location as near final, pending the signature of the final agreements. On January 19, 2010, Wyandotte County approved the bonds to help finance the stadium, and on January 20 the groundbreaking ceremony was made, with Wizards CEO Robb Heineman using heavy machinery to move dirt on the construction site.\nWhen the Kansas City Wizards first rebranded as Sporting Kansas City, they built Livestrong Sporting Park. Spending $200\u00a0million on the complex, it was the first \"European style\" soccer complex in the United States. Name rights were held by the Livestrong Foundation until the downfall of Lance Armstrong from his doping scandal; Sporting Kansas City subsequently changed the name of their stadium to Sporting Park.\nOn November 19, 2015, the stadium was renamed to Children's Mercy Park in a ten-year deal with Children's Mercy Hospital.\nPrevious stadiums:\nClub culture.\nSupporters.\nSporting regularly sells out its matches, with over 100 straight sellouts as of August 2017. Sporting has 14,000 season-ticket holders, with a wait list for season tickets of 3,000 people. Sporting KC has a relatively young fan base, with season-ticket holders having an average age of 29.7 years. Sporting KC works with Sporting Innovations, a consulting firm spun off from the team that focuses on fan engagement. Administrators from several college football teams, such as the Florida Gators, have visited Sporting KC to learn from the team's success at fan engagement.\nThe main supporters group of Sporting Kansas City cheers in the Members' Stand on the North side of Children's Mercy Park and is known as \"The Cauldron\". The name is derived from the large metal pots used for boiling potions, due to the team's former name Wizards. Since the rebranding in 2010, Sporting have seen dramatic growth in their fan section, with several fan groups adding their voice to The Cauldron culture and atmosphere.\nCurrent groups in the north stands along with The Cauldron include: The Emeritus, Drainage Pond SC, Monster Squad, La Barra KC, Mass Street Mob, King City Yardbirds, Fountain City Ultras, Trenches, and Ladies of SKC.\nThe South Stand SC cheers from the south end of Children's Mercy Park and is the umbrella group for The Wedge and Ad Astra SKC (a reference to the motto of the state of Kansas), while American Outlaws \u2013 Kansas City Chapter are also present in the stands.\nMascot.\n\"Blue the Dog\" is the franchise's official mascot.\nRivalries.\nHouston Dynamo.\nThe two teams had faced each other regularly over the years, while both having been members of the Eastern conference. During that time, Sporting KC had frequently faced Houston in the playoffs, beginning their rivalry. As of 2022, SKC is 18\u201318\u201316 (W\u2013L\u2013T) against the Dynamo.\nReal Salt Lake.\nIn their total meetings, Sporting KC is 17\u201319\u201312 (W\u2013L\u2013T), (as of October 2023). The two teams faced each other in MLS Cup 2013, in what was the coldest MLS Cup final at that time.\nPortland Timbers.\nIn recent years, the metro areas of Portland and Kansas City have both become major soccer markets due to the performance of their respective soccer teams. Additionally their NWSL teams, the Portland Thorns and the Kansas City Current, have become major rivals, especially since the Thorns' 2\u20130 win over the Current in the 2022 NWSL Championship.\nSt. Louis City SC.\nSporting KC began a rivalry with St. Louis City SC starting with the team's entrance into the league in the 2023 season. Prior to the first meeting, a St Louis fan podcast, the Soccer Capitol Podcast, became the center of attention and heightening tensions between supporters. A series of emails from Sporting Kansas City's front office arrived in the inbox of the podcast's Gmail account. The club believed the Soccer Capitol Podcast was infringing on the trademark \"The Soccer Capital of America,\" which was registered to Kansas Training Partners LLC, an affiliate company of Sporting Kansas City. St. Louis City won the first meeting at CityPark in May 2023, but Sporting KC won the second meeting, which took place at Children's Mercy Park the following September. The two teams played in their first postseason matchup in the 2023 MLS Cup playoffs, with Sporting Kansas City (the #8 seed) upsetting the #1 seeded St. Louis in a best-of-three series.\nBroadcasting.\nFrom 2023, every Sporting Kansas City match is available via MLS Season Pass on the Apple TV app.\nPrior to 2017 matches were broadcast in high definition on KMCI-TV (except for nationally broadcast matches). The play-by-play announcer was WHB 810AM 'Border Patrol' host Nate Bukaty, who began broadcasting for the team in the 2015 season. Former Sporting Kansas City goalkeeper Andy Gruenebaum provided color commentary following his retirement after the 2014 season. Color commentary was covered by Jake Yadrich through the 2013 season, after which he transitioned to be the lead analyst on the sidelines during games. Morning reporter Kacie McDonnell of KSHB-TV, an NBC affiliate and KMCI-TV's sister station, served as the network host of the pregame and postgame shows.\nIn addition, the Sporting Kansas City Television Network provided coverage across markets in six states:\nMatches that are not broadcast nationally were broadcast on Fox Sports Kansas City (it was also carried on Fox Sports Midwest in the St. Louis market until 2023, where it was removed due to founding of St Louis City SC). In 2017, Fox Sports Midwest only carried select matches, while in 2018, the club announced the St. Louis market would receive all matches while the Mid-Missouri and Iowa markets would receive most matches. Nate Bukaty continues to provide the play-by-play commentary, while Jacob Peterson joined as the color commentator ahead of the 2020 season with Carter Augustine returning as the sideline reporter.\nIn 2022, prior to an upcoming leaguewide TV deal, KMCI returned as broadcast partner for those in the Kansas City market, with other areas being able to stream all matches on the club's website.\nRegular local radio coverage in English is provided through an official partnership with Sports Radio 810 WHB and its affiliate ESPN Kansas City 99.3FM. Spanish broadcasting was previously found on KDTD 1340AM, but is on KCZZ (ESPN Deportes Kansas City 1480AM) for the 2018 season. The broadcasts are produced by Jorge Moreno and feature the voice of 13-year MLS veteran Diego Gutierrez along with Ale Cabero, Raul Villegas and Alonso Cadena.\n \"As of October 25, 2025\"\nPlayers and staff.\nRoster.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTeam record.\nSeasons.\nThis is a partial list of the most recent seasons completed by SKC. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Sporting Kansas City seasons.\nGroup stage v. Sporting Cristal: 1\u20132\nGroup stage v. Santos Laguna: 2\u20134\nGroup stage v. Barcelona: 3\u20132\nGroup stage v. Sporting Cristal: 1\u20132\nGroup stage v. Barcelona: 1\u20131\nGroup stage v. Santos Laguna: 0\u20131\nFirst Round v. W Connection: 1\u20130, 2\u20130 (Wizards win 3\u20130 on aggregate)\nQuarterfinal v. Santos Laguna: 1\u20132, 2\u20130 (Wizards win 3\u20132 on aggregate)\nSemifinals v. Monarcas Morelia: 1\u20136, 1\u20131 (Morelia advance 7\u20132 on aggregate)\nFirst Round v. Deportivo Saprissa: 0\u20130, 1\u20132 (Saprissa advance 2\u20131 on aggregate after added extra time)\nGroup stage v. Atlas: 0\u20130\nGroup stage v. New England Revolution: 1\u20131\nGroup stage v. Santos Laguna: 1\u20133\nGroup stage v. Real Estel\u00ed: 2\u20130, 1\u20131\nGroup stage v. Olimpia: 2\u20130, 0\u20130\nQuarterfinals v. Cruz Azul: 1\u20130, 1\u20135 (Cruz Azul advance 5\u20132 on aggregate)\nGroup stage v. Real Estel\u00ed: 1\u20131, 3\u20130\nGroup stage v. Deportivo Saprissa: 3\u20131, 0\u20132\nGroup stage v. Central FC: 2\u20132, 3\u20131\nGroup stage v. Vancouver Whitecaps FC: 3\u20130, 1\u20132\nRound of 16 v. Toluca: 3\u20130, 2\u20130 (Sporting KC advance 5\u20130 on aggregate)\nQuarterfinals v. Independiente: 1\u20132, 3\u20130 (Sporting KC advance 4\u20132 on aggregate)\nSemifinals v. Monterrey 0\u20135, 2\u20135 (Monterrey advance 10\u20132 on aggregate)\n \"As of September 10, 2023\"\nPlayer records.\nTop goalscorers.\nThe following records are for MLS regular season only:\nSporting Legends.\nSporting Legends is an initiative launched in 2013 that pays tribute to the individuals who played an instrumental role for Sporting Kansas City and in the growth of soccer in the region.\nThe individuals named as Sporting Legends, their year of induction, and a brief description are listed below:\nHat tricks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ + Dom Dwyer scored four goals in this game\nReferences.\nPrimary sources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "16858", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16858", "title": "Knights of Columbus", "text": "Catholic fraternal service organization founded in 1882\nThe Knights of Columbus (K of C) is a global Catholic fraternal service order founded by Blessed Michael J. McGivney. Membership is limited to practicing Catholic men. It is led by Patrick E. Kelly, the order's 14th Supreme Knight.\nThe organization was founded on March 29, 1882, as a mutual benefit society for working-class and immigrant Catholics in the United States. In addition to providing an insurance system for its members, it has grown to support refugee relief, Catholic education, local parishes and dioceses, and global Catholic social causes. The Knights of Columbus have played an active role in politics ever since its formation, and promote the Catholic view on public policy issues around the world.\nThe organization also provides certain financial services to the individual and institutional Catholic market. Its wholly owned insurance company, a \"Fortune\" 1000 company based on its annual revenue, underwrites more than twomillion insurance contracts, totaling more than $121billion of life insurance in force as of 2023. The order also owns the Knights of Columbus Asset Advisors, a money management firm which invests in accordance with Catholic social teachings.\nAs of 2024, the Knights reported having over 2.1million members around the world. Women may participate in K of C through the Columbiettes and other female auxiliaries, and boys may join the Columbian Squires. The Order comprises four different \"degrees\", each one of which exemplifies one of the core principles of the order. There are more than 17,000 local Knights of Columbus councils around the world, including over 400 on college campuses.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nAmerican Catholic priest Michael J. McGivney founded the Knights of Columbus at St. Mary's Church in 1882 as a mutual benefit society for Catholic immigrants in New Haven, Connecticut. As a parish priest in an immigrant community, McGivney saw what could happen to a family when the main income earner died. This was before most government support programs were established. Because of religious and ethnic discrimination, Catholics in the late 19th century were regularly excluded from labor unions, popular fraternal organizations, and other organized groups that provided such social services.\nAlthough its first councils were all in Connecticut, the Order spread throughout New England and the United States in subsequent years. As the order expanded outside of Connecticut, structural changes in the late 1880s and 1890s were instituted to give the Knights a federalist system with local, state, and national levels of government. This allowed them to coordinate activities across states and localities.\n20th century.\nDuring World War I, the Knights established soldiers' welfare centers in the U.S. and abroad. After the war, the Knights participated in education, occupational training, and employment programs for veterans.\nThe Oregon Compulsory Education Act of 1922 would have disallowed parochial schools, including Catholic schools, in that state. The Knights of Columbus challenged the law in court with the ACLU, and, in a landmark 1925 ruling (\"Pierce v. Society of Sisters\"), the U.S. Supreme Court struck it down.\nTo combat the animus targeted at racial and religious minorities, including Catholics, the Order formed a historical commission which published a series of books in the 1920s on their contributions, among other activities. The \"Knights of Columbus Racial Contributions Series\" of books included three titles: \"\", by W. E. B. Du Bois, \"The Jews in the Making of America\" by George Cohen, and \"The Germans in the Making of America\" by Frederick Schrader.\nThe Knights of Columbus \"was the only American fraternal society which did not, by its constitution, prohibit Negro [sic] membership\", according to historian Christopher Kauffman. During World War\u00a0I, the Knights were designated as the official agency for supporting Catholic troops, and its support facilities were the only racially integrated facilities open to troops. Emmett Jay Scott wrote, \"Unlike the other social welfare organizations operating in the war, it never drew the color line.\"\nAs the Knights grew and expanded, some councils in the United States were integrated, and others were not. An example of an integrated council was Sheridan Council 119 in Southborough, Massachusetts. Samuel F. Williams, a black man, was a member and among other activities, spoke on the stage of the 1896 Knights of Columbus Massachusetts State Convention to an audience that included two future Supreme Knights. The path to individual membership in a local Knights council did not explicitly exclude African Americans. Each local council voted in new members, and as few as four or five negative votes against a prospective candidate (no matter the size of the council) was enough to deny someone entry. Joseph Bertrand, who graduated from the University of Notre Dame in 1954, was blackballed from joining a Chicago-area Knights council in 1963 after being nominated by Gene Liner. Liner said that as the vote was announced, \"I just watched his face. There were five black balls.\" Liner then resigned his office in the Knights chapter along with five other council leaders.\nMeanwhile, Church officials and organizations increasingly encouraged integration. By the end of the 1950s, KoC Supreme Knight Luke E. Hart was actively encouraging councils to accept black candidates. In 1963, Hart attended a special meeting at the White House hosted by President John F. Kennedy to discuss civil rights with other religious leaders. After the rejection of Joseph Bertrand's membership application in Chicago, Hart declared that the process for membership would be revised at the next Supreme Convention so that membership rejections would require a majority vote of local council members. The change occurred but Hart died before he could see it take place.\nAround 1915, during the nadir of American race relations, the Ku Klux Klan began promoting a conspiracy theory claiming that Fourth Degree Knights swore an oath to exterminate Freemasons and Protestants. The Knights of Columbus vehemently denied the existence of any such oath, calling the rumors libel. In 1923, the Knights of Columbus offered $25,000 to any person with proof that the fake oath attributed to the fourth-degree membership was part of any authentic ceremony. The Knights began suing distributors for libel in an effort to stop this, and the KKK ended its publication of the false oath.\nRecent history.\nAs the Order and its charitable works grew, so did its prominence within the Church. Pope John Paul I's first audience with a layman was with Supreme Knight Virgil Dechant, and Pope John Paul II met with Supreme Knight Dechant three days after his installation. During the pope's 1979 visit to the United States, the Supreme Officers and Board were the only lay organization to receive an audience.\nRichard Nixon addressed the Supreme Convention in 1971. Ronald Reagan spoke in 1982 and 1986 and George W. Bush spoke in 2004. George H. W. Bush spoke as US vice president in 1984 and then again as president in 1992. Bill Clinton sent a videotaped message to the 111th Supreme Convention saying the Order's \"contributions to the Catholic Church and to your communities merit our applause.\"\nChurch historian Massimo Faggioli believes the scope of the Knights' philanthropy can \"create influence through money, especially in important places like Rome or Washington, D.C.\"\nOrganization and principles.\nThe order is dedicated to the principles of charity, unity, fraternity, and patriotism. Membership is restricted to men, at least 18 years of age, who are practicing Catholics in union with the Holy See and are in good standing with the Church. As of \u00a02024[ [update]], there were over 2.1 million Knights of Columbus worldwide, with the majority in North America.\nAfter his induction and completion of the Exemplification of Charity, a new member becomes a First Degree Knight. He then progresses through the Second and Third Degrees after completing the subsequent Exemplifications of Unity and Fraternity. A Third Degree Knight is considered to have attained full \"Knighthood\" status. Privileges of Third Degree membership include the ability to serve as a local council officer, and admission to state and Supreme Council business meetings.\nA Third Degree Knight in good standing is eligible to complete the Exemplification of Patriotism and progress to the Fourth Degree. This is an optional degree, but represents the highest ideals of the order. A Knight who has attained this level is addressed as \"Sir Knight\".\nEach member belongs to one of more than 17,000 local councils around the world. Most are based in Catholic parishes, though some have their own council hall within a community. Each local council works to assist with the needs of its community consistent with the principles of the order.\nThe college councils program, started at Catholic University of America in 1898, was created to promote the moral, intellectual and spiritual development of college men on campuses throughout the world. The oldest continuously running college council is the University of Notre Dame Council #1477, chartered in 1910. Councils at seminaries (\"seminarian councils\") are classified as college councils. As of 2024[ [update]], there are more than 340 college councils worldwide.\nThroughout most of its history, the Knights of Columbus has provided active support to members of the armed forces and their families. As of 2024[ [update]], there are more than 50 military councils in military bases throughout North America and around the world.\nA Knight who has attained the Fourth Degree also belongs to a Fourth Degree assembly. Fourth Degree Knights are men who have chosen to embrace the order's fourth principle of patriotism. Fourth Degree assemblies get their members from multiple councils within a local geographical area. They lead the efforts to reach out to veterans and active military and to embody the fact that one can be a faithful Catholic and also be a faithful citizen. As of 2024[ [update]], there are more than 3,600 Fourth Degree assemblies worldwide.\nFourth Degree assemblies may form Color Corps, an elective division of the Fourth Degree, whose distinctive presence in parades, wreath-laying ceremonies, Confirmations and other Catholic functions are a visible reminder of the Knights' service to their communities. Fourth Degree Color Corps are often the most visible arm of the Knights.\nThe Supreme Council is the governing body of the order. It elects insurance members to serve three-year terms on a 24-member Board of Directors. Leaders' salaries are set by the board of directors and ratified by the delegates to the Supreme Convention. The seven-figure salaries of senior K of C officers have been criticized as excessive.\nIn 1969, the Knights opened a 23-story headquarters building in New Haven.\nCharitable giving.\nCharity is the foremost important principle of the Knights of Columbus. At their 2024 convention in August, 2024, Supreme Knight Patrick Kelly said that the organization had donated $190million and 47million volunteer-hours toward charity projects in 2023. Charitable activities include support for refugees, aid for victims of natural disasters, and advocating Catholic ethics, such as opposition to same-sex marriage and opposition to abortion.\nBeginning in 1897, the National Council encouraged local councils to establish funds to support members affected by the 1890s depression. Councils also offered employment agency services and provided aid to the poor and sick. Aid has also been dispensed to assist victims of natural and man-made disasters, starting with a flood in Kansas in 1903. In 2015 alone, the order donated hundreds of thousands of US dollars to victims of typhoons and other natural disasters.\nDuring times of war, the Order supports aid to refugees. Between 2014 and 2018, the Knights gave more than $2million to provide food, shelter, clothing, and medical care to persecuted Christians and other religious minorities in the Middle East. The Knights donated $250,000 in 2018 to help refugees crossing over the Mexico\u2013United States border who were seeking asylum in the United States and later expanded the program. Within days of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, the 2,000 Knights of Columbus in the country worked to help those impacted. They began by providing food and clothing to those at train and bus stations in Lviv who were fleeing into Poland. They then began organizing busses to take people to the Polish border. In the first three months of the war, the Knights in Poland helped more than 300,000 people, or 10% of those who fled to that country. Since the start of the war, the Knights of Columbus have delivered more than 8.5 million pounds of relief supplies and provided more than $17million for humanitarian relief in Ukraine.\nThe Knights of Columbus has donated more than $600 million to those with intellectual and physical disabilities. One of the largest recipients of aid in this area has been the Special Olympics, where the Knights have been involved since the first games in 1968. In 2023, the Knights donated more than $4 million to Special Olympics and helped organize and run nearly 4,000 competitions.\nAfter the Knights had donated more than 1,000 ultrasound machines to crisis pregnancy centers from 2009 to 2019, Anderson said, \"Our ultrasound initiative is now the greatest humanitarian achievement in the history of the Knights of Columbus. ... We can, and I am confident that we will, save millions of unborn lives.\" Following the United States Supreme Court decision in \"Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization\", Supreme Knight Patrick E. Kelly called on the order to increase their support for women facing unplanned and crisis pregnancies with the Aid and Support After Pregnancy (ASAP) initiative.\nThe Global Wheelchair Mission is an alliance of independent international organizations working to deliver wheelchairs and mobility assistance to people worldwide. In 2023, the Knights provided more than 11,000 wheelchairs to the Global Wheelchair Mission.\nThe Knights also donate to the institutional church, including being a major donor to the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops and the Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops. As of 2017[ [update]], the Knights' \"Vicarius Christi\" fund has contributed more than $57 million to the charitable efforts of the pope. The Knights have supported the Vatican's news operation for decades.\nIn the field of education, the Knights of Columbus have a number of scholarships and other programs for seminarians, veterans and students at the Catholic University of America, and at other Catholic colleges. Especially during World War I and World War II, the Order operated a number of \"huts\" to support troops serving in combat, regardless of race or religion.\nInsurance program.\nEarly years.\nThe original insurance system devised by McGivney gave a deceased Knight's widow a $1,000 death benefit. Each member was assessed $1 upon a death, and when the number of Knights grew beyond 1,000, the assessment decreased according to the rate of increase. Each member, regardless of age, was assessed equally. As a result, younger, healthier members could expect to pay more over the course of their lifetimes than those men who joined when they were older. There was also a Sick Benefit Deposit for members who fell ill and could not work. Each sick Knight was entitled to draw up to $5 a week for 13 weeks (roughly equivalent to $155 in 2022 dollars). If he remained sick after that, the council to which he belonged determined the sum of money given to him.\nThe need for a reserve fund for times of epidemic was seen from the earliest days, but it was rejected several times before finally being established in 1892. It had $12,000 in assets in 1896. By 1897, the method of funding the program changed. Each member was assessed five cents a month for 100 months, so that he would contribute $5.\nSince its first loan to St. Rose Church in Meriden, Connecticut, in the late 1890s, the Knights of Columbus have made loans to parishes, dioceses, and other Catholic institutions. By 1954, over $300\u00a0million had been loaned and the program \"never lost one cent of principal or interest.\"\nIn the post\u2013World War II era, the interest rates on long-term bonds dipped below levels at which the order's insurance program could sustain itself, and Supreme Knight Hart moved the order into a more aggressive program of investing in real estate. Under his leadership, the order established a lease-back investment program in which the order would buy a piece of property and then lease it back to the original owner \"upon terms generally that would bring to our Order a net rental equal to the normal mortgage interest rate.\" Between 1952 and 1962, 18 pieces of land were purchased for a total of $29million. Late in 1953 the order purchased the land beneath Yankee Stadium for $2.5million. In 1971, the City of New York took the land by eminent domain.\nBetween 1952 and 1962, 18 pieces of land were purchased as part of the lease-back program for a total of $29\u00a0million. During this time, the amount of money invested in common stock also increased.\nModern program.\nThe order offers a modern, professional insurance operation with more than $121\u00a0billion of life insurance policies in force and $26\u00a0billion in assets as of \u00a02023[ [update]]. This places the Order on the Fortune 1000 list and it is large enough to rank 49th on the A.\u00a0M. Best list of all life insurance companies in North America.\nProducts include permanent and term life insurance, as well as annuities, long term care insurance, and disability insurance. The insurance program is not a separate business offered by the order to others, but is exclusively for the benefit of members and their families. All agents are members of the order.\nThe order's insurance program is the most highly rated program in North America. For more than 40 consecutive years, the order has received A.\u00a0M. Best's highest rating, A++. \"Forbes\" publishes an annual list of what it refers to as \"America's Best Insurance Companies\", and it has included the Knights of Columbus insurance program on this list since 2022.\nThe order maintains a two-prong investment strategy: a company must first be a sound investment before stock in it is purchased, and secondly the company's activities must not conflict with Catholic social teaching. The guidelines include protecting human life, promoting human dignity, reducing arms production, pursuing economic justice, protecting the environment, and encouraging corporate responsibility. As of 2017, it had been named a \"World's Most Ethical Company\" by Ethisphere Institute for five consecutive years. Citing the awards they have won, the order calls themselves \"champions of ethical investing\".\nIn 2017, over $965 million was awarded in benefits. Since the founding of the order, $3.5\u00a0billion in death benefits have been paid. Additionally, the insurance program has a low 3.5 percent lapse rate of the 1.9\u00a0million members and their families who are insured.\nIts insurance operation invests in loans to various churches, schools, and other Catholic institutions. As of 2008[ [update]], over $500million had been loaned through the ChurchLoan program. At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Order established a $100 million fund to provide short-term loans to help dioceses weather the economic storm. Each diocese was eligible to obtain a $1 million secured line of credit.\nPromotion of the Catholic faith.\nEfforts against religious discrimination.\nSince its earliest days, the Knights of Columbus has been a \"Catholic anti-defamation society\". In 1914, it established a Commission on Religious Prejudices. As part of the effort, the order distributed pamphlets, and lecturers toured the country speaking on how Catholics could love and be loyal to America.\nThe creation of the 4th Degree, with its emphasis on patriotism, performed an anti-defamation function as well as asserting claims to Americanism. In response to a defamatory \"bogus oath\" circulated by the KKK, in 1914 the Knights set up a framework for a lecture series and educational programs to combat anti-Catholic sentiment.\nNew evangelization.\nThe Knights have been urged to take a prominent role in the new evangelization. The CIS published a series on the new evangelization in 2011, and donations to other Catholic mass communication services represent one of the Knights' major expenditures. The Knights have also established councils in both secular and Catholic universities.\nAwards.\nThe order sponsors a number of international awards. The first, the \"Gaudium et Spes Award\", is named after the document from the Second Vatican Council, and is the highest honor bestowed by the order. It \"is awarded only in special circumstances and only to individuals of exceptional merit\" and comes with an honorarium of $100,000. In the first 25 years after its institution in 1992, it was only awarded twelve times. The award \"recognizes individuals for their exemplary contributions to the realization of the message of faith and service in the spirit of Christ as articulated in the document for which it is named\".\nThe second international award, also only given when merited, is the \"Caritas Award\". Named for the theological virtue alternatively translated as either charity or love, it recognizes \"extraordinary works of charity and service\" and was established in 2013. It was first awarded to Monsignor Robert Weiss, pastor of St Rose of Lima in Newtown, Connecticut. The second was awarded to St. Virgilius Knights of Columbus Council 185. Both received the honor, and the $100,000 honorarium, for their actions following the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting.\nThe \"Saint Michael Award\" was established in conjunction with the \"Caritas Award\" to recognize members of the order who have exemplified a lifetime of service on behalf of the Knights of Columbus. Additionally, at its annual convention each year, the order recognizes other individuals and councils with awards. These include the Family of the Year award, and prizes for the best activities in the categories of church, community, council, culture of life, family, and youth. Additionally, top selling general and field insurance agents are recognized, as are top recruiting individuals and councils.\nThe order established the Grand Cross of the Knights of Columbus, but awarded it only to Cristobal Col\u00f3n y de La Cerda, Duke of Veragua and descendant of Columbus, when he visited the US in 1893.\nPolitical activity.\nWhile the Knights were politically active from an early date, in the years following the Second Vatican Council, as the \"Catholic anti-defamation character\" of the order began to diminish as Catholics gained more acceptance, the leadership began to use its financial resources to directly influence the direction of the church. That led to the creation of a \"variety of new programs reflecting the proliferation of the new social ministries of the church.\"\nAt times, the leadership of the order has been both liberal and conservative. Martin H. Carmody and Luke E. Hart were both political conservatives, but John J. Phelan was a Democratic politician prior to becoming Supreme Knight, John Swift's \"strong support for economic democracy and social-welfare legislation marks him as a fairly representative New Deal anti-communist,\" and Francis P. Matthews was a civil rights official and member of Harry Truman's cabinet. Anderson previously served in the Office of Public Liaison under Ronald Reagan.\nThe Knights of Columbus is classified as a 501(c)(8) fraternal benefit society by the IRS. Unlike the more common 501(c)(3) nonprofits, 501(c)(8)s are allowed to engage in limited direct political activity without jeopardizing their tax exemptions. However, Anderson has said \"One of our most important traditions throughout our 125-year history is that we do not, as an organization, become involved in partisan politics.\"\nThe Knights of Columbus supports political awareness and activity among its members and local councils. Public policy activity is limited to issue-specific campaigns, typically dealing with Catholic family and sanctity of life issues. They state that\nIn addition to performing charitable works, the Knights of Columbus encourages its members to meet their responsibilities as Catholic citizens and to become active in the political life of their local communities, to vote and to speak out on the public issues of the day... In the political realm, this means opening our public policy efforts and deliberations to the life of Christ and the teachings of the Church. In accord with our Bishops, the Knights of Columbus has consistently maintained positions that take these concerns into account. The order supports and promotes the social doctrine of the Church, including a robust vision of religious liberty that embraces religion's proper role in the private and public spheres.\nThe order opposed the persecution of Catholics in Mexico during the Cristero War, and opposed communism. During the 20th century, the order also established the Commission on Religious Prejudices and the Knights of Columbus Historical Commission, organizations which fought against racism. It was also supportive of trade unionism, and published the works \"of the broad array of intellectuals\", including George Schuster, Samuel Flagg Bemis, Allan Nevins, and W.\u00a0E.\u00a0B. DuBois.\nDuring the Cold War, the order had a history of waging anti-socialist, anti-communist and anti-anarchist crusades. They lobbied for the addition of the words \"under God\" to the Pledge of Allegiance, as a religious response to Soviet atheism. The Knights have actively opposed the legalization of same-sex marriage and in terms of funding, they have also been a key contributor to local measures against same-sex marriage. The Knights have donated over to the Susan B. Anthony Foundation and other anti-abortion and anti-contraception organizations.\nSubsidiaries.\nMuseum.\nOn March 10, 2001, the order opened a museum in New Haven dedicated to their history. The 77,000 square foot building cost to renovate. It holds mosaics on loan from the Vatican and gifts from Popes, the membership application from John F. Kennedy, and a number of other items related to the history of the Knights. Near the entrance is the cross held by Jesus Christ on the facade of St. Peter's Basilica before undergoing a Knights-financed renovation.\nKnights of Columbus Asset Advisors.\nIn 2015, the order launched Knights of Columbus Asset Advisors, a money management firm which invests money in accordance with Catholic social teaching. As of early 2023, the firm had $25.8 billion in assets under management.\nThe firm uses the Socially Responsible Investment Guidelines published by the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops to guide their investment decisions. The guidelines include protecting human life, promoting human dignity, reducing arms production, pursuing economic justice, protecting the environment, and encouraging corporate responsibility.\nIn addition to the wholly owned subsidiary, it also purchased 20% of Boston Advisors, a boutique investment management firm, managing assets for institutional and high-net-worth investors. Knights of Columbus Asset Advisors manages the fixed-income strategies for their funds while Boston Advisors sub-advises on the equity strategies. Knights of Columbus Asset Advisors also offers model portfolio, outsourced CIO services, a bank loan strategy, and other alternative investment strategies. In 2019, the Knights purchased the institutional management business of Boston Advisors.\nSaint John Paul II National Shrine.\nThe order owns and operates the Saint John Paul II National Shrine in Washington D.C. In 2011, the Order purchased the 130,000-square-foot John Paul II Cultural Center. The mission as a cultural center ended in 2009 and the Knights rebranded it as a shrine to Pope John Paul II. Soon after the pope was canonized, the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops named the building a national shrine.\nEach year 64,000 pilgrims visit the shrine, which features video content, interactive displays, and personal effects from John Paul. There is also a first class relic of the pope's blood on display for veneration. It also serves as a base for the Order in Washington, D.C.\nNotable Knights.\nSome of the most notable American members include John F. Kennedy; Ted Kennedy; Al Smith; Sargent Shriver; Samuel Alito; Conrad Hilton; John Boehner; Ray Flynn; Jeb Bush; film maker John Ford; and Sergeant Major Daniel Daly, a two-time Medal of Honor recipient.\nIn the world of sports, Vince Lombardi, the famed former coach of the Green Bay Packers; James Connolly, the first Olympic gold medal champion in modern times; Floyd Patterson, former heavyweight boxing champion; and baseball legend Babe Ruth were all knights.\nOn October 15, 2006, Bishop Rafael Gu\u00edzar y Valencia (1878\u20131938) was canonized by Pope Benedict XVI in Rome. In 2000, six other Knights, who were killed in the violence following the Mexican Revolution, were declared saints by Pope John Paul II.\nEmblem of the order.\nThe emblem of the order was designed by Past Supreme Knight James T. Mullen and adopted at the second Supreme Council meeting on May 12, 1883. Shields used by medieval knights served as the inspiration. The emblem consists of a shield mounted on a Form\u00e9e cross, which is an artistic representation of the cross of Christ. This represents the Catholic identity of the order.\nMounted on the shield are three objects: the fasces, an anchor, and a sword. In ancient Rome, the fasces was carried before magistrates as an emblem of authority. The order uses it as \"symbolic of authority which must exist in any tightly bonded and efficiently operating organization.\" The anchor represents Christopher Columbus, admiral under the orders of the kings of Spain and patron of this partnership, here a symbol of the Catholic contribution to America. The short sword, or dagger, was a weapon used by medieval knights. The shield as a whole, with the letters \"K of C\", represents \"Catholic Knighthood in organized merciful action.\"\nTriad Emblem of the Fourth Degree.\nFourth Degree assemblies are separate from councils. They have their own officers and a separate emblem. This optional, patriotic degree was instituted in 1900.\nThe Triad Emblem of the Fourth Degree features a white dove, a red cross and a blue globe. The dove \u2013 a classic symbol of the Holy Spirit and of peace \u2013 is shown hovering over the globe. Both are mounted on a variation of the Crusaders' cross, the cross worn on the tunics and capes of knights of the Middle Ages. These three items are also representative of the Blessed Trinity:\nThe red, white and blue colors on the emblem are those of the flag of the United States, where the Knights of Columbus originated. They also help to underscore the value of patriotism that is the foundational principle of the Fourth Degree.\nAuxiliary groups.\nWomen's auxiliaries.\nMany councils also have women's auxiliaries. At the turn of the 20th century, two were formed by local councils, each taking the name Daughters of Isabella. They expanded and issued charters to other circles but never merged. The newer organization renamed itself the Catholic Daughters of the Americas in 1921, and both have structures independent of the Knights of Columbus. Other groups are known as the Columbiettes. In the Philippines, the ladies' auxiliary is known as the Daughters of Mary Immaculate.\nA proposal in 1896 to establish councils for women did not pass and was never proposed again.\nColumbian Squires.\nThe Knights' official junior organization is the Columbian Squires. According to its founder Barnabas McDonald, \"The supreme purpose of the Columbian Squires is character building.\"\nIt was founded in 1925 in Duluth, Minnesota, by Barnabas McDonald. The formation of new Squire Circles in the United States and Canada is discouraged, as the Order desires to move youth activities from exclusive clubs into the local parish youth groups.\nSimilar Christian organizations.\nThe Knights of Columbus is a member of the International Alliance of Catholic Knights (IACK), which includes fifteen fraternal orders such as the Knights of Saint Columbanus in Ireland, the Knights of St Columba in Great Britain, the Knights of Peter Claver in the United States, the Knights of the Southern Cross in Australia and New Zealand, the Knights of Marshall in Ghana, the Knights of Da Gama in South Africa, and the Knights of Saint Mulumba in Nigeria.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16860", "revid": "1318840539", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16860", "title": "Japanese sword", "text": "Type of traditionally made sword from Japan\nA is one of several types of traditionally made swords from Japan. Bronze swords were made as early as the Yayoi period (1,000 BC \u2013 300 AD), though most people generally refer to the curved blades made from the Heian period (794\u20131185) to the present day when speaking of \"Japanese swords\". There are many types of Japanese swords that differ by size, shape, field of application, and method of manufacture. Some of the more commonly known types of Japanese swords are the \"katana\", \"tachi\", \"\u014ddachi\", \"wakizashi\", and \"tant\u014d\".\nEtymology.\nThe word \"katana\" was used in ancient Japan and is still used today, whereas the old usage of the word \"nihont\u014d\" is found in the poem the Song of \"Nihont\u014d\", by the Song dynasty poet Ouyang Xiu. The word \"nihont\u014d\" became more common in Japan in the late Tokugawa shogunate. Due to importation of Western swords, the word \"nihont\u014d\" was adopted to distinguish it from the .\n\"Meibutsu\" (noted swords) is a special designation given to sword masterpieces which are listed in a compilation from the 18th century called the \"Kyoho Meibutsucho\". The swords listed are \"Koto\" blades from several different provinces; 100 of the 166 swords listed are known to exist today, with \"S\u014dsh\u016b\" blades being very well represented. The \"Kyoho Meibutsucho\" also listed the nicknames, prices, history and length of the \"Meibutsu\", with swords by Yoshimitsu, Masamune, Yoshihiro, and Sadamune being very highly priced.\nAnatomy.\nBlade.\nEach blade has a unique profile, mostly dependent on the swordsmith and the construction method. The most prominent part is the middle ridge, or \"shinogi\". In the earlier picture, the examples were flat to the shinogi, then tapering to the blade edge. However, swords could narrow down to the shinogi, then narrow further to the blade edge, or even expand outward towards the shinogi then shrink to the blade edge (producing a trapezoidal shape). A flat or narrowing shinogi is called \"shinogi-hikushi\", whereas a flat blade is called a \"shinogi-takushi\".\nThe shinogi can be placed near the back of the blade for a longer, sharper, more fragile tip or a more moderate shinogi near the center of the blade.\nThe sword also has an exact tip shape, which is considered an extremely important characteristic: the tip can be long (\"\u014dkissaki\"), medium (\"ch\u016bkissaki\"), short (\"kokissaki\"), or even hooked backwards (\"ikuri-\u014dkissaki\"). In addition, whether the front edge of the tip is more curved (\"fukura-tsuku\") or (relatively) straight (\"fukura-kareru\") is also important.\nThe \"\" (point) is not usually a \"chisel-like\" point, and the Western knife interpretation of a \"tant\u014d point\" is rarely found on true Japanese swords; a straight, linearly sloped point has the advantage of being easy to grind, but less stabbing/piercing capabilities compared to traditional Japanese kissaki Fukura (curvature of the cutting edge of tip) types. Kissaki usually have a curved profile, and smooth three-dimensional curvature across their surface towards the edge\u2014though they are bounded by a straight line called the \"yokote\" and have crisp definition at all their edges. While the straight tip on the \"American tanto\" is identical to traditional Japanese fukura, two characteristics set it apart from Japanese sword makes: The absolute lack of curve only possible with modern tools, and the use of the word \"tanto\" in the nomenclature of the western tribute is merely a nod to the Japanese word for knife or short sword, rather than a tip style.\nAlthough it is not commonly known, the \"chisel point\" kissaki originated in Japan. Examples of such are shown in the book \"The Japanese Sword\" by Kanzan Sato. Because American bladesmiths use this design extensively it is a common misconception that the design originated in America.\nA hole is punched through the tang ', called a '. It is used to anchor the blade using a ', a small bamboo pin that is inserted into another cavity in the handle ' and through the mekugi-ana, thus restricting the blade from slipping out. To remove the handle one removes the mekugi. The swordsmith's signature \"\" is carved on the tang.\nMountings.\nIn Japanese, the scabbard is referred to as a ', and the handguard piece, often intricately designed as an individual work of art\u2014especially in later years of the Edo period\u2014was called the \"tsuba\". Other aspects of the mountings , such as the ' (decorative grip swells), ' (blade collar and scabbard wedge), ' and ' (handle collar and cap), ' (small utility knife handle), ' (decorative skewer-like implement), ' lacquer, and \"\" (professional handle wrap, also named ), received similar levels of artistry.\nSignature and date.\nThe \"mei\" is the signature inscribed on to the tang of the Japanese sword. Fake signatures (\"gimei\") are common not only due to centuries of forgeries but potentially misleading ones that acknowledge prominent smiths and guilds, and those commissioned to a separate signer.\nSword scholars collect and study \"oshigata\", or paper tang-rubbings, taken from a blade: to identify the mei, the hilt is removed and the sword is held point side up. The mei is chiseled onto the tang on the side which traditionally faces away from the wearer's body while being worn; since the katana and wakizashi are always worn with the cutting edge up, the edge should be held to the viewer's left. The inscription will be viewed as kanji on the surface of the tang: the first two kanji represent the province; the next pair is the smith; and the last, when present, is sometimes a variation of 'made by', or, 'respectfully'. The date will be inscribed near the mei, either with the reign name; the Zodiacal Method; or those calculated from the reign of the legendary Emperor Jimmu, dependent upon the period.\nLength.\nWhat generally differentiates the different swords is their length. Japanese swords are measured in units of \"shaku\". Since 1891, the modern Japanese shaku is approximately equal to a foot (11.93\u00a0inches), calibrated with the meter to equal exactly 10 meters per 33 shaku (30.30\u00a0cm).\nHowever, the historical shaku was slightly longer (13.96\u00a0inches or 35.45\u00a0cm). Thus, there may sometimes be confusion about the blade lengths, depending on which shaku value is being assumed when converting to metric or U.S. customary measurements.\nThe three main divisions of Japanese blade length are:\nA blade shorter than one \"shaku\" is considered a \"tant\u014d\" (knife). A blade longer than one \"shaku\" but less than two is considered a \"sh\u014dt\u014d\" (short sword). The wakizashi and \"kodachi\" are in this category. The length is measured in a straight line across the back of the blade from tip to \"munemachi\" (where blade meets tang). Most blades that fall into the \"sh\u014dt\u014d\" size range are \"wakizashi\". However, some \"dait\u014d\" were designed with blades slightly shorter than 2 \"shaku\". These were called \"kodachi\" and are somewhere in between a true \"dait\u014d\" and a \"wakizashi\". A \"sh\u014dt\u014d\" and a \"dait\u014d\" together are called a \"daish\u014d\" (literally, \"big-little\"). The \"daish\u014d\" was the symbolic armament of the Edo period samurai.\nA blade longer than two \"shaku\" is considered a \"dait\u014d\", or long sword. To qualify as a \"dait\u014d\" the sword must have a blade longer than 2 \"shaku\" (approximately 24\u00a0inches or 60 centimeters) in a straight line. While there is a well defined lower limit to the length of a \"dait\u014d\", the upper limit is not well enforced; a number of modern historians, swordsmiths, etc. say that swords that are over 3 \"shaku\" in blade length are \"longer than normal \"dait\u014d\"\" and are usually referred to as \"\u014ddachi\". The word \"dait\u014d\" is often used when explaining the related terms \"sh\u014dt\u014d\" (short sword) and \"daish\u014d\" (the set of both large and small sword). Miyamoto Musashi refers to the long sword in \"The Book of Five Rings\". He is referring to the \"katana\" in this, and refers to the \"nodachi\" and the \"odachi\" as \"extra-long swords\".\nBefore about 1500 most swords were usually worn suspended from cords on a belt, edge-down. This style is called \"jindachi-zukuri\", and \"dait\u014d\" worn in this fashion are called \"tachi\" (average blade length of 75\u201380\u00a0cm). From 1600 to 1867, more swords were worn through an \"obi\" (sash), paired with a smaller blade; both worn edge-up. This style is called \"buke-zukuri\", and all \"dait\u014d\" worn in this fashion are \"katana\", averaging 70\u201374\u00a0cm (2 shaku 3 sun to 2 shaku 4 sun 5 bu) in blade length. However, Japanese swords of longer lengths also existed, including lengths up to 78\u00a0cm (2 shaku 5 sun 5 bu).\nIt was not simply that the swords were worn by cords on a belt, as a 'style' of sorts. Such a statement trivializes an important function of such a manner of bearing the sword. It was a very direct example of 'form following function.' At this point in Japanese history, much of the warfare was fought on horseback. Being so, if the sword or blade were in a more vertical position, it would be cumbersome, and awkward to draw. Suspending the sword by 'cords' allowed the sheath to be more horizontal, and far less likely to bind while drawing it in that position.\nAbnormally long blades (longer than 3 \"shaku\"), usually carried across the back, are called \"\u014ddachi\" or \"nodachi.\" The word \"\u014ddachi\" is also sometimes used as a synonym for Japanese swords. \"Odachi\" means \"great sword\", and \"Nodachi\" translates to \"field sword\". These greatswords were used during war, as the longer sword gave a foot soldier a reach advantage. These swords are now illegal in Japan. Citizens are not allowed to possess an \"odachi\" unless it is for ceremonial purposes.\nHere is a list of lengths for different types of blades:\nBlades whose length is next to a different classification type are described with a prefix 'O-' (for great) or 'Ko-' (for small), e.g. a Wakizashi with a length of 59\u00a0cm is called an O-wakizashi (almost a Katana) whereas a Katana of 61\u00a0cm is called a Ko-Katana (for small Katana; but note that a small accessory blade sometimes found in the sheath of a long sword is also a \"kogatana\" (\u5c0f\u5200)).\nSince 1867, restrictions and/or the deconstruction of the samurai class meant that most blades have been worn \"jindachi-zukuri\" style, like Western navy officers. Since 1953, there has been a resurgence in the \"buke-zukuri\" style, permitted only for demonstration purposes.\nClassification.\nClassification by shape and usage.\nIn modern times the most commonly known type of Japanese sword is the \"Shinogi-Zukuri\" \"katana\", which is a single-edged and usually curved sabre traditionally worn by samurai from the 15th century onwards. Western historians have said that Japanese katana were among the finest cutting weapons in world military history, for their intended use.\nOther types of Japanese swords include: tsurugi or , which is a straight double-edged sword; \u014ddachi, tachi, which are older styles of a very long curved single-edged sword; uchigatana, a slightly shorter curved single-edged long sword; wakizashi, a medium-sized sword; and tant\u014d, which is an even smaller knife-sized sword. Naginata, nagamaki, and yari, despite being polearms, are still considered to be swords, which is a common misconception; naginata, nagamaki and yari differ from swords.\nThe type classifications for Japanese swords indicate the combination of a blade and its mounts as this, then, determines the style of use of the blade. An unsigned and shortened blade that was once made and intended for use as a tachi may be alternately mounted in tachi koshirae and katana koshirae. It is properly distinguished, then, by the style of mount it currently inhabits. A long tanto may be classified as a wakizashi due to its length being over ; however, it may have originally been mounted and used as a tanto making the length distinction somewhat arbitrary but necessary when referring to unmounted short blades. When the mounts are taken out of the equation, a tanto and wakizashi will be determined by length under or over , unless their intended use can be absolutely determined or the speaker is rendering an opinion on the intended use of the blade. In this way, a blade formally attributed as a wakizashi due to length may be informally discussed between individuals as a tanto because the blade was made during an age where tanto were popular and the wakizashi as a companion sword to katana did not yet exist.\nThe following are types of Japanese swords:\nThere are other bladed weapons made in the same traditional manner as Japanese swords, which are not swords, but are still classified as Japanese swords (\"nihont\u014d\") (as \"t\u014d\" means \"blade\", rather than specifically \"sword\") because of the way they are made in a similar manner to Japanese swords:\nOther edged weapons or tools that are made using the same methods as Japanese swords:\nClassification by period.\nEach Japanese sword is classified according to when the blade was made.:\nHistorically in Japan, the ideal blade of a Japanese sword has been considered to be the \"kot\u014d\" in the Kamakura period, and the swordsmiths from the Edo period to the present day from the \"Shinto\" period focused on reproducing the blade of a Japanese sword in the Kamakura period. There are more than 100 Japanese swords designated as National Treasures in Japan, of which the \"Kot\u014d\" of the Kamakura period account for 80% and the \"tachi\" account for 70%.\nJapanese swords since \"shint\u014d\" are different from \"kot\u014d\" in forging method and steel. This was due to the destruction of the Bizen school due to a great flood, the spread of the Mino school, and the virtual unification of Japan by Toyotomi Hideyoshi, which made almost no difference in the steel used by each school. Japanese swords since the \"Shint\u014d\" period often have gorgeous decorations carved on the blade and lacquered \"maki-e\" decorations on the scabbard. This was due to the economic development and the increased value of swords as arts and crafts as the Sengoku period ended and the peaceful Edo period began.\nJapanese swords are still commonly seen today; antique and modern forged swords can be found and purchased. Modern, authentic Japanese swords (\"nihont\u014d\") are made by a few hundred swordsmiths. Many examples can be seen at an annual competition hosted by the All Japan Swordsmith Association, under the auspices of the Nihont\u014d Bunka Shink\u014d Ky\u014dkai (Society for the Promotion of Japanese Sword Culture). However, to maintain the quality of Japanese swords, the Japanese government limits the number of Japanese swords a swordsmith can make in a year to 24 (up to 2 swords per month). Therefore, many of the swords called \"Japanese sword\" distributed around the world today are made in China, and the manufacturing process and quality are not authorized.\nClassification by school.\nMany old Japanese swords can be traced back to one of five provinces, each of which had its own school, traditions, and \"trademarks\" (e.g., the swords from Mino province were \"from the start famous for their sharpness\"). These schools are known as \"Gokaden\" (The Five Traditions). In the \"Kot\u014d\" era there were several other schools that did not fit within the Five Traditions or were known to mix elements of each \"Gokaden\", and they were called (small school). There were 19 commonly referenced . The number of swordsmiths of \"Gokaden\", as confirmed by signatures and documents, were 4005 in Bizen, 1269 in Mino, 1025 in Yamato, 847 in Yamashiro and 438 in S\u014dsh\u016b. These traditions and provinces are as follows:\nYamato school.\nThe Yamato school is a school that originated in Yamato Province corresponding to present-day Nara Prefecture. Nara was the capital of ancient Japan.\nSince there is a legend that it was a swordsmith named Amakuni who first signed the tang of a sword, he is sometimes regarded as the founder and the oldest school.\nHowever, the founder identified in the material is Yukinobu in the Heian period. They forged the swords that were often worn by monk warriors called \"s\u014dhei\" in Nara's large temples. The Yamato school consists of five schools: \"Senjuin, Shikkake, Taima, Tegai, and H\u014dsh\u014d\".\nEach school forged swords under the supervision of a different temple. In the middle of the Muromachi period, swordsmiths moved to various places such as Mino, and the school disappeared. Their swords are often characterized by a deep curve, a narrow width from blade to back, a high central ridge, and a small tip. There are direct lines on the surface of the blade, the \"hamon\" is linear, and the grain at the boundary of the hamon is medium in size. It is often evaluated as a sword with a simple and strong impression.\nYamashiro school.\nThe Yamashiro school is a school that originated in Yamashiro Province, corresponding to present-day Kyoto Prefecture. When Emperor Kanmu relocated the capital to Kyoto in 794, swordsmiths began to gather. The founder of the school was Sanj\u014d Munechika in the late 10th century in the Heian period. The Yamashiro school consisted of schools such as \"Sanj\u014d, Ayanok\u014dji, Awataguchi, and Rai\". At first, they often forged swords in response to aristocrats' demands, so importance was placed on aesthetics and practicality was not emphasized. However, when a domestic conflict occurred at the end of the Heian period, practicality was emphasized and a swordsmith was invited from the Bizen school. In the Kamakura period, \"tachi\" from a magnificent \"rai\" school became popular among samurai. After that, they also adopted the forging method of S\u014dsh\u016b school. Their swords are often characterized as long and narrow, curved from the base or center, and have a sparkle on the surface of the blade, with the \"hamon\" being straight and the grains on the boundary of the \"hamon\" being small. It is often evaluated as a sword with an elegant impression.\nBizen school.\nThe Bizen school is a school that originated in Bizen Province, corresponding to present-day Okayama Prefecture. Bizen has been a major production area of high-quality iron sand since ancient times. The Ko-bizen school in the mid Heian period was the originator. The Bizen school consisted of schools such as \"Ko-bizen, Fukuoka-ichimonji, Osafune,\" and \"Hatakeda\".\nAccording to a sword book written in the Kamakura period, out of the 12 best swordsmiths in Japan who were convened by the Retired Emperor Go-Toba, 10 were from the Bizen school.\nGreat swordsmiths were born one after another in the \"Osafune\" school which started in the Kamakura period, and it developed to the largest school in the history of Japanese swords.\nKanemitsu and Nagayoshi of the \"Osafune\" school were apprentices to Masamune of the S\u014dsh\u016b school, the greatest swordsmith in Japan. While they forged high-quality swords by order, at the same time, from the Muromachi period, when wars became large-scale, they mass-produced low-quality swords for drafted farmers and for export.\nThe Bizen school had enjoyed the highest prosperity for a long time, but declined rapidly due to a great flood which occurred in the late 16th century during the Sengoku period. Their swords are often characterized as curved from the base, with irregular fingerprint-like patterns on the surface of the blade, while the \"hamon\" has a flashy pattern like a series of cloves, and there is little grain but a color gradient at the boundary of the \"hamon\". It is often evaluated as a sword with a showy and gorgeous impression.\nS\u014dsh\u016b school.\nThe S\u014dsh\u016b school is a school that originated in Sagami Province, corresponding to present-day Kanagawa Prefecture. Sagami Province was the political center of Japan where the Kamakura shogunate was established in the Kamakura period. At the end of the 13th century, the Kamakura shogunate invited swordsmiths from Yamashiro school and Bizen school, and swordsmiths began to gather. Shint\u014dgo Kunimitsu forged experimental swords by combining the forging technology of Yamashiro school and Bizen school. Masamune, who learned from Shint\u014dgo Kunimitsu, became the greatest swordsmith in Japan. From the lessons of the Mongol invasion of Japan, they revolutionized the forging process to make stronger swords. Although this forging method is not fully understood to date, one of the elements is heating at higher temperatures and rapid cooling. Their revolution influenced other schools to make the highest quality swords, but this technique was lost before the Azuchi\u2013Momoyama period (\"Shint\u014d\" period). The S\u014dsh\u016b school declined after the fall of the Kamakura shogunate. Their swords are often characterized by a shallow curve, a wide blade to the back, and a thin cross-section. There are irregular fingerprint-like patterns on the surface of the blade, the \"hamon\" has a pattern of undulations with continuous roundness, and the grains at the boundary of the \"hamon\" are large.\nMino school.\nThe Mino school is a school that originated in Mino Province, corresponding to present-day Gifu Prefecture. Mino Province was a strategic traffic point connecting the Kanto and Kansai regions, and was surrounded by powerful \"daimyo\" (feudal lords). The Mino school started in the middle of the Kamakura period, when swordsmiths of the Yamato school who learned from the S\u014dsh\u016b school gathered in Mino. The Mino school became the largest production area of Japanese swords after the Bizen school declined due to a great flood. The production rate of \"katana\" was high, because it was the newest school among five big schools. Their swords are often characterized by a slightly higher central ridge and a thinner back. There are irregular fingerprint-like patterns on the surface of the blade, the \"hamon\" are various, and the grain on the border of the hamon are hardly visible.\nHistory.\nThe production of swords in Japan is divided into specific time periods: \"j\u014dkot\u014d\" (ancient swords, until around 900 A.D.), \"kot\u014d\" (old swords from around 900\u20131596), \"shint\u014d\" (new swords 1596\u20131780), \"shinshint\u014d\" (new new swords 1781\u20131876), \"gendait\u014d\" (modern or contemporary swords 1876\u2013present)\nJ\u014dkot\u014d \u2013 Kot\u014d (Old swords).\nEarly examples of iron swords were straight \"tsurugi\", \"chokut\u014d\" and others with unusual shapes, some of the styles and techniques were derived from Chinese dao, and some directly imported through trade. The swords of this period were a mixture of swords of Japanese original style and those of Chinese style brought to Japan via the Korean Peninsula and East China Sea. The cross-sectional shape of the blades of these early swords was an isosceles triangular \"hira-zukuri\", and the \"kiriha-zukuri\" sword, which sharpened only the part close to the cutting edge side of a planar blade, gradually appeared. Swords of this period are classified as \"j\u014dkot\u014d\" and are often referred to in distinction from Japanese swords.\nThe direct predecessor of the \"tachi\" (\u592a\u5200) has been called \"Warabitet\u014d\" () by the Emishi (Not to be confused with Ainu) of Tohoku. The Nihonto Meikan shows the earliest and by far the largest group of \u014csh\u016b smiths from the beginning of the 8th century were from the Mokusa school, listing over 100 Mokusa smiths before the beginning of the Kamakura period. Archaeological excavations of the \u014csh\u016b Tohoku region show iron ore smelting sites dating back to the early Nara period. The Tohoku region and indeed the whole \u014csh\u016b district in the 8th century was controlled and populated by the Emishi. Archaeological evidence of recovered \"Warabitet\u014d\" (\u8568\u624b\u5200) show a high concentration in the burial goods of the \u014csh\u016b and Hokkaido regions. Mokusa Area was famous for legendary swordsmiths in the Heian period (AD 794\u20131185). They are considered as the original producers of the Japanese swords known as \"\"Warabitet\u014d\" \" which can date back to the sixth to eighth centuries. \"\"Warabitet\u014d\" \" gained its fame through the series of battles between Emishi people (\u8766\u5937) and the Yamato-chotei government (\u5927 \u548c\u671d\u5ef7) in the late eighth century. Using \"\"Warabitet\u014d\",\" the small number of Emishi soldiers could resist against the numerous Yamato-chotei army over a Thirty-Eight Years' War (\u4e09\u5341\u516b\u5e74\u6226\u4e89) (AD 770\u2013811). The Meikan describes that from earlier time there was a list of forty-two famous swordsmiths in the Toukou Meikan \u5200\u5de5\u9298\u9451 at Kanchiin \u89b3\u667a\u9662. Eight of the swordsmiths on this list were from \u014csh\u016b schools. Five from Mokusa being Onimaru \u9b3c\u4e38, Yoyasu \u4e16\u5b89, Morifusa \u68ee\u623f, Hatafusa \u5e61\u623f and Gaan \u74e6\u5b89, two from the Tamatsukuri Fuju \u8af7\u8aa6,Houji \u5bf6\u6b21 and one from Gassan signing just Gassan \u6708\u5c71. According to the Nihonto Meikan, the \u014csh\u016b swordsmith group consists of the Mokusa (\u821e\u8349), the Gassan (\u6708\u5c71) and the Tamatsukuri (\u7389\u9020), later to become the Hoju (\u5bf6\u58fd) schools. \u014csh\u016b swords appear in various old books of this time, for example Heiji Monogatari \u5e73\u6cbb\u7269\u8a9e (Tale of Heiji), Konjaku Monogatari \u4eca\u6614\u7269\u8a9e (Anthology of tales from the past), Kojidan \u53e4\u4e8b\u8ac7 (Japanese collection of Setsuwa \u8aac\u8a71), and Gikeiki \u7fa9\u7d4c\u8a18 (War tale that focuses on the legends of Minamoto no Yoshitsune \u6e90\u7fa9\u7d4c and his followers). \u014csh\u016b swordsmiths appeared in books in quite early times compared to others. Tales in these books tell of the Emishi-to in the capital city and these swords seem to have been quite popular with the Bushi. Maybe a badge of honour being captured weapons. For example, In \"Nihongiryaku\" \u65e5\u672c\u7d00\u7565 983AD :\" the number of people wearing a funny looking Tachi \u592a\u5200 is increasing.\" In \"Kauyagokau\" \u9ad8\u91ce\u5fa1\u5e78 1124AD :\" when emperor Shirakawa \u767d\u6cb3\u6cd5\u7687 visited Kouyasan \u9ad8 \u91ce\u5c71, Fujiwara Zaemon Michisue \u85e4\u539f\u5de6\u885b\u9580\u901a\u5b63 was wearing a Fush\u016b sword \" In \"Heihanki\" \u5175\u7bc4\u8a18 1158AD there was a line that mentioned the Emperor himself had Fush\u016b Tachi.\" It seems that during the late Heian the Emishi-to was gaining popularity in Kyoto.\nIn the middle of the Heian period (794\u20131185), samurai improved on the Warabitet\u014d to develop \"Kenukigata-tachi ()\" -early Japanese sword-. To be more precise, it is thought that the \"Emishi\" improved the \"warabitet\u014d\" and developed \"Kenukigata-warabitet\u014d ()\" with a hole in the hilt and \"kenukigatat\u014d ()\" without decorations on the tip of the hilt, and the samurai developed \"kenukigata-tachi\" based on these swords. \"Kenukigata-tachi\", which was developed in the first half of the 10th century, has a three-dimensional cross-sectional shape of an elongated pentagonal or hexagonal blade called \"shinogi-zukuri\" and a gently curved single-edged blade, which are typical features of Japanese swords. There is no wooden hilt attached to \"kenukigata-tachi\", and the tang (\"nakago\") which is integrated with the blade is directly gripped and used. The term \"kenukigata\" is derived from the fact that the central part of tang is hollowed out in the shape of an ancient Japanese tweezers (\"kenuki\").\nIn the \"tachi\" developed after \"kenukigata-tachi\", a structure in which the hilt is fixed to the tang (\"nakago\") with a pin called \"mekugi\" was adopted. As a result, a sword with three basic external elements of Japanese swords, the cross-sectional shape of \"shinogi-zukuri\", a gently curved single-edged blade, and the structure of \"nakago\", was completed. Its shape may reflect the changing form of warfare in Japan. Cavalry were now the predominant fighting unit and the older straight \"chokut\u014d\" were particularly unsuitable for fighting from horseback. The curved sword is a far more efficient weapon when wielded by a warrior on horseback where the curve of the blade adds considerably to the downward force of a cutting action. Early models had uneven curves with the deepest part of the curve at the hilt. As eras changed the center of the curve tended to move up the blade.\nThe \"tachi\" is a sword which is generally larger than a \"katana\", and is worn suspended with the cutting edge down. This was the standard form of carrying the sword for centuries, and would eventually be displaced by the \"katana\" style where the blade was worn thrust through the belt, edge up. The \"tachi\" was worn slung across the left hip. The signature on the tang of the blade was inscribed in such a way that it would always be on the outside of the sword when worn. This characteristic is important in recognizing the development, function, and different styles of wearing swords from this time onwards.\nWhen worn with full armour, the \"tachi\" would be accompanied by a shorter blade in the form known as \"koshigatana\" (\u8170\u5200, \"waist sword\"); a type of short sword with no handguard, and where the hilt and scabbard meet to form the style of mounting called an \"aikuchi\" (\"meeting mouth\"). Daggers (\"tant\u014d\"), were also carried for close combat fighting as well as carried generally for personal protection.\nBy the 11th century during the Heian period, Japanese swords had already been exported to neighboring countries in Asia. For example, in the poem \"The Song of Japanese Swords\" Ouyang Xiu, a statesman of the Song dynasty in China, described Japanese swords as \"It is a treasured sword with a scabbard made of fragrant wood covered with fish skin, decorated with brass and copper, and capable of exorcising evil spirits. It is imported at a great cost.\".\nFrom the Heian period (794\u20131185), ordinary samurai wore swords of the style called \"kurourusi tachi (kokushitsu no tachi, \u9ed2\u6f06\u592a\u5200)\", which meant black lacquer \"tachi\". The hilt of a \"tachi\" is wrapped in leather or ray skin, and it is wrapped with black thread or leather cord, and the scabbard is coated with black lacquer. On the other hand, court nobles wore \"tachi\" decorated with precisely carved metal and jewels for ceremonial purposes. High-ranking court nobles wore swords of the style called \"kazari tachi\" or \"kaza tachi\" (\u98fe\u592a\u5200, \u98fe\u5263), which meant decorative \"tachi\", and lower-ranking court nobles wore simplified \"kazatachi\" swords of the style called \"hosodachi\" (\u7d30\u592a\u5200), which meant thin \"tachi\". The \"kazatachi\" and \"hosodachi\" worn by nobles were initially straight like a \"chokut\u014d\", but since the Kamakura period they have had a gentle curve under the influence of \"tachi\". Since \"tachi\" worn by court nobles were for ceremonial use, they generally had an iron plate instead of a blade.\nIn the Kamakura period (1185\u20131333), high-ranking samurai wore \"hyogo gusari tachi (hyogo kusari no tachi, \u5175\u5eab\u9396\u592a\u5200)\", which meant a sword with chains in the arsenal. The scabbard of the \"tachi\" was covered with a gilt copper plate and hung by chains at the waist. At the end of the Kamakura period, simplified \"hyogo gusari tachi\" came to be made as an offering to the \"kami\" of Shinto shrines and fell out of use as weapons. On the other hand, in the Kamakura period, there was a type of \"tachi\" called \"hirumaki tachi\" (\u86ed\u5dfb\u592a\u5200) with a scabbard covered with metal, which was used as a weapon until the Muromachi period. The meaning was a sword wrapped around a leech, and its feature was that a thin metal plate was spirally wrapped around the scabbard, so it was both sturdy and decorative, and chains were not used to hang the scabbard around the waist.\nThe Mongol invasions of Japan in the 13th century during the Kamakura period spurred further evolution of the Japanese sword. The swordsmiths of the S\u014dsh\u016b school represented by Masamune studied \"tachi\" that were broken or bent in battle, developed new production methods, and created innovative Japanese swords. They forged the blade using a combination of soft and hard steel to optimize the temperature and timing of the heating and cooling of the blade, resulting in a lighter but more robust blade. They also made the curve of the blade gentle, lengthened the tip linearly, widened the width from the cutting edge to the opposite side of the blade, and thinned the cross section to improve the penetration and cutting ability of the blade.\nHistorically in Japan, the ideal blade of a Japanese sword has been considered to be the (lit., \"old swords\") in the Kamakura period, and the swordsmiths from the Edo period (1603\u20131868) to the present day from the (lit., \"new swords\") period focused on reproducing the blade of the Japanese sword made in Kamakura period. There are more than 100 Japanese swords designated as National Treasures in Japan, of which the \"Kot\u014d\" of the Kamakura period account for 80% and the \"tachi\" account for 70%.\nFrom the end of the Kamakura period to the end of the Muromachi period (1333\u20131573), \"kawatsutsumi tachi\" (\u9769\u5305\u592a\u5200), which means a \"tachi\" wrapped in leather, was popular. The \"kawatsutsumi tachi\" was stronger than the \"kurourushi tachi\" because its hilt was wrapped in leather or ray skin, lacquer was painted on top of it, leather straps and cords were wrapped around it, and the scabbard and sometimes the \"tsuba\" (hand guard) were also wrapped in leather.\nIn the Nanboku-ch\u014d period (1336\u20131392) which corresponds to the early Muromachi period (1336\u20131573), huge Japanese swords such as \"\u014ddachi\" became popular. The reason for this is thought to be that the conditions for making a practical large-sized sword were established due to the nationwide spread of strong and sharp swords of the S\u014dsh\u016b school. In the case of \"\u014ddachi\" whose blade was 150\u00a0cm long, it was impossible to draw a sword from the scabbard on the waist, so people carried it on their back or had their servants carry it. Large \"naginata\" and \"kanab\u014d\" were also popular in this period.\n\"Katana\" originates from \"sasuga\", a kind of \"tant\u014d\" used by lower-ranking samurai who fought on foot in the Kamakura period. Their main weapon was a long \"naginata\" and \"sasuga\" was a spare weapon. In the Nanboku-ch\u014d period, long weapons such as \"\u014ddachi\" were popular, and along with this, \"sasuga\" lengthened and finally became \"katana\". Also, there is a theory that \"koshigatana\" (\u8170\u5200), a kind of \"tant\u014d\" which was equipped by high ranking samurai together with \"tachi\", developed to \"katana\" through the same historical background as \"sasuga\", and it is possible that both developed to \"katana\". The oldest \"katana\" in existence today is called \"Hishizukuri uchigatana\", which was forged in the Nanbokuch\u014d period, and was dedicated to Kasuga Shrine later.\nBy the 15th century, Japanese swords had already gained international fame by being exported to China and Korea. For example, Korea learned how to make Japanese swords by sending swordsmiths to Japan and inviting Japanese swordsmiths to Korea. According to the record of June 1, 1430, in the \"Veritable Records of the Joseon Dynasty\", a Korean swordsmith who went to Japan and mastered the method of making Japanese swords presented a Japanese sword to the King of Korea and was rewarded for the excellent work which was no different from the swords made by the Japanese.\nTraditionally, \"yumi\" (bows) were the main weapon of war in Japan, and \"tachi\" and \"naginata\" were used only for close combat. The \u014cnin War in the late 15th century in the Muromachi period expanded into a large-scale domestic war, in which employed farmers called \"ashigaru\" were mobilized in large numbers. They fought on foot using \"katana\" shorter than \"tachi\". In the Sengoku period (1467\u20131615, period of warring states) in the late Muromachi period, the war became bigger and \"ashigaru\" fought in a close formation using \"yari\" (spears) lent to them. Furthermore, in the late 16th century, \"tanegashima\" (muskets) were introduced from Portugal, and Japanese swordsmiths mass-produced improved products, with \"ashigaru\" fighting with leased guns. On the battlefield in Japan, guns and spears became main weapons in addition to bows. Due to the changes in fighting styles in these wars, the \"tachi\" and \"naginata\" became obsolete among samurai, and the \"katana\", which was easy to carry, became the mainstream. The dazzling looking \"tachi\" gradually became a symbol of the authority of high-ranking samurai.\nOn the other hand, \"kenjutsu\" (swordsmanship) that makes use of the characteristics of \"katana\" was invented. The quicker draw of the sword was well suited to combat where victory depended heavily on short response times. (The practice and martial art for drawing the sword quickly and responding to a sudden attack was called 'Batt\u014djutsu', which is still kept alive through the teaching of Iaido.) The \"katana\" further facilitated this by being worn thrust through a belt-like sash (\"obi\") with the sharpened edge facing up. Ideally, samurai could draw the sword and strike the enemy in a single motion. Previously, the curved \"tachi\" had been worn with the edge of the blade facing down and suspended from a belt.\nFrom the 15th century, low-quality swords were mass-produced under the influence of the large-scale war. These swords, along with spears, were lent to recruited farmers called \"ashigaru\" and swords ware exported. Such mass-produced swords are called \"kazuuchimono\", and swordsmiths of the Bisen school and Mino school produced them by division of labor. The export of Japanese sword reached its height during the Muromachi period when at least 200,000 swords were shipped to Ming dynasty China in official trade in an attempt to soak up the production of Japanese weapons and make it harder for pirates in the area to arm. In the Ming dynasty of China, Japanese swords and their tactics were studied to repel pirates, and \"wodao\" and \"miaodao\" were developed based on Japanese swords.\nFrom this period, the tang () of many old were cut and shortened into . This kind of remake is called (\u78e8\u4e0a\u3052). For example, many of the \"tachi\" that Masamune forged during the Kamakura period were converted into \"katana\", so his only existing works are \"katana\" and \"tant\u014d\". During this period, a great flood occurred in Bizen, which was the largest production area of Japanese swords, and the Bizen school rapidly declined, after which the Mino school flourished.\nFrom around the 16th century, many Japanese swords were exported to Thailand, where katana-style swords were made and prized for battle and art work, and some of them are in the collections of the Thai royal family.\nIn the Sengoku period (1467\u20131615) or the Azuchi\u2013Momoyama period (1568\u20131600), the \"itomaki tachi\" (\"itomaki no tachi\", \u7cf8\u5dfb\u592a\u5200), which means a \"tachi\" wound with thread, appeared and became the mainstream of \"tachi\" after that. \"itomaki tachi\" was decorated with gorgeous lacquer decorations with lots of \"maki-e\" and flashy colored threads, and was used as a gift, a ceremony, or an offering to the \"kami\" of Shinto shrines.\nIn later Japanese feudal history, during the Sengoku and Edo periods, certain high-ranking warriors of what became the ruling class would wear their sword \"tachi\"-style (edge-downward), rather than with the scabbard thrust through the belt with the edge upward. This style of swords is called \"handachi\", \"half \"tachi\"\". In \"handachi\", both styles were often mixed, for example, fastening to the \"obi\" was \"katana\" style, but metalworking of the scabbard was \"tachi\" style.\nIn the Muromachi period, especially the Sengoku period, anybody such as farmers, townspeople and monks could equip a sword. However, in 1588 during the Azuchi\u2013Momoyama period, Toyotomi Hideyoshi conducted a sword hunt and banned farmers from owning them with weapons.\nHowever, Toyotomi's sword hunt couldn't disarm peasants. Farmers and townspeople could wear daisho until 1683. And most of them kept wearing wakizashi on a daily basis until the middle of the 18th century. After then they wore it special times (travel, wedding, funeral) until meiji restoration.\nShint\u014d \u2013 Shinshint\u014d (New swords).\nSwords forged after 1596 in the Keich\u014d period of the Azuchi-Momoyama period are classified as \"shint\u014d\" (New swords). Japanese swords since \"shint\u014d\" are different from \"kot\u014d\" in forging method and steel (\"tamahagane\"). This is thought to be because Bizen school, which was the largest swordsmith group of Japanese swords, was destroyed by a great flood in 1590 and the mainstream shifted to Mino school, and because Toyotomi Hideyoshi virtually unified Japan, uniform steel began to be distributed throughout Japan. The \"kot\u014d\" swords, especially the Bizen school swords made in the Kamakura period, had a \"midare-utsuri\" like a white mist between \"hamon\" and \"shinogi\", but the swords since \"shinto\" have almost disappeared. In addition, the whole body of the blade became whitish and hard. Almost no one was able to reproduce \"midare-utsurii\" until Kunihira Kawachi reproduced it in 2014.\nJapanese swords since the \"sint\u014d\" period often have gorgeous decorations carved on the blade and lacquered \"maki-e\" decorations on the scabbard. This was due to the economic development and the increased value of swords as arts and crafts as the Sengoku period ended and the peaceful Edo period began. The Umetada school led by Umetada Myoju who was considered to be the founder of \"shinto\" led the improvement of the artistry of Japanese swords in this period. They were both swordsmiths and metalsmiths, and were famous for carving the blade, making metal accouterments such as \"tsuba\" (handguard), remodeling from \"tachi\" to \"katana\" (\"suriage\"), and inscriptions inlaid with gold.\nDuring this period, the Tokugawa shogunate required samurai to wear \"Katana\" and shorter swords in pairs. These short swords were \"wakizashi\" and \"tant\u014d\", and \"wakizashi\" were mainly selected. This set of two is called a \"daish\u014d\". Only \"samurai\" could wear the \"daish\u014d\": it represented their social power and personal honour. Samurai could wear decorative sword mountings in their daily lives, but the Tokugawa shogunate regulated the formal sword that samurai wore when visiting a castle by regulating it as a \"daisho\" made of a black scabbard, a hilt wrapped with white ray skin and black string.\nTownspeople (\"Ch\u014dnin\") and farmers were allowed to equip a short wakizashi, and the public were often equipped with \"wakizashi\" on their travels. Under the Tokugawa shogunate, swordmaking and the use of firearms declined. Japanese swords made in this period is classified as \"shint\u014d\".\nIn the late 18th century, swordsmith Suishinshi Masahide criticized that the present \"katana\" blades only emphasized decoration and had a problem with their toughness. He insisted that the bold and strong kot\u014d blade from the Kamakura period to the Nanboku-ch\u014d period was the ideal Japanese sword, and started a movement to restore the production method and apply it to \"katana\". \"Katana\" made after this is classified as a , \"new revival swords\" or literally \"new-new swords\". One of the most popular swordsmiths in Japan today is Minamoto Kiyomaro who was active in this \"shinshint\u014d\" period. His popularity is due to his timeless exceptional skill, as he was nicknamed \"Masamune in Yotsuya\" and his disastrous life. His works were traded at high prices and exhibitions were held at museums all over Japan from 2013 to 2014.\nThe arrival of Matthew Perry in 1853 and the subsequent Convention of Kanagawa caused chaos in Japanese society. Conflicts began to occur frequently between the forces of \"sonn\u014d j\u014di\" (\u5c0a\u738b\u6518\u5937\u6d3e), who wanted to overthrow the Tokugawa Shogunate and rule by the emperor, and the forces of \"sabaku\" (\u4f50\u5e55\u6d3e), who wanted the Tokugawa Shogunate to continue. These political activists, called the \"shishi\" (\u5fd7\u58eb), fought using a practical \"katana\", called the \"kinn\u014dt\u014d\" (\u52e4\u7687\u5200) or the \"bakumatsut\u014d\" (\u5e55\u672b\u5200). Their \"katana\" were often longer than in blade length, less curved, and had a big and sharp point, which was advantageous for stabbing in indoor battles.\nGendait\u014d (Modern or contemporary swords).\nIn 1867, the Tokugawa Shogunate declared the return of Japan's sovereignty to the emperor, and from 1868, the government by the emperor and rapid modernization of Japan began, which was called the Meiji Restoration. The Hait\u014drei Edict in 1876 all but banned carrying swords and guns on streets. Overnight, the market for swords died, many swordsmiths were left without a trade to pursue, and valuable skills were lost. Swords forged after the Hait\u014drei Edict are classified as \"gendait\u014d\". The craft of making swords was kept alive through the efforts of some individuals, notably Miyamoto kanenori (\u5bae\u672c\u5305\u5247, 1830\u20131926) and Gassan Sadakazu (\u6708\u5c71\u8c9e\u4e00, 1836\u20131918), who were appointed Imperial Household Artist. These smiths produced fine works that stand with the best of the older blades for the emperor and other high-ranking officials. The businessman Mitsumura Toshimo (\u5149\u6751\u5229\u85fb, 1877\u20131955) tried to preserve their skills by ordering swords and sword mountings from the swordsmiths and craftsmen. He was especially enthusiastic about collecting sword mountings, and he collected about 3,000 precious sword mountings from the end of the Edo period to the Meiji period. About 1200 items from a part of the collection are now in the Nezu Museum.\nThe Japanese sword remained in use in some occupations such as the police force. At the same time, kendo was incorporated into police training so that police officers would have at least the training necessary to properly use one. In time, it was rediscovered that soldiers needed to be armed with swords, and over the decades at the beginning of the 20th century swordsmiths again found work. These swords, called \"gunt\u014d,\" were often oil-tempered, or simply stamped out of steel and given a serial number rather than a chiseled signature. The mass-produced ones often look like Western cavalry sabers rather than Japanese swords, with blades slightly shorter than blades of the \"shint\u014d\" and \"shinshint\u014d\" periods. In 1934 the Japanese government issued a military specification for the \"shin gunt\u014d\" (new army sword), the first version of which was the Type 94 \"Katana\", and many machine- and hand-crafted swords used in World War II conformed to this and later \"shin gunt\u014d\" specifications.\nUnder the United States occupation at the end of World War II all armed forces in occupied Japan were disbanded and production of Japanese swords with edges was banned except under police or government permit. The ban was overturned through a personal appeal by Dr. Junji Honma. During a meeting with General Douglas MacArthur, Honma produced blades from the various periods of Japanese history and MacArthur was able to identify very quickly what blades held artistic merit and which could be considered purely weapons. As a result of this meeting, the ban was amended so that \"gunt\u014d\" weapons would be destroyed while swords of artistic merit could be owned and preserved. Even so, many Japanese swords were sold to American soldiers at a bargain price; in 1958 there were more Japanese swords in America than in Japan. The vast majority of these one million or more swords were \"gunt\u014d\", but there were still a sizable number of older swords.\nAfter the Edo period, swordsmiths turned increasingly to the production of civilian goods. The Occupation and its regulations almost put an end to the production of Japanese swords. A few smiths continued their trade, and Honma went on to be a founder of the , who made it their mission to preserve the old techniques and blades. Thanks to the efforts of other like-minded individuals, the Japanese swords did not disappear, many swordsmiths continued the work begun by Masahide, and the old swordmaking techniques were rediscovered.\nNowadays, \"iait\u014d\" is used for \"iaid\u014d\". Due to their popularity in modern media, display-only Japanese swords have become widespread in the sword marketplace. Ranging from small letter openers to scale replica \"wallhangers\", these items are commonly made from stainless steel (which makes them either brittle (if made from cutlery-grade 400-series stainless steel) or poor at holding an edge (if made from 300-series stainless steel)) and have either a blunt or very crude edge. There are accounts of good quality stainless steel Japanese swords, however, these are rare at best. Some replica Japanese swords have been used in modern-day armed robberies. As a part of marketing, modern ahistoric blade styles and material properties are often stated as traditional and genuine, promulgating disinformation. Some companies and independent smiths outside Japan produce \"katana\" as well, with varying levels of quality. According to the Parliamentary Association for the Preservation and Promotion of Japanese Swords, organized by Japanese Diet members, many Japanese swords distributed around the world as of the 21st century are fake Japanese-style swords made in China. The \"Sankei Shimbun\" analyzed that this is because the Japanese government allowed swordsmiths to make only 24 Japanese swords per person per year to maintain the quality of Japanese swords.\nIn Japan, genuine edged hand-made Japanese swords, whether antique or modern, are classified as art objects (and not weapons) and must have accompanying certification to be legally owned. \nPrior to WWII Japan had 1.5million swords in the country \u2013 200,000 of which had been manufactured in factories during the Meiji Restoration. As of 2008, only 100,000 swords remain in Japan. It is estimated that 250,000\u2013350,000 sword have been brought to other nations as souvenirs, art pieces or for Museum purposes. 70% of \"daito\" (long swords), formerly owned by Japanese officers, have been exported or brought to the United States.\nMany swordsmiths since the Edo period have tried to reproduce the sword of the Kamakura period which is considered as the best sword in the history of Japanese swords, but they have failed. Then, in 2014, Kunihira Kawachi succeeded in reproducing it and won the Masamune Prize, the highest honor as a swordsmith. No one could win the Masamune Prize unless he made an extraordinary achievement, and in the section of \"tachi\" and \"katana\", no one had won for 18 years before Kawauchi.\nThe popularity of Japanese swords among Japanese women increased dramatically after the release of a browser video game called \"Touken Ranbu\", featuring anthropomorphic characters of famous Japanese swords, in 2015. Since then, sales of books on Japanese swords have increased dramatically, and the number of special exhibitions at various museums featuring famous historical swords has increased dramatically, leading to a dramatic increase in the number of visitors to museums. In addition, museums and Shinto shrines have launched a number of crowdfunding programmes to purchase historical swords featured in games from private owners, as well as reproductions of swords and new sword mountings, increasing the number of opportunities to view these masterpieces. With the increased interest in Japanese swords, \"gendait\u014d\" swordsmiths are now being asked by women for their autographs.\nCultural and social significance.\nThe events of Japanese society have shaped the craft of sword making, as has the sword itself influenced the course of cultural and social development within the nation.\nThe Museum of Fine Arts states that when an artisan plunged the newly crafted sword into the cold water, a portion of his spirit was transferred into the sword. His spirit, morals and state of mind at the time became crucial to the defining of the swords moral and physical characteristics\nDuring the J\u014dmon period (10,000\u20131000 BCE) swords resembled iron knife blades and were used for hunting, fishing and farming. There is the idea that swords were more than a tool during the J\u014dmon period, no swords have been recovered to back this hypothesis.\nThe Yayoi period (1000 BCE \u2013 300 CE) saw the establishment of villages and the cultivation of rice farming within Japan. Rice farming came as a result of Chinese and Korean influence, they were the first group of people to introduce swords into the Japanese Isles. Subsequently, bronze swords were used for religious ceremonies. The Yayoi period saw swords be used primarily for religious and ceremonial purposes.\nDuring the Kofun period (250\u2013538 CE) Animism was introduced into Japanese society. Animism is the belief that everything in life contains or is connected to a divine spirit. This connection to the spirit world premediates the introduction of Buddhism into Japan. During this time, China was craving steel blades on the Korean Peninsula. Japan saw this as a threat to national security and felt the need to develop their military technology. As a result, clan leaders took power as military elites, fighting one another for power and territory. As dominant figures took power, loyalty and servitude became an important part of Japanese life \u2013 this became the catalyst for the honour culture that is often affiliated with Japanese people.\nIn the Edo period (1603\u20131868), swords gained prominence in everyday life as the \"most important\" part of a warrior's amour. The Edo era saw swords became a mechanism for bonding between Daimyo and Samurai. Daimyo would gift samurai's with swords as a token of their appreciation for their services. In turn, samurai would gift Daimyo swords as a sign of respect, most Daimyo would keep these swords as family heirlooms. In this period, it was believed that swords were multifunctional; in spirit they represent proof of military accomplishment, in practice they are coveted weapons of war and diplomatic gifts.\nThe peace of the Edo period saw the demand for swords fall. To retaliate, in 1719 the eighth Tokugawa shogun, Yoshimune, compiled a list of \"most famous swords\". Masamune, Awatacuchi Yoshimitsu, and Go no Yoshihiro were dubbed the \"Three Famous Smiths\", their swords became sought after by the Daimyo. The prestige and demand for these status symbols spiked the price for these fine pieces.\nDuring the Late-Edo period, Suishinshi Masahide wrote that swords should be less extravagant. Swords began to be simplified and altered to be durable, sturdy and made to cut well. In 1543 guns arrived in Japan, changing military dynamic and practicality of swords and samurai's. This period also saw introduction of martial arts as a means to connecting to the spirit world and allowed common people to participate in samurai culture.\nThe Meiji period (1868\u20131912) saw the dissolution of the samurai class, after foreign powers demanded Japan open their borders to international trade \u2013 300-hundred years of Japanese isolation came to an end. In 1869 and 1873, two petition were submitted to government to abolish the custom of sword wearing because people feared the outside world would view swords as a \"tool for bloodshed\" and would consequentially associate Japanese people as violent. Hait\u014drei (1876) outlawed and prohibited wearing swords in public, with the exception for those in the military and government official; swords lost their meaning within society. Emperor Meiji was determined to westernize Japan with the influence of American technological and scientific advances; however, he himself appreciated the art of sword making. The Meiji era marked the final moments of samurai culture, as samurai's were no match for conscript soldiers who were trained to use western firearms. Some samurai found it difficult to assimilate to the new culture as they were forced to give up their privileges, while others preferred this less-hierarchical way of life. Even with the ban, the Sino-Japanese War (1894) saw Japanese troops wear swords into battle, not for practical use but for symbolic reasons.\nThe Meiji era also saw the integration of Buddhism into Shinto Japanese beliefs. Swords were no longer necessary, in war or lifestyle, and those who practiced martial arts became the \"modern samurai\" \u2013 young children were still groomed to serve the emperor and put loyalty and honour above all else, as this new era of rapid development required loyal, hard working men. The practice of sword making was prohibited, thus swords during the Meiji period were obsolete and a mere symbol of status. Swords were left to rust, sold or melted into more 'practical' objects for everyday life.\nPrior to and during WWII, even with the modernization of the army, the demand for swords exceeded the number of swordsmiths still capable of making them. As a result, swords of this era are of poor quality. In 1933, during the Sh\u014dwa era (1926\u20131989), a sword making factory designed to re-establish the \"spirit of Japan\" through the art of sword making was built to preserve the legacy and art of swordsmiths and sword making. The government at the time feared that the warrior spirit (loyalty and honour) was disappearing within Japan, along with the integrity and quality of swords.\nFor a portion of the US occupation of Japan, sword making, swordsmiths and wielding of swords was prohibited. As a means to preserve the warrior culture of Japan, martial arts was put into the school curriculum. In 1953, America finally lifted the ban on swords after realizing that sword making is an important cultural asset to preserving Japanese history and legacy.\nReligion, honour and mythology.\nThe origins of Japanese swords and their effects and influence on society differs depending on the story that is followed.\nThere is a rich relationship between swords, Japanese culture, and societal development. The different interpretations of the origins of swords and their connection to the spirit world, each hold their own merit within Japanese society, past and present. Which one and how modern-day samurai interpret the history of swords, help influence the kind of samurai and warrior they choose to be.\nManufacturing.\nJapanese swords are generally made by a division of labor between six and eight craftsmen. \"Tosho\" (\"Toko\", \"Katanakaji\") is in charge of forging blades, \"togishi\" is in charge of polishing blades, \"kinkosi\" (\"chokinshi\") is in charge of making metal fittings for sword fittings, \"shiroganeshi\" is in charge of making \"habaki\" (blade collar), \"sayashi\" is in charge of making scabbards, \"nurishi\" is in charge of applying lacquer to scabbards, \"tsukamakishi\" is in charge of making hilt, and \"tsubashi\" is in charge of making \"tsuba\" (hand guard). \"Tosho\" use apprentice swordsmiths as assistants. Prior to the Muromachi period, \"tosho\" and \"kacchushi\" (armorer) used surplus metal to make \"tsuba\", but from the Muromachi period onwards, specialized craftsmen began to make \"tsuba\". Nowadays, \"kinkoshi\" sometimes serves as \"shiroganeshi\" and \"tsubashi\".\nTypical features of Japanese swords represented by \"katana\" and \"tachi\" are a three-dimensional cross-sectional shape of an elongated pentagonal or hexagonal blade called \"shinogi-zukuri\", a style in which the blade and the tang (\"nakago\") are integrated and fixed to the hilt (\"tsuka\") with a pin called \"mekugi\", and a gentle curve.\nWhen a \"shinogi-zukuri\" sword is viewed from the side, there is a ridge line of the thickest part of the blade called \"shinogi\" between the cutting edge side and the back side. This \"shinogi\" contributes to lightening and toughening of the blade and high cutting ability.\nJapanese swords were often forged with different profiles, different blade thicknesses, and varying amounts of grind. \"Wakizashi\" and \"tant\u014d\", for instance, were not simply scaled-down versions of \"katana\"; they were often forged in a shape called \"hira-zukuri\", in which the cross-sectional shape of the blade becomes an isosceles triangle.\nThe \"daish\u014d\" was not always forged together. If a samurai was able to afford a \"daish\u014d\", it was often composed of whichever two swords could be conveniently acquired, sometimes by different smiths and in different styles. Even when a \"daish\u014d\" contained a pair of blades by the same smith, they were not always forged as a pair or mounted as one. \"Daish\u014d\" made as a pair, mounted as a pair, and owned/worn as a pair, are therefore uncommon and considered highly valuable, especially if they still retain their original mountings (as opposed to later mountings, even if the later mounts are made as a pair).\nThe forging of a Japanese blade typically took weeks or even months and was considered a sacred art. As with many complex endeavors, rather than a single craftsman, several artists were involved. There was a smith to forge the rough shape, often a second smith (apprentice) to fold the metal, a specialist polisher (called a \"togi\") as well as the various artisans that made the \"koshirae\" (the various fittings used to decorate the finished blade and \"saya\" (sheath) including the \"tsuka\" (hilt), \"fuchi\" (collar), \"kashira\" (pommel), and \"tsuba\" (hand guard)). It is said that the sharpening and polishing process takes just as long as the forging of the blade itself.\nThe legitimate Japanese sword is made from Japanese steel \"Tamahagane\". The most common lamination method the Japanese sword blade is formed from is a combination of two different steels: a harder outer jacket of steel wrapped around a softer inner core of steel. This creates a blade which has a hard, razor sharp cutting edge with the ability to absorb shock in a way which reduces the possibility of the blade breaking when used in combat. The \"hadagane\", for the outer skin of the blade, is produced by heating a block of raw steel, which is then hammered out into a bar, and the flexible back portion. This is then cooled and broken up into smaller blocks which are checked for further impurities and then reassembled and reforged. During this process the billet of steel is heated and hammered, split and folded back upon itself many times and re-welded to create a complex structure of many thousands of layers. Each different steel is folded differently, to provide the necessary strength and flexibility to the different steels. The precise way in which the steel is folded, hammered and re-welded determines the distinctive grain pattern of the blade, the \"jihada\", (also called \"jigane\" when referring to the actual surface of the steel blade) a feature which is indicative of the period, place of manufacture and actual maker of the blade. The practice of folding also ensures a somewhat more homogeneous product, with the carbon in the steel being evenly distributed and the steel having no voids that could lead to fractures and failure of the blade in combat.\nThe shingane (for the inner core of the blade) is of a relatively softer steel with a lower carbon content than the hadagane. For this, the block is again hammered, folded and welded in a similar fashion to the hadagane, but with fewer folds. At this point, the hadagane block is once again heated, hammered out and folded into a 'U' shape, into which the shingane is inserted to a point just short of the tip. The new composite steel billet is then heated and hammered out ensuring that no air or dirt is trapped between the two layers of steel. The bar increases in length during this process until it approximates the final size and shape of the finished sword blade. A triangular section is cut off from the tip of the bar and shaped to create what will be the kissaki. At this point in the process, the blank for the blade is of rectangular section. This rough shape is referred to as a .\nThe is again heated, section by section and hammered to create a shape which has many of the recognisable characteristics of the finished blade. These are a thick back (), a thinner edge (), a curved tip (), notches on the edge () and back () which separate the blade from the tang (). Details such as the ridge line () another distinctive characteristic of the Japanese sword, are added at this stage of the process. The smith's skill at this point comes into play as the hammering process causes the blade to naturally curve in an erratic way, the thicker back tending to curve towards the thinner edge, and he must skillfully control the shape to give it the required upward curvature. The is finished by a process of filing and scraping which leaves all the physical characteristics and shapes of the blade recognisable. The surface of the blade is left in a relatively rough state, ready for the hardening processes. The is then covered all over with a clay mixture which is applied more thickly along the back and sides of the blade than along the edge. The blade is left to dry while the smith prepares the forge for the final heat treatment of the blade, the yaki-ire, the hardening of the cutting edge.\nThis process takes place in a darkened smithy, traditionally at night, so that the smith can judge by eye the colour and therefore the temperature of the sword as it is repeatedly passed through the glowing charcoal. When the time is deemed right (traditionally the blade should be the colour of the moon in February and August which are the two months that appear most commonly on dated inscriptions on the tang), the blade is plunged edge down and point forward into a tank of water. The precise time taken to heat the sword, the temperature of the blade and of the water into which it is plunged are all individual to each smith and they have generally been closely guarded secrets. Legend tells of a particular smith who cut off his apprentice's hand for testing the temperature of the water he used for the hardening process. In the different schools of swordmakers there are many subtle variations in the materials used in the various processes and techniques outlined above, specifically in the form of clay applied to the blade prior to the yaki-ire, but all follow the same general procedures.\nThe application of the clay in different thicknesses to the blade allows the steel to cool more quickly along the thinner coated edge when plunged into the tank of water and thereby develop into the harder form of steel called martensite, which can be ground to razor-like sharpness. The thickly coated back cools more slowly retaining the pearlite steel characteristics of relative softness and flexibility. The precise way in which the clay is applied, and partially scraped off at the edge, is a determining factor in the formation of the shape and features of the crystalline structure known as the hamon. This distinctive tempering line found near the edge is one of the main characteristics to be assessed when examining a blade.\nThe martensitic steel which forms from the edge of the blade to the hamon is in effect the transition line between these two different forms of steel, and is where most of the shapes, colours and beauty in the steel of the Japanese sword are to be found. The variations in the form and structure of the hamon are all indicative of the period, smith, school or place of manufacture of the sword. As well as the aesthetic qualities of the hamon, there are, perhaps not unsurprisingly, real practical functions. The hardened edge is where most of any potential damage to the blade will occur in battle. This hardened edge is capable of being reground and sharpened many times, although the process will alter the shape of the blade. Altering the shape will allow more resistance when fighting in hand-to-hand combat.\nAlmost all blades are decorated, although not all blades are decorated on the visible part of the blade. Once the blade is cool, and the mud is scraped off, grooves and markings (hi or bo-hi) may be cut into it. One of the most important markings on the sword is performed here: the file markings. These are cut into the tang or the hilt-section of the blade, where they will be covered by the hilt later. The tang is never supposed to be cleaned; doing this can reduce the value of the sword by half or more. The purpose is to show how well the steel ages.\nSome other marks on the blade are aesthetic: dedications written in Kanji characters as well as engravings called \"horimono\" depicting gods, dragons, or other acceptable beings. Some are more practical. The presence of a groove (the most basic type is called a \"hi\") reduces the weight of the sword yet keeps its structural integrity and strength.\nUse.\nThe \"tachi\" became the primary weapon on the battlefield during the Kamakura period, used by cavalry. The sword was mostly considered as a secondary weapon until then, used in the battlefield only after the bow and polearm were no longer feasible. During the Edo period samurai went about on foot unarmored, and with much less combat being fought on horseback in open battlefields the need for an effective close quarter weapon resulted in samurai being armed with daish\u014d.\nTesting of swords, called \"tameshigiri\", was practiced on a variety of materials (often the bodies of executed criminals) to test the sword's sharpness and practice cutting techniques.\n\"Kenjutsu\" is the Japanese martial art of using the Japanese swords in combat. The Japanese swords are primarily a cutting weapon, or more specifically, a slicing one. Its moderate curve, however, allowed for effective thrusting as well. The hilt was held with two hands, though a fair amount of one-handed techniques exist. The placement of the right hand was dictated by both the length of the handle and the length of the wielder's arm. Two other martial arts were developed specifically for training to draw the sword and attack in one motion. They are \"batt\u014djutsu\" and \"iaijutsu\", which are superficially similar, but do generally differ in training theory and methods.\nFor cutting, there was a specific technique called \"\"ten-uchi\".\" \"Ten-uchi\" refers to an organized motion made by arms and wrist, during a descending strike. As the sword is swung downward, the elbow joint drastically extends at the last instant, popping the sword into place. This motion causes the swordsman's grip to twist slightly and if done correctly, is said to feel like wringing a towel (Thomas Hooper reference). This motion itself caused the sword's blade to impact its target with sharp force, and is used to break initial resistance. From there, fluidly continuing along the motion wrought by \"ten-uchi\", the arms would follow through with the stroke, dragging the sword through its target. Because the Japanese swords slices rather than chops, it is this \"dragging\" which allows it to do maximum damage, and is thus incorporated into the cutting technique. At full speed, the swing will appear to be full stroke, the sword passing through the targeted object. The segments of the swing are hardly visible, if at all. Assuming that the target is, for example, a human torso, \"ten-uchi\" will break the initial resistance supplied by shoulder muscles and the clavicle. The follow through would continue the slicing motion, through whatever else it would encounter, until the blade inherently exited the body, due to a combination of the motion and its curved shape.\nNearly all styles of \"kenjutsu\" share the same five basic guard postures. They are as follows; \"ch\u016bdan-no-kamae\" (middle posture), \"j\u014ddan-no-kamae\" (high posture), \"gedan-no-kamae\" (low posture), \"hass\u014d-no-kamae\" (eight-sided posture), and \"waki-gamae\" (side posture).\nThe Japanese swords razor-edge was so hard that upon hitting an equally hard or harder object, such as another sword's edge, chipping became a definite risk. As such, blocking an oncoming blow blade-to-blade was generally avoided. In fact, evasive body maneuvers were preferred over blade contact by most, but, if such was not possible, the flat or the back of the blade was used for defense in many styles, rather than the precious edge. A popular method for defeating descending slashes was to simply beat the sword aside. In some instances, an \"umbrella block\", positioning the blade overhead, diagonally (point towards the ground, pommel towards the sky), would create an effective shield against a descending strike. If the angle of the block was drastic enough, the curve of the Japanese swords blade would cause the attacker's blade to slide along its counter and off to the side.\nCarrying.\nJapanese swords were carried in several different ways, varying throughout Japanese history. The style most commonly seen in \"samurai\" movies is called \"buke-zukuri\", with the katana (and \"wakizashi\", if also present) carried edge up, with the sheath thrust through the \"obi\" (sash).\nThe sword would be carried in a sheath and tucked into the samurai's belt. Originally, they would carry the sword with the blade turned down. This was a more comfortable way for the armored samurai to carry his very long sword or to draw while mounted. The bulk of the samurai armor made it difficult to draw the sword from any other place on his body. When unarmored, samurai would carry their sword with the blade facing up. This made it possible to draw the sword and strike in one quick motion. In one such method of drawing the sword, the samurai would turn the sheath downward ninety degrees and pull it out of his sash just a bit with his left hand, then gripping the hilt with his right hand he would slide it out while sliding the sheath back to its original position.\nAppreciation.\nHistorically, Japanese swords have been regarded not only as weapons but also as works of art, especially for high-quality ones. For a long time, Japanese people have developed a unique appreciation method in which the blade is regarded as the core of their aesthetic evaluation rather than the sword mountings decorated with luxurious lacquer or metal works.\nIt is said that the following three objects are the most noteworthy objects when appreciating a blade. The first is the overall shape referred to as \"sugata\". Curvature, length, width, tip, and shape of tang of the sword are the objects for appreciation. The second is a fine pattern on the surface of the blade, which is referred to as \"hada\" or \"jigane\". By repeatedly folding and forging the blade, fine patterns such as fingerprints, tree rings and bark are formed on its surface. The third is \"hamon\". It is a fuzzy line in the white pattern of the cutting edge produced by quenching and tempering. It does not refer to the white area on the side of the blade. The white part is the part that is whitened by a polishing process called \"hadori\" to make it easier to see the \"hamon\", and the actual \"hamon\" is a fuzzy line within the white part. The actual line of the \"hamon\" can be seen by holding the sword in your hand and looking at it while changing the angle of the light shining on the blade. The object of appreciation is the shape of hammon and the crystal particles formed at the boundary of hammon. Depending on the size of the particles, they can be divided into two types, a \"nie\" and a \"nioi\", which makes them look like stars or mist. In addition to these three objects, a swordsmith signature and a file pattern engraved on tang, and a carving inscribed on the blade, which is referred to as \"horimono\", are also the objects of appreciation.\nThe Hon'ami clan, which was an authority of appraisal of Japanese swords, rated Japanese swords from these artistic points of view. In addition, experts of modern Japanese swords judge when and by which swordsmith school the sword was made from these artistic points of view.\nGenerally, the blade and the sword mounting of Japanese swords are displayed separately in museums, and this tendency is remarkable in Japan. For example, the Nagoya Japanese Sword Museum \"Nagoya Touken World\", one of Japan's largest sword museums, posts separate videos of the blade and the sword mounting on its official website and YouTube.\nRating of Japanese swords and swordsmiths.\nIn Japan, Japanese swords are rated by authorities of each period, and some of the authority of the rating is still valid today.\nIn 1719, Tokugawa Yoshimune, the 8th shogun of the Tokugawa shogunate, ordered Hon'ami K\u014dch\u016b, who was an authority of sword appraisal, to record swords possessed by \"daimyo\" all over Japan in books. In the completed \"\"Ky\u014dh\u014d Meibutsu Ch\u014d\" (\u4eab\u4fdd\u540d\u7269\u5e33) 249 precious swords were described, and additional 25 swords were described later. The list also includes 81 swords that had been destroyed in previous fires. The precious swords described in this book were called \"Meibutsu\"\" (\u540d\u7269) and the criteria for selection were artistic elements, origins and legends. The list of \"Meibutsu\" includes 59 swords made by Masamune, 34 by Awataguchi Yoshimitsu and 22 by Go Yoshihiro, and these 3 swordsmiths were considered special. \"Daimyo\" hid some swords for fear that they would be confiscated by the Tokugawa Shogunate, so even some precious swords were not listed in the book. For example, \"Daihannya Nagamitsu\" and \"Yamatorige\", which are now designated as National Treasures, were not listed.\nYamada Asaemon V, who was the official sword cutting ability examiner and executioner of the Tokugawa shogunate, published a book, \"Kaiho Kenjaku\" (\u61d0\u5b9d\u5263\u5c3a), in 1797 in which he ranked the cutting ability of swords. The book lists 228 swordsmiths, whose forged swords are called \"\"Wazamono\" (\u696d\u7269) and the highest \"Saijo \u014c Wazamono\" (\u6700\u4e0a\u5927\u696d\u7269) has 12 selected. In the reprinting in 1805, 1 swordsmith was added to the highest grade, and in the major revised edition in 1830 \"Kokon Kajibiko\" (\u53e4\u4eca\u935b\u51b6\u5099\u8003), two swordsmiths were added to the highest grade, and in the end, 15 swordsmiths were ranked as the highest grade. The \"katana\" forged by Nagasone Kotetsu, one of the top-rated swordsmiths, became very popular at the time when the book was published, and many counterfeits were made. In these books, the three swordsmiths treated specially in \"Ky\u014dh\u014d Meibutsu Ch\u014d\"\" and Muramasa, who was famous at that time for forging swords with high cutting ability, were not mentioned. The reasons for this are considered to be that Yamada was afraid of challenging the authority of the shogun, that he could not use the precious sword possessed by the daimyo in the examination, and that he was considerate of the legend of Muramasa's curse.\nAt present, by the Law for the Protection of Cultural Properties, important swords of high historical value are designated as Important Cultural Properties (\"J\u016by\u014d Bunkazai\", \u91cd\u8981\u6587\u5316\u8ca1), and special swords among them are designated as National Treasures (\"Kokuh\u014d\", \u56fd\u5b9d). The swords designated as cultural properties based on the law of 1930, which was already abolished, have the rank next to Important Cultural Properties as Important Art Object (\"J\u016by\u014d Bijutsuhin\", \u91cd\u8981\u7f8e\u8853\u54c1). In addition, the Society for Preservation of Japanese Art Swords, a public interest incorporated foundation, rates high-value swords in four grades, and the highest grade Special Important Sword (\"Tokubetsu Juyo Token\", \u7279\u5225\u91cd\u8981\u5200\u5263) is considered to be equivalent to the value of Important Art Object. Although swords owned by the Japanese imperial family are not designated as National Treasures or Important Cultural Properties because they are outside the jurisdiction of the Law for the Protection of Cultural Properties, there are many swords of the National Treasure class, and they are called \"Gyobutsu\" (\u5fa1\u7269).\nCurrently, there are several authoritative rating systems for swordsmiths. According to the rating approved by the Japanese government, from 1890 to 1947, two swordsmiths who were appointed as Imperial Household Artist and after 1955, six swordsmiths who were designated as Living National Treasure are regarded as the best swordsmiths. According to the rating approved by the Society for Preservation of Japanese Art Swords, a public interest incorporated foundation, 39 swordsmiths who were designated as \"Mukansa\" (\u7121\u9451\u67fb) since 1958 are considered to be the highest-ranking swordsmiths. The best sword forged by Japanese swordsmiths is awarded the most honorable Masamune prize by the Society for Preservation of Japanese Art Swords. Since 1961, eight swordsmiths have received the Masamune Prize, and among them, three swordsmiths, Masamine Sumitani, Akitsugu Amata and Toshihira Osumi, have received the prize three times each and Sadakazu Gassan II has received the prize two times. These four persons were designated both Living National Treasures and \"Mukansa\".\nGallery.\nGenerally, the blade and the sword mounting of Japanese swords are displayed separately in museums, and this tendency is remarkable in Japan. For example, the Nagoya Japanese Sword Museum \"Nagoya Touken World\", one of Japan's largest sword museums, posts separate videos of the blade and the sword mounting on its official website and YouTube.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16861", "revid": "12136076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16861", "title": "Kurt Vonnegut", "text": "American author (1922\u20132007)\nKurt Vonnegut ( ; November 11, 1922 \u2013 April 11, 2007) was an American author known for his satirical and darkly humorous novels. His published work includes fourteen novels, three short-story collections, five plays, and five nonfiction works over fifty years; further works have been published since his death.\nBorn and raised in Indianapolis, Vonnegut attended Cornell University, but withdrew in January 1943 and enlisted in the U.S. Army. As part of his training, he studied mechanical engineering at the Carnegie Institute of Technology and the University of Tennessee. He was then deployed to Europe to fight in World War II and was captured by the Germans during the Battle of the Bulge. He was interned in Dresden, where he survived the Allied bombing of the city in a meat locker of the slaughterhouse where he was imprisoned. After the war, he married Jane Marie Cox. He and his wife both attended the University of Chicago while he worked as a night reporter for the City News Bureau.\nVonnegut published his first novel, \"Player Piano\", in 1952. It received favorable reviews yet sold poorly. In the nearly 20 years that followed, several well-regarded novels were published, including \"The Sirens of Titan\" (1959) and \"Cat's Cradle\" (1963), both of which were nominated for the Hugo Award for best science fiction novel of the year. His short-story collection, \"Welcome to the Monkey House,\" was published in 1968. \nVonnegut's breakthrough was his commercially and critically successful sixth novel, \"Slaughterhouse-Five\" (1969). Its anti-war sentiment resonated with its readers amid the Vietnam War, and its reviews were generally positive. It rose to the top of \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list and made Vonnegut famous. Later in his career, Vonnegut published autobiographical essays and short-story collections such as \"Fates Worse Than Death\" (1991) and \"A Man Without a Country\" (2005). He has been hailed for his darkly humorous commentary on American society. His son Mark published a compilation of his work, \"Armageddon in Retrospect\", in 2008. In 2017, Seven Stories Press published \"Complete Stories\", a collection of Vonnegut's short fiction.\nBiography.\nFamily and early life.\nVonnegut was born in Indianapolis, on November 11, 1922, the youngest of three children of Kurt Vonnegut Sr. and his wife Edith (n\u00e9e Lieber). His older siblings were Bernard and Alice. He descended from a long line of German Americans; his paternal great-grandfather, Clemens Vonnegut, settled in Indianapolis and founded the Vonnegut Hardware Company. His father and grandfather Bernard were architects; the architecture firm under Kurt Sr. designed such buildings as Das Deutsche Haus (now called \"The Athen\u00e6um\"), the Indiana headquarters of the Bell Telephone Company, and the Fletcher Trust Building. Vonnegut's mother was born into Indianapolis's Gilded Age high society, as her family, the Liebers, were among the wealthiest in the city based on a fortune deriving from a successful brewery.\nBoth of Vonnegut's parents were fluent speakers of German, but pervasive anti-German sentiment during and after World War I caused them to abandon German culture; many German Americans were told at the time that this was a precondition for American patriotism. Thus, they did not teach Vonnegut to speak German or introduce him to German literature, cuisine, or traditions, leaving him feeling \"ignorant and rootless.\" Vonnegut later credited Ida Young, his family's African-American cook and housekeeper during the first decade of his life, for raising him and giving him values; he said, \"she gave me decent moral instruction and was exceedingly nice to me,\" and \"was as great an influence on me as anybody.\" He described her as \"humane and wise\" and added that \"the compassionate, forgiving aspects of [his] beliefs\" came from her.\nThe financial security and social prosperity that the Vonneguts had once enjoyed were destroyed in a matter of years. The Liebers' brewery closed down in 1921 after the advent of prohibition. When the Great Depression hit, few people could afford to build, causing clients at Kurt Sr.'s architectural firm to become scarce. Vonnegut's brother and sister had finished their primary and secondary educations in private schools, but Vonnegut was placed in a public school called Public School No.\u00a043 (now the James Whitcomb Riley School). He was bothered by the Great Depression, and both his parents were affected deeply by their economic misfortune. His father withdrew from normal life and became what Vonnegut called a \"dreamy artist.\" His mother became depressed, withdrawn, bitter, and abusive. She labored to regain the family's wealth and status, and Vonnegut said that she expressed hatred for her husband that was \"as corrosive as hydrochloric acid.\" She often tried in vain to sell short stories she had written to \"Collier's,\" \"The Saturday Evening Post,\" and other magazines.\nHigh school and Cornell University.\nVonnegut enrolled at Shortridge High School in Indianapolis in 1936. While there, he played clarinet in the school band and became a co-editor (along with Madelyn Pugh) of the Tuesday edition of the school newspaper, \"The Shortridge Echo.\" Vonnegut said that his tenure with the \"Echo\" allowed him to write for a large audience\u2014his fellow students\u2014rather than for a teacher, an experience, he said, which was \"fun and easy.\" \"It just turned out that I could write better than a lot of other people,\" Vonnegut observed. \"Each person has something he can do easily and can't imagine why everybody else has so much trouble doing it.\"\nAfter graduating from Shortridge in 1940, Vonnegut enrolled at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York. He wanted to study the humanities and had aspirations of becoming an architect like his father, but his father and brother Bernard, an atmospheric scientist, urged him to study a \"useful\" discipline. As a result, Vonnegut majored in biochemistry, but he had little proficiency in the area and was indifferent towards his studies. As his father had been a member of the Delta Upsilon fraternity at MIT, Vonnegut was entitled to join and did so. He overcame stiff competition for a place at the university's independent newspaper, \"The Cornell Daily Sun,\" first serving as a staff writer, then as an editor. By the end of his first year, he was writing a column titled \"Innocents Abroad,\" which reused jokes from other publications. He later penned a piece titled \"Well All Right\" focusing on pacifism, a cause he strongly supported, arguing against US intervention in World War\u00a0II.\nWorld War II.\nThe attack on Pearl Harbor brought the United States into World War II. Vonnegut was a member of Cornell's Reserve Officers' Training Corps unit, but poor grades and a satirical article in Cornell's newspaper cost him his place there. He was placed on academic probation in May 1942 and dropped out the following January. No longer eligible for a deferment as a member of ROTC, he faced likely conscription into the U.S. Army. Instead of waiting to be drafted, he enlisted in the Army and in March 1943 reported to Fort Bragg, North Carolina, for basic training. Vonnegut was trained to fire and maintain howitzers and later received instruction in mechanical engineering at the Carnegie Institute of Technology and the University of Tennessee as part of the Army Specialized Training Program (ASTP).\nIn early 1944, the ASTP was canceled due to the Army's need for soldiers to support the D-Day invasion, and Vonnegut was ordered to an infantry battalion at Camp Atterbury, south of Indianapolis in Edinburgh, Indiana, where he trained as a scout. He lived so close to his home that he was \"able to sleep in [his] own bedroom and use the family car on weekends\".\nOn May 14, 1944, Vonnegut returned home on leave for Mother's Day weekend to discover that his mother had killed herself the previous night by overdosing on sleeping pills. Possible factors that contributed to Edith Vonnegut's suicide include the family's loss of wealth and status, Vonnegut's forthcoming deployment overseas, and her own lack of success as a writer. She was inebriated at the time and under the influence of prescription drugs.\nThree months after his mother's suicide, Vonnegut was sent to Europe as an intelligence scout with the 106th Infantry Division. In December 1944, he fought in the Battle of the Bulge, one of the last German offensives of the war. On December 22, Vonnegut was captured with about 50 other American soldiers. Vonnegut was taken by boxcar to a prison camp south of Dresden, in the German province of Saxony. During the journey, the Royal Air Force mistakenly attacked the trains carrying Vonnegut and his fellow prisoners of war, killing about 150 of them. Vonnegut was sent to Dresden, the \"first fancy city [he had] ever seen,\" where he lived in a slaughterhouse and worked in a factory that made malt syrup for pregnant women. Vonnegut recalled the sirens going off whenever another city was bombed. The Germans did not expect Dresden to be bombed, Vonnegut said. \"There were very few air-raid shelters in town and no war industries, just cigarette factories, hospitals, clarinet factories.\"\nOn February 13, 1945, Dresden became the target of Allied forces. In the hours and days that followed, the Allies engaged in a firebombing of the city. The offensive subsided on February 15, with about 25,000 civilians killed in the bombing. Vonnegut marveled at the level of both the destruction in Dresden and the secrecy that attended it. He had survived by taking refuge in a meat locker three stories underground. \"It was cool there, with cadavers hanging all around,\" Vonnegut said. \"When we came up the city was gone\u00a0... They burnt the whole damn town down.\" Vonnegut and other American prisoners were put to work immediately after the bombing, excavating bodies from the rubble. He described the activity as a \"terribly elaborate Easter-egg hunt.\"\nThe American POWs were evacuated on foot to the border of Saxony and Czechoslovakia after U.S. General George S.\u00a0Patton's 3rd Army captured Leipzig. With the captives abandoned by their guards, Vonnegut reached a prisoner-of-war repatriation camp in Le Havre, France, in May 1945, with the aid of the Soviets. Sent back to the United States, he was stationed at Fort Riley, Kansas, typing discharge papers for other soldiers. Soon after, he was awarded a Purple Heart, about which he remarked: \"I myself was awarded my country's second-lowest decoration, a Purple Heart for frost-bite.\" He was discharged from the U.S. Army and returned to Indianapolis.\nMarriage, University of Chicago, and early employment.\nAfter he returned to the United States, 22-year-old Vonnegut married Jane Marie Cox, his high-school girlfriend and classmate since kindergarten, on September 1, 1945. The pair moved to Chicago; there, Vonnegut enrolled in the University of Chicago on the G.I. Bill, as an anthropology student in an unusual five-year joint undergraduate/graduate program that conferred a master's degree. He studied under anthropologist Robert Redfield, his \"most famous professor.\" He also worked as a reporter for the City News Bureau of Chicago.\nJane, who had graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Swarthmore, accepted a scholarship from the university to study Russian literature as a graduate student. She dropped out of the program after becoming pregnant with the couple's first child, Mark (born May 1947), while Kurt also left the university without a degree (despite having completed his undergraduate education). Vonnegut failed to write a dissertation, as his ideas had all been rejected. One abandoned topic was about the Ghost Dance and Cubist movements. A later topic, rejected \"unanimously,\" had to do with the shapes of stories. Vonnegut received his graduate degree in anthropology 25 years after he left, when the university accepted his novel \"Cat's Cradle\" in lieu of his master's thesis.\nShortly thereafter, General Electric (GE) hired Vonnegut as a technical writer, then publicist, for the company's Schenectady, New York, News Bureau, a publicity department that operated like a newsroom. His brother Bernard had worked at GE since 1945, focusing mainly on a silver-iodide-based cloud seeding project that quickly became a joint GE\u2013U.S. Army Signal Corps program, Project Cirrus. In \"The Brothers Vonnegut\", Ginger Strand draws connections between many real events at General Electric, including Bernard's work, and Vonnegut's early stories, which were regularly being rejected everywhere he sent them. Throughout this period, Jane Vonnegut encouraged him, editing his stories, strategizing about submissions and buoying his spirits.\nIn 1949, Kurt and Jane had a daughter named Edith. Still working for GE, Vonnegut had his first piece, titled \"Report on the Barnhouse Effect,\" published in the February 11, 1950, issue of \"Collier's,\" for which he received $750. The story concerned a scientist who fears that his invention will be used as a weapon, much as Bernard was fearing at the time about his cloudseeding work. Vonnegut wrote another story, after being coached by the fiction editor at \"Collier's,\" Knox Burger, and again sold it to the magazine, this time for $950. While Burger supported Vonnegut's writing, he was shocked when Vonnegut quit GE as of January 1, 1951, later stating: \"I never said he should give up his job and devote himself to fiction. I don't trust the freelancer's life, it's tough.\" Nevertheless, in early 1951 Vonnegut moved with his family to Cape Cod, Massachusetts, to write full time, leaving GE behind. He initially moved to Osterville, but he ended up purchasing a home in Barnstable.\nFirst novel.\nIn 1952, Vonnegut's first novel, \"Player Piano,\" was published by Scribner's. The novel has a post-World War III setting, in which factory workers have been replaced by machines. \"Player Piano\" draws upon Vonnegut's experience as an employee at GE. The novel is set at a General Electric-like company and includes many scenes based on things Vonnegut saw there. He satirizes the drive to climb the corporate ladder, one that in \"Player Piano\" is rapidly disappearing as automation increases, putting even executives out of work. His central character, Paul Proteus, has an ambitious wife, a backstabbing assistant, and a feeling of empathy for the poor. Sent by his boss, Kroner, as a double agent among the poor (who have all the material goods they want, but little sense of purpose), he leads them in a machine-smashing, museum-burning revolution. \"Player Piano\" expresses Vonnegut's opposition to McCarthyism, something made clear when the Ghost Shirts, the revolutionary organization Paul penetrates and eventually leads, is referred to by one character as \"fellow travelers.\"\nIn \"Player Piano,\" Vonnegut originates many of the techniques he would use in his later works. The comic, heavy-drinking Shah of Bratpuhr, an outsider to this dystopian corporate United States, is able to ask many questions that an insider would not think to ask, or would cause offense by doing so. For example, when taken to see the artificially intelligent supercomputer EPICAC, the Shah asks it \"what are people for?\" and receives no answer. Speaking for Vonnegut, he dismisses it as a \"false god.\" This type of alien visitor would recur throughout Vonnegut's later novels.\n\"The New York Times\" writer and critic Granville Hicks gave \"Player Piano\" a positive review, favorably comparing it to Aldous Huxley's \"Brave New World.\" Hicks called Vonnegut a \"sharp-eyed satirist.\" None of the reviewers considered the novel particularly important. Several editions were printed\u2014one by Bantam with the title \"Utopia\u00a014,\" and another by the Doubleday Science Fiction Book Club\u2014whereby Vonnegut gained the reputation as a writer of science fiction, a genre held in disdain by writers at that time. He defended the genre and deplored a perceived sentiment that \"no one can simultaneously be a respectable writer and understand how a refrigerator works.\"\nStruggling writer.\nAfter \"Player Piano,\" Vonnegut continued to sell short stories to various magazines. Contracted to produce a second novel (which eventually became \"Cat's Cradle\"), he struggled to complete it, and the work languished for years. In 1954, the couple had a third child, Nanette. With a growing family and no financially successful novels yet, Vonnegut's short stories helped to sustain the family, though he frequently needed to find additional sources of income. In 1957, he and a partner opened a Saab automobile dealership on Cape Cod, but it went bankrupt by the end of the year. He designed a World War II\u2013themed board game called \"GHQ\" (General Headquarters), but publishers did not buy it.\nIn 1958, his sister, Alice, died of cancer two days after her husband, James Carmalt Adams, was killed in a train accident. The Vonneguts took in three of the Adamses' young sons\u2014James, Steven, and Kurt, aged 14, 11, and 9, respectively. A fourth Adams son, Peter, age 2, also stayed with the Vonneguts for about a year before being given to the care of a paternal relative in Georgia.\nGrappling with family challenges, Vonnegut continued to write, publishing novels vastly dissimilar in terms of plot.\n\"The Sirens of Titan\" (1959) features a Martian invasion of Earth as experienced by a bored billionaire, Malachi Constant. He meets Winston Niles Rumfoord, an aristocratic space traveler, who is virtually omniscient but stuck in a time warp that causes him to appear on Earth only every 59 days. The billionaire learns that his actions and the events of all of history are determined by a race of robotic aliens from the planet Tralfamadore, who need a replacement part that can only be produced by an advanced civilization in order to repair their spaceship and return home. Human history has been manipulated to produce it. Some human structures, such as the Kremlin, are coded signals from the aliens to their ship as to how long it may expect to wait for the repair to take place. Reviewers were uncertain what to think of the book, with one comparing it to Offenbach's opera \"The Tales of Hoffmann.\"\nRumfoord, who is based on Franklin D. Roosevelt, physically resembles the former president. Rumfoord is described this way: he \"put a cigarette in a long, bone cigarette holder, lighted it. He thrust out his jaw. The cigarette holder pointed straight up.\" William Rodney Allen, in his guide to Vonnegut's works, stated that Rumfoord foreshadowed the fictional political figures who would play major roles in \"God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater\" and \"Jailbird.\"\n\"Mother Night,\" published in 1961, received little attention at the time of its publication. Howard W.\u00a0Campbell\u00a0Jr., Vonnegut's protagonist, is an American who is raised in Germany from age 11 and joins the Nazi Party during the war as a double agent for the US Office of Strategic Services, rising to the regime's highest ranks as a radio propagandist. After the war, the spy agency refuses to clear his name, and he is eventually imprisoned by the Israelis in the same cell block as Adolf Eichmann. Vonnegut wrote in a foreword to a later edition, \"We are what we pretend to be, so we must be careful about what we pretend to be.\" Literary critic Lawrence Berkove considered the novel, like Mark Twain's \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,\" to illustrate the tendency for \"impersonators to get carried away by their impersonations, to become what they impersonate and therefore to live in a world of illusion.\"\nAlso published in 1961 was Vonnegut's short story \"Harrison Bergeron,\" set in a dystopic future where all are equal, even if that means disfiguring beautiful people and forcing the strong or intelligent to wear devices that negate their advantages. Fourteen-year-old Harrison is a genius and athlete forced to wear record-level \"handicaps\" and imprisoned for attempting to overthrow the government. He escapes to a television studio, tears away his handicaps, and frees a ballerina from her lead weights. As they dance, they are killed by the Handicapper General, Diana Moon Glampers. Vonnegut, in a later letter, suggested that \"Harrison Bergeron\" might have sprung from his envy and self-pity as a high-school misfit. In his 1976 biography of Vonnegut, Stanley Schatt suggested that the short story shows that \"in any leveling process, what really is lost, according to Vonnegut, is beauty, grace, and wisdom.\" Darryl Hattenhauer, in his 1998 journal article on \"Harrison Bergeron,\" theorized that the story was a satire on American Cold War understandings of communism and socialism.\nWith \"Cat's Cradle\" (1963), Allen wrote, \"Vonnegut hit full stride for the first time.\" The narrator, John, intends to write of Dr.\u00a0Felix Hoenikker, one of the fictional fathers of the atomic bomb, seeking to cover the scientist's human side. Hoenikker, in addition to the bomb, has developed another threat to mankind, \"ice-nine,\" which is solid water stable at room temperature but more dense than liquid water. If a particle of ice-nine is dropped in water, all of the surrounding water becomes ice-nine. Felix Hoenikker is based on Bernard Vonnegut's boss at the GE Research Lab, Irving Langmuir, and the way ice-nine is described in the novel is reminiscent of how Bernard Vonnegut explained his own invention, silver iodide cloudseeding, to Kurt. Much of the second half of the book is spent on the fictional Caribbean island of San Lorenzo, where John explores a religion called Bokononism, whose holy books (excerpts from which are quoted) give the novel the moral core science does not supply. After the oceans are converted to ice-nine, wiping out most of humankind, John wanders the frozen surface, seeking to save himself and to make sure that his story survives.\nVonnegut based the title character of \"God Bless You, Mr.\u00a0Rosewater\" (1964) on an accountant he knew in Cape Cod who specialized in clients in trouble and often had to comfort them. Eliot Rosewater, the wealthy son of a Republican senator, seeks to atone for his wartime killing of noncombatant firefighters by serving in a volunteer fire department and giving away money to those in trouble or need. Stress from a battle for control of his charitable foundation pushes him over the edge, and he is placed in a mental hospital. He recovers and ends the financial battle by declaring the children of his county to be his heirs. Allen deemed \"God Bless You, Mr.\u00a0Rosewater\" more \"a cry from the heart than a novel under its author's full intellectual control,\" that reflected family and emotional stresses Vonnegut was going through at the time.\nIn the mid-1960s, Vonnegut contemplated abandoning his writing career. In 1999, he wrote in \"The New York Times,\" \"I had gone broke, was out of print and had a lot of kids...\" But then, on the recommendation of an admirer, he received a surprise offer of a teaching job at the Iowa Writers' Workshop, employment that he likened to the rescue of a drowning man.\n\"Slaughterhouse-Five\".\nAfter spending almost two years at the writer's workshop at the University of Iowa, teaching one course each term, Vonnegut was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship for research in Germany. By the time he won it, in March 1967, he was becoming a well-known writer. He used the funds to travel in Eastern Europe, including to Dresden, where he found many prominent buildings still in ruins.\nVonnegut had been writing about his war experiences at Dresden ever since he returned from the war, but unable to write anything that was acceptable to himself or his publishers; chapter one of \"Slaughterhouse-Five\" tells of his difficulties. Released in 1969, the novel rocketed Vonnegut to fame. It tells of the life of Billy Pilgrim, who like Vonnegut was born in 1922 and survives the bombing of Dresden. The story is told in a non-linear fashion, with many of the story's climaxes\u2014Billy's death in 1976, his kidnapping by aliens from the planet Tralfamadore nine years earlier, and the execution of Billy's friend Edgar Derby in the ashes of Dresden for stealing a teapot\u2014disclosed in the story's first pages. \n\"Slaughterhouse-Five\" received generally positive reviews, with Michael Crichton writing in \"The New Republic\":\nhe writes about the most excruciatingly painful things. His novels have attacked our deepest fears of automation and the bomb, our deepest political guilts, our fiercest hatreds and loves. No one else writes books on these subjects; they are inaccessible to normal novelists.\nThe book went immediately to the top of \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list. Vonnegut's earlier works had appealed strongly to many college students, and the antiwar message of \"Slaughterhouse-Five\" resonated with a generation marked by the Vietnam War. He later stated that the loss of confidence in government that Vietnam caused finally allowed an honest conversation regarding events like Dresden.\nIn 1970, Vonnegut was also a correspondent in Biafra during the Nigerian Civil War.\nLater life.\nAfter \"Slaughterhouse-Five\" was published, Vonnegut embraced the fame and financial security that attended its release. He was hailed as a hero of the burgeoning anti-war movement in the United States, was invited to speak at numerous rallies, and gave college commencement addresses around the country. In addition to briefly teaching at Harvard University as a lecturer in creative writing in 1970, Vonnegut taught at the City College of New York as a distinguished professor during the 1973\u20131974 academic year. He was later elected vice president of the National Institute of Arts and Letters and given honorary degrees by, among others, Indiana University and Bennington College. Vonnegut also wrote a play called \"Happy Birthday, Wanda June,\" which opened on October 7, 1970, at New York's Theatre de Lys. Receiving mixed reviews, it closed on March 14, 1971. In 1972, Universal Pictures adapted \"Slaughterhouse-Five\" into a film, which the author said was \"flawless.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRequiem (ending)\n&lt;poem&gt;When the last living thing\nhas died on account of us,\nhow poetical it would be\nif Earth could say,\nin a voice floating up\nperhaps\nfrom the floor\nof the Grand Canyon,\n\"It is done.\"\nPeople did not like it here.&lt;/poem&gt;\nKurt Vonnegut, \"A Man Without a Country,\" 2005\nVonnegut's difficulties in his personal life thereafter materialized in numerous ways, including the painfully slow progress made on his next novel, the darkly comical \"Breakfast of Champions.\" In 1971, he stopped writing the novel altogether. When it was finally released in 1973, it was panned critically. In Thomas S.\u00a0Hischak's book \"American Literature on Stage and Screen,\" \"Breakfast of Champions\" was called \"funny and outlandish,\" but reviewers noted that it \"lacks substance and seems to be an exercise in literary playfulness.\" Vonnegut's 1976 novel \"Slapstick,\" which meditates on the relationship between him and his sister (Alice), met a similar fate. In \"The New York Times\"'s review of \"Slapstick,\" Christopher Lehmann-Haupt said that Vonnegut \"seems to be putting less effort into [storytelling] than ever before\" and that \"it still seems as if he has given up storytelling after all.\" At times, Vonnegut was disgruntled by the personal nature of his detractors' complaints.\nIn subsequent years, his popularity resurged as he published several satirical books, including \"Jailbird\" (1979), \"Deadeye Dick\" (1982), \"Gal\u00e1pagos\" (1985), \"Bluebeard\" (1987), and \"Hocus Pocus\" (1990). Although he remained a prolific writer in the 1980s, Vonnegut struggled with depression and attempted suicide in 1984. Two years later, Vonnegut was seen by a younger generation when he played himself in Rodney Dangerfield's film \"Back to School.\" The last of Vonnegut's fourteen novels, \"Timequake\" (1997), was, as University of Detroit history professor and Vonnegut biographer Gregory Sumner said, \"a reflection of an aging man facing mortality and testimony to an embattled faith in the resilience of human awareness and agency.\" Vonnegut's final book, a collection of essays entitled \"A Man Without a Country\" (2005), became a bestseller.\nPersonal life.\nVonnegut married his first wife, Jane Marie Cox, in 1945. She later embraced Christianity, which was contrary to Vonnegut's atheistic beliefs. After five of their six children had left home, Vonnegut said that the two were forced to find \"other sorts of seemingly important work to do\". The couple battled over their differing beliefs until Vonnegut moved from their Cape Cod home to New York in 1971. Vonnegut called the disagreements \"painful\" and said that the resulting split was a \"terrible, unavoidable accident that we were ill-equipped to understand\". The couple divorced but remained friends until Jane's death in late 1986. \nBeyond his failed marriage, Vonnegut was deeply affected when his son Mark suffered a mental breakdown in 1972, which exacerbated Vonnegut's chronic depression and led him to take Ritalin. When he stopped taking the drug in the mid-1970s, he began to see a psychologist weekly.\nIn 1979, Vonnegut married Jill Krementz, a photographer whom he met while she was working on a series about writers in the early 1970s. With Jill, he adopted a daughter, Lily, when the baby was three days old. They remained married until his death.\nDeath and legacy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVonnegut's sincerity, his willingness to scoff at received wisdom, is such that reading his work for the first time gives one the sense that everything else is rank hypocrisy. His opinion of human nature was low, and that low opinion applied to his heroes and his villains alike\u2014he was endlessly disappointed in humanity and in himself, and he expressed that disappointment in a mixture of tar-black humor and deep despair. He could easily have become a crank, but he was too smart; he could have become a cynic, but there was something tender in his nature that he could never quite suppress; he could have become a bore, but even at his most despairing he had an endless willingness to entertain his readers: with drawings, jokes, sex, bizarre plot twists, science fiction, whatever it took.\nLev Grossman, \"Time,\" 2007\nIn a 2006 \"Rolling Stone\" interview, Vonnegut sardonically stated that he would sue the Brown &amp; Williamson tobacco company, the maker of the Pall Mall-branded cigarettes he had been smoking since he was around 12 or 14 years old, for false advertising: \"And do you know why? Because I'm 83 years old. The lying bastards! On the package Brown &amp; Williamson promised to kill me.\"\nVonnegut died in Manhattan on the night of April 11, 2007, as a result of brain injuries incurred several weeks prior in a fall at his brownstone home. His death was reported by his wife, Jill. He was 84 years old. At the time of his death he had written fourteen novels, three short-story collections, five plays, and five nonfiction books. A book composed of his unpublished pieces, \"Armageddon in Retrospect,\" was compiled and posthumously published by his son Mark in 2008.\nWhen asked about the impact Vonnegut had on his work, author Josip Novakovich stated that he has \"much to learn from Vonnegut\u2014how to compress things and yet not compromise them, how to digress into history, quote from various historical accounts, and not stifle the narrative. The ease with which he writes is sheerly masterly, Mozartian.\" \"Los Angeles Times\" columnist Gregory Rodriguez said that the author will \"rightly be remembered as a darkly humorous social critic and the premier novelist of the counterculture\", and Dinitia Smith of \"The New York Times\" dubbed Vonnegut the \"counterculture's novelist\".\nVonnegut has inspired numerous posthumous tributes and works. In 2008, the Kurt Vonnegut Society was established, and in November 2010, the Kurt Vonnegut Museum and Library was opened in Vonnegut's hometown of Indianapolis. The Library of America published a compendium of Vonnegut's compositions between 1963 and 1973 the following April, and another compendium of his earlier works in 2012. Late 2011 saw the release of two Vonnegut biographies: Gregory Sumner's \"Unstuck in Time\" and Charles J. Shields's \"And So It Goes.\" Shields's biography of Vonnegut created some controversy. According to \"The Guardian\", the book portrays Vonnegut as distant, cruel and nasty. \"Cruel, nasty and scary are the adjectives commonly used to describe him by the friends, colleagues, and relatives Shields quotes\", said \"The Daily Beast\"'s Wendy Smith. \"Towards the end he was very feeble, very depressed and almost morose\", said Jerome Klinkowitz of the University of Northern Iowa, who has examined Vonnegut in depth.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLike Mark Twain, Mr. Vonnegut used humor to tackle the basic questions of human existence: Why are we in this world? Is there a presiding figure to make sense of all this, a god who in the end, despite making people suffer, wishes them well?\nDinitia Smith, \"The New York Times\", 2007\nVonnegut's works have evoked ire on several occasions. His most prominent novel, \"Slaughterhouse-Five,\" has been objected to or removed at various institutions in at least 18 instances. In the case of \"Island Trees School District v.\u00a0Pico,\" the United States Supreme Court ruled that a school district's ban on \"Slaughterhouse-Five\"\u2014which the board had called \"anti-American, anti-Christian, anti-Semitic, and just plain filthy\"\u2014and eight other novels was unconstitutional. When a school board in Republic, Missouri, decided to withdraw Vonnegut's novel from its libraries, the Kurt Vonnegut Memorial Library offered a free copy to all the students of the district.\nTally, writing in 2013, suggests that Vonnegut has only recently become the subject of serious study rather than fan adulation, and much is yet to be written about him. \"The time for scholars to say 'Here's why Vonnegut is worth reading' has definitively ended, thank goodness. We know he's worth reading. Now tell us things we don't know.\" Todd F.\u00a0Davis notes that Vonnegut's work is kept alive by his loyal readers, who have \"significant influence as they continue to purchase Vonnegut's work, passing it on to subsequent generations and keeping his entire canon in print\u2014an impressive list of more than twenty books that [Dell Publishing] has continued to refurbish and hawk with new cover designs.\" Donald E.\u00a0Morse notes that Vonnegut \"is now firmly, if somewhat controversially, ensconced in the American and world literary canon as well as in high school, college and graduate curricula\". Tally writes of Vonnegut's work:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Vonnegut's 14 novels, while each does its own thing, together are nevertheless experiments in the same overall project. Experimenting with the form of the American novel itself, Vonnegut engages in a broadly modernist attempt to apprehend and depict the fragmented, unstable, and distressing bizarreries of postmodern American experience\u00a0... That he does not actually succeed in representing the shifting multiplicities of that social experience is beside the point. What matters is the attempt, and the recognition that\u00a0... we must try to map this unstable and perilous terrain, even if we know in advance that our efforts are doomed.\nThe Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted Vonnegut posthumously in 2015. The asteroid 25399 Vonnegut is named in his honor. A crater on the planet Mercury has also been named in his honor. In 2021, the Kurt Vonnegut Museum and Library in Indianapolis was designated a Literary Landmark by the Literary Landmarks Association. In 1986, the University of Evansville library located in Evansville, Indiana, where he spoke during the dedication ceremony, was named after Vonnegut.\nViews.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The beliefs I have to defend are so soft and complicated, actually, and, when vivisected, turn into bowls of undifferentiated mush. I am a pacifist, I am an anarchist, I am a planetary citizen, and so on.\u2014\u200a\nWar.\nIn the introduction to \"Slaughterhouse-Five\", Vonnegut recounts meeting the film producer Harrison Starr at a party, who asked him whether his forthcoming book was an anti-war novel\u2014\"Yes, I guess\", replied Vonnegut. Starr responded: \"Why don't you write an anti-glacier novel?\" In the novel, Vonnegut's character continues: \"What he meant, of course, is that there would always be wars, that they were as easy to stop as glaciers. I believe that, too. And even if wars didn't keep coming like glaciers, there would still be plain old death.\" Vonnegut was a pacifist.\nIn 2011, NPR wrote, \"Kurt Vonnegut's blend of anti-war sentiment and satire made him one of the most popular writers of the 1960s.\" Vonnegut stated in a 1987 interview, \"My own feeling is that civilization ended in World War\u00a0I, and we're still trying to recover from that,\" and that he wanted to write war-focused works without glamorizing war itself. Vonnegut had not intended to publish again, but his anger against the George W.\u00a0Bush administration led him to write \"A Man Without a Country.\"\n\"Slaughterhouse-Five\" is the Vonnegut novel best known for its antiwar themes, but the author expressed his beliefs in ways beyond the depiction of the destruction of Dresden. One character, Mary O'Hare, opines that \"wars were partly encouraged by books and movies\" starring \"Frank Sinatra or John Wayne or some of those other glamorous, war-loving, dirty old men.\" Vonnegut made a number of comparisons in \"Slaughterhouse-Five\" between Dresden and the bombing of Hiroshima and wrote in \"Palm Sunday\" (1991), \"I learned how vile that religion of mine could be when the atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima.\"\nNuclear war, or at least deployed nuclear arms, is mentioned in almost all of Vonnegut's novels. In \"Player Piano,\" the computer EPICAC is given control of the nuclear arsenal and is charged with deciding whether to use high-explosive or nuclear arms. In \"Cat's Cradle,\" John's original purpose in setting pen to paper was to write an account of what prominent Americans had been doing as Hiroshima was bombed.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSome of you may know that I am neither Christian nor Jewish nor Buddhist, nor a conventionally religious person of any sort. I am a humanist, which means, in part, that I have tried to behave decently without any expectation of rewards or punishments after I'm dead. ... I myself have written, \"If it weren't for the message of mercy and pity in Jesus' Sermon on the Mount, I wouldn't want to be a human being. I would just as soon be a rattlesnake.\"\nKurt Vonnegut, \"God Bless You, Dr. Kevorkian,\" 1999\nVonnegut was an atheist, a humanist and a freethinker, serving as the honorary president of the American Humanist Association. In an interview for \"Playboy,\" he stated that his forebears who came to the United States did not believe in God, and he learned his atheism from his parents. Vonnegut did not, however, disdain those who seek the comfort of religion, hailing church associations as a type of extended family. He occasionally attended a Unitarian church, but with little consistency. In his autobiographical work \"Palm Sunday,\" Vonnegut says that he is a \"Christ-worshipping agnostic.\" During a speech to the Unitarian Universalist Association, he called himself a \"Christ-loving atheist.\" However, he was keen to stress that he was not a Christian.\nVonnegut was an admirer of Jesus's Sermon on the Mount, particularly the Beatitudes, and incorporated it into his own doctrines. He also referred to it in many of his works. In his 1991 book \"Fates Worse than Death,\" Vonnegut suggests that during the Reagan administration, \"anything that sounded like the Sermon on the Mount was socialistic or communistic, and therefore anti-American\". In \"Palm Sunday,\" he wrote that \"the Sermon on the Mount suggests a mercifulness that can never waver or fade.\" However, Vonnegut had a deep dislike for certain aspects of Christianity, often reminding his readers of the bloody history of the Crusades and other religion-inspired violence. He despised the televangelists of the late 20th century, feeling that their thinking was narrow-minded.\nReligion features frequently in Vonnegut's work, both in his novels and elsewhere. He laced a number of his speeches with religion-focused rhetoric and was prone to using such expressions as \"God forbid\" and \"thank God.\" He once wrote his own version of the Requiem Mass, which he then had translated into Latin and set to music. In \"God Bless You, Dr.\u00a0Kevorkian,\" Vonnegut goes to heaven after he is euthanized by Dr.\u00a0Jack Kevorkian. Once in heaven, he interviews 21 deceased celebrities, including Isaac Asimov, William Shakespeare, and Kilgore Trout\u2014the last a fictional character from several of his novels. Vonnegut's works are filled with characters founding new faiths, and religion often serves as a major plot device, for example, in \"Player Piano\", \"The Sirens of Titan\" and \"Cat's Cradle.\" In \"The Sirens of Titan,\" Rumfoord proclaims The Church of God the Utterly Indifferent. \"Slaughterhouse-Five\" sees Billy Pilgrim, lacking religion himself, nevertheless become a chaplain's assistant in the military and display a large crucifix on his bedroom wall. In \"Cat's Cradle,\" Vonnegut invented the religion of Bokononism.\nPolitics.\nVonnegut's thoughts on politics were shaped in large part by Robert Redfield, an anthropologist at the University of Chicago, co-founder of the Committee on Social Thought, and one of Vonnegut's professors during his time at the university. In a commencement address, Vonnegut remarked that \"Dr.\u00a0Redfield's theory of the Folk Society\u00a0... has been the starting point for my politics, such as they are.\" Vonnegut did not particularly sympathize with liberalism or conservatism. Vonnegut also mused on the specious simplicity of American politics, saying facetiously: \"If you want to take my guns away from me, and you're all for murdering fetuses, and love it when homosexuals marry each other\u00a0... you're a liberal. If you are against those perversions and for the rich, you're a conservative. What could be simpler?\" Regarding political parties, Vonnegut said: \"The two real political parties in America are the Winners and the Losers. The people don't acknowledge this. They claim membership in two imaginary parties, the Republicans and the Democrats, instead.\"\nVonnegut disdained more mainstream American political ideologies in favor of socialism, which he thought could provide a valuable substitute for what he saw as social Darwinism and a spirit of \"survival of the fittest\" in American society, believing that \"socialism would be a good for the common man.\" Vonnegut often returned to a quote by socialist and five-time presidential candidate Eugene V.\u00a0Debs: \"As long as there is a lower class, I am in it. As long as there is a criminal element, I'm of it. As long as there is a soul in prison, I am not free.\" Vonnegut expressed disappointment that communism and socialism seemed to be unsavory topics to the average American and believed that they offered beneficial substitutes to contemporary social and economic systems.\nTechnology.\nIn \"A Man Without a Country\", Vonnegut quipped, \"I have been called a Luddite. I welcome it. Do you know what a Luddite is? A person who hates newfangled contraptions.\" The negative effects of the progress of technology are a constant theme throughout Vonnegut's works, from \"Player Piano\" to his final essay collection, \"A Man Without a Country.\" Political theorist Patrick Deneen has identified this skepticism about technological progress as a theme of Vonnegut novels and stories, including \"Player Piano,\" \"Harrison Bergeron,\" and \"Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow.\" Scholars who position Vonnegut as a critic of liberalism reference his pessimism toward technological progress. Vonnegut described \"Player Piano\" some years after its publication as \"a novel about people and machines, and machines frequently got the best of it, as machines will.\" Loss of jobs due to machine innovation, and thus loss of meaning or purpose in life, is a key plot point in the novel. The \"newfangled contraptions\" Vonnegut hated included the television, which he critiqued often throughout his nonfiction and fiction. In \"Timequake,\" for example, Vonnegut tells the story of \"Booboolings,\" human analogs who develop morally through their imaginative formation. However, one evil sister on the planet of the Booboolings learns from lunatics how to build televisions. He writes: When the bad sister was a young woman, she and the nuts worked up designs for television cameras and transmitters and receivers. Then she got money from her very rich mom to manufacture these satanic devices, which made imaginations redundant. They were instantly popular because the shows were so attractive and no thinking was involved\u00a0... Generations of Booboolings grew up without imaginations\u00a0... Without imaginations, though, they couldn't do what their ancestors had done, which was read interesting, heartwarming stories in the faces of one another. So\u00a0... Booboolings became among the most merciless creatures in the local family of galaxies.Against imagination-killing devices like televisions, and against electronic substitutes for embodied community, Vonnegut argued that \"Electronic communities build nothing. You wind up with nothing. We are dancing animals. How beautiful it is to get up and go out and do something.\"\nWriting.\nInfluences.\nVonnegut's writing was inspired by an eclectic mix of sources. When he was younger, Vonnegut stated that he read works of pulp fiction, science fiction, fantasy, and action-adventure. He also read the classics, such as the plays of Aristophanes\u2014like Vonnegut's works, humorous critiques of contemporary society. Vonnegut's life and work also share similarities with that of Mark Twain. Both shared pessimistic outlooks on humanity and a skeptical take on religion and, as Vonnegut put it, were both \"associated with the enemy in a major war,\" as Twain briefly enlisted in the South's cause during the American Civil War, and Vonnegut's German name and ancestry connected him with the United States' enemy in both world wars. He also cited Ambrose Bierce as an influence, calling \"An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge\" the greatest American short story and deeming any who disagreed or had not read the story \"twerps.\"\nVonnegut called George Orwell his favorite writer and admitted that he tried to emulate Orwell. \"I like his concern for the poor, I like his socialism, I like his simplicity,\" Vonnegut said. Vonnegut also said that Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" and \"Brave New World\" by Aldous Huxley heavily influenced his debut novel, \"Player Piano,\" in 1952. The novel also included ideas from mathematician Norbert Wiener's book \"Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine.\" Vonnegut commented that Robert Louis Stevenson's stories were emblems of thoughtfully put together works that he tried to mimic in his own compositions. Vonnegut also hailed playwright and socialist George Bernard Shaw as \"a hero of [his]\" and an \"enormous influence.\" Within his own family, Vonnegut stated that his mother, Edith, had the greatest influence on him. \"[My] mother thought she might make a new fortune by writing for the slick magazines. She took short-story courses at night. She studied writers the way gamblers study horses.\"\nEarly on in his career, Vonnegut decided to model his style after that of Henry David Thoreau, who wrote as if from the perspective of a child, allowing Thoreau's works to be widely comprehensible. Using a youthful narrative voice allowed Vonnegut to deliver concepts in a modest and straightforward way. Other influences on Vonnegut include \"The War of the Worlds\" author H.\u00a0G. Wells and satirist Jonathan Swift. Vonnegut credited American journalist and critic H.\u00a0L. Mencken for inspiring him to become a journalist.\nStyle and technique.\nThe book \"Pity the Reader: On Writing with Style\" by Kurt Vonnegut and his longtime friend and former student Suzanne McConnell, published posthumously by Rosetta Books and Seven Stories Press in 2019, delves into the style, humor, and methodologies Vonnegut employed, including his belief that one should \"Write like a human being. Write like a writer.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI've heard the Vonnegut voice described as \"manic depressive,\" and there's certainly something to this. It has an incredible amount of energy married to a very deep and dark sense of despair. It's frequently over-the-top, and scathingly satirical, but it never strays too far from pathos\u2014from an immense sympathy for society's vulnerable, oppressed and powerless. But, then, it also contains a huge allotment of warmth. Most of the time, reading Kurt Vonnegut feels more like being spoken to by a very close friend. There's an inclusiveness to his writing that draws you in, and his narrative voice is seldom absent from the story for any length of time. Usually, it's right there in the foreground\u2014direct, involving and extremely idiosyncratic.\nGavin Extence, \"The Huffington Post,\" 2013\nIn his book \"Popular Contemporary Writers,\" Michael D.\u00a0Sharp describes Vonnegut's linguistic style as straightforward, his sentences concise, his language simple, his paragraphs brief, and his ordinary tone conversational. Vonnegut uses this style to convey normally complex subject matter in a way that is intelligible to a large audience. He credited his time as a journalist for his ability and pointed to his work with the Chicago City News Bureau, which required him to convey stories in telephone conversations. Vonnegut's compositions include distinct references to his own life, notably in \"Slaughterhouse-Five\" and \"Slapstick.\"\nVonnegut believed that ideas and the convincing communication of those ideas to the reader were vital to literary art. He did not always sugarcoat his points; much of \"Player Piano\" leads to the moment when Paul, on trial and hooked to a lie detector, is asked to tell a falsehood. Paul says, \"Every new piece of scientific knowledge is a good thing for humanity.\" Robert T.\u00a0Tally\u00a0Jr., in his volume on Vonnegut's novels, wrote, \"Rather than tearing down and destroying the icons of twentieth-century, middle-class American life, Vonnegut gently reveals their basic flimsiness.\" Vonnegut did not simply propose utopian solutions to the ills of American society but showed how such schemes would not allow ordinary people to live lives free from want and anxiety. The large, artificial U.S. families in \"Slapstick\" soon serve as an excuse for tribalism. People give no help to those not part of their group; the extended family's place in the social hierarchy becomes vital.\nIn the introduction to their essay \"Kurt Vonnegut and Humor\", Tally and Peter C.\u00a0Kunze suggest that Vonnegut was not a \"black humorist,\" but a \"frustrated idealist\" who used \"comic parables\" to teach the reader absurd, bitter or hopeless truths, with his grim witticisms serving to make the reader laugh rather than cry. \"Vonnegut makes sense through humor, which is, in the author's view, as valid a means of mapping this crazy world as any other strategies.\" Vonnegut resented being called a black humorist, feeling that, as with many literary labels, it allowed readers to disregard aspects of a writer's work that did not fit the label.\nVonnegut's works have been labeled science fiction, satire and postmodern. He resisted such labels, but his works do contain common tropes in those genres. In his books, Vonnegut imagines alien societies and civilizations, as is common in science fiction. He emphasizes or exaggerates absurdities and idiosyncrasies. Furthermore, Vonnegut makes fun of problems, as satire does. However, literary theorist Robert Scholes noted in \"Fabulation and Metafiction\" that Vonnegut \"reject[s] the traditional satirist's faith in the efficacy of satire as a reforming instrument. [He has] a more subtle faith in the humanizing value of laughter.\"\nPostmodernism entails a response to the theory that science will reveal truths. Postmodernists contend that truth is subjective rather than objective. Truth includes bias toward individual beliefs and outlooks on the world. Postmodernist writers use unreliable, first-person narration, and narrative fragmentation. One critic has argued that Vonnegut's most famous novel, \"Slaughterhouse-Five,\" features a metafictional, Janus-headed outlook and seeks to represent historical events while doubting the ability to represent history. Doubt is evident in the opening lines of the novel: \"All this happened, more or less. The war parts, anyway, are pretty much true.\" The bombastic opening\u2014\"All this happened\"\u2014\"reads like a declaration of complete mimesis,\" which is radically called into question in the rest of the quote and \"[t]his creates an integrated perspective that seeks out extratextual themes [like war and trauma] while thematizing the novel's textuality and inherent constructedness at one and the same time.\" Although Vonnegut does use fragmentation and metafiction in some of his works, he more distinctly focuses on the peril of individuals who find subjective truths, mistake them for objective truths, and proceed to impose these truths on other people.\nThemes.\nEconomy.\nVonnegut was a vocal critic of American society, and this was reflected in his writings. Several key social themes recur in Vonnegut's works, such as wealth, the lack of it, and its unequal distribution among a society. In \"The Sirens of Titan\", the novel's protagonist, Malachi Constant, is exiled to Saturn's moon Titan as a result of his vast wealth, which has made him arrogant and wayward. In \"God Bless You, Mr.\u00a0Rosewater\", readers may find it difficult to determine whether the rich or the poor are in worse circumstances, as the lives of both groups' members are ruled by their wealth or their poverty. Further, in \"Hocus Pocus\", the protagonist is named Eugene Debs Hartke, a homage to the famed socialist Eugene V.\u00a0Debs and Vonnegut's socialist views.\nIn \"Kurt Vonnegut: A Critical Companion\", Thomas F.\u00a0Marvin states: \"Vonnegut points out that, left unchecked, capitalism will erode the democratic foundations of the United States.\" Marvin suggests that Vonnegut's works demonstrate what happens when a \"hereditary aristocracy\" develops, where wealth is inherited along familial lines: the ability of poor Americans to overcome their situations is greatly or completely diminished. Vonnegut also often laments social Darwinism and a \"survival of the fittest\" view of society. He points out that social Darwinism leads to a society that condemns its poor for their own misfortune and fails to help them out of their poverty because \"they deserve their fate\".\nEthics in science.\nScience and the ethical obligations of scientists are also a common theme in Vonnegut's works. His first published story, \"Report on the Barnhouse Effect,\" like many of his early stories, centered on a scientist concerned about the uses of his own invention. \"Player Piano\" and \"Cat's Cradle\" explore the effects on humans of scientific advances. In 1969, Vonnegut gave a speech to the American Association of Physics Teachers called \"The Virtuous Physicist.\" Asked afterwards what a virtuous scientist was, Vonnegut replied, \"one who declines to work on weapons.\"\nLife.\nVonnegut also confronts the idea of free will in a number of his pieces. In \"Slaughterhouse-Five\" and \"Timequake\" the characters have no choice in what they do; in \"Breakfast of Champions\", characters are very obviously stripped of their free will and even receive it as a gift; and in \"Cat's Cradle\", Bokononism views free will as heretical.\nThe majority of Vonnegut's characters are estranged from their actual families and seek to build replacement or extended families. For example, the engineers in \"Player Piano\" called their manager's spouse \"Mom\". In \"Cat's Cradle\", Vonnegut devises two separate methods for loneliness to be combated: A \"karass\", which is a group of individuals appointed by God to do his will, and a \"granfalloon\", defined by Marvin as a \"meaningless association of people, such as a fraternal group or a nation\". Similarly, in \"Slapstick\", the US government codifies that all Americans are a part of large extended families.\nFear of losing one's purpose in life is a theme in Vonnegut's works. During the Great Depression Vonnegut witnessed the devastation many people felt when they lost their jobs, and while at General Electric he witnessed machines being built to take the place of human labor. He confronts these things in his works through references to the growing use of automation and its effects on human society. This is most starkly represented in his first novel, \"Player Piano\", where many Americans are left purposeless and unable to find work, as machines replace human workers. Loss of purpose is also depicted in \"Gal\u00e1pagos\", where a florist rages at her spouse for creating a robot able to do her job, and in \"Timequake\", where an architect kills himself when replaced by computer software.\nSuicide by fire is another common theme in Vonnegut's works; the author often returns to the theory that \"many people are not fond of life\". He uses this as an explanation for why humans have so severely damaged their environment and made devices such as nuclear weapons that can make their creators extinct. In \"Deadeye Dick\" Vonnegut features the neutron bomb, which is designed to kill people but leave buildings and structures untouched. He also uses this theme to demonstrate the recklessness of those who put powerful, apocalypse-inducing devices at the disposal of politicians.\n\"What is the point of life?\" is a question Vonnegut often pondered in his works. When one of his characters, Kilgore Trout, finds the question \"What is the purpose of life?\" written in a bathroom, his response is, \"To be the eyes and ears and conscience of the Creator of the Universe, you fool.\" Marvin finds Trout's theory curious, given that Vonnegut was an atheist and thus for him, there is no Creator to report back to, and comments that, \"[as] Trout chronicles one meaningless life after another, readers are left to wonder how a compassionate creator could stand by and do nothing while such reports come in\". In the epigraph to \"Bluebeard\", Vonnegut quotes his son Mark and gives an answer to what he believes is the meaning of life: \"We are here to help each other get through this thing, whatever it is.\"\nTralfamadore.\nA fictional planet called Tralfamadore is a recurring motif in Vonnegut's works. A planet by that name is referenced in \"The Sirens of Titan\"; \"God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater\"; \"Slaughterhouse-Five\"; \"Hocus Pocus\"; and \"Timequake\". It is variously depicted as being located outside the Milky Way galaxy or being fictional within the fiction itself; in \"Slaughterhouse-Five,\" it is implied to be imaginary as a result of the protagonist losing his grip on reality. A recurring characteristic of the inhabitants of Tralfamadore is their low esteem of humanity. According to Julia A. Whitehead, Vonnegut used the concept of an imagined planet inhabited by beings more enlightened than humans as an outlet for escapism. By contrast, Lawrence R. Boer rejects the notion that the pessimism and fatalism of the Tralfamadorians in \"Slaughterhouse-Five\" reflect the views of the author, and Brian Stableford characterizes the different Tralfamadorian races in that book and \"The Sirens of Titan\" as \"tiny-minded smartasses.\"\nWorks.\nUnless otherwise cited, items in this list are taken from Thomas F. Marvin's 2002 book \"Kurt Vonnegut: A Critical Companion\", and the date in parentheses is the date the work was published:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "16862", "revid": "47971260", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16862", "title": "Koan", "text": "Short instructive text in some Buddhist practices\nA ( ; ; ; ; ) is a story, dialogue, question, or statement from Chinese Chan Buddhist lore, supplemented with commentaries, that is used in Chan, Zen, Seon and Thi\u1ec1n Buddhist practice in different ways. The main goal of practice in Zen is to achieve (Chinese: ), to see or observe one's buddha-nature.\nExtended study of literature as well as meditation () on a is a major feature of modern Rinzai Zen. They are also studied in the S\u014dt\u014d school of Zen to a lesser extent. In Chinese Chan and Korean Seon Buddhism, meditating on a , a key phrase of a , is also a major Zen meditation method.\nEtymology.\nThe Japanese word is the Sino-Japanese pronunciation of the Chinese word \"g\u014dng'\u00e0n\" (or \"g\u016bng'on\" in Cantonese). According to the Yuan dynasty Zen master Zhongfeng Mingben ( 1263\u20131323), originated as an abbreviation of (, Japanese ), which referred to a \"public record\" or the \"case records of a public law court\" in Tang dynasty China. / thus serves as a metaphor for principles of reality beyond the private or subjective opinion of one person, and a teacher may test the student's ability to recognize and understand that principle.\nCommentaries in collections bear some similarity to judicial decisions that cite and sometimes modify precedents. An article by T. Griffith Foulk claims:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Its literal meaning is the 'table' or 'bench' of a 'magistrate' or 'judge' .\n was itself originally a metonym\u2014an article of furniture involved in setting legal precedents came to stand for such precedents. For example, () is the original title of \"Celebrated Cases of Judge Dee\", the famous Chinese detective novel based on a historical Tang dynasty judge. Similarly, Zen collections are public records of the notable sayings and actions of Zen masters and disciples attempting to pass on their teachings.\nDoctrinal background.\nThe popular Western understanding sees as referring to an unanswerable question or a meaningless or absurd statement. However, in Zen practice, a is not meaningless, and not a riddle or a puzzle. Teachers do expect students to present an appropriate response when asked about a . According to Hori, a central theme of many is the 'identity of opposites':\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; after explores the theme of nonduality. Hakuin's well-known , \"Two hands clap and there is a sound, what is the sound of one hand?\" is clearly about two and one. The asks, you know what duality is, now what is nonduality? In \"What is your original face before your mother and father were born?\" the phrase \"father and mother\" alludes to duality. This is obvious to someone versed in the Chinese tradition, where so much philosophical thought is presented in the imagery of paired opposites. The phrase \"your original face\" alludes to the original nonduality.\nComparable statements are: \"Look at the flower and the flower also looks\"; \"Guest and host interchange\". are also understood as pointers to an unmediated \"Pure Consciousness\", devoid of cognitive activity. Victor Hori criticizes this understanding:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[A] pure consciousness without concepts, if there could be such a thing, would be a booming, buzzing confusion, a sensory field of flashes of light, unidentifiable sounds, ambiguous shapes, color patches without significance. This is not the consciousness of the enlightened Zen master.\nin China.\nThe \"public cases\" of the old masters.\n literature developed at some point in between the late Tang dynasty (10th century) to the Song dynasty (960\u20131279), though the details are unclear. They arose out of the collections of the recorded sayings of Chan masters and \"transmission\" texts like the \"Transmission of the Lamp\". These sources contained numerous stories of famous past Chan masters which were used to educate Chan/Zen students. According to Morten Schl\u00fctter \"it is not clear exactly when the practice of commenting on old gongan cases started, but the earliest Chan masters to have such commentaries included in the recorded sayings attributed to them appear to be Yunmen Wenyan and Fenyang Shanzhao (947\u20131024).\"\nAccording to Robert Buswell, the tradition \"can be viewed as the products of an internal dynamic within Chan that began in the T'ang and climaxed in the Sung.\" By the beginning of the Song era, Chan masters were known to use these stories in their sermons, as well as to comment on them and to use them to challenge their students.\nSchl\u00fctter also writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[M]uch of the material in the recorded sayings collections of individual Song Chan masters consists of the master quoting (\"raising\"; ) a story about a famous past Chan figure's encounter with disciples or other interlocutors and then offering his own comments on it. The stories held up for comment came to be referred to as gongan, \"public cases,\" or , \"old model cases,\" both terms borrowed, it would seem, from the language of law.\nOriginally, such a story was only considered a when it was commented upon by another Chan master, i.e. when it was used as a \"case\" study for enlightenment. This practice of commenting on the words and deeds of past masters also served to confirm the master's position as an awakened master in a lineage of awakened masters of the past.\nAccording to Schl\u00fctter, these stories were also used \"to challenge Chan students to demonstrate their insights: a Chan master would cite a story about a famous master and then demand that his students comment.\" Later on, certain questions (like: \"Why did Bodhidharma come from the West?\") developed independently from the traditional stories and were used in the same fashion. Schl\u00fctter also notes that \"most commonly used in the Song originally came from the influential \"Transmission of the Lamp\", although the subsequent transmission histories also became sources of .\"\nOver time, a whole literary genre of collection and commentary developed which was influenced by \"educated literati\" of the Song era. These collections included quotations of encounter-dialogue passages (the \"cases\", ) with a master's comment on the case attached. When a prose comment was added, the genre was called ('picking up the old ones'), and when poems were used to comment, the genre was termed ('eulogizing the old ones'). Further commentaries would then be written by later figures on these initial comments, leading to quite complex and layered texts.\nThe style of these Song-era Zen texts was influenced by many Chinese literary conventions and the style of \"literary games\" (competitions involving improvised poetry). Common literary devices included:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThere were dangers involved in such a highly literary approach, such as ascribing specific meanings to the cases, or become too involved in book learning. Dahui Zonggao is even said to have burned the woodblocks of the \"Blue Cliff Record\", for the hindrance it had become to the study of Chan by his students.\n\"Observing the phrase\".\nDuring the late Song dynasty (11th\u201312th century), the practice of assigning specific to students for contemplation had become quite common and some sources contain examples of Zen masters (e.g. Touzi Yiqing) who became enlightened through contemplating a . \nThus, by the time of Dahui Zonggao (1089\u20131163), this practice was well established. Dahui promoted and popularized the practice extensively, under the name of \"observing the phrase zen\" (). In this practice, students were to observe () or concentrate on a single word or phrase (), such as the famous of the , and develop a sense of \"great doubt\" within until this ball of doubt \"shattered\", leading to enlightenment. Dahui's invention was aimed at balancing the insight developed by reflection on the teachings with developing \u015bamatha, calmness of mind.\nThis idea of observing a key phrase or word was Dahui's unique contribution, since the earlier method of contemplation never taught the focusing on a single word, nor did it teach to develop a \"ball of doubt that builds up before finally shattering.\" According to Wright, instead of focusing on the full narrative of a , Dahui promoted \"intense focus on one critical phrase, generally one word or element at the climax of the .\"\nDahui also taught that meditation on just one of a single was enough to achieve enlightenment, since penetrating one was penetrating into all of them. He went even further, arguing that this new meditation technique was the only way of achieving enlightenment for Chan practitioners of his day. Thus, Schl\u00fctter writes that \"in this insistence, he was unusual among the Song Chan masters, who generally tended to take a rather inclusive view of Buddhist practice. It is therefore fair to say that Dahui not only developed a new contemplative technique, he also invented a whole new kind of Chan in the process.\" Whatever the case, Dahui was extremely influential in shaping the development of the Linji school in the Song.\nDale S. Wright also writes that Dahui: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[...] maintained that the had no meaning and that any intellectualization, any conceptual thinking at all, would obstruct the possibility of break-through. As a corollary to this, Ta-hui warned that the intellectuals who in his day were the ones most interested in meditation would be the least likely to succeed at it, given their tendency to think. His advice to them, therefore, was to cease completely any effort to resolve the and \"to give up the conceit that they have the intellectual tools that would allow them to understand it.\" The primary effort required in this enterprise was a negative one, \"nonconceptualization,\"...\nAs Robert Buswell explains, this emphasis on non-conceptual meditation on a meant that \"there is nothing that need be developed; all the student must do is simply renounce both the hope that there is something that can be achieved through the practice as well as the conceit that he will achieve that result.\"\nWright argues that since \"the narrative structure of the was eliminated in the focus on a single point\", that is the (which was said to have no meaning), such a practice became a \u015bamatha-like practice (which even resembles Caodong silent illumination), even if this was never acknowledged by the masters of the Linji school in the Song. Furthermore, Wright also argues that this practice was anti-intellectual since all learning was to be renounced in the practice of . According to Wright, this development left Chinese Chan vulnerable to criticisms by a resurgent neo-Confucianism.\nAccording to Mario Poceski, although Dahui's \"kanhua\" Chan (in which one focuses on a \"huatou\") purports to be a sudden method, it essentially consists of a process of gradually perfecting concentration. Poceski also observes the role the \"kanhua\" technique played in standardizing Chan practice. He argues that this contributed to the routinization of the tradition, resulting in a loss of some of the more open and creative aspects of earlier Chan.\nThe Chan master's role.\nAccording to Kasulis, the rise of contemplation in Song-era Zen led to a greater emphasis on the interaction between master and student, which came to be identified as the essence of enlightenment, since \"its verification was always interpersonal. In effect, enlightenment came to be understood not so much as an insight, but as a way of acting in the world with other people.\"\nThis mutual inquiry of past cases gave Zen students a role model and a sense of belonging to a spiritual family since \"one looked at the enlightened activities of one's lineal forebears in order to understand one's own identity.\" The practice also served to confirm an individual's enlightenment and authority in a specific lineage or school. This formal authorization or confirmation (, Japanese: , Korean: ) was given by their teacher and was often part of a process of \"dharma transmission\" () in a specific lineage. This formal act placed the \"confirmed\" Chan master in a special unique position as an interpreter and guide to the .\nThe importance of the teacher student relationship is seen in modern Japanese training which always requires an authorized teacher ( or ) in a specific lineage who has the ability to judge a disciple's understanding and expression of a . In the Rinzai Zen school, which uses extensively, the teacher certification process includes an appraisal of proficiency in using that school's extensive curriculum. According to Barbara O'Brien, the practice of going to a private interview with one's Zen master () where one has to prove one's understanding of \"is the real point of the whole exercise\".\nChinese collections.\nSome of the key Song-era collections are:\nThese texts mostly draw and develop stories which are found in other sources, mainly the \"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\" (Chinese , mid-10th century), and the hagiographical \"Jingde Record of the Transmission of the Lamp\" (Chinese , early 11th century).\nAfter the Song era.\nZhongfeng Mingben (1263\u20131323), a Chinese Chan master who lived at the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, revitalized the Chinese Linji school. Zhongfeng put a strong emphasis on the use of , seeing them as a \"work of literature [that] should be used as objective, universal standards to test the insight of monks who aspired to be recognized as Ch'an masters\". He also promoted Dahui's famous method of meditating on a and influenced several Japanese Rinzai masters of the time who came to China to study with him, including Kosen Ingen, Koh\u014d Kakumy\u014d, Jakushitsu Genk\u014d (1290\u20131367).\nAccording to Zhongfeng:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The koans do not represent the private opinion of a single man, but rather the hundreds and thousands of bodhisattvas of the three realms and ten directions. This principle accords with the spiritual source, tallies with the mysterious meaning, destroys birth-and-death, and transcends the passions. It cannot be understood by logic; it cannot be transmitted in words; it cannot be explained in writing; it cannot be measured by reason. It is like the poisoned drum that kills all who hear it, or like a great fire that consumes all who come near it. What is called \"the special transmission of the Vulture Peak\" was the transmission of this; what is called the \"direct pointing of Bodhidharma at Shao-lin-ssu\" is this.\nIn later periods like the Ming dynasty, Chinese Chan developed in different directions, such as incorporating Pure Land elements and the re-introduction of an emphasis on the study of scripture.\nHowever, meditation was still practiced in the Linji lineages. During the Ming, Miyun Yuanwu (1566\u20131642) was a successful promoter of the Linji school's methods, emphasizing vigorous master disciple encounters which made use of shouting and beating in imitation of classic stories. Yuanwu's efforts to revive the Linji tradition were so successful that according to Marcus Bingenheimer, \"Miyun's Tiantong branch of the Linji School became the dominant Chan lineage in China and beyond\" (c.\u200917th century). He led numerous communities of thousands of monks and confirmed twelve dharma heirs.\nHis teachings also influenced Japanese Zen since his student Yinyuan Longqi (Japanese: Ingen Ry\u016bki, 1592\u20131673) later founded the \u014cbaku school in Japan. This lineage also spread the Linji teachings to Vietnam, mainly through the efforts of Yuanshao (, 1648\u20131728).\nModern Chinese Chan and Korean Seon.\nIn the modern period, the practice of meditating on the critical phrase () of a is still taught and some Chinese Chan figures like Sheng Yen and Xuyun taught the practice and wrote on it.\nModern Chinese Chan and Korean Seon generally follow the method taught by Dahui, which emphasizes meditation on a ('critical phrase', 'word head'). In this method one repeats the phrase over and over again and inquires into it while in meditation (sitting or walking) as well as in daily activities. In this mainland tradition of practice, also called , 'reflection on the ', a fragment of a , such as , or a \"what is\"-question is used by focusing on this fragment and repeating it over and over again.\nIn this tradition one generally contemplates one such phrase for an extended period of time, going deeper and deeper into it, instead of going through an extended curriculum as in Japanese Rinzai. A student may be assigned only one for their whole life. The focus of this contemplation is on generating the sense of \"great doubt\" and on having faith in the Dharma and the practice. According to Ford the \"becomes a touchstone of our practice: it is a place to put our doubt, to cultivate great doubt, to allow the revelation of great faith, and to focus our great energy.\"\nXuyun wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExamples of which are used in meditation include: \"What is this?\"; \"What was the original face before my father and mother were born?\"; \"Who is dragging this corpse about?\"; and \"Who am I?\".\nAnother popular practice in Chinese Chan is using the (repetition of Amitabha Buddha's name) as a practice. This method of \" Chan\" () was promoted in the modern era by Xuyun and relies on repeating the Buddha's name while also asking \"who is reciting?\". The practice of using in a like fashion is also found in the Japanese \u014cbaku school and was taught by their founding masters (including Yinyuan, i.e. Ingen), indicating that this method dates at least as far back as the Ming dynasty.\nThe modern Korean master Seung Sahn developed his own curriculum of multiple in his Kwan Um School of Zen, but this was a modern development unheard of in Korean Seon.\nin Japan.\nThe introduction of.\nWhen the Chan tradition was established in Japan in the 12th century, both Rinzai and S\u014dt\u014d, took over the use of study and commenting. In S\u014dt\u014d-Zen, commentary was not linked to seated meditation. Japanese monks had to master the Chinese language and specific expressions used in the training. The desired \"spontaneity\" expressed by enlightened masters required a thorough study of Chinese language and poetry. Japanese Zen imitated the Chinese \"syntax and stereotyped norms\".\nDuring the Kamakura period, the officially recognized Rinzai monasteries belonging to the (Five Mountain System) where key centers for the study of . Senior monks in these monasteries were supposed to compose Chinese verse in a complex style of matched counterpoints known as . It took a lot of literary and intellectual skills for a monk to succeed in this system.\nThe Rinka monasteries, the provincial temples which were under less direct state control, laid less stress on the correct command of Chinese verse. These monasteries developed \"more accessible methods of instruction\". It had three features:\nBy standardizing the curriculum every generation of students proceeded to the same series of . Students had to memorize a set number of stereotyped sayings, , 'appended words'. The proper series of responses for each were taught by the master in private instruction sessions to selected individual students who would inherit the dharma lineage.\nThe development of Rinzai curriculums occurred in various stages. According to Eshin Nishimura, Japanese Rinzai-masters like (1202\u20131280) and (1235\u20131308) had already divided the Chinese into three groups namely ('ultimate truth'), ('skillful method') and ('non-attachment'). Mus\u014d Soseki (1275\u20131351) further developed the use of . Despite belonging to the Rinzai-school, Mus\u014d Soseki also made extensive use of (teaching), explaining the sutras, instead of (). According to Mus\u014d Soseki, both are , 'skillful means' meant to educate students. Mus\u014d Soseki called both , 'little jewels', tools to help the student to attain satori.\nIn the 18th century, the Rinzai school became dominated by the legacy of Hakuin, who laid a strong emphasis on study as a means to gain , but also not to get stuck in this initial insight, and to develop a compassionate, selfless attitude. After Hakuin, most Rinzai monasteries followed the teachings of his lineage on practice. study was also further systematized in a standard sequence of that the student had to pass and work through step by step. There are two curricula used in Rinzai, derived from two dharma-heirs of Gasan: the Takuju curriculum, and the Inzan curriculum. Both curricula have standardized answers.\nRinzai school.\n practice is particularly important among Japanese practitioners of the Rinzai school. Japanese Rinzai uses extensive -curricula, checking questions, and ('capping phrases', quotations from Chinese poetry) in its use of koans,\nKoan practice starts with the , or 'first barrier', usually the or the question \"What is the sound of one hand?\". After having attained , students continue their practice investigating subsequent . In the Takuju-school, after breakthrough students work through the \"Gateless Gate\" (), the \"Blue Cliff Record\" (), the \"Entangling Vines\" (), and the \"Collection of Wings of the Blackbird\" (, ). The Inzan-school uses its own internally generated list of .\ncurricula.\nIn Rinzai a gradual succession of is studied. There are two general branches of curricula used within Rinzai, the Takuju curriculum, and the Inzan curriculum. However, there are a number of sub-branches of these, and additional variations of curriculum often exist between individual teaching lines which can reflect the recorded experiences of a particular lineage's members. curricula are, in fact, subject to continued accretion and evolution over time, and thus are best considered living traditions of practice rather than set programs of study.\nWhile Hakuin only refers to break-through , and \"difficult to pass\" to sharpen and refine the initial insight and foster compassion, Hakuin's descendants developed a fivefold classification system:\nAccording to Akizuki there was an older classification system, in which the fifth category was , 'Directed upwards'. This category too was meant to rid the monk of any \"stink of Zen\". The very advanced practitioner may also receive the , \"The last barrier\", and , \"The final confirmation\". \"The last barrier\" is given when one left the training hall, for example \"Sum up all of the records of Rinzai in one word!\" It is not meant to be solved immediately, but to be carried around in order to keep practising. \"The final confirmation\" may be another word for the same kind of . Shin'ichi Hisamatsu gave \"If nothing what you do will do, then what will you do?\" as an 'unanswerable' question, which keeps nagging on premature certainty.\nThe breakthrough-.\nIn the Rinzai school, the Sanbo Kyodan, and the White Plum Asanga, practice starts with the assignment of a or \"break-through \", usually the or \"the sound of one hand\". Students are instructed to concentrate on the \"word-head\", like the phrase . In the Wumenguan (), public case No. 1 (\"Zhaozhou's Dog\"), Wumen (Mumon) wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[C]oncentrate yourself into this 'W\u00fa'[...] making your whole body one great inquiry. Day and night work intently at it. Do not attempt nihilistic or dualistic interpretations.\nArousing this great inquiry or \"Great Doubt\" is an essential element of practice. It builds up \"strong internal pressure (), never stopping knocking from within at the door of [the] mind, demanding to be resolved\". To illustrate the enormous concentration required in meditation, Zen Master Wumen commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is like swallowing a red-hot iron ball. You try to vomit it out, but you can't.\nAnalysing the for its literal meaning will not lead to insight, though understanding the context from which emerged can make them more intelligible. For example, when a monk asked Zhaozhou (Joshu) \"does a dog have Buddha-nature or not?\", the monk was referring to the understanding of the teachings on Buddha-nature, which were understood in the Chinese context of absolute and relative reality.\nThe continuous pondering of the break-through () or , \"word head\", leads to , an initial insight into \"seeing the (Buddha-)nature.\nThe aim of the break-through is to see the \"nonduality of subject and object\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVarious accounts can be found which describe \"becoming one\" with the and the resulting breakthrough:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was dead tired. That evening when I tried to settle down to sleep, the instant I laid my head on the pillow, I saw: \"Ah, this outbreath is Mu!\" Then: the in-breath too is Mu!\" Next breath, too: Mu! Next breath: Mu, Mu! \"Mu, a whole sequence of Mu! Croak, croak; meow, meow \u2013 these too are Mu! The bedding, the wall, the column, the sliding-door \u2013 these too are Mu! This, that and everything is Mu! Ha ha! Ha ha ha ha Ha! that is a rascal! He's always tricking people with his 'Mu, Mu, Mu'!...\nHowever, the use of the has also been criticised. According to Ama Samy, the main aim is merely to \"'become one' with the \". Showing to have 'become one' with the first is enough to pass the first . According to Samy, this is not equal to :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The one-pointed, non-intellectual concentration on the (or Mu) is a pressure-cooker tactic, a reduction to a technique which can produce some psychic experiences. These methods and techniques are forced efforts which can even run on auto-pilot. They can produce experiences but not wisdom. Some speak of 'investigating' the , but it is rather a matter of concentration, which sometimes can provide insights, yet no more than that.\nTesting insight \u2013 or learning responses.\n\u2013 Checking questions.\nTeachers may probe students about their practice using , \"checking questions\" to validate their (understanding) or (seeing the nature). For the and the clapping hand-, there are between 20 and 100 checking questions, depending on the teaching lineage. The checking questions serve to deepen the insight or of the student, but also to test his or her understanding.\nStandardized answers.\nThose checking questions, and their answers, are part of a standardised set of questions and answers. Ama Samy states that the \"s and their standard answers are fixed.\" Isshu Muira Roshi also states, in \"The Zen Koan\": \"In the Inzan and Takuju lines, the answers to the koans were more or less standardized for each line respectively.\" and , \"Records of secret instruction\" have been preserved for various Rinzai lineages. They contain both the curricula and the standardized answers.\nIn S\u014dt\u014d-Zen they are called , an abbreviation of , \"secret instructions of the lineage\". The follow a standard question-and-answer format. A series of questions is given, to be asked by the master. The answers are also given by the master, to be memorized by the student.\nAccording to critics, students are learning a \"ritual performance\", learning how to behave and respond in specific ways, learning \"clever repartees, ritualized language and gestures and be submissive to the master's diktat and arbitration.\"\nIn 1916 Tominaga Sh\u016bho, using the pseudonym \"Hau H\u014d\u014d\", published a critique of the Rinzai system, , which also contained a translation of a . The part has been translated by Yoel Hoffmann as \"The Sound of the One Hand\" (see ) and .\nJakugo \u2013 Capping phrases.\nIn the Rinzai school, passing a koan and the checking questions has to be supplemented by \"jakugo\", \"capping phrases\", citations of Chinese poetry to demonstrate the insight. Students can use collections of those citations, instead of composing poetry themselves.\nPost-satori practice.\nAfter the initial insight further practice is necessary, to deepen the insight and learn to integrate it in daily life. In Chinese Chan and Korean Seon, this further practice consists of further pondering of the same Hua Tou. In Rinzai-Zen, this further practice is undertaken by further koan-study, for which elaborate curricula exist. In S\u014dt\u014d-Zen, Shikantaza is the main practice for deepening insight.\nReal-life integration.\nAfter completing the koan-training, \"Gogo no shugyo\" is necessary:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCompleting the koan-curriculum in the Rinzai-schools traditionally also led to a mastery of Chinese poetry and literary skills:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[D]isciples today are expected to spend a dozen or more years with a master to complete a full course of training in koan commentary. Only when a master is satisfied that a disciple can comment appropriately on a wide range of old cases will he recognize the latter as a dharma heir and give him formal \"proof of transmission\" (J. \"inka shomei\"). Thus, in reality, a lot more than \"satori\" is required for one to be recognized as a master (J. \"shike\", \"roshi\") in the Rinzai school of Zen at present. The accepted proof of \"satori\" is a set of literary and rhetorical skills that takes many years to acquire.\nBreathing practices.\nHakuin Ekaku, the 17th century revitalizer of the Rinzai school, taught several practices which serve to correct physical and mental imbalances arising from, among other things, incorrect or excessive koan practice. The \"soft-butter\" method (\"nanso no ho\") and \"introspection method\" (\"naikan no ho\") involve cultivation of ki centered on the tanden (Chinese:dantian). These practices are described in Hakuin's works Orategama and Yasen Kanna, and are still taught in some Rinzai lineages today.\nIn Japanese S\u014dt\u014d.\nFew S\u014dt\u014d Zen practitioners concentrate on k\u014dans during meditation, but the S\u014dt\u014d sect has a strong historical connection with k\u014dans, since many k\u014dan collections were compiled by S\u014dt\u014d priests. During the 13th century, D\u014dgen, founder of the S\u014dt\u014d sect in Japan, quoted 580 k\u014dans in his teachings. He compiled some 300 k\u014dans in the volumes known as the Greater \"Sh\u014db\u014dgenz\u014d.\" D\u014dgen wrote of \"Genjok\u014dan\", which points out that everyday life experience and indeed, the whole universe in this moment, is the \"fundamental k\u014dan\", which does not refer to any ancient Zen story, but to the \"heart of the matter\", the question of life and death.\nOver time, S\u014dt\u014d sect adopted various koan meditation methods from other schools like Rinzai, including the method of observing a koan in meditation and koan curriculums. By the 15th century, S\u014dt\u014d temples were publishing koan texts, and S\u014dt\u014d monks often studied at Rinzai temples and passed on Rinzai koan practice lineages (and vice versa). S\u014dt\u014d teachers continued to write and collect k\u014dan texts throughout the medieval period. Later k\u014dan collections compiled and annotated by S\u014dt\u014d priests include \"The Iron Flute\" (Tetteki T\u014dsui) by Genr\u014d \u014cry\u016b in 1783 and \"Verses and Commentaries on One Hundred Old Cases of Tenchian\" (\"Tenchian hyakusoku hyoju\") compiled by Tetsumon in 1771.\nHowever, during the late 18th and 19th century, the S\u014dt\u014d tradition of commentary and practice became criticized and suppressed in the S\u014dt\u014d school, due to a reform movement that sought to return to the teaching of D\u014dgen and standardise the procedures for dharma transmission. An important figure in this development was Gent\u014d Sokuch\u016b (1729-1807), who sought to remove Rinzai and Obaku influences on S\u014dt\u014d and focus strictly on D\u014dgen's teachings and writings.\nAnother reason for suppressing the tradition in the S\u014dt\u014d school may have been to highlight the differences with the Rinzai school, and create a clear S\u014dt\u014d identity. This reform movement had started to venerate D\u014dgen as the founding teacher of the S\u014dt\u014d school and they sought to make D\u014dgen's teachings the main standard for the S\u014dt\u014d school. While D\u014dgen himself made extensive use of commentary in his works, it is clear he emphasized shikantaza (\"just sitting\") without an object, instead of the koan introspection method.\nIn Sanbo Kyodan and White Plum Asanga.\nThe Sanbo Kyodan school of the former S\u014dt\u014d-priest Hakuun Yasutani, and the White Plum Asanga of Taizan Maezumi and the many groups that derive from him, incorporate koan-study. The Sanbo kyodan places great emphasis on kensho, initial insight into one's true nature, as a start of real practice. It follows the so-called Harada-Yasutani koan-curriculum, which is derived from Hakuin's student Takuju. It is a shortened koan-curriculum, in which the so-called \"capping phrases\" are removed. The curriculum takes considerably less time to study than the Takuju-curriculum of Rinzai.\nTo attain kensho, most students are assigned the mu-koan. After breaking through, the student first studies twenty-two \"in-house\" koans, which are \"unpublished and not for the general public\", but are nevertheless published and commented upon. There-after, the students goes through the \"Gateless Gate\" (Mumonkan), the \"Blue Cliff Record\", the \"Book of Equanimity\", and the \"Record of Transmitting the Light\". The koan-curriculum is completed by the Five ranks of Tozan and the precepts.\nExamples of traditional k\u014dans.\nDoes a dog have Buddha-nature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA monk asked Zhaozhou, \"Does a dog have Buddha nature, or does he not have Buddha-nature?\"\nZhaozhou said, \"Wu\".\n\"Zhaozhou\" is rendered as \"Chao-chou\" in Wade\u2013Giles, and pronounced \"Joshu\" in Japanese. \"Wu\" appears as \"mu\" in Japanese, meaning \"no\", \"not\", \"nonbeing\", or \"without\" in English. This is a fragment of Case No. 1 of the \"W\u00fam\u00e9ngu\u0101n\". However, another koan presents a longer version, in which Zhaozhou answered \"yes\" in response to the same question asked by a different monk: see Case No. 18 of the \"Book of Serenity\".\nThe sound of one hand.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Two hands clap and there is a sound. What is the sound of one hand? ()\u2014\u200a\nVictor Hori comments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0in the beginning a monk first thinks a k\u014dan is an inert object upon which to focus attention; after a long period of consecutive repetition, one realizes that the k\u014dan is also a dynamic activity, the very activity of seeking an answer to the k\u014dan. The k\u014dan is both the object being sought and the relentless seeking itself. In a k\u014dan, the self sees the self not directly but under the guise of the k\u014dan ... When one realizes (\"makes real\") this identity, then two hands have become one. The practitioner becomes the k\u014dan that he or she is trying to understand. That is the sound of one hand.\nYet, Hakuin himself introduced this question with a reference to Kanzeon (Guanyin), bodhisattva of great compassion, who hears the sounds of the suffering ones in the world, and is awakened by hearing these sounds and responding to them. To hear the sound of one hand is to still the sounds of the world, that is, to put an end to all suffering.\nOriginal face.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Huineng asked Hui Ming, \"Without thinking of good or evil, show me your original face before your mother and father were born.\"\nThis is a fragment of case No. 23 of the \"Wumenguan\".\nKilling the Buddha.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If you meet the Buddha, kill him. ()\nOther koans.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA student asked Master Yunmen (949 AD) \"Not even a thought has arisen; is there still a sin or not?\"\nMaster replied, \"Mount Sumeru!\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA monk asked Dongshan Shouchu, \"What is Buddha?\"\nDongshan said, \"Three pounds of flax.\"\nThis is a fragment of case No. 18 of the \"Wumenguan\" as well as case No. 12 of the \"Blue Cliff Record\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA monk asked Ummon, \"What is the teaching that transcends the Buddha and patriarchs?\"\nUmmon said, \"A sesame bun.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA monk asked Zhaozhou, \"What is the meaning of the ancestral teacher's (i.e., Bodhidharma's) coming from the west?\"\nZhaozhou said, \"The cypress tree in front of the hall.\"\nThis is a fragment of case No. 37 of the \"Wumenguan\" as well as case No. 47 of the \"Book of Serenity\".\nCultural legacy.\nGent\u014d Sokuch\u016b, the 18th century abbot of Dogen's Eihei-ji, aggressively sought to reform S\u014dt\u014d from all things 'foreign' and associated with Rinzai, including k\u014dans. The unorthodox Zen monk Ikky\u016b contemplated k\u014dans for years while creating dolls for a merchant in Kyoto, specifically penetrating the case no. 15 from \"The Gateless Gate\" and thereafter earning his dharma name \"Ikky\u016b\".\nFacing criticism by Buddhists such as Philip Kapleau and D. T. Suzuki for misunderstanding Zen, Alan Watts claimed that a k\u014dan supported his lack of zazen practice. On the topic, Suzuki claimed: \"I regret to say that Mr. Watts did not understand that story.\"\nDouglas Hofstadter's 1979 book \"\" discusses Zen k\u014dans in relation to paradoxical questions and perceiving reality outside of one's experience. Inspired by Zen teachings (including k\u014dans), Frank Herbert wrote on the subject of the paradoxical elements of his \"Dune\" series:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What especially pleases me is to see the interwoven themes, the fugue like relationships of images that exactly replay the way \"Dune\" took shape. As in an Escher lithograph, I involved myself with recurrent themes that turn into paradox. ... It's like a k\u014dan, a Zen mind breaker.\nThe 1989 South Korean film \"Why Has Bodhi-Dharma Left for the East?\" bases much of its narrative on k\u014dans, with its title deriving from a particular k\u014dan about the founder of Zen, Bodhidharma.\nAfter becoming smitten with Zen (even offering to turn his own house into a zendo), filmmaker Alejandro Jodorowsky meditated and studied koans with the traveling monk Ejo Takata (1928\u20131997). After the release of \"The Holy Mountain\", Jodorowsky gave a talk at the University of Mexico on the subject of k\u014dans. After this talk, Takata gifted Jodorowsky his keisaku, believing that the filmmaker had mastered the ability to understand k\u014dans.\nIn the 1958 novel \"The Dharma Bums\", Jack Kerouac paraphrases the Yunmen \"shit-stick\" k\u014dan as: \"The Buddha is a dried piece of turd\". The second volume of the manga \"Lone Wolf and Cub\" by Kazuo Koike and Goseki Kojima is titled 'The Gateless Barrier' and revolves around a Linji k\u014dan (\"If you meet a Buddha, kill him\") as the protagonist is tasked to kill a troublesome \"living Buddha\".\nIn hacker culture, funny short stories concerning computer science developed, named hacker koans. The book Jargon File contains many k\u014dans, including the \"AI Koans\". \"The Codeless Code\" is another book about software engineers at big businesses instead of unix hackers, deriving its title from the \"Gateless Gate\".\nThe song \"False Prophet\" by Bob Dylan includes the line: \"I climbed a mountain of swords on my bare feet\", a reference to a Gateless Gate k\u014dan (\"You must climb a mountain of swords with bare feet\"). British musical artist Brian Eno collaborated with Intermorphic on developing a generative music software system named \"Koan\". In 2009, American composer and multi-instrumentalist Tyshawn Sorey released his second album, \"Koan\".\nThe 1997 novel \"The Sound of One Hand Clapping\" by Richard Flanagan (and its 1998 film adaptation of the same name) derives its title from a k\u014dan by Hakuin Ekaku. The episode of the 2014 first season of \"Fargo\" entitled \"Eating the Blame\" derives its episode title from a koan of the same name from the \"Shasekish\u016b\". Cyriaque Lamar of io9 stated that the approach to technology in \"\" was reminiscent of k\u014dans.\nCriticism.\nAcademic criticism.\nAn encounter dialogue constitutes the narrative component of a koan/\"gong'an.\" It depicts an interaction between a master and student who is being tested, or between rivals as a kind of contest of spiritual prowess. However, according to Mario Poceski, encounter dialogues are not historically reliable and \"have little or nothing to do with the lives, ideas, and teachings of the Tang-era protagonists who are featured in them.\" Such stories instead reflect the artistic license and religious imagination of mid-tenth century Chan. Steven Heine points to the sociopolitical background of encounter-dialogue literature, stating that such writings are not concerned with the task of historiography \"because their aim was not factuality but persuading the selected audience of the significance of master-disciple relations in terms of legitimating lineages and establishing the authority and hierarchy of transmission.\" Poceski observes that although Zen is often portrayed as promoting spontaneity and freedom, encounter-dialogue exegesis actually points in the opposite direction, namely towards a tradition bound by established parameters of orthodoxy. According to Poceski, on the whole, the encounter-dialogue genre is marked by formulaic repetition and clich\u00e9. He describes encounter-dialogue stories as \"mass produced\" and \"artificially manufactured.\" He says: In the end, notwithstanding the iconoclastic ethos imputed to them, it is apparent that these textual sources are products of a conservative tradition that, in the course of its growth and transformation during the Tang-Song transition, was keen to promote a particular version of Buddhist orthodoxy and secure its place as the main representative of elite Chinese Buddhism.\nPoceski points out how, in commenting on \"gong'an\", Chan masters' interpretive possibilities are limited by \"the straightjacket of a certain type of Chan orthodoxy.\" This refers to \"ideological constraints and clerical agendas\" which take encounter-dialogue stories as actual depictions of the enlightened behavior of perfected beings that point to some rarefied truth, despite there being no compelling empirical evidence for this. According to Poceski, as this is never up for questioning or scrutiny, \"gong'an\" stories amount to \"received articles of faith, reinforced by a cumulative tradition and embedded in specific institutional structures.\"\nPoceski explains how \"gong'an\" have been put in the service of institutional agendas and have historically been tied up with nexuses of power. Commenting on ancient cases bolstered Chan masters as living embodiments of a mystical Chan lineage, reinforcing their status and authority. At the same time, the ostentatious literary form such exegesis often took served to impress literati supporters, the sociopolitical elites of Song China, who were its intended audience. In this way, \"gong'an\" exegesis aligned with the cultural predilections and aesthetic sensibilities of the establishment. Alan Cole also suggests that koan writing may be seen as a response to patterns of patronage. What's more, Cole states that, in China, koan writing \"appears to have been a thoroughly literary affair, with little or nothing to do with meditation.\"\nAccording to Foulk, commenting on a \"gong'an\" doesn't merely serve to elucidate the wisdom of the patriarchs for a student's sake, but rather functions as a device for demonstrating a master's authority, not only in relation to a living disciple, but also in relation to the patriarchs themselves. That is, in commenting on a \"gong'an\", a master's authority is demonstrated to be both derivative and absolute: derivative in that it draws on the prestige of the earlier patriarchs, absolute in the sense that it gives the living master the last word and ultimate judgment. Similarly, Cole points out that koan exegesis is a kind of performance which positions the commentator as an absolute master of tradition, \"one who has even mastered the Chan masters of the Tang\" (who appear as the main characters in koan stories).\nFoulk explains that koans presuppose an inherent hierarchy in which the commentator's voice is privileged above the root case itself, maintaining a clear juxtaposition between \"judge\" and \"judged.\" Foulk writes, \"In a social context, this means that whoever can work himself (by whatever means) into the position of speaking as a judge of old cases will thereafter be deemed a worthy spokesman of the awakened point of view, regardless of what he says.\" Similarly, Stuart Lachs understands koans to be largely literary fictions which serve to reinforce hierarchical structures within Zen institutions. Lachs observes that the ritual koan interview between a student and master is so presented as to give a sense of timelessness in which the student is made to feel that the procedure is an inherent part of Zen that has existed since the beginning, despite its being an institutional construction. Lachs quotes from Peter Berger's analysis of religious legitimation, stating that the point of the ritual is to \"let people forget that this order was established by men and continues to be dependent on the consent of men.\"\nPoceski points out how \"gong'an\" exegesis deploys certain strategies to deflect criticism or challenges to authority which continue all the way to the present. These often involve the charge that critics lack genuine Chan experience and understanding. As this can be true even of bodhisattvas of the tenth level, this also reflects a sectarian notion that Chan is superior to canonical Buddhism. Poceski says:\nA person daring to articulate any sort of meaningful criticism can simply be dismissed as being an unenlightened ignoramus whose mind is filled with shallow views and one-sided attachments. So much for intellectual freedom and the need to question established authority.\nAccording to Poceski, modern publications and popular Zen books tend to be confined to the same strictures and ideological suppositions as the classical sources. This includes the notion that \"gong'an\" represent timeless truths that must be \"unlocked via dedicated Zen practice, undertaken under proper spiritual guidance,\" with modern interpretations of \"gong'an\" material tending to stick uncritically to conventional lines of exegesis that fail to question normative traditions and the untenable assumptions which buttress them. The emphasis on training under a qualified guide also reinforces the modern Zen master as gatekeeper of truth and \"prime arbiter of value and meaning,\" reflecting a concern for orthodoxy and authority. In this way, ideological suppositions about \"gong'an\" are entwined with social relationships and power structures, as they aim to perpetuate a religious institution whose members derive tangible benefits by virtue of their status in it as maintainers of tradition. As Lachs points out, advancement within Zen institutions requires a sufficient degree of socialization, and this entails not questioning official positions and authority. In regard to this state of affairs, Poceski asks:However, was it not the case that Chan/Zen was supposed to take us in an entirely different direction, away from the familiar intersections of knowledge and power? Wasn't it supposed to blow away archaic ideological smokescreens and obliterate all forms of conceptual posturing, rather than conjure or shore them up? Perhaps not, or so it seems.\nCriticism from within the Zen tradition.\nKoans have also been criticized from within the Zen tradition at various points throughout history. According to Schl\u00fctter, \"the practice was common enough to attract criticism\" which can be found in Song sources like the \"Sengbao zhengxu zhuan\" (True continuation of the chronicles of the sa\u1e43gha treasure), where one master called Chanti Weizhao \"rails against deluded masters who teach people to contemplate (\"can\") gongan stories.\" The Song era master Foyan Qingyuan (1067\u20131120) was critical of the use of koans (public cases) and similar stories, arguing that they did not exist during the time of Bodhidharma. He said, \"In other places they like to have people look at model case stories, but here we have the model case story of what is presently coming into being; you should look at it, but no one can make you see all the way through such an immense affair.\"\nAccording to Arthur Braverman, Bassui Tokush\u014d (1327\u20131387) \"was very critical of the Rinzai practice of studying k\u014dans, perhaps because they were becoming more and more formalized, hence losing their original spirit.\" Ikky\u016b S\u014djun (1394\u20131481) also criticized the mechanical nature of koan practice during his time, in which formulaic answers to koans were preserved and sold.\nThe unconventional Rinzai master Bankei Y\u014dtaku (1622\u20131693) famously criticized the k\u014dan method, seeing it as a hopelessly contrived and artificial technique. Bankei referred to k\u014dans disparagingly as \"old wastepaper\" and referred to Zen masters who required devices in order to guide people as engaging in \"devices Zen.\" Bankei also criticized the practice of rousing a \"great ball of doubt\" employed in koan Zen. He said:\nOthers tell students pursuing this teaching that it's no good unless they rouse a great ball of doubt and succeed in breaking through it. 'No matter what,' they tell them, 'you've got to rouse a ball of doubt!' They don't teach, 'Abide in the Unborn Buddha Mind!' [but instead] cause people \"without\" any ball of doubt to saddle themselves \"with\" one, making them exchange the Buddha Mind for a ball of doubt. A mistaken business, isn't it!\nWhen asked why he did not make use of koans, Bankei pointed out that Chan masters before Yuanwu and Dahui did not make use of koans either. Bankei observed accurately that koan study represents a later development of Chinese Chan. \"In this sense,\" Peter Haskel writes, \"Bankei was a traditionalist. He harked back to the Zen masters of the 'golden age' before the triumph of the koan, masters like Lin-chi I-hs\u00fcan (J: Rinzai Gigen, d. 860), founder of the Rinzai school.\" Similarly, D.T. Suzuki writes, \"Bankei can be said to have attempted a return to the Zen of the early T'ang dynasty.\" Bankei said:\nUnlike the other masters everywhere, in my teaching I don't set up any particular object, such as realizing enlightenment or studying koans. Nor do I rely on the words of the buddhas and patriarchs. I just point things out directly, so there's nothing to hold onto, and that's why no one will readily accept [what I teach].\nThe S\u014dt\u014d school emphasizes shikantaza as its main practice, though it does not completely reject the study and use of koans. That being said, some S\u014dt\u014d figures have criticized the Rinzai style koan method. Gent\u014d Sokuch\u016b (1729\u20131807), nominated abbot of Eiheiji in 1795, sought to purify the S\u014dt\u014d school of koans, which he regarded as a foreign influence. According to Buswell and Lopez, the S\u014dt\u014d school regards the Rinzai koan method as \"an inferior, expedient attempt at concentration\" in comparison to shikantaza, which is thus deployed in S\u014dt\u014d polemics against the rival Rinzai school. The famous S\u014dt\u014d master Kodo Sawaki also criticized Rinzai koan practice as \"stepladder Zen\" and said:From the end of the Song Dynasty to the Yuan [and] Ming dynasties techniques developed, and solving koans was the way monks became respected for having had satoris. Well, today [monks] have satoris, which in certain religious sects allows the monks to be candidates to be head priests of temples. That's the way they think. But they're wrong. Believe in zazen itself, and if you put your whole body into it, that is [true] zazen.\nShin'ichi Hisamatsu (1889\u20131980) criticized contemporary koan practice, which moves from one koan to another, as gradualistic and likened it to trying to approximate a circle by forever increasing the number of sides of a polygon. He instead emphasized what he called his \"fundamental koan\" which he said included all koans. Hisamatsu also said of his fundamental koan that it could be practiced on one's own, without the guidance of a teacher.\nThe modern Korean S\u014fn master Daehaeng taught that it was not necessary to receive a \"hwadu\" (the \"critical phrase\" of a koan) from others since everyone already has their own \"original hwadus.\" She said:Daily life is itself a hwadu, so there is no need to receive a hwadu from others or to give a hwadu to others. Your very existence is a hwadu. Thus, if you are continuously holding on to a hwadu someone else gave you, when will you be able to solve your original hwadu? Trying to solve another person's hwadu is like turning empty millstones or spinning a car's wheels without moving forward. Your body itself is a hwadu. Birth itself is a hwadu. Work itself is a hwadu. The vast universe is a hwadu. If you want to add more hwadus to these, when will you be able to taste this infinitely deep world we live in?\nOther criticism.\nD.T. Suzuki observes that although the koan method represents a convenience for the Zen practitioner, a form of \"grandmotherly kindness,\" it is also liable to tend towards formalization and counterfeit. He writes:\nThe danger lies in the tendency to formalization. It may happen that a petty thief crowing like a cock at dawn will get past the barrier by deceiving the gatekeeper into opening the gates. As a matter of fact, in the koan system such fellows do get past, or we should say rather that they are passed through. The danger that the goods will be sold cheap is something intrinsic to the system. In any construct devised by man a pattern always evolves. When the pattern becomes fixed, the quick of life cannot move within it. When the realm of true reality which is freed of samsaric suffering is treated in such a way that it comes to resemble the fixed gestures and patterned moves learned in a fencing class, Zen ceases to be Zen. At times patterns work well and are useful. And they do have the virtue of universal currency. But by that alone no living thing is produced. I suppose, though, there are some who even find enjoyment in such a counterfeit, lifeless thing, much as they would divert themselves with games of chess or mahjong.\nAccording to Alan Watts, the koan method suffered from two drawbacks. The first is that it can potentially lead to a kind of romanticism for exotic cultural forms. The second was that its method of deliberately rousing great doubt and then breaking through it after an intense period of striving amounted to a kind of psychological trick. Regarding this, Watts says:\nThe second, and more serious, drawback can arise from the opposition of satori to the intense \u201cfeeling of doubt\u201d which some koan exponents so deliberately encourage. For this is to foster a dualistic satori. To say that the depth of the satori is proportional to the intensity of seeking and striving which precede it is to confuse satori with its purely emotional adjuncts. In other words, if one wants to feel exhilaratingly light-footed, it is always possible to go around for some time with lead in one\u2019s shoes\u2013and then take them off. The sense of relief will certainly be proportional to the length of time such shoes have been worn, and to the weight of the lead. This is equivalent to the old trick of religious revivalists who give their followers a tremendous emotional uplift by first implanting an acute sense of sin, and then relieving it through faith in Jesus.\nSee also.\nBuddhism\nOther\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16864", "revid": "38415975", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16864", "title": "Karma", "text": "Concept about individuals' intent and actions influencing those individuals' future\nKarma (, from , ; ) is an ancient Indian concept that refers to an action, work, or deed, and its effect or consequences. In Indian religions, the term more specifically refers to a principle of cause and effect, often descriptively called the principle of karma, wherein individuals' intent and actions (cause) influence their future (effect): Good intent and good deeds contribute to good karma and happier rebirths, while bad intent and bad deeds contribute to bad karma and worse rebirths. In some scriptures, however, there is no link between rebirth and karma. \nIn Hinduism, karma is traditionally classified into four types: Sanchita karma (accumulated karma from past actions across lifetimes), Pr\u0101rabdha karma (a portion of Sanchita karma that is currently bearing fruit and determines the circumstances of the present life), \u0100g\u0101mi karma (future karma generated by present actions), and Kriyam\u0101\u1e47a karma (immediate karma created by current actions, which may yield results in the present or future).\nKarma is often misunderstood as fate, destiny, or predetermination. Fate, destiny or predetermination has specific terminology in Sanskrit and is called Prarabdha.\nThe concept of karma is closely associated with the idea of rebirth in many schools of Indian religions (particularly in Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, and Sikhism), as well as Taoism. In these schools, karma in the present affects one's future in the current life as well as the nature and quality of future lives\u2014one's \"sa\u1e43s\u0101ra\".\nMany New Agers believe in karma, treating it as a law of cause and effect that assures cosmic balance, although in some cases they stress that it is not a system that enforces punishment for past actions.\nDefinition.\nThe term \"karma\" (; ) refers to both the executed 'deed, work, action, act' and the 'object, intent'.\nWilhelm Halbfass (2000) explains karma (\"karman\") by contrasting it with the Sanskrit word \"kriya\": whereas \"kriya\" is the activity along with the steps and effort in action, \"karma\" is (1) the executed action as a consequence of that activity, as well as (2) the intention of the actor behind an executed action or a planned action (described by some scholars as metaphysical residue left in the actor). A good action creates good karma, as does good intent. A bad action creates bad karma, as does bad intent.\nDifficulty in arriving at a definition of karma arises because of the diversity of views among the schools of Hinduism; some, for example, consider karma and rebirth linked and simultaneously essential, some consider karma but not rebirth to be essential, and a few discuss and conclude karma and rebirth to be flawed fiction. Buddhism and Jainism have their own karma precepts. Thus, karma has not one, but multiple definitions and different meanings. It is a concept whose meaning, importance, and scope varies between the various traditions that originated in India, and various schools in each of these traditions. According to Manu Doshi, all Aryan philosophies accept karma but Jainism has gone deeper into this subject. Wendy O'Flaherty claims that, furthermore, there is an ongoing debate regarding whether karma is a theory, a model, a paradigm, a metaphor, or a metaphysical stance.\nPrinciple of karma.\n\"Karma\" also refers to a conceptual principle that originated in India, often descriptively called the \"principle of karma\", and sometimes the \"karma-theory\" or the \"law of karma\".\nIn the context of theory, \"karma\" is complex and difficult to define. Different schools of Indology derive different definitions for the concept from ancient Indian texts; their definition is some combination of (1) causality that may be ethical or non-ethical; (2) ethicization, i.e., good or bad actions have consequences; and (3) rebirth. Other Indologists include in the definition that which explains the present circumstances of an individual with reference to their actions in the past. These actions may be those in a person's current life, or, in some schools of Indian traditions, possibly actions from their past lives; furthermore, the consequences may result in the current life, or a person's future lives. The law of karma operates independent of any deity or any process of divine judgment.\nCausality.\nA common theme to theories of karma is its principle of causality. This relationship between karma and causality is a central motif in all schools of Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain thought. One of the earliest associations of karma to causality occurs in the \"Brihadaranyaka Upanishad\" verses 4.4.5\u20136:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nNow as a man is like this or like that,\naccording as he acts and according as he behaves, so will he be;\na man of good acts will become good, a man of bad acts, bad;\nhe becomes pure by pure deeds, bad by bad deeds;\nAnd here they say that a person consists of desires,\nand as is his desire, so is his will;\nand as is his will, so is his deed;\nand whatever deed he does, that he will reap.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nThe theory of karma as causation holds that: (1) executed actions of an individual affects the individual and the life he or she lives, and (2) the intentions of an individual affects the individual and the life he or she lives. Disinterested actions, or unintentional actions do not have the same positive or negative karmic effect, as interested and intentional actions. In Buddhism, for example, actions that are performed, or arise, or originate without any bad intent, such as covetousness, are considered non-existent in karmic impact or neutral in influence to the individual.\nAnother causality characteristic, shared by karmic theories, is that \"like deeds\" lead to \"like effects\". Thus, good karma produces good effect on the actor, while bad karma produces bad effect. This effect may be material, moral, or emotional \u2013 that is, one's karma affects both one's happiness and unhappiness. The effect of karma need not be immediate; the effect of karma can be later in one's current life, and in some schools it extends to future lives.\nThe consequence or effects of one's karma can be described in two forms: \"phala\" and \"samskara\". A \"phala\" (lit.\u2009'fruit' or 'result') is the visible or invisible effect that is typically immediate or within the current life. In contrast, a \"samskara\" () is an invisible effect, produced inside the actor because of the karma, transforming the agent and affecting their ability to be happy or unhappy in their current and future lives. The theory of karma is often presented in the context of \"samskaras\".\nKarl Potter and Harold Coward suggest that karmic principle can also be understood as a principle of psychology and habit. Karma seeds habits (\"v\u0101san\u0101\"), and habits create the nature of man. Karma also seeds self perception, and perception influences how one experiences life-events. Both habits and self perception affect the course of one's life. Breaking bad habits is not easy: it requires conscious karmic effort. Thus, psyche and habit, according to Potter and Coward, link karma to causality in ancient Indian literature. The idea of karma may be compared to the notion of a person's 'character', as both are an assessment of the person and determined by that person's habitual thinking and acting.\nEthicization.\nThe second theme common to karma theories is ethicization. This begins with the premise that every action has a consequence, which will come to fruition in either this life or a future life; thus, morally good acts will have positive consequences, whereas bad acts will produce negative results. An individual's present situation is thereby explained by reference to actions in his present or in previous lifetimes. Karma is not itself \"reward and punishment\", but the law that produces consequence. Wilhelm Halbfass notes that good karma is considered as \"dharma\" and leads to \"punya\" ('merit'), while bad karma is considered \"adharma\" and leads to \"p\u0101p\" ('demerit, sin').\nReichenbach (1988) suggests that the theories of karma are an ethical theory. This is so because the ancient scholars of India linked intent and actual action to the merit, reward, demerit, and punishment. A theory without ethical premise would be a pure causal relation; the merit or reward or demerit or punishment would be same regardless of the actor's intention. In ethics, one's intentions, attitudes, and desires matter in the evaluation of one's action. Where the outcome is unintended, the moral responsibility for it is less on the actor, even though causal responsibility may be the same regardless. A karma theory considers not only the action, but also the actor's intentions, attitude, and desires before and during the action. The karma concept thus encourages each person to seek and live a moral life, as well as avoid an immoral life. The meaning and significance of karma is thus as a building-block of an ethical theory.\nRebirth.\nThe third common theme of karma theories is the concept of reincarnation or the cycle of rebirths (\"sa\u1e43s\u0101ra\"). Rebirth is a fundamental concept of Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, and Sikhism. Rebirth, or \"sa\u1e43s\u0101ra\", is the concept that all life forms go through a cycle of reincarnation, that is, a series of births and rebirths. The rebirths and consequent life may be in different realm, condition, or form. The karma theories suggest that the realm, condition, and form depends on the quality and quantity of karma. In schools that believe in rebirth, every living being's soul transmigrates (recycles) after death, carrying the seeds of Karmic impulses from life just completed, into another life and lifetime of karmas. This cycle continues indefinitely, except for those who consciously break this cycle by reaching \"moksha\". Those who break the cycle reach the realm of gods, those who do not continue in the cycle.\nThe concept has been intensely debated in ancient literature of India; with different schools of Indian religions considering the relevance of rebirth as either essential, or secondary, or unnecessary fiction. Hiriyanna (1949) suggests rebirth to be a necessary corollary of karma; Yamunacharya (1966) asserts that karma is a fact, while reincarnation is a hypothesis; and Creel (1986) suggests that karma is a basic concept, rebirth is a derivative concept.\nThe theory of \"karma and rebirth\" raises numerous questions \u2013 such as how, when, and why did the cycle start in the first place, what is the relative Karmic merit of one karma versus another and why, and what evidence is there that rebirth actually happens, among others. Various schools of Hinduism realized these difficulties, debated their own formulations \u2013 some reaching what they considered as internally consistent theories \u2013 while other schools modified and de-emphasized it; a few schools in Hinduism such as Charvakas (or Lokayata) abandoned the theory of \"karma and rebirth\" altogether. Schools of Buddhism consider karma-rebirth cycle as integral to their theories of soteriology.\nEarly development.\nThe Vedic Sanskrit word (nominative ) means 'work' or 'deed', often used in the context of Srauta rituals. In the \"Rigveda\", the word occurs some 40 times. In \"Satapatha Brahmana\" 1.7.1.5, \"sacrifice\" is declared as the \"greatest\" of works; \"Satapatha Brahmana\" 10.1.4.1 associates the potential of becoming immortal (\"amara\") with the karma of the \"agnicayana\" sacrifice.\nIn the early Vedic literature, the concept of karma is also present beyond the realm of rituals or sacrifices. The Vedic language includes terms for sins and vices such as \u0101gas, agha, enas, p\u0101pa/p\u0101pman, du\u1e63k\u1e5bta, as well as for virtues and merit like suk\u1e5bta and pu\u1e47ya, along with the neutral term karman.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whatever good deed man does that is inside the Vedi; and whatever evil he does that is outside the Vedi.\u2014\u200a\nThe verse refers to the evaluation of virtuous and sinful actions in the afterlife. Regardless of their application in rituals (whether within or outside the Vedi), the concepts of good and evil here broadly represent merits and sins.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What evil is done here by man, that it (i.e. speech = Brahman) makes manifest. Although he thinks that he does it secretly, as it were, still it makes it manifest. Verily, therefore one should not commit evil.\u2014\u200a&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is the eternal greatness of the Brahmin. He does not increase by k\u00e1rman, nor does he become less. His \u0101tman knows the path. Knowing him (the \u0101tman) one is not polluted by evil karman.\u2014\u200a\nThe Vedic words for \"action\" and \"merit\" in pre-Upani\u1e63adic texts carry moral significance and are not solely linked to ritual practices. The word karman simply means \"action,\" which can be either positive or negative, and is not always associated with religious ceremonies; its predominant association with ritual in the Br\u0101hma\u1e47a texts is likely a reflection of their ritualistic nature. In the same vein, suk\u1e5bta (and subsequently, pu\u1e47ya) denotes any form of \"merit,\" whether it be ethical or ritualistic. In contrast, terms such as p\u0101pa and du\u1e63k\u1e5bta consistently represent morally wrong actions.\nThe earliest clear discussion of the karma doctrine is in the \"Upanishads\". The doctrine occurs here in the context of a discussion of the fate of the individual after death. For example, causality and ethicization is stated in \"B\u1e5bhad\u0101ra\u1e47yaka Upani\u1e63ad\" 3.2.13:Truly, one becomes good through good \"deeds\", and evil through evil \"deeds\". Some authors state that the \"samsara\" (transmigration) and karma doctrine may be non-Vedic, and the ideas may have developed in the \"shramana\" traditions that preceded Buddhism and Jainism. Others state that some of the complex ideas of the ancient emerging theory of karma flowed from Vedic thinkers to Buddhist and Jain thinkers. The mutual influences between the traditions is unclear, and likely co-developed.\nMany philosophical debates surrounding the concept are shared by the Hindu, Jain, and Buddhist traditions, and the early developments in each tradition incorporated different novel ideas. For example, Buddhists allowed karma transfer from one person to another and sraddha rites, but had difficulty defending the rationale. In contrast, Hindu schools and Jainism would not allow the possibility of karma transfer.\nIn Hinduism.\nThe concept of karma in Hinduism developed and evolved over centuries. The earliest \"Upanishads\" began with the questions about how and why man is born, and what happens after death. As answers to the latter, the early theories in these ancient Sanskrit documents include \"pancagni vidya\" (the five fire doctrine), \"pitryana\" (the cyclic path of fathers), and \"devayana\" (the cycle-transcending, path of the gods). Those who perform superficial rituals and seek material gain, claimed these ancient scholars, travel the way of their fathers and recycle back into another life; those who renounce these, go into the forest and pursue spiritual knowledge, were claimed to climb into the higher path of the gods. It is these who break the cycle and are not reborn. With the composition of the Epics \u2013 the common man's introduction to dharma in Hinduism \u2013 the ideas of causality and essential elements of the theory of karma were being recited in folk stories. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As a man himself sows, so he himself reaps; no man inherits the good or evil act of another man. The fruit is of the same quality as the action.\u2014\u200a\nThe 6th chapter of the \"Anushasana Parva\" (the Teaching Book), the 13th book of the \"Mahabharata\", opens with Yudhishthira asking Bhishma: \"Is the course of a person's life already destined, or can human effort shape one's life?\" The future, replies Bhishma, is both a function of current human effort derived from free will and past human actions that set the circumstances. Over and over again, the chapters of Mahabharata recite the key postulates of karma theory. That is: intent and action (karma) has consequences; karma lingers and doesn't disappear; and, all positive or negative experiences in life require effort and intent. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nHappiness comes due to good actions, suffering results from evil actions,\nby actions, all things are obtained, by inaction, nothing whatsoever is enjoyed.\nIf one's action bore no fruit, then everything would be of no avail,\nif the world worked from fate alone, it would be neutralized.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nOver time, various schools of Hinduism developed many different definitions of karma, some making karma appear quite deterministic, while others make room for free will and moral agency. Among the six most studied schools of Hinduism, the theory of karma evolved in different ways, as their respective scholars reasoned and attempted to address the internal inconsistencies, implications and issues of the karma doctrine. According to Professor Wilhelm Halbfass,\nThe above schools illustrate the diversity of views, but are not exhaustive. Each school has sub-schools in Hinduism, such as that of non-dualism and dualism under Vedanta. Furthermore, there are other schools of Indian philosophy, such as Charvaka (or Lokayata; the materialists), that denied the theory of karma-rebirth, as well as the existence of God; to this non-Vedic school, the properties of things come from the nature of things. Causality emerges from the interaction, actions, and nature of things and people, making determinative principles such as karma or God unnecessary.\nIn Buddhism.\nKarma and \"karmaphala\" are fundamental concepts in Buddhism, which explain how our intentional actions keep us tied to rebirth in \"samsara\", whereas the Buddhist path, as exemplified in the Noble Eightfold Path, shows us the way out of \"samsara\".\nThe cycle of rebirth is determined by karma, literally 'action'. \"Karmaphala\" (wherein \"phala\" means 'fruit, result') refers to the 'effect' or 'result' of karma. The similar term \"karmavipaka\" (wherein \"vip\u0101ka\" means 'ripening') refers to the 'maturation, ripening' of karma.\nIn the Buddhist tradition, \"karma\" refers to actions driven by intention (\"cetan\u0101\"), a deed done deliberately through body, speech or mind, which leads to future consequences. The \"Nibbedhika Sutta\", Anguttara Nikaya 6.63:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Intention (\"cetana\") I tell you, is kamma. Intending, one does kamma by way of body, speech, &amp; intellect.\nHow these intentional actions lead to rebirth, and how the idea of rebirth is to be reconciled with the doctrines of impermanence and no-self, is a matter of philosophical inquiry in the Buddhist traditions, for which several solutions have been proposed. In early Buddhism, no explicit theory of rebirth and karma is worked out, and \"the karma doctrine may have been incidental to early Buddhist soteriology.\" In early Buddhism, rebirth is ascribed to craving or ignorance.\nUnlike that of Jains, Buddha's teaching of karma is not strictly deterministic, but incorporated circumstantial factors such as other Niyamas. It is not a rigid and mechanical process, but a flexible, fluid and dynamic process. There is no set linear relationship between a particular action and its results. The karmic effect of a deed is not determined solely by the deed itself, but also by the nature of the person who commits the deed, and by the circumstances in which it is committed. \"Karmaphala\" is not a \"judgement\" enforced by a God, Deity or other supernatural being that controls the affairs of the Cosmos. Rather, \"karmaphala\" is the outcome of a natural process of cause and effect.\nWithin Buddhism, the real importance of the doctrine of karma and its fruits lies in the recognition of the urgency to put a stop to the whole process. The \"Acintita Sutta\" warns that \"the results of karma\" is one of the four incomprehensible subjects (or \"acinteyya\"), subjects that are beyond all conceptualization, and cannot be understood with logical thought or reason.\nNichiren Buddhism teaches that transformation and change through faith and practice changes adverse karma\u2014negative causes made in the past that result in negative results in the present and future\u2014to positive causes for benefits in the future.\nIn Jainism.\nIn Jainism, karma conveys a totally different meaning from that commonly understood in Hindu philosophy and western civilization. Jain philosophy is one of the oldest Indian philosophy that completely separates body (matter) from the soul (pure consciousness). In Jainism, karma is referred to as karmic dirt, as it consists of very subtle particles of matter that pervade the entire universe. Karmas are attracted to the karmic field of a soul due to vibrations created by activities of mind, speech, and body as well as various mental dispositions. Hence the karmas are the subtle matter surrounding the consciousness of a soul. When these two components (consciousness and karma) interact, we experience the life we know at present. Jain texts expound that seven \"tattvas\" (truths or fundamentals) constitute reality. These are:\nAccording to Padmanabh Jaini,\nThis emphasis on reaping the fruits only of one's own karma was not restricted to the Jainas; both Hindus and Buddhist writers have produced doctrinal materials stressing the same point. Each of the latter traditions, however, developed practices in basic contradiction to such belief. In addition to \"shrardha\" (the ritual Hindu offerings by the son of deceased), we find among Hindus widespread adherence to the notion of divine intervention in ones fate, while Buddhists eventually came to propound such theories like boon-granting bodhisattvas, transfer of merit and like. Only the Jainas have been absolutely unwilling to allow such ideas to penetrate their community, despite the fact that there must have been tremendous amount of social pressure on them to do so.\nThe relationship between the soul and karma, states Padmanabh Jaini, can be explained with the analogy of gold. Like gold is always found mixed with impurities in its original state, Jainism holds that the soul is not pure at its origin but is always impure and defiled like natural gold. One can exert effort and purify gold, similarly, Jainism states that the defiled soul can be purified by proper refining methodology. Karma either defiles the soul further, or refines it to a cleaner state, and this affects future rebirths. Karma is thus an efficient cause (\"nimitta\") in Jain philosophy, but not the material cause (\"upadana\"). The soul is believed to be the material cause.\nThe key points where the theory of karma in Jainism can be stated as follows:\nEight Karmas.\nThere are eight types of Karma which attach a soul to Samsara (the cycle of birth and death):\nReception in other traditions.\nSikhism.\nIn Sikhism, all living beings are described as being under the influence of the three qualities of \"maya\". Always present together in varying mix and degrees, these three qualities of \"maya\" bind the soul to the body and to the earth plane. Above these three qualities is the eternal time. Due to the influence of three modes of \"maya's\" nature, \"jivas\" (individual beings) perform activities under the control and purview of the eternal time. These activities are called \"karma\", wherein the underlying principle is that karma is the law that brings back the results of actions to the person performing them.\nThis life is likened to a field in which our karma is the seed. We harvest exactly what we sow; no less, no more. This infallible law of karma holds everyone responsible for what the person is or is going to be. Based on the total sum of past karma, some feel close to the Pure Being in this life and others feel separated. This is the law of karma in Gurbani (Sri Guru Granth Sahib). Like other Indian and oriental schools of thought, the Gurbani also accepts the doctrines of karma and reincarnation as the facts of nature.\nFalun Gong.\nDavid Ownby, a scholar of Chinese history at the University of Montreal, asserts that Falun Gong differs from Buddhism in its definition of the term \"karma\" in that it is taken not as a process of award and punishment, but as an exclusively negative term. The Chinese term \"de\", or 'virtue', is reserved for what might otherwise be termed 'good karma' in Buddhism. Karma is understood as the source of all suffering \u2013 what Buddhism might refer to as 'bad karma'. According to Li Hongzhi, the founder of Falun Gong: \"A person has done bad things over his many lifetimes, and for people this results in misfortune, or for cultivators, its karmic obstacles, so there's birth, aging, sickness, and death. This is ordinary karma.\"\nFalun Gong teaches that the spirit is locked in the cycle of rebirth, also known as \"samsara\", due to the accumulation of karma. This is a negative, black substance that accumulates in other dimensions lifetime after lifetime, by doing bad deeds and thinking bad thoughts. Falun Gong states that karma is the reason for suffering, and what ultimately blocks people from the truth of the universe and attaining enlightenment. At the same time, karma is also the cause of one's continued rebirth and suffering. Li says that due to accumulation of karma, the human spirit upon death will reincarnate over and over again, until the karma is paid off or eliminated through cultivation, or the person is destroyed due to the bad deeds he has done.\nOwnby regards the concept of karma as a cornerstone to individual moral behaviour in Falun Gong, and also readily traceable to the Christian doctrine of \"one reaps what one sows\". Others say means no unbeliever will not fully reap what they sow until they are judged by God after death in Hell. Ownby says Falun Gong is differentiated by a \"system of transmigration\", although, \"in which each organism is the reincarnation of a previous life form, its current form having been determined by karmic calculation of the moral qualities of the previous lives lived.\" Ownby says the seeming unfairness of manifest inequities can then be explained, at the same time allowing a space for moral behaviour in spite of them. In the same vein of Li's \"monism\", matter and spirit are one, karma is identified as a black substance which must be purged in the process of cultivation.\nAccording to Li, Human beings all fell here from the many dimensions of the universe. They no longer met the requirements of the Fa at their given levels in the universe, and thus had to drop down. Just as we have said before, the heavier one's mortal attachments, the further down one drops, with the descent continuing until one arrives at the state of ordinary human beings.He says that, in the eyes of higher beings, the purpose of human life is not merely to be human, but to awaken quickly on Earth, a \"setting of delusion,\" and return. \"That is what they really have in mind; they are opening a door for you. Those who fail to return will have no choice but to reincarnate, with this continuing until they amass a huge amount of karma and are destroyed.\"\nOwnby regards this as the basis for Falun Gong's apparent \"opposition to practitioners' taking medicine when ill; they are missing an opportunity to work off karma by allowing an illness to run its course (suffering depletes karma) or to fight the illness through cultivation.\" Benjamin Penny shares this interpretation. Since Li believes that \"karma is the primary factor that causes sickness in people,\" Penny asks: \"if disease comes from karma and karma can be eradicated through cultivation of \"xinxing\", then what good will medicine do?\" Li himself states that he is not forbidding practitioners from taking medicine, maintaining that \"What I'm doing is telling people the relationship between practicing cultivation and medicine-taking.\" Li also states that \"An everyday person needs to take medicine when he gets sick.\" Danny Schechter (2001) quotes a Falun Gong student who says \"It is always an individual choice whether one should take medicine or not.\"\nTaoism.\nKarma is an important concept in Taoism. Every deed is tracked by deities and spirits. Appropriate rewards or retribution follow karma, just like a shadow follows a person.\nThe karma doctrine of Taoism developed in three stages. In the first stage, causality between actions and consequences was adopted, with supernatural beings keeping track of everyone's karma and assigning fate (\"ming\"). In the second phase, transferability of karma ideas from Chinese Buddhism were expanded, and a transfer or inheritance of Karmic fate from ancestors to one's current life was introduced. In the third stage of karma doctrine development, ideas of rebirth based on karma were added. One could be reborn either as another human being or another animal, according to this belief. In the third stage, additional ideas were introduced; for example, rituals, repentance and offerings at Taoist temples were encouraged as it could alleviate Karmic burden.\nShinto.\nInterpreted as , a view of karma is recognized in Shinto as a means of enriching, empowering, and affirming life. \"Musubi\" has fundamental significance in Shinto, because creative development forms the basis of the Shinto worldview.\nMany deities are connected to musubi and have it in their names.\nDiscussion.\nFree will and destiny.\nOne of the significant controversies with the karma doctrine is whether it always implies destiny, and its implications on free will. This controversy is also referred to as the moral agency problem; the controversy is not unique to karma doctrine, but also found in some form in monotheistic religions.\nThe free will controversy can be outlined in three parts:\nThe explanations and replies to the above free will problem vary by the specific school of Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism. The schools of Hinduism, such as Yoga and Advaita Vedanta, that have emphasized current life over the dynamics of karma residue moving across past lives, allow free will. Their argument, as well of other schools, are threefold:\nOther schools of Hinduism, as well as Buddhism and Jainism that do consider cycle of rebirths central to their beliefs and that karma from past lives affects one's present, believe that both free will (\"cetan\u0101\") and karma can co-exist; however, their answers have not persuaded all scholars.\nPsychological indeterminacy.\nAnother issue with the theory of karma is that it is psychologically indeterminate, suggests Obeyesekere (1968). That is, if no one can know what their karma was in previous lives, and if the karma from past lives can determine one's future, then the individual is psychologically unclear what if anything he or she can do now to shape the future, be more happy, or reduce suffering. If something goes wrong, such as sickness or failure at work, the individual is unclear if karma from past lives was the cause, or the sickness was caused by curable infection and the failure was caused by something correctable.\nThis psychological indeterminacy problem is also not unique to the theory of karma; it is found in every religion adopting the premise that God has a plan, or in some way influences human events. As with the karma-and-free-will problem above, schools that insist on primacy of rebirths face the most controversy. Their answers to the psychological indeterminacy issue are the same as those for addressing the free will problem.\nTransferability.\nSome schools of Indian religions, particularly within Buddhism, allow transfer of karma merit and demerit from one person to another. This transfer is an exchange of non-physical quality just like an exchange of physical goods between two human beings. The practice of karma transfer, or even its possibility, is controversial. Karma transfer raises questions similar to those with substitutionary atonement and vicarious punishment. It undermines the ethical foundations, and dissociates the causality and ethicization in the theory of karma from the moral agent. Proponents of some Buddhist schools suggest that the concept of karma merit transfer encourages religious giving and that such transfers are not a mechanism to transfer bad karma (i.e., demerit) from one person to another.\nIn Hinduism, Sraddha rites during funerals have been labelled as karma merit transfer ceremonies by a few scholars, a claim disputed by others. Other schools in Hinduism, such as the Yoga and Advaita Vedantic philosophies, and Jainism hold that karma can not be transferred.\nThe problem of evil.\nThere has been an ongoing debate about karma theory and how it answers the problem of evil and related problem of theodicy. The problem of evil is a significant question debated in monotheistic religions with two beliefs:\nThe problem of evil is then stated in formulations such as, \"why does the omnibenevolent, omniscient and omnipotent God allow any evil and suffering to exist in the world?\" Sociologist Max Weber extended the problem of evil to Eastern traditions.\nThe problem of evil, in the context of karma, has been long discussed in Eastern traditions, both in theistic and non-theistic schools; for example, in \"Uttara M\u012bm\u0101\u1e43s\u0101\" Sutras Book 2 Chapter 1; the 8th century arguments by Adi Sankara in \"Brahma Sutra\" \"bhasya\" where he posits that God cannot reasonably be the cause of the world because there exists moral evil, inequality, cruelty and suffering in the world; and the 11th century theodicy discussion by Ramanuja in \"Sri Bhasya\". Epics such as the \"Mahabharata\", for example, suggest three prevailing theories in ancient India as to why good and evil exist \u2013 one being that everything is ordained by God, another being karma, and a third citing chance events (\"yadrccha\", \u092f\u0926\u0943\u091a\u094d\u091b\u093e). The \"Mahabharata\", which includes Hindu deity Vishnu in the avatar of Krishna as one of the central characters, debates the nature and existence of suffering from these three perspectives, and includes a theory of suffering as arising from an interplay of chance events (such as floods and other events of nature), circumstances created by past human actions, and the current desires, volitions, dharma, adharma and current actions (\"purusakara\") of people. However, while karma theory in the \"Mahabharata\" presents alternative perspectives on the problem of evil and suffering, it offers no conclusive answer.\nOther scholars suggest that nontheistic Indian religious traditions do not assume an omnibenevolent creator, and some theistic schools do not define or characterize their God(s) as monotheistic Western religions do and the deities have colorful, complex personalities; the Indian deities are personal and cosmic facilitators, and in some schools conceptualized like Plato's Demiurge. Therefore, the problem of theodicy in many schools of major Indian religions is not significant, or at least is of a different nature than in Western religions. Many Indian religions place greater emphasis on developing the karma principle for first cause and innate justice with Man as focus, rather than developing religious principles with the nature and powers of God and divine judgment as focus. Some scholars, particularly of the Nyaya school of Hinduism and Sankara in \"Brahma Sutra bhasya\", have posited that karma doctrine implies existence of god, who administers and affects the person's environment given that person's karma, but then acknowledge that it makes karma as violable, contingent and unable to address the problem of evil. Arthur Herman states that karma-transmigration theory solves all three historical formulations to the problem of evil while acknowledging the theodicy insights of Sankara and Ramanuja.\nSome theistic Indian religions, such as Sikhism, suggest evil and suffering are a human phenomenon and arises from the karma of individuals. In other theistic schools such as those in Hinduism, particularly its Nyaya school, karma is combined with dharma and evil is explained as arising from human actions and intent that is in conflict with dharma. In nontheistic religions such as Buddhism, Jainism and the Mimamsa school of Hinduism, karma theory is used to explain the cause of evil as well as to offer distinct ways to avoid or be unaffected by evil in the world.\nThose schools of Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism that rely on karma-rebirth theory have been critiqued for their theological explanation of suffering in children by birth, as the result of their sins in a past life. Others disagree, and consider the critique as flawed and a misunderstanding of the karma theory.\nComparable concepts.\nWestern culture, influenced by Christianity, holds a notion similar to karma, as demonstrated in the phrase \"what goes around comes around\".\nChristianity.\nMary Jo Meadow suggests karma is akin to \"Christian notions of sin and its effects.\" She states that the Christian teaching on a Last Judgment according to one's charity is a teaching on karma. Christianity also teaches morals such as one reaps what one sows (Galatians 6:7) and live by the sword, die by the sword (Matthew 26:52). Most scholars, however, consider the concept of Last Judgment as different from karma, with karma as an ongoing process that occurs every day in one's life, while Last Judgment, by contrast, is a one-time review at the end of life.\nJudaism.\nThere is a concept in Judaism called in Hebrew \"midah k'neged midah\", which is often translated as \"measure for measure\". The concept is used not so much in matters of law, but rather in matters of divine retribution for a person's actions. David Wolpe compared \"midah k'neged midah\" to karma.\nPsychoanalysis.\nCarl Jung once opined on unresolved emotions and the synchronicity of karma;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When an inner situation is not made conscious, it appears outside as fate.\nPopular methods for negating cognitive dissonance include meditation, metacognition, counselling, psychoanalysis, etc., whose aim is to enhance emotional self-awareness and thus avoid negative karma. This results in better emotional hygiene and reduced karmic impacts. Permanent neuronal changes within the amygdala and left prefrontal cortex of the human brain attributed to long-term meditation and metacognition techniques have been proven scientifically. This process of emotional maturation aspires to a goal of Individuation or self-actualisation. Such peak experiences are hypothetically devoid of any karma (nirvana or moksha).\nTheosophy.\nThe idea of karma was popularized in the Western world through the work of the Theosophical Society. In this conception, karma was a precursor to the Neopagan \"law of return\" or \"Threefold Law,\" the idea that the beneficial or harmful effects one has on the world will return to oneself. Colloquially this may be summed up as 'what goes around comes around.'\nTheosophist I. K. Taimni wrote, \"Karma is nothing but the Law of Cause and Effect operating in the realm of human life and bringing about adjustments between an individual and other individuals whom he has affected by his thoughts, emotions and actions.\" Theosophy also teaches that when humans reincarnate they come back as humans only, not as animals or other organisms.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16869", "revid": "20506903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16869", "title": "Knights Templar", "text": "Catholic military order, 1118 to 1312\nMilitary unit\nThe Poor Fellow-Soldiers of Christ and of the Temple of Solomon, mainly known as the Knights Templar, was a military order of the Catholic faith, and one of the most important military orders in Western Christianity. They were founded in 1118 to defend pilgrims on their way to Jerusalem, with their headquarters located there on the Temple Mount, and existed for nearly two centuries during the Middle Ages.\nOfficially endorsed by the Catholic Church by such decrees as the papal bull \"Omne datum optimum\" of Pope Innocent II, the Templars became a favoured charity throughout Christendom and grew rapidly in membership and power. The Templar knights, in their distinctive white mantles with a red cross, were among the most skilled fighting units of the Crusades. They were prominent in Christian finance; non-combatant members of the order, who made up as much as 90% of their members, managed a large economic infrastructure throughout Christendom. They developed innovative financial techniques that were an early form of banking, building a network of nearly 1,000 commanderies and fortifications across Europe and the Holy Land. \nThe Templars were closely tied to the Crusades. As they became unable to secure their holdings in the Holy Land, support for the order faded. In 1307, King Philip IV of France had many of the order's members in France arrested, tortured into giving false confessions, and then burned at the stake. Under pressure from Philip, Pope Clement V disbanded the order in 1312. In spite of its dissolution, however, between 1317\u20131319, a number of Templar knights, properties and other assets were absorbed within the Portuguese Order of Christ, and the Spanish Order of Montesa; the abrupt disappearance of this major medieval European institution in its original incarnation gave rise to speculation and legends, which have currently kept the \"Templar\" name alive in self-styled orders and popular culture.\nNames.\nThe Poor Fellow-Soldiers of Christ and of the Temple of Solomon ( and ) are also known as the Order of Solomon's Temple, and mainly the Knights Templar (), or simply the Templars (). \nThe Temple Mount where they had their headquarters had a mystique because it was above what was believed to be the ruins of the Temple of Solomon.\nHistory.\nRise.\nAfter the Franks in the First Crusade captured Jerusalem from the Fatimid Caliphate in 1099, many Christians made pilgrimages to various sacred sites in the Holy Land. Although the city of Jerusalem was relatively secure under Christian control, the rest of Outremer was not. Bandits and marauding highwaymen preyed upon these Christian pilgrims, who were routinely slaughtered, sometimes by the hundreds, as they attempted to make the journey from the coastline at Jaffa through to the interior of the Holy Land.\nIn 1119, the French knight Hugues de Payens approached King Baldwin II of Jerusalem and Warmund, Patriarch of Jerusalem, and proposed creating a monastic Catholic religious order for the protection of these pilgrims. King Baldwin and Patriarch Warmund agreed to the request, probably at the Council of Nablus in January 1120, and the king granted the Templars a headquarters in a wing of the royal palace on the Temple Mount in the captured Al-Aqsa Mosque.\nThe order, with about nine knights including Godfrey de Saint-Omer and Andr\u00e9 de Montbard, had few financial resources and relied on donations to survive. Their emblem was of two knights riding on a single horse, emphasizing the order's poverty.\nThe impoverished status of the Templars did not last long. They had a powerful advocate in Saint Bernard of Clairvaux, a leading Church figure, the French abbot primarily responsible for the founding of the Cistercian Order of monks and a nephew of Andr\u00e9 de Montbard, one of the founding knights. Bernard put his weight behind them and wrote persuasively on their behalf in the letter \"In Praise of the New Knighthood\", and in 1129, at the Council of Troyes, he led a group of leading churchmen to officially approve and endorse the order on behalf of the church. With this formal blessing, the Templars became a favoured charity throughout Christendom, receiving money, land, businesses, and noble-born sons from families who were eager to help with the fight in the Holy Land. At the Council of Pisa in 1135, Pope Innocent II initiated the first papal monetary donation to the Order. Another major benefit came in 1139, when Innocent II's papal bull exempted the order from obedience to local laws. This ruling meant that the Templars could pass freely through all borders, were not required to pay any taxes and were exempt from all authority except that of the pope. However, in practice, they often had to respect the wishes of the European rulers in whose kingdoms they resided, especially in their handling of funds for the local noblility in their banks.\nWith its clear mission and ample resources, the order grew rapidly. Templars were often the advance shock troops in key battles of the Crusades, as the heavily armoured knights on their warhorses would charge into the enemy lines ahead of the main army. One of their most famous victories was in 1177 during the Battle of Montgisard, where some 500 Templar knights helped several thousand infantry to defeat Saladin's army of more than 26,000 soldiers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA Templar Knight is truly a fearless knight, and secure on every side, for his soul is protected by the armour of faith, just as his body is protected by the armour of steel. He is thus doubly armed, and need fear neither demons nor men.\n \u2015 Bernard of Clairvaux, c.\u20091135&lt;br&gt;\"De Laude Novae Militae \u2013 In Praise of the New Knighthood\"\nAlthough the primary mission of the order was military, relatively few members were combatants. The majority acted in support positions to assist the knights and manage their financial infrastructure. Although individual members were sworn to poverty, the Templar Order controlled vast wealth even beyond direct donations. A nobleman participating in the Crusades might place all his assets under Templar management during his absence. Accumulating wealth in this manner throughout Christendom and the Outremer, in 1150 the order began to issue letters of credit for pilgrims journeying to the Holy Land: pilgrims deposited their valuables with a local Templar preceptory before embarking, received a document indicating the value of their deposit, then showed that document upon arrival in the Holy Land to claim treasure of equal value to their funds. This innovative arrangement was an early form of banking and may have been the first use of bank cheques; it protected pilgrims from robbery, while augmenting Templar finances.\nBased on this mix of donations and business dealings, the Templars established financial networks across the whole of Christendom. They acquired large tracts of land, both in Europe and the Middle East; they bought and managed farms and vineyards; they built massive stone cathedrals and castles; they were involved in manufacturing, import, and export; they owned fleets of ships; and at one point they even owned the entire island of Cyprus. The order arguably qualifies as the world's first multinational corporation. By the late 12th century the Templars were also politically powerful in the Holy Land. Secular nobles in the Kingdom of Jerusalem began granting them castles and surrounding lands as a defense against the growing threat of the Zengids in Syria. The Templars were even allowed to negotiate with Muslim rulers independently of the feudal lords. The Templar castles became \"de facto\" independent lordships with their own markets, further growing their political authority. During the regency after the death of King Baldwin IV in 1185, the royal castles were placed in the custody of the Templars and Hospitallers: the grand masters of the two orders, along with the patriarch of Jerusalem, each had a key to the crown jewels.\nFrom the mid-12th century, the Templars were recruited (jointly with the Hospitallers) to fight the Muslim kingdoms in the Iberian Peninsula, in addition to their campaigns in the Latin East. In the kingdoms of Castile and Le\u00f3n, they obtained some major strongholds (such as Calatrava la Vieja or Coria), but their vulnerability along the border was exposed during the Almohad offensive. In Aragon, the Templars subsumed the Order of Mountjoy in the late 12th century, becoming an important vanguard force on the border, while in Portugal they commanded some castles along the Tagus line. One of these was Tomar, which was unsuccessfully besieged by the Almohad Caliphate in 1190.\nDue to the expense of sending a third of their revenues to the East, Templar and Hospitaller activities in the Iberian Peninsula were at a disadvantage to the Hispanic military orders which expended all their resources in the region.\nWar.\nAccounts of the Order's early military activities in the Levant are vague, though it appears their first battles were defeats, because the Seljuk Turks and other Muslim powers used different tactics than those in Europe at that time. The Templars later adapted to this and became strategic advisors to the leaders of the Crusader states. The first recorded battle involving the Knights Templar was in the town of Teqoa, south of Jerusalem, in 1138. A force of Templars led by their grand master, Robert de Craon (who succeeded Hugues de Payens about a year earlier), was sent to retake the town after it was captured by Muslims. They were initially successful, but the Muslims regrouped outside the town and were able to take it back from the Templars. \nThe Order's mission developed from protecting pilgrims to taking part in regular military campaigns early on, and this is shown by the fact that the first castle received by the Knights Templar was located four hundred miles north of the pilgrim road from Jaffa to Jerusalem, on the northern frontier of the Principality of Antioch: the castle of Bagras in the Amanus Mountains. It may have been as early as 1131, and by 1137 at the latest, that the Templars were given the mountainous region that formed the border of Antioch and Cilician Armenia, which included the castles of Bagras, Darbsak, and Roche de Roissel. The Templars were there when Byzantine emperor John II Komnenos tried to make the Crusader states of Antioch, Tripoli, and Edessa his vassals between 1137 and 1142. Templar knights accompanied Emperor John II with troops from those states during his campaign against Muslim powers in Syria from 1137 to 1138, including at the sieges of Aleppo and Shaizar. In 1143, the Templars also began taking part in the Reconquista in Iberia at the request of the count of Barcelona. \nIn 1147 a force of French, Spanish, and English Templars left France to join the Second Crusade, led by King Louis VII. At a meeting held in Paris on 27 April 1147 they were given permission by Pope Eugenius III to wear the red cross on their uniforms. They were led by the Templar provincial master in France, Everard des Barres, who was one of the ambassadors King Louis sent to negotiate the passage of the Crusader army through the Byzantine Empire on its way to the Holy Land. During the dangerous journey of the Second Crusade through Anatolia, the Templars provided security to the rest of the army from Turkish raids. After the Crusaders arrived in 1148, the kings Louis VII, Conrad III of Germany, and Baldwin III of Jerusalem made the decision to capture Damascus, but their siege in the summer of that year failed and ended with the defeat of the Christian army. In the fall of 1148 some returning Templars took part in the successful siege of Tortosa in Spain, after which one-fifth of that city was given to the Order.\nRobert de Craon died in January 1149 and was succeeded as grand master by Everard des Barres, one of the few leaders at the siege of Damascus whose reputation was not damaged by the event. After the Second Crusade, Zengid forces under Nur ad-Din Zengi of Aleppo attacked the Principality of Antioch, and in June 1149 his army defeated the Crusaders at the Battle of Inab, where Prince Raymond of Antioch was killed. King Baldwin III led reinforcements to the principality, which led Nur ad-Din to accept a truce with Antioch and not advance any further. The force with King Baldwin included 120 Templar knights and 1,000 sergeants and squires.\nIn the winter of 1149 and 1150, King Baldwin III oversaw the reconstruction of the fortress at Gaza City, which had been left in ruins. It was part of the ring of castles that were built along the southern border of the Kingdom of Jerusalem to protect it from raids by the Egyptian Fatimid Caliphate, and specifically from the Fatimid troops at the fortress of Ascalon, which by then was the last coastal city in the Levant still under Muslim control. Gaza was given to the Knights Templar, becoming the first major Templar castle. In 1152 Everard stepped down as grand master for unknown reasons, and his successor was Bernard de Tremelay. In January of the following year, Bernard led the Templars when King Baldwin III led a Crusader army to besiege Ascalon. Several months of fighting went by until the wall of the city was breached in August 1153, at which point Bernard led forty knights into Ascalon. But the rest of the army did not join them and all of the Templars were killed by the Muslim defenders. Ascalon was captured by the rest of the army several days later, and Bernard was eventually succeeded by Andr\u00e9 de Montbard.\nAfter the fall of Ascalon, the Templars continued operating in that region from their castle at Gaza. In June 1154 they attacked Abbas ibn Abi al-Futuh, the vizier of Egypt, when he tried to flee from Cairo to Damascus after losing a power struggle. Abbas was killed and the Templars captured his son, who they later sent back to the Fatimids. In the late 1150s the Egyptians launched raids against the Crusaders in the areas of Gaza and Ascalon.\nDecline.\nIn the mid-12th century, the tide began to turn in the Crusades. The Islamic world had become more united under effective leaders such as Saladin, and the reborn Sunni regime in Egypt. Dissension arose among Christian factions in and concerning the Holy Land. The Knights Templar were occasionally at odds with the two other Christian military orders, the Knights Hospitaller and the Teutonic Knights, and decades of internecine feuds weakened Christian positions, both politically and militarily. After the Templars were involved in several unsuccessful campaigns, including the pivotal Battle of Hattin, Jerusalem was recaptured by Muslim forces under Saladin in 1187. The Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II reclaimed the city for Christians in the Sixth Crusade of 1229, without Templar aid, but only held it for a little more than a decade. In 1244, the Ayyubid dynasty together with Khwarezmi mercenaries recaptured Jerusalem, and the city did not return to Western control until 1917 when, during World War I, the British captured it from the Ottoman Empire.\nThe Templars were forced to relocate their headquarters to other cities in the north, such as the seaport of Acre, which they held for the next century. It was lost in 1291, followed by their last mainland strongholds, Tortosa (Tartus in present-day Syria) and Atlit (in present-day Israel). Their headquarters then moved to Limassol on the island of Cyprus, and they also attempted to maintain a garrison on tiny Arwad Island, just off the coast from Tortosa. In 1300, there was some attempt to engage in coordinated military efforts with the Mongols via a new invasion force at Arwad. In 1302 or 1303, however, the Templars lost the island to the Egyptian Mamluk Sultanate in the siege of Arwad. With the island gone, the Crusaders lost their last foothold in the Holy Land.\nWith the order's military mission now less important, support for the organization began to dwindle. The situation was complex, however, since during the two hundred years of their existence, the Templars had become a part of daily life throughout Christendom. The organization's Templar Houses, hundreds of which were dotted throughout Europe and the Near East, gave them a widespread presence at the local level. The Templars still managed many businesses, and many Europeans had daily contact with the Templar network, such as by working at a Templar farm or vineyard, or using the order as a bank in which to store personal valuables. The order was still not subject to local government, making it everywhere a \"state within a state\" \u2013 its standing army, although it no longer had a well-defined mission, could pass freely through all borders. This situation heightened tensions with some European nobility, especially as the Templars were indicating an interest in founding their own monastic state, just as the Teutonic Knights had done in Prussia and the Baltic and the Knights Hospitaller were doing in Rhodes.\nThe Templars were accused of enabling corruption in their ranks which often allowed them to influence the legal systems of Europe to act in their favor and gain influence over local rulers' lands at the expense of the rulers.\nArrests, charges and dissolution.\nIn 1305, the new Pope Clement V, based in Avignon, France, sent letters to both the Templar Grand Master Jacques de Molay and the Hospitaller Grand Master Fulk de Villaret to discuss the possibility of merging the two orders. Neither was amenable to the idea, but Pope Clement persisted, and in 1306 he invited both grand masters to France to discuss the matter. De Molay arrived first in early 1307, but de Villaret was delayed for several months. While waiting, de Molay and Clement discussed criminal charges that had been made two years earlier by an ousted Templar and were being discussed by King Philip IV of France and his ministers. It was generally agreed that the charges were false, but Clement sent King Philip a written request for assistance in the investigation. According to some historians, Philip, who was already deeply in debt to the Templars from his war against England, decided to seize upon the rumours for his own purposes. He began pressuring the church to take action against the order, as a way of freeing himself from his debts. \nAt dawn on Friday, 13 October 1307, King Philip IV had de Molay and scores of other French Templars simultaneously arrested. The arrest warrant started with the words: (\"God is not pleased. We have enemies of the faith in the kingdom.\"). \nClaims were made that during Templar admissions ceremonies, recruits were forced to spit on the Cross, deny Christ, and engage in indecent kissing; brethren were also accused of worshipping idols, and the order was said to have encouraged homosexual practices. Many of these allegations contain tropes that bear similarities to accusations made against other persecuted groups such as Jews, heretics, and accused witches. These allegations, though, were highly politicised without any real evidence. Still, the Templars were charged with numerous other offences such as financial corruption, fraud, and secrecy. Many of the accused confessed to these charges under torture, and their confessions, even though obtained under duress, caused a scandal in Paris. The prisoners were coerced to confess that they had spat on the Cross. One said: (\"I, Raymond de La F\u00e8re, 21 years old, admit that I have spat three times on the Cross, but only from my mouth and not from my heart\"). The Templars were accused of idolatry and were charged with worshipping either a figure known as Baphomet or a mummified severed head they recovered, amongst other artefacts, at their original headquarters on the Temple Mount. Some have theorised that this head might have been believed to be that of John the Baptist, among other things.\nRelenting to King Phillip's demands, Pope Clement then issued the papal bull on 22 November 1307, which instructed all Christian monarchs in Europe to arrest all Templars and seize their assets. Clement called for papal hearings to determine the Templars' guilt or innocence, and once freed, many Templars recanted their confessions. \nSeveral Templars are listed as having come from Gisors to defend the Order on 26 February 1310: Henri Zappellans or Chapelain, Anceau de Rocheria, Enard de Valdencia, Guillaume de Roy, Geoffroy de Cera or de La Fere-en-Champagne, Robert Harle or de Hermenonville, and Dreux de Chevru. Some had sufficient legal experience to defend themselves in the trials, but in 1310, having appointed the archbishop of Sens, Philippe de Marigny, to lead the investigation, Philip blocked this attempt, using the previously forced confessions to have dozens of Templars burned at the stake in Paris.\nWith Philip threatening military action unless the pope complied with his wishes, Clement finally agreed to disband the order, citing the public scandal that had been generated by the confessions. At the Council of Vienne in 1312, he issued a series of papal bulls, including , which officially dissolved the order, and , which turned over most Templar assets to the Hospitallers.\nAs for the leaders of the order, the elderly Grand Master Jacques de Molay, who had confessed under torture, retracted his confession. Geoffroi de Charney, Preceptor of Normandy, also retracted his confession and insisted on his innocence. Both men, under pressure from the king, were declared guilty of being relapsed heretics and sentenced to burn alive at the stake in Paris on 18 March 1314. De Molay reportedly remained defiant to the end, asking to be tied in such a way that he could face the Notre Dame Cathedral and hold his hands together in prayer. According to legend, he called out from the flames that both Pope Clement and King Philip would soon meet him before God. His actual words were recorded on the parchment as follows: (\"God knows who is wrong and has sinned. Soon a calamity will occur to those who have condemned us to death\"). Clement died only a month later, and Philip died while hunting within the same year.\nThe remaining Templars around Europe were either arrested and tried under the Papal investigation (with virtually none convicted), absorbed into other Catholic military orders, or pensioned off and allowed to live out their days peacefully. By papal decree, the property of the Templars was transferred to the Knights Hospitaller except in the Kingdoms of Castile, Aragon, and Portugal. Portugal was the first country in Europe where they had settled, occurring only two or three years after the order's foundation in Jerusalem and even having a presence during Portugal's conception.\nThe Portuguese king, Denis I, refused to pursue and persecute the former knights, as had occurred in some other states under the influence of Philip &amp; the crown. Under his protection, Templar organizations simply changed their name, from \"Knights Templar\" to the reconstituted Order of Christ and also a parallel Supreme Order of Christ of the Holy See; both are considered successors to the Knights Templar.\nChinon Parchment.\nIn September 2001, a document known as the Chinon Parchment dated 17\u201320 August 1308 was discovered in the Vatican Archives by Barbara Frale, apparently after having been filed in the wrong place in 1628. It is a record of the trial of the Templars and shows that Clement absolved the Templars of all heresies in 1308 before formally disbanding the order in 1312, as did another Chinon Parchment dated 20 August 1308 addressed to Philip IV of France, also mentioning that all Templars that had confessed to heresy were \"restored to the Sacraments and to the unity of the Church\". This other Chinon Parchment has been well known to historians, having been published by \u00c9tienne Baluze in 1693 and by Pierre Dupuy in 1751.\nThe current position of the Catholic Church is that the persecution of the Knights Templar was unjust, that nothing was inherently wrong with the order or its rule, and that Pope Clement V was pressed into his actions by the magnitude of the public scandal and by the dominating influence of King Philip IV.\nOrganization.\nThe Templars were organised as a monastic order similar to Bernard's Cistercian Order, which was considered the first effective international organization in Europe. The organizational structure had a strong chain of authority. Each country with a major Templar presence (France, Poitou, Anjou, Jerusalem, England, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Tripoli, Antioch, Hungary, and Croatia) had a master of the Order for the Templars in that region.\nAll of them were subject to the grand master, appointed for life, who oversaw both the order's military efforts in the East and their financial holdings in the West. The grand master exercised his authority via the visitors-general of the order, who were knights specially appointed by the grand master and convent of Jerusalem to visit the different provinces, correct malpractices, introduce new regulations, and resolve important disputes. The visitors-general had the power to remove knights from office and to suspend the master of the province concerned.\nThe central headquarters of the Templars had several offices that answered to the grand master. These were held as temporary appointments rather than for life. The second-in-command of the Order was the seneschal. The highest ranking military official was the marshal, while the preceptor (who was also sometimes called the commander) was responsible for the administration and provisions. The draper was responsible for their uniforms, the treasurer was in charge of finance, the turcopolier commanded auxiliary forces, and the prior was the head of the church at the headquarters. The headquarters and its most senior officials were known as the convent and its role was to assist and advise the grand master with running the administration of the Order.\nNo precise numbers exist, but it is estimated that at the order's peak, there were between 15,000 and 20,000 Templars, of whom about a tenth were actual knights.\nRanks within the order.\nThree main ranks.\nThere was a threefold division of the ranks of the Templars: the noble knights, the non-noble sergeants, and the chaplains. The knights wore white mantles to symbolise their purity and chastity. The sergeants wore black or brown. All three classes of brothers wore the order's red cross. Before they received their monastic rule in 1129 at the Council of Troyes, the Templars were referred to only as knights (\"milites\" in Latin), and after 1129 they were also called brothers of their monastic order. Therefore the three main ranks were eventually known as knight brothers, sergeant brothers, and chaplain brothers. Knights and chaplains were referred to as brothers by 1140, but sergeants were not full members of the Order until the 1160s.\nThe knights were the most visible division of the order. They were equipped as heavy cavalry, with three or four horses and one or two squires. Squires were generally not members of the order but were instead outsiders who were hired for a set period of time. The Templars did not perform knighting ceremonies, so anyone wishing to become a knight in the Templar order had to be a knight already.\nBeneath the knights in the order and drawn from non-noble families were the sergeants. They brought vital skills and trades from blacksmiths and builders, including administration of many of the order's European properties. In the Crusader states, they fought alongside the knights as light cavalry with a single horse. Several of the order's most senior positions were reserved for sergeants, including the post of Commander of the Vault of Acre, who also served as the Templar fleet's admiral. But he was subordinated to the Order's preceptor instead of the marshal, indicating that the Templars considered their ships to be mainly for commerce rather than military purposes.\nFrom 1139, chaplains constituted a third Templar rank. They were ordained priests who cared for the Templars' spiritual needs. These Templar clerics were also referred to as priest brothers or chaplain brothers.\nThe Templars also employed lightly armed mercenaries as cavalry in the 12th century that were known as turcopoles (a Greek term for descendants of Turks). Its meaning has been interpreted as either referring to people of a mixed Muslim-Christian heritage who became Christians, or members of the local population in Syria. Sometime in the 13th century, turcopole became a formal rank held by Templar brothers, including Latin Christians.\nGrand masters.\nStarting with founder Hugues de Payens, the order's highest office was that of grand master, a position which was held for life, though considering the martial nature of the order, this could mean a very short tenure. All but two of the grand masters died in office, and several died during military campaigns. For example, during the Siege of Ascalon in 1153, Grand Master Bernard de Tremelay led a group of 40 Templars through a breach in the city walls. When the rest of the Crusader army did not follow, the Templars, including their grand master, were surrounded and beheaded. Grand master G\u00e9rard de Ridefort was beheaded by Saladin in 1189 at the Siege of Acre.\nThe grand master oversaw all of the operations of the order, including both the military operations in the Holy Land and Eastern Europe and the Templars' financial and business dealings in Western Europe. Some grand masters also served as battlefield commanders, though this was not always wise: several blunders in de Ridefort's combat leadership contributed to the devastating defeat at the Battle of Hattin. The last grand master was Jacques de Molay, burned at the stake in Paris in 1314 by order of King Philip IV.\nConduct, uniform and beards.\nBernard de Clairvaux and founder Hugues de Payens devised a specific code of conduct for the Templar Order, known to modern historians as the Latin Rule. Its 72 clauses laid down the details of the knights' way of life, including the types of garments they were to wear and how many horses they could have. Knights were to take their meals in silence, eat meat no more than three times per week, and not have physical contact of any kind with women, even members of their own family. A master of the Order was assigned \"four horses, and one chaplain-brother, and one clerk with three horses, and one sergeant brother with two horses, and one gentleman valet to carry his shield and lance, with one horse\". As the order grew, more guidelines were added, and the original list of 72 clauses was expanded to several hundred in its final form.\nThe daily schedule of the order adhered to the canonical hours in the \"Rule of Saint Benedict\", with communal prayers designated at specific hours throughout the day. Members unable to participate must recite the \"Lord's Prayer\" at the same hours.\nThe knights wore a white surcoat with a red cross, and a white mantle also with a red cross; the sergeants wore a black tunic with a red cross on the front and a black or brown mantle. The white mantle was assigned to the Templars at the Council of Troyes in 1129, and the cross was most probably added to their robes at the launch of the Second Crusade in 1147, when Pope Eugenius\u00a0III, King Louis VII of France, and many other notables attended a meeting of the French Templars at their headquarters near Paris. Under the Rule, the knights were to wear the white mantle at all times: They were even forbidden to eat or drink unless wearing it.\nThe red cross that the Templars wore on their robes was a symbol of martyrdom, and to die in combat was considered a great honour that assured a place in heaven. There was a cardinal rule that the warriors of the order should never surrender unless the Templar flag had fallen, and even then they were first to try to regroup with another of the Christian orders, such as that of the Hospitallers. Only after all flags had fallen were they allowed to leave the battlefield. This uncompromising principle, along with their reputation for courage, excellent training, and heavy armament, made the Templars one of the most feared combat forces in medieval times.\nAlthough not prescribed by the Templar Rule, it later became customary for members of the order to wear long and prominent beards. In about 1240, Alberic of Trois-Fontaines described the Templars as an \"order of bearded brethren\"; while during the interrogations by the papal commissioners in Paris in 1310\u20131311, out of nearly 230 knights and brothers questioned, 76 are described as wearing a beard, in some cases specified as being \"in the style of the Templars\", and 133 are said to have shaved off their beards, either in renunciation of the order or because they had hoped to escape detection.\nInitiation, known as \"reception\" (\"receptio\") into the order, was a profound commitment and involved a solemn ceremony. Outsiders were discouraged from attending the ceremony, which aroused the suspicions of medieval inquisitors during the later trials. New members had to willingly sign over all of their wealth and goods to the order and vow to \"God and Our Lady\" (mother of Jesus) poverty, chastity, piety, obedience to the master of the order, and to conquer the Holy Land of Jerusalem. They were then promised \"the bread and water and poor clothing of the house and much pain and suffering\".\nMost brothers joined for life, although some were allowed to join for a set period. Sometimes a married man was allowed to join if he had his wife's permission, but a married brother was not allowed to wear the white mantle.\nLegacy.\nWith their military mission and extensive financial resources, the Knights Templar funded a large number of building projects around Europe and the Holy Land. Many of these structures are still standing. Many sites also maintain the name \"Temple\" because of centuries-old association with the Templars. For example, some of the Templars' lands in London were later rented to lawyers, which led to the names of the Temple Bar gateway and the Temple Underground station. Two of the four Inns of Court which may call members to act as barristers are the Inner Temple and Middle Temple \u2013 the entire area known as Temple, London.\nDistinctive architectural elements of Templar buildings include the use of the image of \"two knights on a single horse\", representing the Knights' poverty, and round buildings designed to resemble the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem.\nModern organizations.\nThe Knights Templar were disbanded in 1309. Following the suppression of the Order, a number of Knights Templar joined the newly established Order of Christ, which effectively reabsorbed the Knights Templar and its properties in AD 1319, especially in Portugal. \nThe story of the persecution and sudden dissolution of the Templars has drawn many other groups to use alleged connections with them as a way of enhancing their own image and mystery. Apart from the Order of Christ and Order of Montesa in Spain, there are no historical connections between the Knights Templar and any other modern organization, the earliest of which emerged publicly in the 18th century. \nOrder of Christ.\nFollowing the dissolution of the Knights Templar, the Order of Christ was erected in 1319 and absorbed many of the Knights Templar into its ranks, along with Knights Templar properties in Portugal. Its headquarters became a castle in Tomar, a former Knights Templar castle. \nThe Military Order of Christ consider themselves the successors of the former Knights Templar. After the Templars were abolished on 22 March 1312, the Order of Christ was founded in 1319 under the protection of the Portuguese king Denis, who refused to persecute the former knights. Denis revived the Templars of Tomar as the Order of Christ, grateful for their aid during the \"Reconquista\" and in the reconstruction of Portugal after the wars. Denis negotiated with Clement's successor John XXII for recognition of the new order and its right to inherit Templar assets and property. This was granted in the papal bull \"Ad ea ex quibus\" of 14 March 1319. The Portuguese brought the Order of Christ with them to Kongo and Brazil, where the Order of Christ continues to be awarded; the Vatican additionally has awarded the Supreme Order of Christ.\nAssociations of the faithful.\nIn the Catholic Church, there are certain associations of the Christian faithful that have modeled themselves after the Knights Templar, such as the Militia Templi. Founded by Count Marcello Alberto Cristofani della Magione in 1979, the headquarters of the Militia Templi is located in the Castello della Magione, which originally belonged to the Knights Templar. Those belonging to the Militia Templi include professed religious knights and dames, as well as married couples, all of whom recite the Divine Office daily. \nTemperance movement.\nMany temperance organizations named themselves after the Poor Fellow-Soldiers of Christ and of the Temple of Solomon, citing the belief that the original Knights Templar \"drank sour milk, and also because they were fighting 'a great crusade' against 'this terrible vice' of alcohol\". The largest of these, the International Order of Good Templars (IOGT), grew throughout the world after being started in the 19th century and continues to advocate for the abstinence from alcohol and other drugs; other Orders in this tradition include those of the Templars of Honor and Temperance (Tempel Riddare Orden), which has a large presence in Scandinavia.\nFreemasonry.\nFreemasonry has incorporated the symbols and rituals of several medieval military orders in a number of Masonic bodies since at least the 18th century. This can be seen in the \"Red Cross of Constantine,\" inspired by the Military Constantinian Order; the \"Order of Malta,\" inspired by the Knights Hospitaller; and the \"Order of the Temple\", inspired by the Knights Templar. The Orders of Malta and the Temple feature prominently in the York Rite. Though some have claimed a link between the historical Knights Templar of the 14th century through members who allegedly took refuge in Scotland and aided Robert the Bruce, this theory has been rejected by both Freemasons and historians.\nNeo-Templarism.\nNeo-Templarism is a term used to describe movements that claim to be direct continuations of the original Templars. The Templar degree system in Freemasonry built off an idea that Templars had embedded themselves within Freemasonry; however, some Freemasons believed the Templar degrees were not subordinate to masonry and were their own system. This culminated in 1805, when Bernard-Raymond Fabr\u00e9-Palaprat, a physician who refused to acknowledge the authority of the Catholic Church, created a revivalist Templar movement, claiming he had discovered a document that revealed an unbroken history of Templar grand masters to the present day. Fabr\u00e9-Palaprat declared himself the grand master of his revivalist order. This began a long series of revival orders involving various schisms, which Fabr\u00e9-Palaprat is usually regarded as the originator of; Fabr\u00e9-Palaprat's organization eventually evolved into the Sovereign Military Order of the Temple of Jerusalem. The idea that these orders have legitimate descent from the Templars has been criticized by scholars of Templar history as dubious and tied to false claims.\nModern popular culture.\nThe Knights Templar have been associated with legends circulated even during their time. Many orders, such as the freemasons, claimed to have received esoteric wisdom from the Templars, or were direct descendants of the order. Masonic writers added their own speculations in the 18th century, and further fictional embellishments have been added in popular novels such as \"Ivanhoe\", \"Foucault's Pendulum\", and \"The Da Vinci Code\"; modern movies such as \"National Treasure\", \"The Last Templar\", \"Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade\"; the television series \"Knightfall\"; as well as video games such as \"Broken Sword\", \"Deus Ex\", \"Assassin's Creed\" and \"Dante's Inferno\".\nThe Templars were the subject of many conspiracy theories and legends. A legend is that when Louis XVI was executed, a freemason dipped a cloth in the king's blood and said, \"Jacques de Molay, you are avenged.\", the idea being that the king of France was responsible for destroying the Knights Templar back then. A theory states that they are still existent and running a secret conspiracy to preserve the bloodline of Jesus.\nThere have been speculative popular publications surrounding the order's early occupation of the Temple Mount in Jerusalem as well as speculation about what relics the Templars may have found there. The association of the Holy Grail with the Templars has precedents even in 12th-century fiction; Wolfram von Eschenbach's \"Parzival\" calls the knights guarding the Grail Kingdom \"templeisen\", apparently a conscious fictionalization of the \"templarii\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16870", "revid": "9612106", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16870", "title": "KKK", "text": ""}
{"id": "16871", "revid": "8262820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16871", "title": "Kazaa", "text": "Peer-to-peer file sharing application\n \nKazaa Media Desktop ( ; (once stylized as \"KaZaA\", but later usually written \"Kazaa\") was a peer-to-peer file sharing application using the FastTrack protocol licensed by Joltid Ltd. and operated as Kazaa by Sharman Networks. Kazaa was subsequently under license as a legal music subscription service by Atrinsic, Inc., which lasted until August 2012.\nKazaa Media Desktop was commonly used to exchange MP3 music files and other file types, such as videos, applications, and documents over the Internet. The Kazaa Media Desktop client could be downloaded free of charge; however, it was bundled with adware and for a period there were \"No spyware\" warnings found on Kazaa's website. During the years of Kazaa's operation, Sharman Networks and its business partners and associates were the target of copyright-related lawsuits, related to the content distributed via Kazaa Media Desktop on the FastTrack protocol.\nBy August 2012, the Kazaa website was no longer active.\nHistory.\nKazaa and FastTrack were originally created and developed by Estonian programmers from BlueMoon Interactive including Jaan Tallinn and sold to Swedish entrepreneur Niklas Zennstr\u00f6m and Danish programmer Janus Friis (who were later to create Skype and later still Joost and Rdio). Kazaa was introduced by the Dutch company Consumer Empowerment in March 2001, near the end of the first generation of P2P networks typified by the shutdown of Napster in July 2001. Skype itself was based on Kazaa's P2P backend, which allowed users to make a call by directly connecting them with each other.\nInitially, some users of the Kazaa network were users of the Morpheus client program, formerly made available by MusicCity. Eventually, the official Kazaa client became more widespread. In February 2002, when Morpheus developers failed to pay license fees, Kazaa developers used an automatic update ability to shut out Morpheus clients by changing the protocol. Morpheus later became a client of the gnutella network.\nLawsuits.\nConsumer Empowerment was sued in the Netherlands in 2001 by the Dutch music publishing body, Buma/Stemra. The court ordered Kazaa's owners to take steps to prevent its users from violating copyrights or else pay a heavy fine. In October 2001 a lawsuit was filed against Consumer Empowerment by members of the music and motion picture industry in the US. In response Consumer Empowerment sold the Kazaa application to Sharman Networks, headquartered in Australia and incorporated in Vanuatu. In late March 2002, a Dutch court of appeal reversed an earlier judgment and stated that Kazaa was not responsible for the actions of its users. Buma/Stemra lost its appeal before the Dutch Supreme Court in December 2003.\nIn 2003, Kazaa signed a deal with Altnet and Streamwaves to try to convert users to paying, legal customers. Searchers on Kazaa were offered a free 30-second sample of songs for which they were searching and directed to sign up for the full-featured Streamwaves service.\nHowever, Kazaa's new owner, Sharman, was sued in Los Angeles by the major record labels and motion pictures studios and a class of music publishers. The other defendants in that case (Grokster and MusicCity, makers of the Morpheus file-sharing software) initially prevailed against the plaintiffs on summary judgment (Sharman joined the case too late to take advantage of that ruling). The summary judgment ruling was upheld by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, but was unanimously reversed by the US Supreme Court in a decision titled \"MGM Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd.\"\nFollowing that ruling in favor of the plaintiff labels and studios, Grokster almost immediately settled the case. Shortly thereafter, on 27 July 2006, it was announced that Sharman had also settled with the record industry and motion picture studios. As part of that settlement, the company agreed to pay $100 million in damages to the four major music companies\u2014Universal Music, Sony BMG, EMI and Warner Music\u2014and an undisclosed amount to the studios. Sharman also agreed to convert Kazaa into a legal music download service. Like the creators of similar products, Kazaa's owners have been taken to court by music publishing bodies to restrict its use in the sharing of copyrighted material.\nWhile the US action was still pending, the record industry commenced proceedings against Sharman on its home turf. In February 2004, the Australian Record Industry Association (ARIA) announced its own legal action against Kazaa, alleging massive copyright breaches. The trial began on 29 November 2004. On 6 February 2005, the homes of two Sharman Networks executives and the offices of Sharman Networks in Australia were raided under a court order by ARIA to gather evidence for the trial.\nOn 5 September 2005, the Federal Court of Australia issued a landmark ruling that Sharman, though not itself guilty of copyright infringement, had \"authorized\" Kazaa users illegally to swap copyrighted songs. The court ruled six defendants\u2014including Kazaa's owners Sharman Networks, Sharman's Sydney-based boss Nikki Hemming and associate Kevin Bermeister\u2014had knowingly allowed Kazaa users illegally to swap copyrighted songs. The company was ordered to modify the software within two months (a ruling enforceable only in Australia). Sharman and the other five parties faced paying millions of dollars in damages to the record labels that instigated the legal action.\nOn 5 December 2005, the Federal Court of Australia ceased downloads of Kazaa in Australia after Sharman Networks failed to modify their software by the 5 December deadline. Users with an Australian IP address were greeted with the message \"Important Notice: The download of the Kazaa Media Desktop by users in Australia is not permitted\" when visiting the Kazaa website. Sharman planned to appeal against the Australian decision, but ultimately settled the case as part of its global settlement with the record labels and studios in the United States.\nIn yet another set of related cases, in September 2003, the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) filed suit in civil court against several private individuals who had shared large numbers of files with Kazaa; most of these suits were settled with monetary payments averaging $3,000. Sharman Networks responded with a lawsuit against the RIAA, alleging that the terms of use of the network were violated and that unauthorized client software (such as Kazaa Lite) was used in the investigation to track down the individual file sharers. An effort to throw out this suit was denied in January 2004. However, that suit was also settled in 2006 (see above).\nSeparately, in Duluth, Minnesota, the recording industry sued Jammie Thomas-Rasset, a 30-year-old single mother. On 5 October 2007, Thomas was ordered to pay the six record companies (Sony BMG, Arista Records LLC, Interscope Records, UMG Recordings Inc., Capitol Records Inc. and Warner Bros. Records Inc.) $9,250 for each of the 24 songs they had focused on in this case. She was accused of sharing a total of 1,702 songs through her Kazaa account. Along with attorney fees, this would have cost Thomas half a million dollars. Thomas testified that she does not have a Kazaa account, but her testimony was complicated by the fact that she had replaced her computer's hard drive after the alleged downloading took place, and later than she originally said in a pre-trial deposition. Thomas-Rasset appealed the verdict and was given a new trial. In June 2009 that jury awarded the recording industry plaintiffs a judgment of $80,000 per song, or $1.92 million. This is less than half of the $150,000 amount authorized by statute. The federal court found the award \"monstrous and shocking\" and reduced it to $54,000. The recording industry offered to accept a settlement of $25,000, with the money going to charities that support musicians. Apparently undaunted, Thomas-Rasset was able to obtain a third trial on the issue of damages. In November 2010 she was again ordered to pay for her violation, this time $62,500 per song, for a total of $1.5 million. Her attorneys raised a challenge to the constitutional validity of massive statutory damages, where actual damages would have been $24. But this challenge was rejected by the supreme court in 2013. The final judgement against Thomas-Rasset was $222,000.\nBundled malware.\nIn 2006 StopBadware.org identified Kazaa as a spyware application. They identified the following components:\nIn response, \"clean\" third-party clients such as Kazaa Lite (which also provided slightly extended functionality) gained popularity with Kazaa users. First released in April 2002, by mid-2005 Kazaa Lite was almost as widely used as the official Kazaa client itself. As it connected to the same FastTrack network, it could exchange files with all Kazaa users.\nTransitional period.\nKazaa's legal issues ended after a settlement of $100 million in reparations to the recording industry. Without further recourse, and until the lawsuit was settled, the RIAA actively sued thousands of people across the US for sharing copyrighted music over the network. Particularly, students were targeted and most were threatened with a penalty of $750 per song. Although the lawsuits were mainly in the US, other countries also began to follow suit. Beginning in 2008, however, RIAA announced an end to individual lawsuits.\nWhile Napster lasted just three years, Kazaa survived much longer. However, the lawsuits (and a failed venture into a legal, monthly music subscription service similar to Napster) eventually ended the company.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
