{"id": "18391", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18391", "title": "Lyonel Feininger", "text": "German-American painter\nLyonel Charles Adrian Feininger (; July 17, 1871\u00a0\u2013 January 13, 1956) was a German-American painter, and a leading exponent of Expressionism. He also worked as a caricaturist and comic strip artist. He was born and grew up in New York City. In 1887 he traveled to Europe and studied art in Hamburg, Berlin and Paris. He started his career as a cartoonist in 1894 and met with much success in this area. He also worked as a commercial caricaturist for 20 years. At the age of 36, he began to work as a fine artist. His work, characterized above all by prismatically broken, overlapping forms in translucent colors, with many references to architecture and the sea, made him one of the most important artists of classical modernism. Furthermore he produced a large body of photographic works and created several piano compositions and fugues for organ.\nLife and work.\nLyonel Feininger was born to German-American violinist and composer Karl Feininger and American singer Elizabeth Feininger. He was born and grew up in New York City. In 1887 he traveled to Germany at the age of 16 to study music, but switched to study drawing at the Hamburger Gewerbeschule. In 1888, he moved to Berlin and studied at the K\u00f6nigliche Akademie der K\u00fcnste, Berlin under Ernst Hancke. He continued his studies at art schools in Berlin with Adolf Schlabitz, and in Paris with sculptor Filippo Colarossi. He began working as a caricaturist. He worked for several magazines, including \"Harper's Round Table\", \"Harper's Young People\", \"Humoristische Bl\u00e4tter\", \"Lustige Bl\u00e4tter\", \"Das Narrenschiff\", \"Berliner Tageblatt\" and \"Ulk\".\nIn 1900, he met Clara F\u00fcrst, daughter of the painter Gustav F\u00fcrst. He married her in 1901, and they had two daughters. In 1905, he separated from his wife after meeting Julia Berg. He married Berg in 1908 and the couple had three sons.\nThe artist was represented with drawings at the exhibitions of the annual Berlin Secession in the years 1901 through 1903.\nFeininger's career as cartoonist began in 1894. He was working for several German, French and American magazines. In February 1906, when a quarter of Chicago's population was of German descent, James Keeley, editor of The \"Chicago Tribune\" traveled to Germany to procure the services of the most popular humor artists. He recruited Feininger to illustrate two comic strips \"The Kin-der-Kids\" and \"Wee Willie Winkie's World\" for the \"Chicago Tribune\". The strips were noted for their fey humor and graphic experimentation. He also worked as a commercial caricaturist for 20 years for various newspapers and magazines in the United States, Germany, and France. Later, Art Spiegelman wrote in \"The New York Times Book Review,\" that Feininger's comics have \"achieved a breathtaking formal grace unsurpassed in the history of the medium.\"\nFeininger started working as a fine artist at the age of 36. He was a member of the \"Berliner Sezession\" in 1909, and he was associated with German expressionist groups: Die Br\u00fccke, the Novembergruppe, Gruppe 1919, the Blaue Reiter circle and Die Blaue Vier (The Blue Four). His first solo exhibit was at Sturm Gallery in Berlin, 1917. When Walter Gropius founded the Bauhaus in Germany in 1919, Feininger was his first faculty appointment, and became the master artist in charge of the printmaking workshop.\nFrom 1909 until 1918, Feininger spent summer vacations on the island of Usedom to recover and to get new inspiration. Typical of works from this period were marine settings from the shores of the Baltic See (Ostsee). He continued to create paintings and drawings of Benz for the rest of his life, even after returning to live in the United States. A tour of the sites appearing in the works of Feininger follows a path with markers in the ground to guide visitors.\nHe designed the cover for the Bauhaus 1919 manifesto: an expressionist woodcut 'cathedral'. He taught at the Bauhaus for several years. Among the students who attended his workshops were Ludwig Hirschfeld Mack (German/Australian (1893\u20131965), Hans Friedrich Grohs (German 1892 \u2013 1981), and Margarete Koehler-Bittkow (German/American, 1898\u20131964).\nWhen the Nazi Party came to power in 1933, the situation became unbearable for Feininger and his wife. The Nazi Party declared his work to be \"degenerate\". They moved to America after his work was exhibited in the 'degenerate art' (\"Entartete Kunst\") in 1936, but before the 1937 exhibition in Munich. He taught at Mills College before returning to New York. He was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Letters in 1955.\nIn addition to drawing, painting, woodcutting, and printmaking, Feininger created art with painted toy figures being photographed in front of drawn backgrounds.\nFeininger produced a large body of photographic works between 1928 \u2013 he was then already 58 years old \u2013 and the mid-1950s. He then lived and taught in Dessau, where his neighbor was the famous experimental photographer L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Moholy-Nagy, who encouraged him. He kept his photographic work within his circle of friends, and it was not shared with the public in his lifetime. He gave some prints away to his colleagues Walter Gropius and Alfred H. Barr Jr.\nFeininger also had intermittent activity as a pianist and composer, with several piano compositions and fugues for organ extant. In tandem with the Whitney retrospective, the American Symphony Orchestra under Leon Botstein, at Carnegie Hall on 21 October 2011, performed three orchestral fugues written by Feininger. Barbara Haskell, curator of the Whitney exhibit, wrote that for his entire life, Feininger credited Bach with having been his \"master in painting.\"\nHis sons, Andreas Feininger and T. Lux Feininger, both became noted artists, the former as a photographer and the latter as a photographer and painter. T. Lux Feininger died July 7, 2011, at the age of 101.\nMajor retrospectives.\nA major retrospective exhibition of Lyonel Feininger's work was put on in 2011\u20132012: \"Lyonel Feininger: At the Edge of the World\" opened initially at the Whitney Museum of American Art, June 30 through October 16, 2011, subsequently at the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts, January 1 through May 13, 2012. The exhibition is described as \"the first in Feininger's native country in more than forty-five years, and the first ever to include the full breadth of his art\" and as \"accompanied by a richly illustrated monograph with a feature essay that provides a broad overview of Feininger's career...\" Many critics have argued that the artist's work was at its most mature around 1910 in works in which the power of Feininger as illustrator balance his abstract side; however, we have to consider the possibility that Feininger used Cubism as a more artistically succinct tool to establish his version of the concept known as the objective correlative.\nAn important retrospective exhibition of Lyonel Feininger's photographic work took place Germany and the USA in 2011\u20132012, from Berlin (Kupferstichkabinett, Staatliche Museen) to Cambridge, Massachusetts (Busch-Reisinger Museum), through Munich (Pinakothek der Moderne) and Los Angeles (J. Paul Getty Museum).\nFrom October 27, 2023 \u2013 February 18, 2024, the Schirn Kunsthalle Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, displayed \"Lyonel Feininger. Retrospective\"; in addition to paintings and watercolors, the exhibit included Feininger\u2019s photographs, graphic works and caricatures.\nIn popular culture.\nIn Robert M. Pirsig's \"Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance\" (1974) the narrator finds a print of Feininger's \"Church of the Minorites\" hanging in the office that used to be his in his earlier life as Phaedrus.\nHe writes that his friend \"had frowned because it was a print and prints are of art and not art themselves [...] But the print had an appeal to him that was irrelevant to the art in that the subject, a kind of Gothic cathedral, created from semiabstract lines and planes and colors and shades, seemed to reflect his mind's vision of the Church of Reason and that was why he'd put it here.\" Finding the print jolts loose \"an avalanche of memory\" of the very place his madness started.\nArt market.\nAt a 2001 Christie's auction in London, Feininger's painting \"The Green Bridge\" (1909) was sold for \u00a32.42 million.\nAt a 2007 Sotheby's auction in New York, Feininger's oil painting \"Jesuits III\" (1915) sold for $23,280,000.\nAt a 2017 Sotheby's auction in New York, Feininger's oil painting \"Fin de s\u00e9ance\" (1910) sold for $5,637,500.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18392", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18392", "title": "Lyman Frank Baum", "text": ""}
{"id": "18393", "revid": "3491839", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18393", "title": "Life", "text": "Matter with biological processes\nLife is matter that has biological processes, such as signaling and the ability to sustain itself. It is defined descriptively by the capacity for homeostasis, organisation, metabolism, growth, adaptation, response to stimuli, and reproduction. All life over time eventually reaches a state of death, and none is immortal. Many philosophical definitions of living systems have been proposed, such as self-organizing systems. Defining life is further complicated by viruses, which replicate only in host cells, and the possibility of extraterrestrial life, which is likely to be very different from terrestrial life. Life exists all over the Earth in air, water, and soil, with many ecosystems forming the biosphere. Some of these are harsh environments occupied only by extremophiles. The life in a particular ecosystem is called its biota.\nLife has been studied since ancient times, with theories such as Empedocles's materialism asserting that it was composed of four eternal elements, and Aristotle's hylomorphism asserting that living things have souls and embody both form and matter. Life originated at least 3.5 billion years ago, resulting in a universal common ancestor. This evolved into all the species that exist now, by way of many extinct species, some of which have left traces as fossils. Attempts to classify living things, too, began with Aristotle. Modern classification began with Carl Linnaeus's system of binomial nomenclature in the 1740s.\nLiving things are composed of biochemical molecules, formed mainly from a few core chemical elements. All living things contain two types of macromolecule, proteins and nucleic acids, the latter usually both DNA and RNA: these carry the information needed by each species, including the instructions to make each type of protein. The proteins, in turn, serve as the machinery which carries out the many chemical processes of life. The cell is the structural and functional unit of life. Smaller organisms, including prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea), consist of small single cells. Larger organisms, mainly eukaryotes, can consist of single cells or may be multicellular with more complex structure. Life is only known to exist on Earth but extraterrestrial life is thought probable. Artificial life is being simulated and explored by scientists and engineers.\nDefinitions.\nChallenge.\nThe definition of life has long been a challenge for scientists and philosophers. This is partially because life is a process, not a substance. This is complicated by a lack of knowledge of the characteristics of living entities, if any, that may have developed outside Earth. Philosophical definitions of life have also been put forward, with similar difficulties on how to distinguish living things from the non-living. Legal definitions of life have been debated, though these generally focus on the decision to declare a human dead, and the legal ramifications of this decision. At least 123 definitions of life have been compiled.\nA biota is the assemblage of living things, especially the animals and plants, that inhabit a specific place and time, such as an ecosystem or biome; thus, the goal of nature conservation is to preserve the biota of an ecosystem.\nDescriptive.\nSince there is no consensus for a definition of life, most current definitions in biology are descriptive. Life is considered a characteristic of something that preserves, furthers or reinforces its existence in the given environment. This implies all or most of the following traits:\nPhysics.\nFrom a physics perspective, an organism is a thermodynamic system with an organised molecular structure that can reproduce itself and evolve as survival dictates. Thermodynamically, life has been described as an open system which makes use of gradients in its surroundings to create imperfect copies of itself. Another way of putting this is to define life as \"a self-sustained chemical system capable of undergoing Darwinian evolution\", a definition adopted by a NASA committee attempting to define life for the purposes of exobiology, based on a suggestion by Carl Sagan. This definition, however, has been widely criticised because according to it, a single sexually reproducing individual is not alive as it is incapable of evolving on its own.\nLiving systems.\nOthers take a living systems theory viewpoint that does not necessarily depend on molecular chemistry. One systemic definition of life is that living things are self-organizing and autopoietic (self-producing). Variations of this include Stuart Kauffman's definition as an autonomous agent or a multi-agent system capable of reproducing itself, and of completing at least one thermodynamic work cycle. This definition is extended by the evolution of novel functions over time. Living systems are characterized by a multiscale, hierarchical organization, spanning from molecular machines to cells, organs, tissues, organisms, populations, ecosystems, up to the whole biosphere.\nDeath.\nDeath is the termination of all vital functions or life processes in an organism or cell.\nOne of the challenges in defining death is in distinguishing it from life. Death would seem to refer to either the moment life ends, or when the state that follows life begins. However, determining when death has occurred is difficult, as cessation of life functions is often not simultaneous across organ systems. Such determination, therefore, requires drawing conceptual lines between life and death. This is problematic because there is little consensus over how to define life. The nature of death has for millennia been a central concern of the world's religious traditions and of philosophical inquiry. Many religions maintain faith in either a kind of afterlife or reincarnation for the soul, or resurrection of the body at a later date.\nViruses.\nWhether or not viruses should be considered as alive is controversial. They are most often considered as just gene coding replicators rather than forms of life. They have been described as \"organisms at the edge of life\" because they possess genes, evolve by natural selection, and replicate by making multiple copies of themselves through self-assembly. However, viruses do not metabolise and they require a host cell to make new products. Virus self-assembly within host cells has implications for the study of the origin of life, as it may support the hypothesis that life could have started as self-assembling organic molecules.\nHistory of study.\nMaterialism.\nSome of the earliest theories of life were materialist, holding that all that exists is matter, and that life is merely a complex form or arrangement of matter. Empedocles (430 BC) argued that everything in the universe is made up of a combination of four eternal \"elements\" or \"roots of all\": earth, water, air, and fire. All change is explained by the arrangement and rearrangement of these four elements. The various forms of life are caused by an appropriate mixture of elements.\nDemocritus (460 BC) was an atomist; he thought that the essential characteristic of life was having a soul (\"psyche\"), and that the soul, like everything else, was composed of fiery atoms. He elaborated on fire because of the apparent connection between life and heat, and because fire moves.\nPlato, in contrast, held that the world was organised by permanent forms, reflected imperfectly in matter; forms provided direction or intelligence, explaining the regularities observed in the world.\nThe mechanistic materialism that originated in ancient Greece was revived and revised by the French philosopher Ren\u00e9 Descartes (1596\u20131650), who held that animals and humans were assemblages of parts that together functioned as a machine. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz emphasised the hierarchical organization of living machines, noting in his book \"Monadology\" (1714) that \"...the machines of nature, that is living bodies, are still machines in their smallest parts, to infinity.\" This idea was developed further by Julien Offray de La Mettrie (1709\u20131750) in his book \"L'Homme Machine\". In the 19th century the advances in cell theory in biological science encouraged this view. The evolutionary theory of Charles Darwin (1859) is a mechanistic explanation for the origin of species by means of natural selection. At the beginning of the 20th century St\u00e9phane Leduc (1853\u20131939) promoted the idea that biological processes could be understood in terms of physics and chemistry, and that their growth resembled that of inorganic crystals immersed in solutions of sodium silicate. His ideas, set out in his book \"La biologie synth\u00e9tique\", were widely dismissed during his lifetime, but has incurred a resurgence of interest in the work of Russell, Barge and colleagues.\nHylomorphism.\nHylomorphism is a theory first expressed by the Greek philosopher Aristotle (322 BC). The application of hylomorphism to biology was important to Aristotle, and biology is extensively covered in his extant writings. In this view, everything in the material universe has both matter and form, and the form of a living thing is its soul (Greek \"psyche\", Latin \"anima\"). There are three kinds of souls: the \"vegetative soul\" of plants, which causes them to grow and decay and nourish themselves, but does not cause motion and sensation; the \"animal soul\", which causes animals to move and feel; and the \"rational soul\", which is the source of consciousness and reasoning, which (Aristotle believed) is found only in man. Each higher soul has all of the attributes of the lower ones. Aristotle believed that while matter can exist without form, form cannot exist without matter, and that therefore the soul cannot exist without the body.\nThis account is consistent with teleological explanations of life, which account for phenomena in terms of purpose or goal-directedness. Thus, the whiteness of the polar bear's coat is explained by its purpose of camouflage. The direction of causality (from the future to the past) is in contradiction with the scientific evidence for natural selection, which explains the consequence in terms of a prior cause. Biological features are explained not by looking at future optimal results, but by looking at the past evolutionary history of a species, which led to the natural selection of the features in question.\nSpontaneous generation.\nSpontaneous generation was the belief that living organisms can form without descent from similar organisms. Typically, the idea was that certain forms such as fleas could arise from inanimate matter such as dust or the supposed seasonal generation of mice and insects from mud or garbage.\nThe theory of spontaneous generation was proposed by Aristotle, who compiled and expanded the work of prior natural philosophers and the various ancient explanations of the appearance of organisms; it was considered the best explanation for two millennia. It was decisively dispelled by the experiments of Louis Pasteur in 1859, who expanded upon the investigations of predecessors such as Francesco Redi. Disproof of the traditional ideas of spontaneous generation is no longer controversial among biologists.\nVitalism.\nVitalism is the belief that there is a non-material life-principle. This originated with Georg Ernst Stahl (17th century), and remained popular until the middle of the 19th century. It appealed to philosophers such as Henri Bergson, Friedrich Nietzsche, and Wilhelm Dilthey, anatomists like Xavier Bichat, and chemists like Justus von Liebig. Vitalism included the idea that there was a fundamental difference between organic and inorganic material, and the belief that organic material can only be derived from living things. This was disproved in 1828, when Friedrich W\u00f6hler prepared urea from inorganic materials. This W\u00f6hler synthesis is considered the starting point of modern organic chemistry. It is of historical significance because for the first time an organic compound was produced in inorganic reactions.\nDuring the 1850s Hermann von Helmholtz, anticipated by Julius Robert von Mayer, demonstrated that no energy is lost in muscle movement, suggesting that there were no \"vital forces\" necessary to move a muscle. These results led to the abandonment of scientific interest in vitalistic theories, especially after Eduard Buchner's demonstration that alcoholic fermentation could occur in cell-free extracts of yeast. Nonetheless, belief still exists in pseudoscientific theories such as homoeopathy, which interprets diseases and sickness as caused by disturbances in a hypothetical vital force or life force.\nDevelopment.\nOrigin of life.\nThe age of Earth is about 4.54 billion years. Life on Earth has existed for at least 3.5 billion years, with the oldest physical traces of life dating back 3.7\u00a0billion years. Estimates from molecular clocks, as summarised in the TimeTree public database, place the origin of life around 4.0 billion years ago. Hypotheses on the origin of life attempt to explain the formation of a universal common ancestor from simple organic molecules via pre-cellular life to protocells and metabolism. In 2016, a set of 355 genes from the last universal common ancestor was tentatively identified.\nThe biosphere is postulated to have developed, from the origin of life onwards, at least some 3.5\u00a0billion years ago. The earliest evidence for life on Earth includes biogenic graphite found in 3.7\u00a0billion-year-old metasedimentary rocks from Western Greenland and microbial mat fossils found in 3.48\u00a0billion-year-old sandstone from Western Australia. More recently, in 2015, \"remains of biotic life\" were found in 4.1\u00a0billion-year-old rocks in Western Australia. In 2017, putative fossilised microorganisms (or microfossils) were announced to have been discovered in hydrothermal vent precipitates in the Nuvvuagittuq Belt of Quebec, Canada that were as old as 4.28\u00a0billion years, the oldest record of life on Earth, suggesting \"an almost instantaneous emergence of life\" after ocean formation 4.4\u00a0billion years ago, and not long after the formation of the Earth 4.54\u00a0billion years ago.\nEvolution.\nEvolution is the change in heritable characteristics of biological populations over successive generations. It results in the appearance of new species and often the disappearance of old ones. Evolution occurs when evolutionary processes such as natural selection (including sexual selection) and genetic drift act on genetic variation, resulting in certain characteristics increasing or decreasing in frequency within a population over successive generations. The process of evolution has given rise to biodiversity at every level of biological organisation.\nFossils.\nFossils are the preserved remains or traces of organisms from the remote past. The totality of fossils, both discovered and undiscovered, and their placement in layers (strata) of sedimentary rock is known as the \"fossil record\". A preserved specimen is called a fossil if it is older than the arbitrary date of 10,000 years ago. Hence, fossils range in age from the youngest at the start of the Holocene Epoch to the oldest from the Archaean Eon, up to 3.4 billion years old.\nExtinction.\nExtinction is the process by which a species dies out. The moment of extinction is the death of the last individual of that species. Because a species' potential range may be very large, determining this moment is difficult, and is usually done retrospectively after a period of apparent absence. Species become extinct when they are no longer able to survive in changing habitat or against superior competition. Over 99% of all the species that have ever lived are now extinct. Mass extinctions may have accelerated evolution by providing opportunities for new groups of organisms to diversify.\nEnvironmental conditions.\nThe diversity of life on Earth is a result of the dynamic interplay between genetic opportunity, metabolic capability, environmental challenges, and symbiosis. For most of its existence, Earth's habitable environment has been dominated by microorganisms and subjected to their metabolism and evolution. As a consequence of these microbial activities, the physical-chemical environment on Earth has been changing on a geologic time scale, thereby affecting the path of evolution of subsequent life. For example, the release of molecular oxygen by cyanobacteria as a by-product of photosynthesis induced global changes in the Earth's environment. Because oxygen was toxic to most life on Earth at the time, this posed novel evolutionary challenges, and ultimately resulted in the formation of Earth's major animal and plant species. This interplay between organisms and their environment is an inherent feature of living systems.\nBiosphere.\nThe biosphere is the global sum of all ecosystems. It can also be termed as the zone of life on Earth, a closed system (apart from solar and cosmic radiation and heat from the interior of the Earth), and largely self-regulating. Organisms exist in every part of the biosphere, including soil, hot springs, inside rocks at least deep underground, the deepest parts of the ocean, and at least high in the atmosphere. For example, spores of \"Aspergillus niger\" have been detected in the mesosphere at an altitude of 48 to 77\u00a0km. Under test conditions, life forms have been observed to survive in the vacuum of space. Life forms thrive in the deep Mariana Trench, and inside rocks up to below the sea floor under of ocean off the coast of the northwestern United States, and beneath the seabed off Japan. In 2014, life forms were found living below the ice of Antarctica. Expeditions of the International Ocean Discovery Program found unicellular life in 120\u00a0\u00b0C sediment 1.2\u00a0km below seafloor in the Nankai Trough subduction zone. According to one researcher, \"You can find microbes everywhere\u2014they're extremely adaptable to conditions, and survive wherever they are.\"\nRange of tolerance.\nThe inert components of an ecosystem are the physical and chemical factors necessary for life\u2014energy (sunlight or chemical energy), water, heat, atmosphere, gravity, nutrients, and ultraviolet solar radiation protection. In most ecosystems, the conditions vary during the day and from one season to the next. To survive in these ecosystems, organisms must be able to tolerate a range of conditions defined as the \"range of tolerance\". Outside this range are the \"zones of physiological stress\", where the survival and reproduction are possible but not optimal. Beyond these zones are the \"zones of intolerance\", where survival and reproduction of that organism is unlikely or impossible. Organisms that have a wide range of tolerance are more widely distributed than organisms with a narrow range of tolerance.\nExtremophiles.\nTo survive, some microorganisms have evolved to withstand freezing, complete desiccation, starvation, high levels of radiation exposure, and other physical or chemical challenges. These extremophile microorganisms may survive exposure to such conditions for long periods. They excel at exploiting uncommon sources of energy. Characterization of the structure and metabolic diversity of microbial communities in such extreme environments is ongoing.\nClassification.\nAntiquity.\nThe first classification of organisms was made by the Greek philosopher Aristotle (384\u2013322 BC), who grouped living things as either plants or animals, based mainly on their ability to move. He distinguished animals with blood from animals without blood, which can be compared with the concepts of vertebrates and invertebrates respectively, and divided the blooded animals into five groups: viviparous quadrupeds (mammals), oviparous quadrupeds (reptiles and amphibians), birds, fishes and whales. The bloodless animals were divided into five groups: cephalopods, crustaceans, insects (which included the spiders, scorpions, and centipedes), shelled animals (such as most molluscs and echinoderms), and \"zoophytes\" (animals that resemble plants). This theory remained dominant for more than a thousand years.\nLinnaean.\nIn the late 1740s, Carl Linnaeus introduced his system of binomial nomenclature for the classification of species. Linnaeus attempted to improve the composition and reduce the length of the previously used many-worded names by abolishing unnecessary rhetoric, introducing new descriptive terms and precisely defining their meaning.\nThe fungi were originally treated as plants. For a short period Linnaeus had classified them in the taxon Vermes in Animalia, but later placed them back in Plantae. Herbert Copeland classified the Fungi in his Protoctista, including them with single-celled organisms and thus partially avoiding the problem but acknowledging their special status. The problem was eventually solved by Whittaker, when he gave them their own kingdom in his five-kingdom system. Evolutionary history shows that the fungi are more closely related to animals than to plants.\nAs advances in microscopy enabled detailed study of cells and microorganisms, new groups of life were revealed, and the fields of cell biology and microbiology were created. These new organisms were originally described separately in protozoa as animals and protophyta/thallophyta as plants, but were united by Ernst Haeckel in the kingdom Protista; later, the prokaryotes were split off in the kingdom Monera, which would eventually be divided into two separate groups, the Bacteria and the Archaea. This led to the six-kingdom system and eventually to the current three-domain system, which is based on evolutionary relationships. \nHowever, the classification of eukaryotes, especially of protists, is still controversial.\nAs microbiology developed, viruses, which are non-cellular, were discovered. Whether these are considered alive has been a matter of debate; viruses lack characteristics of life such as cell membranes, metabolism and the ability to grow or respond to their environments. Viruses have been classed into \"species\" based on their genetics, but many aspects of such a classification remain controversial.\nThe original Linnaean system has been modified many times, for example as follows:\nThe attempt to organise the Eukaryotes into a small number of kingdoms has been challenged. The Protozoa do not form a clade or natural grouping, and nor do the Chromista (Chromalveolata).\nMetagenomic.\nThe ability to sequence large numbers of complete genomes has allowed biologists to take a metagenomic view of the phylogeny of the whole tree of life. This has led to the realisation that the majority of living things are bacteria, and that all have a common origin.\nComposition.\nChemical elements.\nAll life forms require certain core chemical elements for their biochemical functioning. These include carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur\u2014the elemental macronutrients for all organisms. Together these make up nucleic acids, proteins and lipids, the bulk of living matter. Five of these six elements comprise the chemical components of DNA, the exception being sulfur. The latter is a component of the amino acids cysteine and methionine. The most abundant of these elements in organisms is carbon, which has the desirable attribute of forming multiple, stable covalent bonds. This allows carbon-based (organic) molecules to form the immense variety of chemical arrangements described in organic chemistry.\nAlternative hypothetical types of biochemistry have been proposed that eliminate one or more of these elements, swap out an element for one not on the list, or change required chiralities or other chemical properties.\nDNA.\nDeoxyribonucleic acid or DNA is a molecule that carries most of the genetic instructions used in the growth, development, functioning and reproduction of all known living organisms and many viruses. DNA and RNA are nucleic acids; alongside proteins and complex carbohydrates, they are one of the three major types of macromolecule that are essential for all known forms of life. Most DNA molecules consist of two biopolymer strands coiled around each other to form a double helix. The two DNA strands are known as polynucleotides since they are composed of simpler units called nucleotides. Each nucleotide is composed of a nitrogen-containing nucleobase\u2014either cytosine (C), guanine (G), adenine (A), or thymine (T)\u2014as well as a sugar called deoxyribose and a phosphate group.\nThe nucleotides are joined to one another in a chain by covalent bonds between the sugar of one nucleotide and the phosphate of the next, resulting in an alternating sugar-phosphate backbone. According to base pairing rules (A with T, and C with G), hydrogen bonds bind the nitrogenous bases of the two separate polynucleotide strands to make double-stranded DNA. This has the key property that each strand contains all the information needed to recreate the other strand, enabling the information to be preserved during reproduction and cell division. Within cells, DNA is organised into long structures called chromosomes. During cell division these chromosomes are duplicated in the process of DNA replication, providing each cell its own complete set of chromosomes. Eukaryotes store most of their DNA inside the cell nucleus. \nCells.\nCells are the basic unit of structure in every living thing, and all cells arise from pre-existing cells by division. Cell theory was formulated by Henri Dutrochet, Theodor Schwann, Rudolf Virchow and others during the early nineteenth century, and subsequently became widely accepted. The activity of an organism depends on the total activity of its cells, with energy flow occurring within and between them. Cells contain hereditary information that is carried forward as a genetic code during cell division.\nThere are two primary types of cells, reflecting their evolutionary origins. Prokaryote cells lack a nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles, although they have circular DNA and ribosomes. Bacteria and Archaea are two domains of prokaryotes. The other primary type is the eukaryote cell, which has a distinct nucleus bound by a nuclear membrane and membrane-bound organelles, including mitochondria, chloroplasts, lysosomes, rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum, and vacuoles. In addition, their DNA is organised into chromosomes. All species of large complex organisms are eukaryotes, including animals, plants and fungi, though with a wide diversity of protist microorganisms. The conventional model is that eukaryotes evolved from prokaryotes, with the main organelles of the eukaryotes forming through endosymbiosis between bacteria and the progenitor eukaryotic cell.\nThe molecular mechanisms of cell biology are based on proteins. Most of these are synthesised by the ribosomes through an enzyme-catalyzed process called protein biosynthesis. A sequence of amino acids is assembled and joined based upon gene expression of the cell's nucleic acid. In eukaryotic cells, these proteins may then be transported and processed through the Golgi apparatus in preparation for dispatch to their destination.\nCells reproduce through a process of cell division in which the parent cell divides into two or more daughter cells. For prokaryotes, cell division occurs through a process of fission in which the DNA is replicated, then the two copies are attached to parts of the cell membrane. In eukaryotes, a more complex process of mitosis is followed. However, the result is the same; the resulting cell copies are identical to each other and to the original cell (except for mutations), and both are capable of further division following an interphase period. \nMost species of multicellular plants, animals and fungi as well as many protists are capable of sexual reproduction. Sexual reproduction, involving a meiotic process, is considered to have arisen very early in the evolution of eukaryotes.\nMulticellular structure.\nMulticellular organisms may have first evolved through the formation of colonies of identical cells. These cells can form group organisms through cell adhesion. The individual members of a colony are capable of surviving on their own, whereas the members of a true multi-cellular organism have developed specialisations, making them dependent on the remainder of the organism for survival. Such organisms are formed clonally or from a single germ cell that is capable of forming the various specialised cells that form the adult organism. This specialisation allows multicellular organisms to exploit resources more efficiently than single cells. About 800 million years ago, a minor genetic change in a single molecule, the enzyme GK-PID, may have allowed organisms to go from a single cell organism to one of many cells.\nCells have evolved methods to perceive and respond to their microenvironment, thereby enhancing their adaptability. Cell signaling coordinates cellular activities, and hence governs the basic functions of multicellular organisms. Signaling between cells can occur through direct cell contact using juxtacrine signalling, or indirectly through the exchange of agents as in the endocrine system. In more complex organisms, coordination of activities can occur through a dedicated nervous system.\nIn the universe.\nThough life is confirmed only on Earth, many think that extraterrestrial life is not only plausible, but probable or inevitable, possibly resulting in a biophysical cosmology instead of a mere physical cosmology. Other planets and moons in the Solar System and other planetary systems are being examined for evidence of having once supported simple life, and projects such as SETI are trying to detect radio transmissions from possible alien civilisations. Other locations within the Solar System that may host microbial life include the subsurface of Mars, the upper atmosphere of Venus, and subsurface oceans on some of the moons of the giant planets.\nInvestigation of the tenacity and versatility of life on Earth, as well as an understanding of the molecular systems that some organisms utilise to survive such extremes, is important for the search for extraterrestrial life. For example, lichen could survive for a month in a simulated Martian environment.\nBeyond the Solar System, the region around another main-sequence star that could support Earth-like life on an Earth-like planet is known as the habitable zone. The inner and outer radii of this zone vary with the luminosity of the star, as does the time interval during which the zone survives. Stars more massive than the Sun have a larger habitable zone, but remain on the Sun-like \"main sequence\" of stellar evolution for a shorter time interval. Small red dwarfs have the opposite problem, with a smaller habitable zone that is subject to higher levels of magnetic activity and the effects of tidal locking from close orbits. Hence, stars in the intermediate mass range such as the Sun may have a greater likelihood for Earth-like life to develop.\nThe location of the star within a galaxy may also affect the likelihood of life forming. Stars in regions with a greater abundance of heavier elements that can form planets, in combination with a low rate of potentially habitat-damaging supernova events, are predicted to have a higher probability of hosting planets with complex life. The variables of the Drake equation are used to discuss the conditions in planetary systems where civilisation is most likely to exist, within wide bounds of uncertainty. A \"Confidence of Life Detection\" scale (CoLD) for reporting evidence of life beyond Earth has been proposed.\nArtificial.\nArtificial life is the simulation of any aspect of life, as through computers, robotics, or biochemistry. Synthetic biology is a new area of biotechnology that combines science and biological engineering. The common goal is the design and construction of new biological functions and systems not found in nature. Synthetic biology includes the broad redefinition and expansion of biotechnology, with the ultimate goals of being able to design and build engineered biological systems that process information, manipulate chemicals, fabricate materials and structures, produce energy, provide food, and maintain and enhance human health and the environment.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18395", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18395", "title": "Lou Gehrigs disease", "text": ""}
{"id": "18396", "revid": "7540398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18396", "title": "Ludolf Bakhuysen", "text": ""}
{"id": "18397", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18397", "title": "Les Guignols de Linfo", "text": ""}
{"id": "18398", "revid": "47812778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18398", "title": "La Espero", "text": "Poem by L. L. Zamenhof and unofficial anthem of Esperanto\n\"La Espero\" (, ) is a poem written by Polish-Jewish doctor L. L. Zamenhof, the initiator of the Esperanto language. The song is often used as the (unofficial) anthem of Esperanto, and is now usually sung to a triumphal march composed by F\u00e9licien Menu de M\u00e9nil in 1909 (although there is an earlier, less martial tune created in 1891 by Claes Adelsk\u00f6ld, along with a number of other lesser-known tunes). It is sometimes referred to as the hymn of the Esperanto movement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18400", "revid": "167282", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18400", "title": "Loonie", "text": "Canadian $1 coin\nThe loonie (), formally the Canadian one-dollar coin, is a gold-coloured Canadian coin that was introduced in 1987 and is produced by the Royal Canadian Mint at its facility in Winnipeg. The most prevalent versions of the coin show a common loon, a bird found throughout Canada, on the reverse and Queen Elizabeth II, the nation's head of state at the time of the coin's issue, on the obverse. Various commemorative and specimen-set editions of the coin with special designs replacing the loon on the reverse have been minted over the years. Beginning in December 2023, a new version featuring King Charles III entered circulation, to replace the version featuring Elizabeth II.\nThe coin's outline is an 11-sided Reuleaux polygon. Its diameter of and its 11-sidedness match that of the already-circulating Susan B. Anthony dollar in the United States, and its thickness of is a close match to the latter's . Its gold colour differs from the silver-coloured Anthony dollar; however, the succeeding Sacagawea and presidential dollars match the loonie's overall hue. Other coins using a non-circular curve of constant width include the 7-sided British twenty pence and fifty pence coins (the latter of which has similar size and value to the loonie but is silver in colour).\nAfter its introduction, the coin became a metonym for the Canadian dollar: media often discuss the rate at which the loonie is trading against other currencies. The nickname \"loonie\" became so widely recognized that in 2006, the Royal Canadian Mint secured the rights to it. When the Canadian two-dollar coin was introduced in 1996, it was in turn nicknamed the \"toonie\" (a portmanteau of \"two\" and \"loonie\").\nBackground.\nCanada first minted a silver dollar coin in 1935 to celebrate the 25th anniversary of George V's reign as king. The voyageur dollar, so named because it featured an Indigenous person and a French voyageur paddling a canoe on the reverse, was minted in silver until 1967, after which it was composed primarily of nickel. The coins did not see wide circulation, mainly due to their size and weight; the nickel version weighed and was in diameter, and was itself smaller than the silver version. By 1978, Canadian businesses, namely vending machine operators, and transit authorities were advocating for a one-dollar coin that circulated more easily.\nBy 1982, the Royal Canadian Mint had begun work on a new composition for the dollar coin that it hoped would lead to increased circulation. At the same time, vending machine operators and transit systems were lobbying the Government of Canada to replace the dollar banknotes with more widely circulating coins. A Commons committee recommended in 1985 that the dollar bill be eliminated despite a lack of evidence that Canadians would support the move. The government argued that it would save between $175million and $250million over 20 years by switching from bills that had a lifespan of less than a year to coins that would last two decades.\nHistory.\nThe government announced on March 25, 1986, that the new dollar coin would be launched the following year as a replacement for the dollar bill, which would be phased out. Two proposals for the coin were considered, one by INCO for the Nigold coin, and one by Sheritt Gordon Mines for an aureate bronze plated on pure nickel (aureate nickel) coin. The government selected the Sherritt Gordon Mines proposal as it was less costly and the innovative technology behind the coin could serve to demonstrate the Royal Canadian Mint's capabilities in the international coinage market.\nIt was expected to cost $31.8million to produce the first 300million coins but, through seigniorage (the difference between the cost of production and the coin's value), expected to make up to $40million a year on the coins. From the proceeds, a total of $60million over five years was dedicated toward funding the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary.\nThe failure of the Susan B. Anthony dollar coin in the United States had been considered and it was believed Americans refused to support the coin due to its similarity to their quarter coin and its lack of aesthetic appeal. In announcing the new Canadian dollar coin, the government stated it would be the same overall size as the Susan B. Anthony coin \u2013 slightly larger than a quarter \u2013 to allow for compatibility with American manufactured vending machines but would be eleven-sided and gold-coloured. The sample Canadian dollar was well received in test groups, with 80% of participants feeling its size, shape and colour made it more easily discernible from other coins. \nIt was planned that the coin would continue using the \"voyageur\" theme reverse designed by Emanuel Hahn and an obverse effigy of Queen Elizabeth designed by Arnold Machine. However, the master dies that had been struck in Ottawa were lost in transit en route to the Mint's facility at Winnipeg. A Commons committee struck to investigate the loss discovered that the Mint had no documented procedures for transport of master dies and that it had shipped them via a local courier in a bid to save $43.50. It was also found to be the third time that the Mint had lost master dies within five years. An internal review by the Royal Canadian Mint argued that while a policy existed to ship the obverse and reverse dies separately, the new coin dies were packaged separately but were part of the same shipment. The Mint also disagreed with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police's contention that the dies were simply lost in transit, believing instead that they were stolen. The dies were never recovered.\nFearing the possibility of counterfeiting, the government approved a new design for the reverse, replacing the \"voyageur\" with a Robert-Ralph Carmichael design of a common loon floating in water. Carmichael's design had been submitted to the Royal Canadian Mint in 1978 and was chosen from the existing bank of designs maintained by the Mint. In particular, the choice of the loon motif fit well with the other existing wildlife depictions used with the five-and twenty-five cent coins. The Canadian Wildlife Federation provided strong approval of the design choice.\nThe coin was immediately nicknamed the \"loonie\" across English Canada and became known as a \"huard\", French for 'loon', in Quebec. The loonie entered circulation on June 30, 1987, as 40million coins were introduced into major cities across the country. Over 800million loonies had been struck by the coin's 20th anniversary.\nAfter a 21-month period in which the loonie and $1 note were produced concurrently with each other, the Bank of Canada ceased production of the dollar banknote. The final dollar bills were printed on June 30, 1989. Initial support for the coin was mixed, but withdrawing the banknote forced acceptance of the coin.\nThe loonie has subsequently gained iconic status within Canada, and is now regarded as a national symbol. The term \"loonie\" has since become synonymous with the Canadian dollar itself. The town of Echo Bay, Ontario, home of Robert-Ralph Carmichael, erected a large loonie monument in his honour in 1992 along the highway, similar to Sudbury's 'Big Nickel'.\nA year after the death of Elizabeth II, a new loonie featuring the image of Charles III designed by Steven Rosati was revealed on November 14, 2023. A small number of the coins entered circulation in December 2023.\nLucky loonie.\nOfficials for the 2002 Salt Lake Winter Olympics invited the National Hockey League's ice making consultant, Dan Craig, to oversee the city's E Center arena, where the ice hockey tournament was being held. Craig invited a couple of members from the ice crew in his hometown of Edmonton to assist. One of them, Trent Evans, secretly placed a loonie at centre ice. He had originally placed a dime but added the loonie after the smaller coin quickly vanished as the ice surface was built up. He placed the coins after realizing there was no target at centre ice for referees to aim for when dropping the puck for a faceoff. A thin yellow dot was painted on the ice surface over the coins, though the loonie was faintly visible to those who knew to look for it.\nKeeping the coin a secret, Evans told only a few people of its placement and swore them to secrecy. Among those told were the players of the men's and women's teams. Both Canadian teams went on to win gold medals. Several members of the women's team kissed the spot where the coin was buried following their victory. After the men won their final, the coin was dug up and given to Wayne Gretzky, the team's executive-director, who revealed the existence of the \"lucky loonie\" at a post-game press conference.\nThe lucky loonie quickly became a piece of Canadian lore. The original lucky loonie was donated to the Hockey Hall of Fame, and Canadians have subsequently hidden loonies at several international competitions, including the 2008 Olympic Games and the 2010 IIHF World Championships. Loonies were buried in the foundations of facilities built for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver.\nCapitalizing on the tradition, the Royal Canadian Mint has released a commemorative edition \"lucky loonie\" for each Olympic Games since 2004.\nComposition.\nThe weight of the coin was originally specified as 108 grains, equivalent to 6.998 grams. The coin's diameter is .\nWhen introduced, loonie coins were made of aureate, a bronze\u2013electroplated nickel combination. Beginning in 2007, some loonie blanks also began to be produced with a cyanide-free brass plating process. In the second quarter of 2012, the composition switched to multi-ply brass-plated steel. As a result, the weight dropped from 7.00 to 6.27 grams. This resulted in the 2012 loonie not being accepted in some vending machines. The Toronto Parking Authority estimated that at about $345 per machine, it would cost about $1million to upgrade almost 3,000 machines to accept the new coins. The Mint stated that multi-ply plated steel technology, already used in Canada's smaller coinage, produces an electromagnetic signature that is harder to counterfeit than that of regular alloy coins; also, using steel provides cost savings and avoids fluctuations in price or supply of nickel.\nOn April 10, 2012, the Royal Canadian Mint announced design changes to the loonie and toonie, which include new security features.\nCommemorative editions.\nAlongside the regular minting of the loonie with the standard image of the common loon on the coin's reverse, the Royal Canadian Mint has also released commemorative editions of the one-dollar coin for a variety of occasions. These coins have a circulation-grade finish and have been made available to the public in five-coin packs and in 25-coin rolls in addition to being released directly into circulation.\nTerry Fox loonie.\nThe Terry Fox Loonie was unveiled in 2005 and designed by Senior Engraver Stanley Witten. The coin depicts the Canadian athlete, humanitarian, and cancer research activist Terry Fox.\nFollowing his design of the 2005 Terry Fox loonie, Witten told the Ottawa Citizen that \"while sculpting the design, I wanted to capture Terry fighting the elements, running against the wind, towering over wind-bent trees on a lonely stretch of Canadian wilderness.\"\nSpecimen set editions.\nIn 1997, 2002, and each year since 2004, the Royal Canadian Mint has issued a one-dollar coin that depicts a different and unique image of native Canadian animals on the coin's reverse. These special loonies have limited mintages and are available only in the six-coin specimen sets.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18401", "revid": "92899", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18401", "title": "Laminar flow", "text": "Flow where fluid particles follow smooth paths in layers\nLaminar flow () is the property of fluid particles in fluid dynamics to follow smooth paths in layers, with each layer moving smoothly past the adjacent layers with little or no mixing. At low velocities, the fluid tends to flow without lateral mixing, and adjacent layers slide past one another smoothly. There are no cross-currents perpendicular to the direction of flow, nor eddies or swirls of fluids. In laminar flow, the motion of the particles of the fluid is very orderly with particles close to a solid surface moving in straight lines parallel to that surface.\nLaminar flow is a flow regime characterized by high momentum diffusion and low momentum convection.\nWhen a fluid is flowing through a closed channel such as a pipe or between two flat plates, either of two types of flow may occur depending on the velocity and viscosity of the fluid: laminar flow or turbulent flow. Laminar flow occurs at lower velocities, below a threshold at which the flow becomes turbulent. The threshold velocity is determined by a dimensionless parameter characterizing the flow called the Reynolds number, which also depends on the viscosity and density of the fluid and dimensions of the channel. Turbulent flow is a less orderly flow regime that is characterized by eddies or small packets of fluid particles, which result in lateral mixing. In non-scientific terms, laminar flow is \"smooth\", while turbulent flow is \"rough\".\nRelationship with the Reynolds number.\nThe type of flow occurring in a fluid in a channel is important in fluid-dynamics problems and subsequently affects heat and mass transfer in fluid systems. The dimensionless Reynolds number is an important parameter in the equations that describe whether fully developed flow conditions lead to laminar or turbulent flow. The Reynolds number is the ratio of the inertial force to the shearing force of the fluid: how fast the fluid is moving relative to how viscous it is, irrespective of the scale of the fluid system. Laminar flow generally occurs when the fluid is moving slowly or the fluid is very viscous. As the Reynolds number increases, such as by increasing the flow rate of the fluid, the flow will transition from laminar to turbulent flow at a specific range of Reynolds numbers, the laminar\u2013turbulent transition range depending on small disturbance levels in the fluid or imperfections in the flow system. If the Reynolds number is very small, much less than 1, then the fluid will exhibit Stokes, or creeping, flow, where the viscous forces of the fluid dominate the inertial forces.\nThe specific calculation of the Reynolds number, and the values where laminar flow occurs, will depend on the geometry of the flow system and flow pattern. The common example is flow through a pipe, where the Reynolds number is defined as\nformula_1\nwhere:\n \"D\"H is the hydraulic diameter of the pipe (m);\n \"Q\" is the volumetric flow rate (m3/s);\n \"A\" is the pipe's cross-sectional area (m2);\n \"u\" is the mean speed of the fluid (SI units: m/s);\n \"\u03bc\" is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid (Pa\u00b7s = N\u00b7s/m2 = kg/(m\u00b7s));\n \"\u03bd\" is the kinematic viscosity of the fluid, \"\u03bd\" \n \"\" (m2/s);\n \"\u03c1\" is the density of the fluid (kg/m3).\nFor such systems, laminar flow occurs when the Reynolds number is below a critical value of approximately 2,040, though the transition range is typically between 1,800 and 2,100.\nFor fluid systems occurring on external surfaces, such as flow past objects suspended in the fluid, other definitions for Reynolds numbers can be used to predict the type of flow around the object. The particle Reynolds number Rep would be used for particle suspended in flowing fluids, for example. As with flow in pipes, laminar flow typically occurs with lower Reynolds numbers, while turbulent flow and related phenomena, such as vortex shedding, occur with higher Reynolds numbers.\nExamples.\nA common application of laminar flow is in the smooth flow of a viscous liquid through a tube or pipe. In that case, the velocity of flow varies from zero at the walls to a maximum along the cross-sectional centre of the vessel. The flow profile of laminar flow in a tube can be calculated by dividing the flow into thin cylindrical elements and applying the viscous force to them.\nAnother example is the flow of air over an aircraft wing. The boundary layer is a very thin sheet of air lying over the surface of the wing (and all other surfaces of the aircraft). Because air has viscosity, this layer of air tends to adhere to the wing. As the wing moves forward through the air, the boundary layer at first flows smoothly over the streamlined shape of the airfoil. Here, the flow is laminar and the boundary layer is a laminar layer. Prandtl applied the concept of the laminar boundary layer to airfoils in 1904.\nAn everyday example is the slow, smooth and optically transparent flow of shallow water over a smooth barrier.\nWhen water leaves a tap without an aerator with little force, it first exhibits laminar flow, but as acceleration by the force of gravity immediately sets in, the Reynolds number of the flow increases with speed, and the laminar flow of the water downstream from the tap can transition to turbulent flow. Optical transparency is then reduced or lost entirely.\nLaminar flow barriers.\nLaminar airflow is used to separate volumes of air, or prevent airborne contaminants from entering an area. Laminar flow hoods are used to exclude contaminants from sensitive processes in science, electronics and medicine. Air curtains are frequently used in commercial settings to keep heated or refrigerated air from passing through doorways. A laminar flow reactor (LFR) is a reactor that uses laminar flow to study chemical reactions and process mechanisms. A laminar flow design for animal husbandry of rats for disease management was developed by Beall et al. 1971 and became a standard around the world including in the then-Eastern Bloc.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18402", "revid": "1121646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18402", "title": "Luanda", "text": "Capital and largest city of Angola\nLuanda ( ) is the capital and largest city of Angola. It is Angola's primary port, and its major industrial, cultural and urban centre. Located on Angola's northern Atlantic coast, Luanda is Angola's administrative centre, its chief seaport, and also the capital of the Luanda Province. Luanda and its metropolitan area is the most populous Portuguese-speaking capital city in the world and the most populous Lusophone city outside Brazil. In 2020 the population reached more than 8.3 million inhabitants (a third of Angola's population).\nAmong the oldest colonial cities of Africa, Luanda was founded in January 1576 as \"S\u00e3o Paulo da Assun\u00e7\u00e3o de Loanda\" by Portuguese explorer Paulo Dias de Novais, being occasionally called \"Leonda\" or \"St Paul de Leonda\" by non-Portuguese sources. The city served as the centre of the slave trade to Brazil before the institution was prohibited.\nAt the start of the Angolan Civil War in 1975, most of the white Portuguese left as refugees, principally migrating to Portugal. Luanda's population increased greatly from internal refugees fleeing the war, but its infrastructure was inadequate to handle the increase. This also caused the exacerbation of slums, or musseques, around Luanda.\nIn the 21st century, the city has been undergoing a major reconstruction. Many new large developments are taking place that will alter its cityscape significantly.\nIndustries present in the city include the processing of agricultural products, beverage production, textile, cement, new car assembly plants, construction materials, plastics, metallurgy, cigarettes and shoes. The city is also notable as an economic centre for oil, and a refinery is located in the city.\nLuanda has been ranked as one of the most expensive cities in the world for expatriates. The inhabitants of Luanda are mostly members of the ethnic Ambundu people. In recent decades of the 21st century, the number of ethnic Bakongo and Ovimbundu have also increased. Ethnic Europeans are mainly Portuguese.\nLuanda was the main host city for the matches of the 2010 African Cup of Nations.\nHistory.\nPortuguese colonization.\nPortuguese explorer Paulo Dias de Novais founded Luanda on 25 January 1576 as \"S\u00e3o Paulo da Assump\u00e7\u00e3o de Loanda\". He had brought one hundred families of settlers and four hundred soldiers. Most of the Portuguese community lived within the fort. Several sources from as early as the 17th century called the city \"St. Paul de Leonda\".\nIn 1618, the Portuguese built the fortress called \"Fortaleza S\u00e3o Pedro da Barra\", and they subsequently built two more: Fortaleza de S\u00e3o Miguel (1634) and Forte de S\u00e3o Francisco do Penedo (1765\u201366). Of these, the Fortaleza de S\u00e3o Miguel is the best preserved.\nLuanda was Portugal's bridgehead from 1627, except during the Dutch rule of Luanda, from 1640 to 1648, as Fort Aardenburgh. The city served as the centre of slave trade to Brazil from c.\u20091550 to 1836. The slave trade was conducted mostly with the Portuguese colony of Brazil; Brazilian ships were the most numerous in the port of Luanda. This slave trade also involved local merchants and warriors who profited from the trade. During this period, no large scale territorial conquest was intended by the Portuguese; only a few minor settlements were established in the immediate hinterland of Luanda, some on the last stretch of the Kwanza River.\nIn the 17th century, the Imbangala became the main rivals of the Mbundu in supplying slaves to the Luanda market. In the 1751, between 5,000 and 10,000 slaves were annually sold. By this time, Angola, a Portuguese colony, was in fact like a colony of Brazil, paradoxically another Portuguese colony. A strong degree of Brazilian influence was noted in Luanda until the Independence of Brazil in 1822.\nIn the 19th century, still under Portuguese rule, Luanda experienced a major economic revolution. The slave trade was abolished in 1836, and in 1844, Angola's ports were opened to foreign shipping. By 1850, Luanda was one of the greatest and most developed Portuguese cities in the vast Portuguese Empire outside Continental Portugal, full of trading companies, exporting (together with Benguela) palm and peanut oil, wax, copal, timber, ivory, cotton, coffee, and cocoa, among many other products. Maize, tobacco, dried meat, and cassava flour are also produced locally. The Angolan bourgeoisie was born by this time.\nIn 1889, Governor Brito Capelo opened the gates of an aqueduct which supplied the city with water, a formerly scarce resource, laying the foundation for major growth.\nEstado Novo.\nThroughout Portugal's dictatorship, known as the Estado Novo, Luanda grew from a town of 61,208 with 14.6% of those inhabitants being white in 1940, to a wealthy cosmopolitan major city of 475,328 in 1970 with 124,814 Europeans (26.3%) and around 50,000 mixed race inhabitants (10.5%).\nLike most of Portuguese Angola, the cosmopolitan city of Luanda was not affected by the Portuguese Colonial War (1961\u20131974); economic growth and development in the entire region reached record highs during this period. In 1982, a report called Luanda the \"Paris of Africa\".\nIndependence.\nBy the time of Angolan independence in 1975, Luanda was a modern city with the majority of its population being African, but also dominated by a strong minority of white Portuguese origin.\nAfter the Carnation Revolution in Lisbon on April 25, 1974, with the advent of independence and the start of the Angolan Civil War (1975\u20132002), most of the white Portuguese Luandans left as refugees, principally for Portugal, however many travelled over land to South Africa.\nThe large numbers of skilled technicians among the force of Cuban soldiers sent in to support the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) government in the Angolan Civil War were able to make a valuable contribution to restoring and maintaining basic services in the city.\nIn the following years, however, slums called \"musseques\"\u2014which had existed for decades\u2014began to grow out of proportion and stretched several kilometres beyond Luanda's former city limits as a result of the decades-long civil war, and because of the rise of deep social inequalities due to large-scale migration of civil war refugees from other Angolan regions. For decades, Luanda's facilities were not adequately expanded to handle this huge increase in the city's population.\n21st century.\nIn 2001 the provisional Angolan governments cleared the Boavista slum in Luanda Bay so that a luxury housing redevelopment was possible. Luanda has since become one of the world's most expensive cities.\nFollowing the Luanda Agreement in 2002, with the end of the Angolan Civil War and high economic growth rates fuelled by the wealth provided by the increasing oil and diamond production, major reconstruction started. Luanda has been of major concern because its population had multiplied and had far outgrown the capacity of the city, especially because much of its infrastructure including water, electricity, and roads had become obsolete and degraded.\nLuanda has been undergoing major road reconstruction in the 21st century, and new highways are planned to improve connections to Cacuaco, Viana, Samba, and the new airport. Major social housing is also being constructed to house those who reside in slums, which dominate the landscape of Luanda. A large Chinese firm has been given a contract to construct the majority of replacement housing in Luanda. The Angolan minister of health recently stated poverty in Angola will be overcome by an increase in jobs and the housing of every citizen.\nGeography.\nHuman geography.\nLuanda is divided into two parts, the \"Baixa de Luanda\" (lower Luanda, the old city) and the \"Cidade Alta\" (upper city or the new part). The \"Baixa de Luanda\" is situated next to the port, and has narrow streets and old colonial buildings. However, new constructions have by now covered large areas beyond these traditional limits, and a number of previously independent nuclei\u00a0\u2014 like Viana\u00a0\u2014 were incorporated into the city.\nMetropolitan Luanda.\nUntil 2011, the former Luanda Province comprised what now forms five municipalities. In 2011 the Province was enlarged by the addition of two additional municipalities transferred from Bengo Province, namely Icolo e Bengo, and Qui\u00e7ama. Excluding these additions, the five municipalities comprise Greater Luanda:\nTwo new municipalities have been created within Greater Luanda since 2017: Talatona and Kilamba-Kiaxi\nDistricts.\nThe city of Luanda is divided in six urban districts: Ingombota, Angola Quiluanje, Maianga, Rangel, Samba and Sambizanga.\nIn Samba and Sambizanga, more high-rise developments are to be built. The capital Luanda is growing constantly - and in addition, increasingly beyond the official city limits and even provincial boundaries.\nLuanda is the seat of a Roman Catholic archbishop. It is also the location of most of Angola's educational institutions, including the private Catholic University of Angola and the public University of Agostinho Neto. It is also the home of the colonial Governor's Palace and the Est\u00e1dio da Cidadela (the \"Citadel Stadium\"), Angola's main stadium, with a total seating capacity of 60,000.\nClimate.\nLuanda has a hot semi-desert climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"BSh\"), bordering upon a hot desert climate (\"BWh\"). The climate is warm to hot but surprisingly dry, owing to the cool Benguela Current, which prevents moisture from easily condensing into rain. Frequent fog prevents temperatures from falling at night even during the completely dry months from May to October. Luanda has an annual rainfall of , but the variability is among the highest in the world, with a co-efficient of variation above 40 percent. The climate is largely influenced by the offshore Benguela current. The current gives the city a surprisingly low humidity despite its tropical latitude, which makes the hotter months considerably more bearable than similar cities in Western/Central Africa. Observed records since 1858 range from in 1958 to in 1916. The short rainy season in March and April depends on a northerly counter current bringing moisture to the city: it has been shown clearly that weakness in the Benguela Current can increase rainfall about sixfold compared with years when that current is strong.\nClimate change.\nA 2019 paper published in PLOS One estimated that under Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5, a \"moderate\" scenario of climate change where global warming reaches ~ by 2100, the climate of Luanda in the year 2050 would most closely resemble the current climate of Guatemala City. The annual temperature would increase by , the temperature of the coldest month by , and the temperature of the warmest month by . According to Climate Action Tracker, the current warming trajectory appears consistent with , which closely matches RCP 4.5.\nMoreover, according to the 2022 IPCC Sixth Assessment Report, Luanda is one of 12 major African cities (Abidjan, Alexandria, Algiers, Cape Town, Casablanca, Dakar, Dar es Salaam, Durban, Lagos, Lom\u00e9, Luanda and Maputo) which would be the most severely affected by the future sea level rise. It estimates that they would collectively sustain cumulative damages of USD 65 billion under RCP 4.5 and USD 86.5 billion for the high-emission scenario RCP 8.5 by the year 2050. Additionally, RCP 8.5 combined with the hypothetical impact from marine ice sheet instability at high levels of warming would involve up to 137.5 billion USD in damages, while the additional accounting for the \"low-probability, high-damage events\" may increase aggregate risks to USD 187 billion for the \"moderate\" RCP4.5, USD 206 billion for RCP8.5 and USD 397 billion under the high-end ice sheet instability scenario. Since sea level rise would continue for about 10,000 years under every scenario of climate change, future costs of sea level rise would only increase, especially without adaptation measures.\nDemographics.\nThe inhabitants of Luanda are primarily members of African ethnic groups, mainly Ambundu, Ovimbundu, and Bakongo. The official and the most widely used language is Portuguese, although several Bantu languages are also used, chiefly Kimbundu, Umbundu, and Kikongo.\nThe population of Luanda has grown dramatically in recent years, due in large part to war-time migration to the city, which is safe compared to the rest of the country. In 2006, however, Luanda saw an increase in violent crime, particularly in the shanty towns that surround the colonial urban core.\nThere is a sizable minority population of European origin, especially Portuguese (about 260,000), as well as Brazilians. In recent years, mainly since the mid-2000s, immigration from Portugal has increased due to greater opportunities present in Angola's booming economy. There is a sprinkling of immigrants from other African countries as well, including a small expatriate South African community. A small number of people of Luanda are of mixed race \u2014 European/Portuguese and native African. Over the last decades, a significant Chinese community has formed, as has a much smaller Vietnamese community.\nPlaces of worship.\nAmong the places of worship, several are predominantly Christian churches and congregations:\nCulture.\nAs the economic and political center of Angola, Luanda is similarly the epicenter of Angolan culture. The city is home to numerous cultural institutions, including the Sindika Dokolo Foundation.\nThe city hosts the annual Luanda International Jazz Festival, since 2009, and houses the \"Clube N\u00e1utico da Ilha de Luanda\" (CNIL), translated as the \"Nautical Club of Luanda Island\". CNIL is a sports club founded on February 28, 1924, under the name \"Nun'Alvares Sports Club\" (\"Clube Desportivo Nun'Alvares\"), a name it kept until April 11, 1979, when following the order of the secretary of the National Council of Physical Education and Sport of Angola, which stated, that clubs with names related to colonialism should proceed to its replacement, the club had to change his name. Since its foundation it is the yacht club with most titles in Angola to date.\nThe city is home to numerous museums, including:\nOther monuments in the city include:\nEconomy.\nAround one-third of Angolans live in Luanda, 53% of whom live in poverty. Living conditions in Luanda are poor for most of the people, with essential services such as safe drinking water and electricity still in short supply, and severe shortcomings in traffic conditions.\nLuanda is one of the world's most expensive cities for resident foreigners. In Mercer's cost of living index, Luanda was ranked as top of the list due to the extremely high costs of goods and security. Luanda sits above Seoul, Geneva and Shanghai in the rankings. These costs have fueled rampant inequality in the city. Skyscrapers are left barren as the price of oil drops.\nNew import tariffs imposed in March 2014 made Luanda even more expensive. As an example, a half-litre tub of vanilla ice cream at the supermarket was reported to cost US$31. The higher import tariffs applied to hundreds of items, from garlic to cars. The stated aim was to try to diversify the heavily oil-dependent economy and nurture farming and industry, sectors that have remained weak. These tariffs have caused much hardship in a country where the average salary was US$260 per month in 2010, the latest year for which data was available. However, the average salary in the booming oil industry was over 20 times higher at US$5,400 per month.\nManufacturing includes processed foods, beverages, textiles, cement and other building materials, plastic products, metalware, cigarettes, and shoes/clothes. Petroleum (found in nearby off-shore deposits) is refined in the city, although this facility was repeatedly damaged during the Angolan Civil War of 1975\u20132002. Luanda has an excellent natural harbour; the chief exports are coffee, cotton, sugar, diamonds, iron, and salt.\nThe city also has a thriving building industry, an effect of the nationwide economic boom experienced since 2002, when political stability returned with the end of the civil war. Economic growth is largely supported by oil extraction activities, although great diversification is taking place. Large investment (domestic and international), along with strong economic growth, has dramatically increased construction of all economic sectors in the city of Luanda. In 2007, the first modern shopping mall in Angola was established in the city at Belas Shopping mall.\nTransport.\nRailway.\nLuanda is the starting point of the Luanda railway that goes due east to Malanje. The civil war left the railway non-functional, but the railway has been restored up to Dondo and Malanje.\nAirports.\nThe main airport of Luanda was Quatro de Fevereiro Airport, which is still the largest in the country. A new international airport, Angola International Airport was constructed southeast of the city, a few kilometres from Viana, and was expected to be opened in 2011. However, as the Angolan government did not continue to make the payments due to the Chinese enterprise in charge of the construction, the firm suspended its work in 2010. The airport finally opened in November 2023. The new airport will gradually replace the old airport.\nPort.\nThe Port of Luanda serves as the largest port of Angola and is one of the busiest ports in Africa. Major expansion of this port is also taking place. In 2014, a new port is being developed at Dande, about 30\u00a0km to the north.\nRoad transport.\nLuanda's roads are in a poor state of repair, but are undergoing an extensive reconstruction process by the government in order to relieve traffic congestion in the city. Major road repairs can be found taking place in nearly every neighbourhood, including a major 6-lane highway connected Luanda to Viana.\nPublic transport.\nPublic transit is provided by the suburban services of the Luanda Railway, by the public company TCUL, and by a large fleet of privately owned collective taxis as white-blue painted minibuses called \"Candongueiro\". Candongueiros are usually Toyota Hiace vans, that are built to carry 12 people, although the candongueiros usually carry at least 15 people. They charge from 100 to 200 kwanzas per trip. They are known to disobey traffic rules, for example not stopping at signs and driving over pavements and aisles.\nIn 2019, the Luanda Light Rail network with an estimated cost of US $3 billion was announced to begin construction in 2020.\nEducation.\nInternational schools:\nHigher education.\nUniversities:\nSports.\nLuanda's Pavilh\u00e3o Multiusos do Kilamba hosted games for Angola's national basketball team on many occasions.\nIn 2013 Luanda together with Namibe, today's Mo\u00e7\u00e2medes, hosted the 2013 FIRS Men's Roller Hockey World Cup, the first time that a World Cup of roller hockey was held in Africa. The city is home to the Desportivo do Bengo football club.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 Sister cities.\nLuanda is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18403", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18403", "title": "Logical positivism", "text": "Movement in Western philosophy\nLogical positivism, also known as logical empiricism or neo-positivism, was a philosophical movement, in the empiricist tradition, that sought to formulate a scientific philosophy in which philosophical discourse would be, in the perception of its proponents, as authoritative and meaningful as empirical science.\nLogical positivism's central thesis was the verification principle, also known as the \"verifiability criterion of meaning\", according to which a statement is \"cognitively meaningful\" only if it can be verified through empirical observation or if it is a tautology (true by virtue of its own meaning or its own logical form). The verifiability criterion thus rejected statements of metaphysics, theology, ethics and aesthetics as \"cognitively meaningless\" in terms of truth value or factual content. Despite its ambition to overhaul philosophy by mimicking the structure and process of empirical science, logical positivism became erroneously stereotyped as an agenda to regulate the scientific process and to place strict standards on it.\nThe movement emerged in the late 1920s among philosophers, scientists and mathematicians congregated within the Vienna Circle and Berlin Circle and flourished in several European centres through the 1930s. By the end of World War II, many of its members had settled in the English-speaking world and the project shifted to less radical goals within the philosophy of science.\nBy the 1950s, problems identified within logical positivism's central tenets became seen as intractable, drawing escalating criticism among leading philosophers, notably from Willard Van Orman Quine and Karl Popper, and even from within the movement, from Carl Hempel. These problems would remain unresolved, precipitating the movement's eventual decline and abandonment by the 1960s. In 1967, philosopher John Passmore pronounced logical positivism \"dead, or as dead as a philosophical movement ever becomes\".\nOrigins.\nLogical positivism emerged in Germany and Austria amid a cultural background characterised by the dominance of Hegelian metaphysics and the work of Hegelian successors such as F. H. Bradley, whose metaphysics portrayed the world without reference to empirical observation. The late 19th century also saw the emergence of neo-Kantianism as a philosophical movement, in the rationalist tradition.\nThe logical positivist program established its theoretical foundations in the empiricism of David Hume, Auguste Comte and Ernst Mach, along with the positivism of Comte and Mach, defining its exemplar of science in Einstein's general theory of relativity. In accordance with Mach's phenomenalism, whereby material objects exist only as sensory stimuli rather than as observable entities in the real world, logical positivists took all scientific knowledge to be only sensory experience. Further influence came from Percy Bridgman's operationalism\u2014whereby a concept is not knowable unless it can be measured experimentally\u2014as well as Immanuel Kant's perspectives on aprioricity.\nLudwig Wittgenstein's \"Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus\" established the theoretical foundations for the verifiability principle. His work introduced the view of philosophy as \"critique of language\", discussing theoretical distinctions between intelligible and nonsensical discourse. \"Tractatus\" adhered to a correspondence theory of truth, as opposed to a coherence theory of truth. Logical positivists were also influenced by Wittgenstein's interpretation of probability though, according to Neurath, some objected to the metaphysics in \"Tractatus\".\nHistory.\nVienna and Berlin Circles.\nThe Vienna Circle was led principally by Moritz Schlick, congregating around the University of Vienna and at the Caf\u00e9 Central. A manifesto written by Otto Neurath, Hans Hahn and Rudolf Carnap in 1929 summarised the Vienna Circle's positions. Schlick had originally held a neo-Kantian position, but later converted, via Carnap's 1928 book \"Der logische Aufbau der Welt\" (\"The Logical Structure of the World\"). The Viennese maintained closely cooperative ties with the Berlin Circle, among whom Hans Reichenbach was pre-eminent. Carl Hempel, who studied under Reichenbach in Germany, was also to prove influential in the movement's later history. A friendly but tenacious critic of the movement was Karl Popper, whom Neurath nicknamed the \"Official Opposition\".\nEarly in the movement, Carnap, Hahn, Neurath and others recognised that the verifiability criterion was too stringent in that it rejected universal statements, which are vital to scientific hypothesis. A radical \"left wing\" emerged from the Vienna Circle, led by Neurath and Carnap, who proposed revisions to weaken the criterion, a program they referred to as the \"liberalisation of empiricism\". A conservative \"right wing\", led by Schlick and Waismann, instead sought to classify universal statements as analytic truths, thereby to reconcile them with the existing criterion. Within the liberal wing Carnap emphasised fallibilism, as well as pragmatics, which he considered integral to empiricism. Neurath prescribed a move from Mach's phenomenalism to physicalism, though this would be opposed by Schlick. As Neurath and Carnap sought to pose science toward social reform, the split in the Vienna Circle also reflected political differences.\nBoth Schlick and Carnap had been influenced by and sought to define logical positivism versus the neo-Kantianism of Ernst Cassirer, the contemporary leading figure of the Marburg school, and against Edmund Husserl's phenomenology. Logical positivists especially opposed Martin Heidegger's obscure metaphysics, the epitome of what they had rejected through their epistemological doctrines. In the early 1930s, Carnap debated Heidegger over \"metaphysical pseudosentences\".\nAnglosphere.\nAs the movement's first emissary to the New World, Moritz Schlick visited Stanford University in 1929, yet otherwise remained in Vienna and was murdered in 1936 at the University by a former student, Johann Nelb\u00f6ck, who was reportedly deranged. That year, A. J. Ayer, a British attendee at various Vienna Circle meetings since 1933, published \"Language, Truth and Logic\", which imported logical positivism to the English-speaking world. In 1933, the Nazi Party's rise to power in Germany had triggered flight of intellectuals, which accelerated upon Germany's annexation of Austria in 1938. The logical positivists, many of whom were Jewish, were targeted and continued flight throughout the pre-war period. Their philosophy thus became dominant in the English-speaking world.\nBy the late 1930s, many in the movement had replaced phenomenalism with Neurath's physicalism, whereby material objects are not reducible to sensory stimuli but exist as publicly observable entities in the real world. Neurath settled in England, where he died in 1945. Carnap, Reichenbach and Hempel settled permanently in America.\nPost-war period.\nFollowing the Second World War, logical positivism\u2014now referred to by some as \"logical empiricism\"\u2014turned to less radical objectives in the philosophy of science. Led by Carl Hempel, who expounded the covering law model of scientific explanation, the movement became a major underpinning of analytic philosophy in the English-speaking world and its influence extended beyond philosophy into the social sciences. At the same time, the movement drew intensifying scrutiny over its central problems and its doctrines were increasingly criticised, most trenchantly by Willard Van Orman Quine, Norwood Hanson, Karl Popper, Thomas Kuhn and Carl Hempel.\nPrinciples.\nVerification and Confirmation.\nVerifiability Criterion of Meaning.\nAccording to the verifiability criterion of meaning, a statement is \"cognitively meaningful\" only if it is either verifiable by empirical observation or is an analytic truth (i.e. true by virtue of its own meaning or its own logical form). \"Cognitive meaningfulness\" was defined variably: possessing truth value; or corresponding to a possible state of affairs; or intelligible or understandable as are scientific statements. Other types of meaning\u2014for instance, emotive, expressive or figurative\u2014were dismissed from further review.\nMetaphysics, theology, as well as much of ethics and aesthetics failed this criterion, and so were found cognitively meaningless and only \"emotively meaningful\" (though, notably, Schlick considered ethical and aesthetic statements cognitively meaningful). Ethics and aesthetics were considered subjective preferences, while theology and metaphysics contained \"pseudostatements\" that were neither true nor false. Thus, logical positivism indirectly asserted Hume's law, the principle that factual statements cannot justify evaluative statements, and that the two are separated by an unbridgeable gap. A. J. Ayer's \"Language, Truth and Logic\" (1936) presented an extreme version of this principle\u2014the boo/hooray doctrine\u2014whereby all evaluative judgments are merely emotional reactions.\nRevisions to the criterion.\nLogical positivists in the Vienna Circle recognised quickly that the verifiability criterion was too restrictive. Specifically, universal statements were noted to be empirically unverifiable, rendering vital domains of science and reason, such as scientific hypothesis, \"cognitively meaningless\" under verificationism. This would pose significant problems for the logical positivist program, absent revisions to its criterion of meaning.\nIn his 1936 and 1937 papers, \"Testability and Meaning\", Carnap proposed \"confirmation\" in place of verification, determining that, though universal laws cannot be verified, they can be confirmed. Carnap employed abundant logical and mathematical tools to research an inductive logic that would account for probability according to \"degrees of confirmation\". However, he was never able to formulate a model. In Carnap's inductive logic, a universal law's degree of confirmation was always zero. The formulation of what eventually came to be called the \"criterion of cognitive significance\", stemming from this research, took three decades (Hempel 1950, Carnap 1956, Carnap 1961). Carl Hempel, who became a prominent critic of the logical positivist movement, elucidated the paradox of confirmation.\nIn his 1936 book, \"Language, Truth and Logic\", A. J. Ayer distinguished \"strong\" and \"weak\" verification. He stipulated that, \"A proposition is said to be verifiable, in the strong sense of the term, if, and only if, its truth could be conclusively established by experience\", but is verifiable in the weak sense \"if it is possible for experience to render it probable\". He would add that, \"no proposition, other than a tautology, can possibly be anything more than a probable hypothesis\". Thus, he would conclude that all are open to weak verification.\nAnalytic-synthetic distinction.\nIn theories of justification, \"a priori\" statements are those that can be known independently of observation, contrasting with \"a posteriori\" statements, which are dependent on observation. Statements may also be categorised into \"analytic\" and \"synthetic\": Analytic statements are true by virtue of their own meaning or their own logical form, therefore are tautologies that are true by necessity but uninformative about the world. Synthetic statements, in comparison, are contingent propositions that refer to a state of facts concerning the world.\nDavid Hume proposed an unambiguous distinction between analytic and synthetic, categorising knowledge exclusively as either \"relations of ideas\" (which are \"a priori\", analytic and abstract) or \"matters of fact and real existence\" (\"a posteriori\", synthetic and concrete), a classification referred to as Hume's fork. Immanuel Kant identified a further category of knowledge: Synthetic \"a priori\" statements, which are informative about the world, but known without observation. This principle is encapsulated in Kant's transcendental idealism, which attributes the mind a constructive role in phenomena whereby intuitive truths\u2014including synthetic \"a priori\" conceptions of space and time\u2014function as an interpretative filter for an observer's experience of the world. His thesis would serve to rescue Newton's law of universal gravitation from Hume's problem of induction by determining uniformity of nature to be in the category of \"a priori\" knowledge.\nThe Vienna Circle rejected Kant's conception of synthetic \"a priori\" knowledge given its incompatibility with the verifiability criterion. Yet, they adopted the Kantian position of defining mathematics and logic\u2014ordinarily considered synthetic truths\u2014as \"a priori\". Carnap's solution to this discrepancy would be to reinterpret logical truths as tautologies, redefining logic as analytic, building upon theoretical foundations established in Wittgenstein's \"Tractatus\". Mathematics, in turn, would be reduced to logic through the logicist approach proposed by Gottlob Frege. In effect, Carnap's reconstruction of analyticity expounded Hume's fork, affirming its analytic-synthetic distinction. This would be critically important in rendering the verification principle compatible with mathematics and logic.\nObservation-theory distinction.\nCarnap devoted much of his career to the cornerstone doctrine of \"rational reconstruction\", whereby scientific theories can be formalised into predicate logic and the components of a theory categorised into \"observation terms\" and \"theoretical terms\". Observation terms are specified by direct observation and thus assumed to have fixed empirical definitions, whereas theoretical terms refer to the unobservables of a theory, including abstract conceptions such as mathematical formulas. The two categories of primitive terms would be interconnected in meaning via a deductive interpretative framework, referred to as \"correspondence rules\".\nEarly in his research, Carnap postulated that correspondence rules could be used to define theoretical terms from observation terms, contending that scientific knowledge could be unified by reducing theoretical laws to \"protocol sentences\" grounded in observable facts. He would soon abandon this model of reconstruction, suggesting instead that theoretical terms could be defined implicitly by the axioms of a theory. Furthermore, that observation terms could, in some cases, garner meaning from theoretical terms via correspondence rules. Here, definition is said to be 'implicit' in that the axioms serve to exclude those interpretations that falsify the theory. Thus, axioms define theoretical terms indirectly by restricting the set of possible interpretations to those that are true interpretations.\nBy reconstructing the semantics of scientific language, Carnap's thesis builds upon earlier research in the reconstruction of syntax, referring to Bertrand Russell's logical atomism\u2014the view that statements in natural language can be converted to standardised subunits of meaning assembled via a logical syntax. Rational reconstruction is sometimes referred to as the \"received view\" or \"syntactic view of theories\" in the context of subsequent work by Carl Hempel, Ernest Nagel and Herbert Feigl.\nLogicism.\nBy reducing mathematics to logic, Bertrand Russell sought to convert the mathematical formulas of physics to symbolic logic. Gottlob Frege began this program of logicism, continuing it with Russell, but eventually lost interest. Russell then continued it with Alfred North Whitehead in their \"Principia Mathematica\", inspiring some of the more mathematical logical positivists, such as Hans Hahn and Rudolf Carnap.\nCarnap's early anti-metaphysical works employed Russell's theory of types. Like Russell, Carnap envisioned a universal language that could reconstruct mathematics and thereby encode physics. Yet Kurt G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorem showed this to be impossible, except in trivial cases, and Alfred Tarski's undefinability theorem finally undermined all hopes of reducing mathematics to logic. Thus, a universal language failed to stem from Carnap's 1934 work \"Logische Syntax der Sprache\" (\"Logical Syntax of Language\"). Still, some logical positivists, including Carl Hempel, continued support of logicism.\nPhilosophy of science.\nThe logical positivist movement shed much of its revolutionary zeal following the defeat of Nazism and the decline of rival philosophies that sought radical reform, notably Marburg neo-Kantianism, Husserlian phenomenology and Heidegger's existential hermeneutics. Hosted in the climate of American pragmatism and common sense empiricism, its proponents no longer crusaded to revise traditional philosophy into a radical \"scientific philosophy\", but became respectable members of a new philosophical subdiscipline, \"philosophy of science\". Receiving support from Ernest Nagel, they were especially influential in the social sciences.\nScientific explanation.\nCarl Hempel was prominent in the development of the deductive-nomological (DN) model, then the foremost model of scientific explanation defended even among critics of neo-positivism such as Popper. According to the DN model, a scientific explanation is valid only if it takes the form of a deductive inference from a set of explanatory premises (\"explanans\") to the observation or theory to be explained (\"explanandum\"). The model stipulates that the premises must refer to at least one law, which it defines as an unrestricted generalization of the conditional form: \"If \"A\", then \"B\"\". Laws therefore differ from mere \"regularities\" (\"George always carries only $1 bills in his wallet\") which do not necessarily support counterfactual claims. Furthermore, laws must be empirically verifiable in compliance with the verification principle.\nThe DN model ignores causal mechanisms beyond the principle of constant conjunction (\"first event \"A\" and then always event \"B\"\") in accordance with the Humean empiricist postulate that, though sequences of events are observable, the underpinning causal principles are not. Hempel stated that well-formulated natural laws (empirically confirmed regularities) are satisfactory in approximating causal explanation.\nHempel later proposed a probabilistic model of scientific explanation: The inductive-statistical (IS) model. Derivation of statistical laws from other statistical laws would further be designated as the deductive-statistical (DS) model. The DN and IS models are collectively referred to as the \"covering law model\" or \"subsumption theory\", the latter referring to the movement's stated goals of \"theory reduction\".\nUnity of science.\nLogical positivists were committed to the vision of a unified science encompassing all scientific fields (including the special sciences, such as biology, anthropology, sociology and economics, and \"the fundamental science\", or fundamental physics) which would be synthesised into a singular epistemic entity. Key to this concept was the doctrine of \"theory reduction\", according to which the covering law model would be used to interconnect the special sciences and, thereupon, to reduce all laws in the special sciences to fundamental physics.\nThe movement envisioned a universal scientific language that could express statements with common meaning intelligible to all scientific fields. Carnap sought to realise this goal through the systematic reduction of the linguistic terms of more specialised fields to those of more fundamental fields. Various methods of reduction were proposed, referring to the use of set theory to manipulate logically primitive concepts (as in Carnap's \"Logical Structure of the World\", 1928) or via analytic and \"a priori\" deductive operations (as described in \"Testability and Meaning\", 1936, 1937). A number of publications over a period of thirty years would attempt to elucidate this concept.\nCriticism.\nIn the post-war period, key tenets of logical positivism, including the verifiability criterion, analytic-synthetic distinction and observation-theory distinction, drew escalated criticism. This would become sustained from various directions by the 1950s, so that, even among fractious philosophers who disagreed on the general objectives of epistemology, most would concur that the logical positivist program had become untenable. Notable critics included Karl Popper, W. V. O. Quine, Norwood Hanson, Thomas Kuhn, Hilary Putnam, as well as J. L. Austin, Peter Strawson, Nelson Goodman and Richard Rorty. Hempel himself became a major critic from within the movement, denouncing the positivist thesis that empirical knowledge is restricted to \"basic statements\", \"observation statements\" or \"protocol statements\".\nKarl Popper.\nKarl Popper, a graduate of the University of Vienna, was an outspoken critic of the logical positivist movement from its inception. In \"Logik der Forschung\" (1934, published in English in 1959 as \"The Logic of Scientific Discovery\") he attacked verificationism directly, contending that the problem of induction renders it impossible for scientific hypotheses and other universal statements to be verified conclusively. Any attempt to do so, he argued, would commit the fallacy of affirming the consequent, given that verification cannot\u2014in itself\u2014exclude alternative valid explanations for a specific phenomenon or instance of observation. He would later affirm that the content of the verifiability criterion cannot be empirically verified, thus is meaningless by its own proposition and ultimately self-defeating as a principle.\nIn the same book, Popper proposed \"falsifiability\", which he presented, not as a criterion of \"cognitive meaning\" like verificationism (as commonly misunderstood), but as a criterion to distinguish scientific from non-scientific statements, thereby to demarcate the boundaries of science. Popper observed that, though universal statements cannot be verified, they can be falsified, and that the most productive scientific theories were apparently those that carried the greatest 'predictive risks' of being falsified by observation. He would conclude that the scientific method should be a hypothetico-deductive model, wherein scientific hypotheses must be falsifiable (per his criterion), held as provisionally true until proven false by observation, and are \"corroborated\" by supporting evidence rather than verified or confirmed.\nIn rejecting neo-positivist views of cognitive meaningfulness, Popper considered metaphysics to be rich in meaning and important in the origination of scientific theories and value systems to be integral to science's quest for truth. At the same time, he disparaged pseudoscience, referring to the confirmation biases that embolden support for unfalsifiable conjectures (notably those in psychology and psychoanalysis) and \"ad hoc\" arguments used to entrench predictive theories that have been proven conclusively false.\nWillard V. O. Quine.\nIn his influential 1951 paper \"Two Dogmas of Empiricism\", American philosopher and logicist Willard Van Orman Quine challenged the analytic-synthetic distinction. Specifically, Quine examined the concept of analyticity, determining that all attempts to explain the idea reduce ultimately to circular reasoning. He would conclude that, if analyticity is untenable, so too is the neo-positivist proposition to redefine its boundaries. Yet Carnap's reconstruction of analyticity was necessary for logic and mathematics to be deemed meaningful under verificationism. Quine's arguments encompassed numerous criticisms on this topic he had articulated to Carnap since 1933. His work effectively pronounced the verifiability criterion untenable, threatening to uproot the broader logical positivist project.\nNorwood Hanson.\nIn 1958, Norwood Hanson's \"Patterns of Discovery\" characterised the concept of theory-ladenness. Hanson and Thomas Kuhn held that even direct observations are never truly neutral in that they are \"laden with theory\", i.e. influenced by a system of theoretical presuppositions that function as an interpretative framework for the senses. Accordingly, individuals subscribed to different theories might report radically different observations even as they investigate the same phenomena. Hanson's thesis attacked the observation-theory distinction, which draws a dividing line between observational and non-observational (theoretical) language. More broadly, its findings challenged the central-most tenets of empiricism in questioning the infallibility and objectivity of empirical observation.\nThomas Kuhn.\nThomas Kuhn's landmark book of 1962, \"The Structure of Scientific Revolutions\"\u2014which discussed paradigm shifts in fundamental physics\u2014critically undermined confidence in scientific foundationalism. Kuhn proposed in its place a coherentist model of science, whereby scientific progress revolves around cores of established, coherent ideas which periodically undergo abrupt revolutionary changes.\nThough foundationalism was often considered a constituent doctrine of logical positivism (and Kuhn's thesis an epistemological criticism of the movement) such views were simplistic: In the 1930s, Neurath had argued for the adoption of coherentism, famously comparing the progress of science to reconstruction of a boat at sea. Carnap had entertained foundationalism from 1929 to 1930, but he, Hans Hahn and others would later join Neurath in converting to a coherentist philosophy. The conservative wing of the Vienna Circle under Moritz Schlick subscribed to a form of foundationalism, but its principles were defined unconventionally or ambiguously.\nIn some sense, Kuhn's book unified science, but through historical and social assessment rather than by networking the scientific specialties using epistemological or linguistic models. His ideas were adopted quickly by scholars in non-scientific disciplines, such as the social sciences in which neo-positivists were dominant, ushering academia into postpositivism or postempiricism.\nHilary Putnam.\nIn his critique of the received view in 1962, Hilary Putnam attacked the observation-theory distinction. Putnam proposed that the division between \"observation terms\" and \"theoretical terms\" was untenable, determining that both categories have the potential to be theory-laden. Accordingly, he remarked that observational reports frequently refer to theoretical terms in practice. He illustrated cases in which observation terms can be applied to entities that Carnap would classify as unobservables. For example, in Newton's corpuscular theory of light, observation concepts can be applied to the consideration of both sub-microscopic and macroscopic objects.\nPutnam advocated scientific realism, whereby scientific theory describes a real world existing independently of the senses. He rejected positivism, which he dismissed as a form of metaphysical idealism, in that it precluded any possibility to acquire knowledge of the unobservable aspects of nature. He also spurned instrumentalism, according to which a scientific theory is judged, not by whether it corresponds to reality, but by the extent to which it allows empirical predictions or resolves conceptual problems.\nDecline and legacy.\nIn 1967, John Passmore wrote, \"Logical positivism is dead, or as dead as a philosophical movement ever becomes\". His opinions concurred with widespread sentiment in academic circles that the movement had run its course by the late 1960s. Logical positivism's fall heralded postpositivism, distinguished by Popper's critical rationalism\u2014which characterised human knowledge as continuously evolving via conjectures and refutations\u2014and Kuhn's historical and social perspectives on the saltatory course of scientific progress.\nIn a 1976 interview, A. J. Ayer, who had introduced logical positivism to the English-speaking world in the 1930s, was asked what he saw as its main defects and answered that, \"nearly all of it was false\". Yet, he maintained that it was \"true in spirit\", referring to the principles of empiricism and reductionism whereby mental phenomena resolve to the material or physical and philosophical questions largely resolve to ones of language and meaning. Despite its problems, logical positivism helped to anchor analytic philosophy in the English-speaking world and its influence extended beyond philosophy in shaping the course of psychology and the social sciences. In the post-war period, Carl Hempel's contributions were vitally important in establishing the subdiscipline of the philosophy of science.\nLogical positivism's fall reopened the debate over the metaphysical merit of scientific theory, whether it can offer knowledge of the world beyond human experience (scientific realism) or whether it is simply an instrument to predict human experience (instrumentalism). Philosophers increasingly critiqued the movement's doctrine and history, often misrepresenting it without thorough examination, sometimes reducing it to oversimplifications and stereotypes, such as its association with foundationalism.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nArticles by logical positivists\nArticles on logical positivism"}
{"id": "18404", "revid": "262666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18404", "title": "Lorentz transformation", "text": "Family of linear transformations\nIn physics, the Lorentz transformations are a six-parameter family of linear transformations from a coordinate frame in spacetime to another frame that moves at a constant velocity relative to the former. The respective inverse transformation is then parameterized by the negative of this velocity. The transformations are named after the Dutch physicist Hendrik Lorentz.\nThe most common form of the transformation, parametrized by the real constant formula_1 representing a velocity confined to the x-direction, is expressed as\nformula_2\nwhere (\"t\", \"x\", \"y\", \"z\") and (\"t\"\u2032, \"x\"\u2032, \"y\"\u2032, \"z\"\u2032) are the coordinates of an event in two frames with the spatial origins coinciding at \"t\" = \"t\"\u2032 = 0, where the primed frame is seen from the unprimed frame as moving with speed v along the x-axis, where c is the speed of light, and \nformula_3\nis the Lorentz factor. When speed v is much smaller than c, the Lorentz factor is negligibly different from 1, but as v approaches c, formula_4 grows without bound. The value of v must be smaller than c for the transformation to make sense.\nExpressing the speed as a fraction of the speed of light, formula_5 an equivalent form of the transformation is\nformula_6\nFrames of reference can be divided into two groups: inertial (relative motion with constant velocity) and non-inertial (accelerating, moving in curved paths, rotational motion with constant angular velocity, etc.). The term \"Lorentz transformations\" only refers to transformations between \"inertial\" frames, usually in the context of special relativity.\nIn each reference frame, an observer can use a local coordinate system (usually Cartesian coordinates in this context) to measure lengths, and a clock to measure time intervals. An event is something that happens at a point in space at an instant of time, or more formally a point in spacetime. The transformations connect the space and time coordinates of an event as measured by an observer in each frame.\nThey supersede the Galilean transformation of Newtonian physics, which assumes an absolute space and time (see \"Galilean relativity\"). The Galilean transformation is a good approximation only at relative speeds much less than the speed of light. Lorentz transformations have a number of unintuitive features that do not appear in Galilean transformations. For example, they reflect the fact that observers moving at different velocities may measure different distances, elapsed times, and even different orderings of events, but always such that the speed of light is the same in all inertial reference frames. The invariance of light speed is one of the postulates of special relativity.\nHistorically, the transformations were the result of attempts by Lorentz and others to explain how the speed of light was observed to be independent of the reference frame, and to understand the symmetries of the laws of electromagnetism. The transformations later became a cornerstone for special relativity.\nThe Lorentz transformation is a linear transformation. It may include a rotation of space; a rotation-free Lorentz transformation is called a Lorentz boost. In Minkowski space\u2014the mathematical model of spacetime in special relativity\u2014the Lorentz transformations preserve the spacetime interval between any two events. They describe only the transformations in which the spacetime event at the origin is left fixed. They can be considered as a hyperbolic rotation of Minkowski space. The more general set of transformations that also includes translations is known as the Poincar\u00e9 group.\nHistory.\nMany physicists\u2014including Woldemar Voigt, George FitzGerald, Joseph Larmor, and Hendrik Lorentz himself\u2014had been discussing the physics implied by these equations since 1887. Early in 1889, Oliver Heaviside had shown from Maxwell's equations that the electric field surrounding a spherical distribution of charge should cease to have spherical symmetry once the charge is in motion relative to the luminiferous aether. FitzGerald then conjectured that Heaviside's distortion result might be applied to a theory of intermolecular forces. Some months later, FitzGerald published the conjecture that bodies in motion are being contracted, in order to explain the baffling outcome of the 1887 aether-wind experiment of Michelson and Morley. In 1892, Lorentz independently presented the same idea in a more detailed manner, which was subsequently called FitzGerald\u2013Lorentz contraction hypothesis. Their explanation was widely known before 1905.\nLorentz (1892\u20131904) and Larmor (1897\u20131900), who believed the luminiferous aether hypothesis, also looked for the transformation under which Maxwell's equations are invariant when transformed from the aether to a moving frame. They extended the FitzGerald\u2013Lorentz contraction hypothesis and found out that the time coordinate has to be modified as well (\"local time\"). Henri Poincar\u00e9 gave a physical interpretation to local time (to first order in \"v\"/\"c\", the relative velocity of the two reference frames normalized to the speed of light) as the consequence of clock synchronization, under the assumption that the speed of light is constant in moving frames. Larmor is credited to have been the first to understand the crucial time dilation property inherent in his equations.\nIn 1905, Poincar\u00e9 was the first to recognize that the transformation has the properties of a mathematical group,\nand he named it after Lorentz.\nLater in the same year Albert Einstein published what is now called special relativity, by deriving the Lorentz transformation under the assumptions of the principle of relativity and the constancy of the speed of light in any inertial reference frame, and by abandoning the mechanistic aether as unnecessary.\nDerivation of the group of Lorentz transformations.\nAn \"event\" is something that happens at a certain point in spacetime, or more generally, the point in spacetime itself. In any inertial frame an event is specified by a time coordinate \"ct\" and a set of Cartesian coordinates x, y, z to specify position in space in that frame. Subscripts label individual events.\nFrom Einstein's second postulate of relativity (invariance of c) it follows that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nin all inertial frames for events connected by \"light signals\". The quantity on the left is called the spacetime interval between events \"a\"1 = (\"t\"1, \"x\"1, \"y\"1, \"z\"1) and \"a\"2 = (\"t\"2, \"x\"2, \"y\"2, \"z\"2). The interval between \"any two\" events, not necessarily separated by light signals, is in fact invariant, i.e., independent of the state of relative motion of observers in different inertial frames, as is shown using homogeneity and isotropy of space. The transformation sought after thus must possess the property that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere (\"t\", \"x\", \"y\", \"z\") are the spacetime coordinates used to define events in one frame, and (\"t\"\u2032, \"x\"\u2032, \"y\"\u2032, \"z\"\u2032) are the coordinates in another frame. First one observes that (D2) is satisfied if an arbitrary 4-tuple b of numbers are added to events \"a\"1 and \"a\"2. Such transformations are called \"spacetime translations\" and are not dealt with further here. Then one observes that a \"linear\" solution preserving the origin of the simpler problem solves the general problem too:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\n(a solution satisfying the first formula automatically satisfies the second one as well; see \"Polarization identity\"). Finding the solution to the simpler problem is just a matter of look-up in the theory of classical groups that preserve bilinear forms of various signature. First equation in (D3) can be written more compactly as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere (\u00b7, \u00b7) refers to the bilinear form of signature (1, 3) on R4 exposed by the right hand side formula in (D3). The alternative notation defined on the right is referred to as the \"relativistic dot product\". Spacetime mathematically viewed as R4 endowed with this bilinear form is known as Minkowski space M. The Lorentz transformation is thus an element of the group O(1, 3), the Lorentz group or, for those that prefer the other metric signature, O(3, 1) (also called the Lorentz group). One has:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhich is precisely preservation of the bilinear form (D3) which implies (by linearity of \u039b and bilinearity of the form) that (D2) is satisfied. The elements of the Lorentz group are rotations and \"boosts\" and mixes thereof. If the spacetime translations are included, then one obtains the \"inhomogeneous Lorentz group\" or the Poincar\u00e9 group.\nGeneralities.\nThe relations between the primed and unprimed spacetime coordinates are the Lorentz transformations, each coordinate in one frame is a linear function of all the coordinates in the other frame, and the inverse functions are the inverse transformation. Depending on how the frames move relative to each other, and how they are oriented in space relative to each other, other parameters that describe direction, speed, and orientation enter the transformation equations.\nTransformations describing relative motion with constant (uniform) velocity and without rotation of the space coordinate axes are called Lorentz boosts or simply \"boosts\", and the relative velocity between the frames is the parameter of the transformation. The other basic type of Lorentz transformation is only a rotation in the spatial coordinates. Unlike boosts, these are inertial transformations since there is no relative motion, the frames are simply tilted (and not continuously rotating), and in this case quantities defining the rotation are the parameters of the transformation (e.g., axis\u2013angle representation, or Euler angles, etc.). A combination of a rotation and a boost is a \"homogeneous transformation\", which transforms the origin back to the origin.\nThe full Lorentz group O(3, 1) also contains special transformations that are neither rotations nor boosts, but rather reflections in a plane through the origin. Two of these can be singled out; spatial inversion in which the spatial coordinates of all events are reversed in sign and temporal inversion in which the time coordinate for each event gets its sign reversed.\nBoosts should not be conflated with mere displacements in spacetime; in this case, the coordinate systems are simply shifted and there is no relative motion. However, these also count as symmetries forced by special relativity since they leave the spacetime interval invariant. A combination of a rotation with a boost, followed by a shift in spacetime, is an \"inhomogeneous Lorentz transformation\", an element of the Poincar\u00e9 group, which is also called the inhomogeneous Lorentz group.\nPhysical formulation of Lorentz boosts.\nCoordinate transformation.\nA \"stationary\" observer in frame F defines events with coordinates t, x, y, z. Another frame \"F\"\u2032 moves with velocity v relative to F, and an observer in this \"moving\" frame \"F\"\u2032 defines events using the coordinates \"t\"\u2032, \"x\"\u2032, \"y\"\u2032, \"z\"\u2032.\nThe coordinate axes in each frame are parallel (the x and \"x\"\u2032 axes are parallel, the y and \"y\"\u2032 axes are parallel, and the z and \"z\"\u2032 axes are parallel), remain mutually perpendicular, and relative motion is along the coincident \"xx\"\u2032 axes. At \"t\" = \"t\"\u2032 = 0, the origins of both coordinate systems are the same, (\"x\", \"y\", \"z\") = (\"x\"\u2032, \"y\"\u2032, \"z\"\u2032) = (0, 0, 0). In other words, the times and positions are coincident at this event. If all these hold, then the coordinate systems are said to be in standard configuration, or synchronized.\nIf an observer in F records an event t, x, y, z, then an observer in \"F\"\u2032 records the \"same\" event with coordinates\nLorentz boost (x \" direction\")\nformula_7\nwhere v is the relative velocity between frames in the x-direction, c is the speed of light, and\nformula_8\n(lowercase gamma) is the Lorentz factor.\nHere, v is the \"parameter\" of the transformation, for a given boost it is a constant number, but can take a continuous range of values. In the setup used here, positive relative velocity \"v\" &gt; 0 is motion along the positive directions of the \"xx\"\u2032 axes, zero relative velocity \"v\" \n 0 is no relative motion, while negative relative velocity \"v\" &lt; 0 is relative motion along the negative directions of the \"xx\"\u2032 axes. The magnitude of relative velocity v cannot equal or exceed c, so only subluminal speeds \u2212\"c\" &lt; \"v\" &lt; \"c\" are allowed. The corresponding range of \u03b3 is 1 \u2264 \"\u03b3\" &lt; \u221e.\nThe transformations are not defined if v is outside these limits. At the speed of light (\"v\" \n \"c\") \u03b3 is infinite, and faster than light (\"v\" &gt; \"c\") \u03b3 is a complex number, each of which make the transformations unphysical. The space and time coordinates are measurable quantities and numerically must be real numbers.\nAs an active transformation, an observer in \"F\"\u2032 notices the coordinates of the event to be \"boosted\" in the negative directions of the \"xx\"\u2032 axes, because of the \u2212\"v\" in the transformations. This has the equivalent effect of the \"coordinate system\" \"F\"\u2032 boosted in the positive directions of the \"xx\"\u2032 axes, while the event does not change and is simply represented in another coordinate system, a passive transformation.\nThe inverse relations (t, x, y, z in terms of \"t\"\u2032, \"x\"\u2032, \"y\"\u2032, \"z\"\u2032) can be found by algebraically solving the original set of equations. A more efficient way is to use physical principles. Here \"F\"\u2032 is the \"stationary\" frame while F is the \"moving\" frame. According to the principle of relativity, there is no privileged frame of reference, so the transformations from \"F\"\u2032 to F must take exactly the same form as the transformations from F to \"F\"\u2032. The only difference is F moves with velocity \u2212\"v\" relative to \"F\"\u2032 (i.e., the relative velocity has the same magnitude but is oppositely directed). Thus if an observer in \"F\"\u2032 notes an event \"t\"\u2032, \"x\"\u2032, \"y\"\u2032, \"z\"\u2032, then an observer in F notes the \"same\" event with coordinates\nInverse Lorentz boost (x \" direction\")\nformula_9\nand the value of \u03b3 remains unchanged. This \"trick\" of simply reversing the direction of relative velocity while preserving its magnitude, and exchanging primed and unprimed variables, always applies to finding the inverse transformation of every boost in any direction.\nSometimes it is more convenient to use \"\u03b2\" \n \"v\"/\"c\" (lowercase beta) instead of v, so that\nformula_10\nwhich shows much more clearly the symmetry in the transformation. From the allowed ranges of v and the definition of \u03b2, it follows \u22121 &lt; \"\u03b2\" &lt; 1. The use of \u03b2 and \u03b3 is standard throughout the literature. In the case of three spatial dimensions [\"ct\", \"x\", \"y\", \"z\"], where the boost formula_11 is in the \"x\" direction, the eigenstates of the transformation are [1, 1, 0, 0] with eigenvalue formula_12, [1, \u22121, 0, 0] with eigenvalue formula_13, and [0, 0, 1, 0] and [0, 0, 0, 1], the latter two with eigenvalue 1.\u00a0\nWhen the boost velocity formula_14 is in an arbitrary vector direction with the boost vector formula_15, then the transformation from an unprimed spacetime coordinate system to a primed coordinate system is given by\nformula_16 \nwhere the Lorentz factor is formula_17. The determinant of the transformation matrix is +1 and its trace is formula_18. The inverse of the transformation is given by reversing the sign of formula_19. The quantity formula_20 is invariant under the transformation: namely formula_21.\nThe Lorentz transformations can also be derived in a way that resembles circular rotations in 3-dimensional space using the hyperbolic functions. For the boost in the x direction, the results are\nLorentz boost (x \" direction with rapidity \" \u03b6)\nformula_22\nwhere \u03b6 (lowercase zeta) is a parameter called \"rapidity\" (many other symbols are used, including \u03b8, \u03d5, \u03c6, \u03b7, \u03c8, \u03be). Given the strong resemblance to rotations of spatial coordinates in 3-dimensional space in the Cartesian \"xy\", \"yz\", and \"zx\" planes, a Lorentz boost can be thought of as a hyperbolic rotation of spacetime coordinates in the xt, yt, and zt Cartesian-time planes of 4-dimensional Minkowski space. The parameter \u03b6 is the hyperbolic angle of rotation, analogous to the ordinary angle for circular rotations. This transformation can be illustrated with a Minkowski diagram.\nThe hyperbolic functions arise from the \"difference\" between the squares of the time and spatial coordinates in the spacetime interval, rather than a sum. The geometric significance of the hyperbolic functions can be visualized by taking \"x\" = 0 or \"ct\" = 0 in the transformations. Squaring and subtracting the results, one can derive hyperbolic curves of constant coordinate values but varying \u03b6, which parametrizes the curves according to the identity\nformula_23\nConversely the \"ct\" and x axes can be constructed for varying coordinates but constant \u03b6. The definition\nformula_24\nprovides the link between a constant value of rapidity, and the slope of the \"ct\" axis in spacetime. A consequence these two hyperbolic formulae is an identity that matches the Lorentz factor\nformula_25\nComparing the Lorentz transformations in terms of the relative velocity and rapidity, or using the above formulae, the connections between \u03b2, \u03b3, and \u03b6 are\nformula_26\nTaking the inverse hyperbolic tangent gives the rapidity formula_27\nSince \u22121 &lt; \"\u03b2\" &lt; 1, it follows \u2212\u221e &lt; \"\u03b6\" &lt; \u221e. From the relation between \u03b6 and \u03b2, positive rapidity \"\u03b6\" &gt; 0 is motion along the positive directions of the \"xx\"\u2032 axes, zero rapidity \"\u03b6\" = 0 is no relative motion, while negative rapidity \"\u03b6\" &lt; 0 is relative motion along the negative directions of the \"xx\"\u2032 axes.\nThe inverse transformations are obtained by exchanging primed and unprimed quantities to switch the coordinate frames, and negating rapidity \"\u03b6\" \u2192 \u2212\"\u03b6\" since this is equivalent to negating the relative velocity. Therefore,\nInverse Lorentz boost (x \" direction with rapidity \" \u03b6)\nformula_28\nThe inverse transformations can be similarly visualized by considering the cases when \"x\"\u2032 = 0 and \"ct\"\u2032 = 0.\nSo far the Lorentz transformations have been applied to \"one event\". If there are two events, there is a spatial separation and time interval between them. It follows from the linearity of the Lorentz transformations that two values of space and time coordinates can be chosen, the Lorentz transformations can be applied to each, then subtracted to get the Lorentz transformations of the differences:\nformula_29\nwith inverse relations\nformula_30\nwhere \u0394 (uppercase delta) indicates a difference of quantities; e.g., \u0394\"x\" = \"x\"2 \u2212 \"x\"1 for two values of x coordinates, and so on.\nThese transformations on \"differences\" rather than spatial points or instants of time are useful for a number of reasons:\nPhysical implications.\nA critical requirement of the Lorentz transformations is the invariance of the speed of light, a fact used in their derivation, and contained in the transformations themselves. If in F the equation for a pulse of light along the x direction is \"x\" = \"ct\", then in F\u2032 the Lorentz transformations give \"x\"\u2032 = \"ct\"\u2032, and vice versa, for any \u2212\"c\" &lt; \"v\" &lt; \"c\".\nFor relative speeds much less than the speed of light, the Lorentz transformations reduce to the Galilean transformation:\nformula_31\nin accordance with the correspondence principle. It is sometimes said that nonrelativistic physics is a physics of \"instantaneous action at a distance\".\nThree counterintuitive, but correct, predictions of the transformations are:\nVector transformations.\nThe use of vectors allows positions and velocities to be expressed in arbitrary directions compactly. A single boost in any direction depends on the full relative velocity vector v with a magnitude |v| = \"v\" that cannot equal or exceed c, so that 0 \u2264 \"v\" &lt; \"c\".\nOnly time and the coordinates parallel to the direction of relative motion change, while those coordinates perpendicular do not. With this in mind, split the spatial position vector r as measured in F, and r\u2032 as measured in \"F\"\u2032, each into components perpendicular (\u22a5) and parallel (||) to v,\nformula_33\nthen the transformations are\nformula_34\nwhere \u00b7 is the dot product. The Lorentz factor \u03b3 retains its definition for a boost in any direction, since it depends only on the magnitude of the relative velocity. The definition \u03b2 = v/\"c\" with magnitude 0 \u2264 \"\u03b2\" &lt; 1 is also used by some authors.\nIntroducing a unit vector n = v/\"v\" = \u03b2/\"\u03b2\" in the direction of relative motion, the relative velocity is v = \"v\"n with magnitude v and direction n, and vector projection and rejection give respectively\nformula_35\nAccumulating the results gives the full transformations,\nLorentz boost (\"in direction \" n \" with magnitude \" v)\nformula_36\nThe projection and rejection also applies to r\u2032. For the inverse transformations, exchange r and r\u2032 to switch observed coordinates, and negate the relative velocity v \u2192 \u2212v (or simply the unit vector n \u2192 \u2212n since the magnitude v is always positive) to obtain\nInverse Lorentz boost (\"in direction \" n \" with magnitude \" v)\nformula_37\nThe unit vector has the advantage of simplifying equations for a single boost, allows either v or \u03b2 to be reinstated when convenient, and the rapidity parametrization is immediately obtained by replacing \u03b2 and \"\u03b2\u03b3\". It is not convenient for multiple boosts.\nThe vectorial relation between relative velocity and rapidity is\nformula_38\nand the \"rapidity vector\" can be defined as\nformula_39\neach of which serves as a useful abbreviation in some contexts. The magnitude of \u03b6 is the absolute value of the rapidity scalar confined to 0 \u2264 \"\u03b6\" &lt; \u221e, which agrees with the range 0 \u2264 \"\u03b2\" &lt; 1.\nTransformation of velocities.\nDefining the coordinate velocities and Lorentz factor by\nformula_40\ntaking the differentials in the coordinates and time of the vector transformations, then dividing equations, leads to\nformula_41\nThe velocities u and u\u2032 are the velocity of some massive object. They can also be for a third inertial frame (say F\u2032\u2032), in which case they must be \"constant\". Denote either entity by X. Then X moves with velocity u relative to F, or equivalently with velocity u\u2032 relative to F\u2032, in turn F\u2032 moves with velocity v relative to F. The inverse transformations can be obtained in a similar way, or as with position coordinates exchange u and u\u2032, and change v to \u2212v.\nThe transformation of velocity is useful in stellar aberration, the Fizeau experiment, and the relativistic Doppler effect.\nThe Lorentz transformations of acceleration can be similarly obtained by taking differentials in the velocity vectors, and dividing these by the time differential.\nTransformation of other quantities.\nIn general, given four quantities A and Z = (\"Z\"\"x\", \"Z\"\"y\", \"Z\"\"z\") and their Lorentz-boosted counterparts A\u2032 and Z\u2032 = (\"Z\"\u2032\"x\", \"Z\"\u2032\"y\", \"Z\"\u2032\"z\"), a relation of the form\nformula_42\nimplies the quantities transform under Lorentz transformations similar to the transformation of spacetime coordinates;\nformula_43\nThe decomposition of Z (and Z\u2032) into components perpendicular and parallel to v is exactly the same as for the position vector, as is the process of obtaining the inverse transformations (exchange (\"A\", Z) and (\"A\"\u2032, Z\u2032) to switch observed quantities, and reverse the direction of relative motion by the substitution n \u21a6 \u2212n).\nThe quantities (\"A\", Z) collectively make up a \"four-vector\", where A is the \"timelike component\", and Z the \"spacelike component\". Examples of A and Z are the following:\nFor a given object (e.g., particle, fluid, field, material), if A or Z correspond to properties specific to the object like its charge density, mass density, spin, etc., its properties can be fixed in the rest frame of that object. Then the Lorentz transformations give the corresponding properties in a frame moving relative to the object with constant velocity. This breaks some notions taken for granted in non-relativistic physics. For example, the energy E of an object is a scalar in non-relativistic mechanics, but not in relativistic mechanics because energy changes under Lorentz transformations; its value is different for various inertial frames. In the rest frame of an object, it has a rest energy and zero momentum. In a boosted frame its energy is different and it appears to have a momentum. Similarly, in non-relativistic quantum mechanics the spin of a particle is a constant vector, but in relativistic quantum mechanics spin s depends on relative motion. In the rest frame of the particle, the spin pseudovector can be fixed to be its ordinary non-relativistic spin with a zero timelike quantity \"s\"\"t\", however a boosted observer will perceive a nonzero timelike component and an altered spin.\nNot all quantities are invariant in the form as shown above, for example orbital angular momentum L does not have a timelike quantity, and neither does the electric field E nor the magnetic field B. The definition of angular momentum is L = r \u00d7 p, and in a boosted frame the altered angular momentum is L\u2032 = r\u2032 \u00d7 p\u2032. Applying this definition using the transformations of coordinates and momentum leads to the transformation of angular momentum. It turns out L transforms with another vector quantity N = (\"E\"/\"c\"2)r \u2212 \"t\"p related to boosts, see \"Relativistic angular momentum\" for details. For the case of the E and B fields, the transformations cannot be obtained as directly using vector algebra. The Lorentz force is the definition of these fields, and in F it is F = \"q\"(E + v \u00d7 B) while in F\u2032 it is F\u2032 = \"q\"(E\u2032 + v\u2032 \u00d7 B\u2032). A method of deriving the EM field transformations in an efficient way which also illustrates the unit of the electromagnetic field uses tensor algebra, given below.\nMathematical formulation.\nThroughout, italic non-bold capital letters are 4 \u00d7 4 matrices, while non-italic bold letters are 3 \u00d7 3 matrices.\nHomogeneous Lorentz group.\nWriting the coordinates in column vectors and the Minkowski metric \u03b7 as a square matrix\nformula_44\nthe spacetime interval takes the form (superscript T denotes transpose)\nformula_45\nand is invariant under a Lorentz transformation\nformula_46\nwhere \u039b is a square matrix which can depend on parameters.\nThe set of all Lorentz transformations formula_47 in this article is denoted formula_48. This set together with matrix multiplication forms a group, in this context known as the \"Lorentz group\". Also, the above expression \"X\"\u00b7\"X\" is a quadratic form of signature (3,1) on spacetime, and the group of transformations which leaves this quadratic form invariant is the indefinite orthogonal group O(3,1), a Lie group. In other words, the Lorentz group is O(3,1). As presented in this article, any Lie groups mentioned are matrix Lie groups. In this context the operation of composition amounts to matrix multiplication.\nFrom the invariance of the spacetime interval it follows\nformula_49\nand this matrix equation contains the general conditions on the Lorentz transformation to ensure invariance of the spacetime interval. Taking the determinant of the equation using the product rule gives immediately\nformula_50\nWriting the Minkowski metric as a block matrix, and the Lorentz transformation in the most general form,\nformula_51\ncarrying out the block matrix multiplications obtains general conditions on \u0393, a, b, M to ensure relativistic invariance. Not much information can be directly extracted from all the conditions, however one of the results\nformula_52\nis useful; bTb \u2265 0 always so it follows that\nformula_53\nThe negative inequality may be unexpected, because \u0393 multiplies the time coordinate and this has an effect on time symmetry. If the positive equality holds, then \u0393 is the Lorentz factor.\nThe determinant and inequality provide four ways to classify Lorentz Transformations (\"herein LTs for brevity\"). Any particular LT has only one determinant sign \"and\" only one inequality. There are four sets which include every possible pair given by the intersections (\"n\"-shaped symbol meaning \"and\") of these classifying sets.\nwhere \"+\" and \"\u2212\" indicate the determinant sign, while \"\u2191\" for \u2265 and \"\u2193\" for \u2264 denote the inequalities.\nThe full Lorentz group splits into the union (\"u\"-shaped symbol meaning \"or\") of four disjoint sets\nformula_54\nA subgroup of a group must be closed under the same operation of the group (here matrix multiplication). In other words, for two Lorentz transformations \u039b and L from a particular subgroup, the composite Lorentz transformations \u039b\"L\" and \"L\"\u039b must be in the same subgroup as \u039b and L. This is not always the case: the composition of two antichronous Lorentz transformations is orthochronous, and the composition of two improper Lorentz transformations is proper. In other words, while the sets formula_55, formula_56, formula_57, and formula_58 all form subgroups, the sets containing improper and/or antichronous transformations without enough proper orthochronous transformations (e.g. formula_59, formula_60, formula_61) do not form subgroups.\nProper transformations.\nIf a Lorentz covariant 4-vector is measured in one inertial frame with result formula_62, and the same measurement made in another inertial frame (with the same orientation and origin) gives result formula_63, the two results will be related by\nformula_64\nwhere the boost matrix formula_65 represents the rotation-free Lorentz transformation between the unprimed and primed frames and formula_66 is the velocity of the primed frame as seen from the unprimed frame. The matrix is given by\nformula_67\nwhere formula_68 is the magnitude of the velocity and formula_69 is the Lorentz factor. This formula represents a passive transformation, as it describes how the coordinates of the measured quantity changes from the unprimed frame to the primed frame. The active transformation is given by formula_70.\nIf a frame \"F\"\u2032 is boosted with velocity u relative to frame F, and another frame F\u2032\u2032 is boosted with velocity v relative to \"F\"\u2032, the separate boosts are\nformula_71\nand the composition of the two boosts connects the coordinates in \"F\"\u2032\u2032 and F,\nformula_72\nSuccessive transformations act on the left. If u and v are collinear (parallel or antiparallel along the same line of relative motion), the boost matrices commute: \"B\"(v)\"B\"(u) \n \"B\"(u)\"B\"(v). This composite transformation happens to be another boost, \"B\"(w), where w is collinear with u and v.\nIf u and v are not collinear but in different directions, the situation is considerably more complicated. Lorentz boosts along different directions do not commute: \"B\"(v)\"B\"(u) and \"B\"(u)\"B\"(v) are not equal. Although each of these compositions is \"not\" a single boost, each composition is still a Lorentz transformation as it preserves the spacetime interval. It turns out the composition of any two Lorentz boosts is equivalent to a boost followed or preceded by a rotation on the spatial coordinates, in the form of \"R\"(\u03c1)\"B\"(w) or \"B\"(w)\"R\"(\u03c1). The w and are composite velocities, while \u03c1 and are rotation parameters (e.g. axis-angle variables, Euler angles, etc.). The rotation in block matrix form is simply\nformula_73\nwhere R(\u03c1) is a 3 \u00d7 3 rotation matrix, which rotates any 3-dimensional vector in one sense (active transformation), or equivalently the coordinate frame in the opposite sense (passive transformation). It is \"not\" simple to connect w and \u03c1 (or and ) to the original boost parameters u and v. In a composition of boosts, the R matrix is named the Wigner rotation, and gives rise to the Thomas precession. These articles give the explicit formulae for the composite transformation matrices, including expressions for w, \u03c1, w, \u03c1.\nIn this article the axis-angle representation is used for \u03c1. The rotation is about an axis in the direction of a unit vector e, through angle \u03b8 (positive anticlockwise, negative clockwise, according to the right-hand rule). The \"axis-angle vector\"\nformula_74\nwill serve as a useful abbreviation.\nSpatial rotations alone are also Lorentz transformations since they leave the spacetime interval invariant. Like boosts, successive rotations about different axes do not commute. Unlike boosts, the composition of any two rotations is equivalent to a single rotation. Some other similarities and differences between the boost and rotation matrices include:\nThe most general proper Lorentz transformation \u039b(v, \u03b8) includes a boost and rotation together, and is a nonsymmetric matrix. As special cases, \u039b(0, \u03b8) = \"R\"(\u03b8) and \u039b(v, 0) = \"B\"(v). An explicit form of the general Lorentz transformation is cumbersome to write down and will not be given here. Nevertheless, closed form expressions for the transformation matrices will be given below using group theoretical arguments. It will be easier to use the rapidity parametrization for boosts, in which case one writes \u039b(\u03b6, \u03b8) and \"B\"(\u03b6).\nLie group SO+(3,1).\nThe set of transformations\nformula_75\nwith matrix multiplication as the operation of composition forms a group, called the \"restricted Lorentz group\", and is the special indefinite orthogonal group SO+(3,1). (The plus sign indicates that it preserves the orientation of the temporal dimension).\nFor simplicity, look at the infinitesimal Lorentz boost in the x direction (examining a boost in any other direction, or rotation about any axis, follows an identical procedure). The infinitesimal boost is a small boost away from the identity, obtained by the Taylor expansion of the boost matrix to first order about \"\u03b6\" = 0,\nformula_76\nwhere the higher order terms not shown are negligible because \u03b6 is small, and \"B\"\"x\" is simply the boost matrix in the \"x\" direction. The derivative of the matrix is the matrix of derivatives (of the entries, with respect to the same variable), and it is understood the derivatives are found first then evaluated at \"\u03b6\" = 0,\nformula_77\nFor now, \"K\"\"x\" is defined by this result (its significance will be explained shortly). In the limit of an infinite number of infinitely small steps, the finite boost transformation in the form of a matrix exponential is obtained\nformula_78\nwhere the limit definition of the exponential has been used (see also \"Characterizations of the exponential function\"). More generally\nformula_79\nThe axis-angle vector \u03b8 and rapidity vector \u03b6 are altogether six continuous variables which make up the group parameters (in this particular representation), and the generators of the group are K = (\"K\"\"x\", \"K\"\"y\", \"K\"\"z\") and J = (\"J\"\"x\", \"J\"\"y\", \"J\"\"z\"), each vectors of matrices with the explicit forms\nformula_80\nThese are all defined in an analogous way to \"K\"\"x\" above, although the minus signs in the boost generators are conventional. Physically, the generators of the Lorentz group correspond to important symmetries in spacetime: J are the \"rotation generators\" which correspond to angular momentum, and K are the \"boost generators\" which correspond to the motion of the system in spacetime. The derivative of any smooth curve \"C\"(\"t\") with \"C\"(0) = \"I\" in the group depending on some group parameter t with respect to that group parameter, evaluated at \"t\" = 0, serves as a definition of a corresponding group generator G, and this reflects an infinitesimal transformation away from the identity. The smooth curve can always be taken as an exponential as the exponential will always map G smoothly back into the group via \"t\" \u2192 exp(\"tG\") for all t; this curve will yield G again when differentiated at \"t\" = 0.\nExpanding the exponentials in their Taylor series obtains\nformula_81\nformula_82\nwhich compactly reproduce the boost and rotation matrices as given in the previous section.\nIt has been stated that the general proper Lorentz transformation is a product of a boost and rotation. At the \"infinitesimal\" level the product\nformula_83\nis commutative because only linear terms are required (products like (\u03b8\u00b7J)(\u03b6\u00b7K) and (\u03b6\u00b7K)(\u03b8\u00b7J) count as higher order terms and are negligible). Taking the limit as before leads to the finite transformation in the form of an exponential\nformula_84\nThe converse is also true, but the decomposition of a finite general Lorentz transformation into such factors is nontrivial. In particular,\nformula_85\nbecause the generators do not commute. For a description of how to find the factors of a general Lorentz transformation in terms of a boost and a rotation \"in principle\" (this usually does not yield an intelligible expression in terms of generators J and K), see \"Wigner rotation\". If, on the other hand, \"the decomposition is given\" in terms of the generators, and one wants to find the product in terms of the generators, then the Baker\u2013Campbell\u2013Hausdorff formula applies.\nLie algebra so(3,1).\nLorentz generators can be added together, or multiplied by real numbers, to obtain more Lorentz generators. In other words, the set of all Lorentz generators\nformula_86\ntogether with the operations of ordinary matrix addition and multiplication of a matrix by a number, forms a vector space over the real numbers. The generators \"J\"\"x\", \"J\"\"y\", \"J\"\"z\", \"K\"\"x\", \"K\"\"y\", \"K\"\"z\" form a basis set of \"V\", and the components of the axis-angle and rapidity vectors, \"\u03b8\"\"x\", \"\u03b8\"\"y\", \"\u03b8\"\"z\", \"\u03b6\"\"x\", \"\u03b6\"\"y\", \"\u03b6\"\"z\", are the coordinates of a Lorentz generator with respect to this basis.\nThree of the commutation relations of the Lorentz generators are\nformula_87\nwhere the bracket [\"A\", \"B\"] = \"AB\" \u2212 \"BA\" is known as the \"commutator\", and the other relations can be found by taking cyclic permutations of x, y, z components (i.e. change x to y, y to z, and z to x, repeat).\nThese commutation relations, and the vector space of generators, fulfill the definition of the Lie algebra formula_88. In summary, a Lie algebra is defined as a vector space \"V\" over a field of numbers, and with a binary operation [ , ] (called a Lie bracket in this context) on the elements of the vector space, satisfying the axioms of bilinearity, alternatization, and the Jacobi identity. Here the operation [ , ] is the commutator which satisfies all of these axioms, the vector space is the set of Lorentz generators \"V\" as given previously, and the field is the set of real numbers.\nLinking terminology used in mathematics and physics: A group generator is any element of the Lie algebra. A group parameter is a component of a coordinate vector representing an arbitrary element of the Lie algebra with respect to some basis. A basis, then, is a set of generators being a basis of the Lie algebra in the usual vector space sense.\nThe exponential map from the Lie algebra to the Lie group,\nformula_89\nprovides a one-to-one correspondence between small enough neighborhoods of the origin of the Lie algebra and neighborhoods of the identity element of the Lie group. In the case of the Lorentz group, the exponential map is just the matrix exponential. Globally, the exponential map is not one-to-one, but in the case of the Lorentz group, it is surjective (onto). Hence any group element in the connected component of the identity can be expressed as an exponential of an element of the Lie algebra.\nImproper transformations.\nLorentz transformations also include parity inversion\nformula_90\nwhich negates all the spatial coordinates only, and time reversal\nformula_91\nwhich negates the time coordinate only, because these transformations leave the spacetime interval invariant. Here I is the 3 \u00d7 3 identity matrix. These are both symmetric, they are their own inverses (see \"Involution (mathematics)\"), and each have determinant \u22121. This latter property makes them improper transformations.\nIf \u039b is a proper orthochronous Lorentz transformation, then \"T\"\u039b is improper antichronous, \"P\"\u039b is improper orthochronous, and \"TP\"\u039b = \"PT\"\u039b is proper antichronous.\nInhomogeneous Lorentz group.\nTwo other spacetime symmetries have not been accounted for. In order for the spacetime interval to be invariant, it can be shown that it is necessary and sufficient for the coordinate transformation to be of the form\nformula_92\nwhere \"C\" is a constant column containing translations in time and space. If \"C\" \u2260 0, this is an inhomogeneous Lorentz transformation or Poincar\u00e9 transformation. If \"C\" = 0, this is a homogeneous Lorentz transformation. Poincar\u00e9 transformations are not dealt further in this article.\nTensor formulation.\nContravariant vectors.\nWriting the general matrix transformation of coordinates as the matrix equation\nformula_93\nFor the magnetic field one obtains\nformula_94\nFor the electric field results\nformula_95\nHere, \u03b2 = (\"\u03b2\", 0, 0) is used. These results can be summarized by\nformula_96\nand are independent of the metric signature. For SI units, substitute \"E\" \u2192 \"E\"/\"c\". refer to this last form as the 3 + 1 view as opposed to the \"geometric view\" represented by the tensor expression\nformula_97\nand make a strong point of the ease with which results that are difficult to achieve using the 3 + 1 view can be obtained and understood. Only objects that have well defined Lorentz transformation properties (in fact under \"any\" smooth coordinate transformation) are geometric objects. In the geometric view, the electromagnetic field is a six-dimensional geometric object in \"spacetime\" as opposed to two interdependent, but separate, 3-vector fields in \"space\" and \"time\". The fields E (alone) and B (alone) do not have well defined Lorentz transformation properties. The mathematical underpinnings are equations (T1) and (T2) that immediately yield (T3). One should note that the primed and unprimed tensors refer to the \"same event in spacetime\". Thus the complete equation with spacetime dependence is\nformula_98\nLength contraction has an effect on charge density \u03c1 and current density J, and time dilation has an effect on the rate of flow of charge (current), so charge and current distributions must transform in a related way under a boost. It turns out they transform exactly like the space-time and energy-momentum four-vectors,\nformula_99\nor, in the simpler geometric view,\nformula_100\nCharge density transforms as the time component of a four-vector. It is a rotational scalar. The current density is a 3-vector.\nThe Maxwell equations are invariant under Lorentz transformations.\nSpinors.\nEquation (T1) hold unmodified for any representation of the Lorentz group, including the bispinor representation. In (T2) one simply replaces all occurrences of \u039b by the bispinor representation \u03a0(\u039b),\nformula_101 (T4)\nThe above equation could, for instance, be the transformation of a state in Fock space describing two free electrons.\nTransformation of general fields.\nA general \"noninteracting\" multi-particle state (Fock space state) in quantum field theory transforms according to the rule\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \\left( \\sum_{\\sigma_1'\\sigma_2' \\cdots} D_{\\sigma_1'\\sigma_1}^{(j_1)}\\left[W(\\Lambda, p_1)\\right] D_{\\sigma_2'\\sigma_2}^{(j_2)}\\left[W(\\Lambda, p_2)\\right] \\cdots \\right)\n \\Psi_{\\Lambda p_1 \\sigma_1' n_1; \\Lambda p_2 \\sigma_2' n_2; \\cdots},\n \\end{align}&lt;/math&gt;\n | 1\nwhere \"W\"(\u039b, \"p\") is the Wigner's little group and \"D\"(\"j\") is the representation of SO(3).\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nPapers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18405", "revid": "20296737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18405", "title": "Lorentz invariance", "text": ""}
{"id": "18406", "revid": "41795850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18406", "title": "Luminiferous aether", "text": "Obsolete postulated medium for the propagation of light\nLuminiferous aether or ether (\"luminiferous\" meaning 'light-bearing') is the formerly postulated medium for the propagation of light. It was invoked to explain the ability of the apparently wave-based light to propagate through empty space (a vacuum), something that waves should not be able to do. The assumption of a spatial plenum (space completely filled with matter) of luminiferous aether, rather than a spatial vacuum, provided the theoretical medium that was required by wave theories of light.\nThe aether hypothesis was the topic of considerable debate throughout its history, as it required the existence of an invisible and infinite material with no interaction with physical objects. As the nature of light was explored, especially in the 19th century, the physical qualities required of an aether became increasingly contradictory. By the late 19th century, the existence of the aether was being questioned, although there was no physical theory to replace it.\nThe negative outcome of the Michelson\u2013Morley experiment (1887) suggested that the aether did not exist, a finding that was confirmed in subsequent experiments through the 1920s. This led to considerable theoretical work to explain the propagation of light without an aether. A major breakthrough was the special theory of relativity, which could explain why the experiment failed to see aether, but was more broadly interpreted to suggest that it was not needed. The Michelson\u2013Morley experiment, along with the blackbody radiator and photoelectric effect, was a key experiment in the development of modern physics, which includes both relativity and quantum theory, the latter of which explains the particle-like nature of light.\nHistory of light and aether.\nParticles vs. waves.\nIn the 17th century, Robert Boyle was a proponent of an aether hypothesis. According to Boyle, the aether consists of subtle particles, one sort of which explains the absence of vacuum and the mechanical interactions between bodies, and the other sort of which explains phenomena such as magnetism (and possibly gravity) that are, otherwise, inexplicable on the basis of purely mechanical interactions of macroscopic bodies, \"though in the ether of the ancients there was nothing taken notice of but a diffused and very subtle substance; yet we are at present content to allow that there is always in the air a swarm of streams moving in a determinate course between the north pole and the south\".\nChristiaan Huygens's \"Treatise on Light\" (1690) hypothesized that light is a wave propagating through an aether. He and Isaac Newton could only envision light waves as being longitudinal, propagating like sound and other mechanical waves in fluids. However, longitudinal waves necessarily have only one form for a given propagation direction, rather than two polarizations like a transverse wave. Thus, longitudinal waves can not explain birefringence, in which two polarizations of light are refracted differently by a crystal. In addition, Newton rejected light as waves in a medium because such a medium would have to extend everywhere in space, and would thereby \"disturb and retard the Motions of those great Bodies\" (the planets and comets) and thus \"as it [light's medium] is of no use, and hinders the Operation of Nature, and makes her languish, so there is no evidence for its Existence, and therefore it ought to be rejected\".\nIsaac Newton contended that light is made up of numerous small particles. This can explain such features as light's ability to travel in straight lines and reflect off surfaces. Newton imagined light particles as non-spherical \"corpuscles\", with different \"sides\" that give rise to birefringence. But the particle theory of light can not satisfactorily explain refraction and diffraction. To explain refraction, Newton's Third Book of \"Opticks\" (1st ed. 1704, 4th ed. 1730) postulated an \"aethereal medium\" transmitting vibrations faster than light, by which light, when overtaken, is put into \"Fits of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission\", which caused refraction and diffraction. Newton believed that these vibrations were related to heat radiation:\nIs not the Heat of the warm Room convey'd through the vacuum by the Vibrations of a much subtiler Medium than Air, which after the Air was drawn out remained in the Vacuum? And is not this Medium the same with that Medium by which Light is refracted and reflected, and by whose Vibrations Light communicates Heat to Bodies, and is put into Fits of easy Reflexion and easy Transmission?\nIn contrast to the modern understanding that heat radiation and light are both electromagnetic radiation, Newton viewed heat and light as two different phenomena. He believed heat vibrations to be excited \"when a Ray of Light falls upon the Surface of any pellucid Body\". He wrote, \"I do not know what this Aether is\", but that if it consists of particles then they must be exceedingly smaller than those of Air, or even than those of Light: The exceeding smallness of its Particles may contribute to the greatness of the force by which those Particles may recede from one another, and thereby make that Medium exceedingly more rare and elastic than Air, and by consequence exceedingly less able to resist the motions of Projectiles, and exceedingly more able to press upon gross Bodies, by endeavoring to expand itself.\nBradley suggests particles.\nIn 1720, James Bradley carried out a series of experiments attempting to measure stellar parallax by taking measurements of stars at different times of the year. As the Earth moves around the Sun, the apparent angle to a given distant spot changes. By measuring those angles the distance to the star can be calculated based on the known orbital circumference of the Earth around the Sun. He failed to detect any parallax, thereby placing a lower limit on the distance to stars.\nDuring these experiments, Bradley also discovered a related effect; the apparent positions of the stars did change over the year, but not as expected. Instead of the apparent angle being maximized when the Earth was at either end of its orbit with respect to the star, the angle was maximized when the Earth was at its fastest sideways velocity with respect to the star. This effect is now known as stellar aberration.\nBradley explained this effect in the context of Newton's corpuscular theory of light, by showing that the aberration angle was given by simple vector addition of the Earth's orbital velocity and the velocity of the corpuscles of light, just as vertically falling raindrops strike a moving object at an angle. Knowing the Earth's velocity and the aberration angle enabled him to estimate the speed of light.\nExplaining stellar aberration in the context of an aether-based theory of light was regarded as more problematic. As the aberration relied on relative velocities, and the measured velocity was dependent on the motion of the Earth, the aether had to be remaining stationary with respect to the star as the Earth moved through it. This meant that the Earth could travel through the aether, a physical medium, with no apparent effect \u2013 precisely the problem that led Newton to reject a wave model in the first place.\nWave-theory triumphs.\nA century later, Thomas Young and Augustin-Jean Fresnel revived the wave theory of light when they pointed out that light could be a transverse wave rather than a longitudinal wave; the polarization of a transverse wave (like Newton's \"sides\" of light) could explain birefringence, and in the wake of a series of experiments on diffraction the particle model of Newton was finally abandoned. Physicists assumed, moreover, that, like mechanical waves, light waves required a medium for propagation, and thus required Huygens's idea of an aether \"gas\" permeating all space.\nHowever, a transverse wave apparently required the propagating medium to behave as a solid, as opposed to a fluid. The idea of a solid that did not interact with other matter seemed a bit odd, and Augustin-Louis Cauchy suggested that perhaps there was some sort of \"dragging\", or \"entrainment\", but this made the aberration measurements difficult to understand. He also suggested that the \"absence\" of longitudinal waves suggested that the aether had negative compressibility. George Green pointed out that such a fluid would be unstable. George Gabriel Stokes became a champion of the entrainment interpretation, developing a model in which the aether might, like pine pitch, be dilatant (fluid at slow speeds and rigid at fast speeds). Thus the Earth could move through it fairly freely, but it would be rigid enough to support light.\nElectromagnetism.\nIn 1856, Wilhelm Eduard Weber and Rudolf Kohlrausch measured the numerical value of the ratio of the electrostatic unit of charge to the electromagnetic unit of charge. They found that the ratio between the electrostatic unit of charge and the electromagnetic unit of charge is the speed of light \"c\". The following year, Gustav Kirchhoff wrote a paper in which he showed that the speed of a signal along an electric wire was equal to the speed of light. These are the first recorded historical links between the speed of light and electromagnetic phenomena.\nJames Clerk Maxwell began working on Michael Faraday's lines of force. In his 1861 paper \"\" he modelled these magnetic lines of force using a sea of molecular vortices that he considered to be partly made of aether and partly made of ordinary matter. He derived expressions for the dielectric constant and the magnetic permeability in terms of the transverse elasticity and the density of this elastic medium. He then equated the ratio of the dielectric constant to the magnetic permeability with a suitably adapted version of Weber and Kohlrausch's result of 1856, and he substituted this result into Newton's equation for the speed of sound. On obtaining a value that was close to the speed of light as measured by Hippolyte Fizeau, Maxwell concluded that light consists in undulations of the same medium that is the cause of electric and magnetic phenomena.\nMaxwell had, however, expressed some uncertainties surrounding the precise nature of his molecular vortices and so he began to embark on a purely dynamical approach to the problem. He wrote another paper in 1864, entitled \"A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field\", in which the details of the luminiferous medium were less explicit. Although Maxwell did not explicitly mention the sea of molecular vortices, his derivation of Amp\u00e8re's circuital law was carried over from the 1861 paper and he used a dynamical approach involving rotational motion within the electromagnetic field which he likened to the action of flywheels. Using this approach to justify the electromotive force equation (the precursor of the Lorentz force equation), he derived a wave equation from a set of eight equations which appeared in the paper and which included the electromotive force equation and Amp\u00e8re's circuital law. Maxwell once again used the experimental results of Weber and Kohlrausch to show that this wave equation represented an electromagnetic wave that propagates at the speed of light, hence supporting the view that light is a form of electromagnetic radiation.\nIn 1887\u20131889, Heinrich Hertz experimentally demonstrated the electric magnetic waves are identical to light waves. This unification of electromagnetic wave and optics indicated that there was a single luminiferous aether instead of many different kinds of aether media.\nThe apparent need for a propagation medium for such Hertzian waves (later called radio waves) can be seen by the fact that they consist of orthogonal electric (E) and magnetic (B or H) waves. The E waves consist of undulating dipolar electric fields, and all such dipoles appeared to require separated and opposite electric charges. Electric charge is an inextricable property of matter, so it appeared that some form of matter was required to provide the alternating current that would seem to have to exist at any point along the propagation path of the wave. Propagation of waves in a true vacuum would imply the existence of electric fields without associated electric charge, or of electric charge without associated matter. Albeit compatible with Maxwell's equations, electromagnetic induction of electric fields could not be demonstrated in vacuum, because all methods of detecting electric fields required electrically charged matter.\nIn addition, Maxwell's equations required that all electromagnetic waves in vacuum propagate at a fixed speed, \"c\". As this can only occur in one reference frame in Newtonian physics (see Galilean relativity), the aether was hypothesized as the absolute and unique frame of reference in which Maxwell's equations hold. That is, the aether must be \"still\" universally, otherwise \"c\" would vary along with any variations that might occur in its supportive medium. Maxwell himself proposed several mechanical models of aether based on wheels and gears, and George Francis FitzGerald even constructed a working model of one of them. These models had to agree with the fact that the electromagnetic waves are transverse but never longitudinal.\nProblems.\nBy this point the mechanical qualities of the aether had become more and more magical: it had to be a fluid in order to fill space, but one that was millions of times more rigid than steel in order to support the high frequencies of light waves. It also had to be massless and without viscosity, otherwise it would visibly affect the orbits of planets. Additionally it appeared it had to be completely transparent, non-dispersive, incompressible, and continuous at a very small scale. Maxwell wrote in \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\":\nAethers were invented for the planets to swim in, to constitute electric atmospheres and magnetic effluvia, to convey sensations from one part of our bodies to another, and so on, until all space had been filled three or four times over with aethers. ... The only aether which has survived is that which was invented by Huygens to explain the propagation of light.\nBy the early 20th century, aether theory was in trouble. A series of increasingly complex experiments had been carried out in the late 19th century to try to detect the motion of the Earth through the aether, and had failed to do so. A range of proposed aether-dragging theories could explain the null result but these were more complex, and tended to use arbitrary-looking coefficients and physical assumptions. Lorentz and FitzGerald offered within the framework of Lorentz ether theory a more elegant solution to how the motion of an absolute aether could be undetectable (length contraction), but if their equations were correct, the new special theory of relativity (1905) could generate the same mathematics without referring to an aether at all. Aether fell to Occam's Razor.\nRelative motion between the Earth and aether.\nAether drag.\nThe two most important models, which were aimed to describe the relative motion of the Earth and aether, were Augustin-Jean Fresnel's (1818) model of the (nearly) stationary aether including a partial aether drag determined by Fresnel's dragging coefficient, and George Gabriel Stokes' (1844)\nmodel of complete aether drag. The latter theory was not considered as correct, since it was not compatible with the aberration of light, and the auxiliary hypotheses developed to explain this problem were not convincing. Also, subsequent experiments as the Sagnac effect (1913) also showed that this model is untenable. However, the most important experiment supporting Fresnel's theory was Fizeau's 1851 experimental confirmation of Fresnel's 1818 prediction that a medium with refractive index \"n\" moving with a velocity \"v\" would increase the speed of light travelling through the medium in the same direction as \"v\" from \"c\"/\"n\" to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_1\nThat is, movement adds only a fraction of the medium's velocity to the light (predicted by Fresnel in order to make Snell's law work in all frames of reference, consistent with stellar aberration). This was initially interpreted to mean that the medium drags the aether along, with a \"portion\" of the medium's velocity, but that understanding became very problematic after Wilhelm Veltmann demonstrated that the index \"n\" in Fresnel's formula depended upon the wavelength of light, so that the aether could not be moving at a wavelength-independent speed. This implied that there must be a separate aether for each of the infinitely many frequencies.\nNegative aether-drift experiments.\nThe key difficulty with Fresnel's aether hypothesis arose from the juxtaposition of the two well-established theories of Newtonian dynamics and Maxwell's electromagnetism. Under a Galilean transformation the equations of Newtonian dynamics are invariant, whereas those of electromagnetism are not. Basically this means that while physics should remain the same in non-accelerated experiments, light would not follow the same rules because it is travelling in the universal \"aether frame\". Some effect caused by this difference should be detectable.\nA simple example concerns the model on which aether was originally built: sound. The speed of propagation for mechanical waves, the speed of sound, is defined by the mechanical properties of the medium. Sound travels 4.3 times faster in water than in air. This explains why a person hearing an explosion underwater and quickly surfacing can hear it again as the slower travelling sound arrives through the air. Similarly, a traveller on an airliner can still carry on a conversation with another traveller because the sound of words is travelling along with the air inside the aircraft. This effect is basic to all Newtonian dynamics, which says that everything from sound to the trajectory of a thrown baseball should all remain the same in the aircraft flying (at least at a constant speed) as if still sitting on the ground. This is the basis of the Galilean transformation, and the concept of frame of reference.\nBut the same was not supposed to be true for light, since Maxwell's mathematics demanded a single universal speed for the propagation of light, based, not on local conditions, but on two measured properties, the permittivity and permeability of free space, that were assumed to be the same throughout the universe.\nThus at any point there should be one special coordinate system, \"at rest relative to the aether\". Maxwell noted in the late 1870s that detecting motion relative to this aether should be easy enough\u2014light travelling along with the motion of the Earth would have a different speed than light travelling backward, as they would both be moving against the unmoving aether. Even if the aether had an overall universal flow, changes in position during the day/night cycle, or over the span of seasons, should allow the drift to be detected.\nFirst-order experiments.\nAlthough the aether is almost stationary according to Fresnel, his theory predicts a positive outcome of aether drift experiments only to \"second\" order in formula_2 because Fresnel's dragging coefficient would cause a negative outcome of all optical experiments capable of measuring effects to \"first\" order in formula_2. This was confirmed by the following first-order experiments, all of which gave negative results. The following list is based on the description of Wilhelm Wien (1898), with changes and additional experiments according to the descriptions of Edmund Taylor Whittaker (1910) and Jakob Laub (1910):\nBesides those optical experiments, also electrodynamic first-order experiments were conducted, which should have led to positive results according to Fresnel. However, Hendrik Antoon Lorentz (1895) modified Fresnel's theory and showed that those experiments can be explained by a stationary aether as well:\nSecond-order experiments.\nWhile the \"first\"-order experiments could be explained by a modified stationary aether, more precise \"second\"-order experiments were expected to give positive results. However, no such results could be found.\nThe famous Michelson\u2013Morley experiment compared the source light with itself after being sent in different directions and looked for changes in phase in a manner that could be measured with extremely high accuracy. In this experiment, their goal was to determine the velocity of the Earth through the aether. The publication of their result in 1887, the null result, was the first clear demonstration that something was seriously wrong with the aether hypothesis (Michelson's first experiment in 1881 was not entirely conclusive). In this case the MM experiment yielded a shift of the fringing pattern of about 0.01 of a fringe, corresponding to a small velocity. However, it was incompatible with the expected aether wind effect due to the Earth's (seasonally varying) velocity which would have required a shift of 0.4 of a fringe, and the error was small enough that the value may have indeed been zero. Therefore, the null hypothesis, the hypothesis that there was no aether wind, could not be rejected. More modern experiments have since reduced the possible value to a number very close to zero, about 10\u221217.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is obvious from what has gone before that it would be hopeless to attempt to solve the question of the motion of the solar system by observations of optical phenomena at the surface of the earth.\u2014\u200a\nA series of experiments using similar but increasingly sophisticated apparatuses all returned the null result as well. Conceptually different experiments that also attempted to detect the motion of the aether were the Trouton\u2013Noble experiment\u00a0(1903), whose objective was to detect torsion effects caused by electrostatic fields, and the experiments of Rayleigh and Brace (1902, 1904), to detect double refraction in various media. However, all of them obtained a null result, like Michelson\u2013Morley (MM) previously did.\nThese \"aether-wind\" experiments led to a flurry of efforts to \"save\" aether by assigning to it ever more complex properties, and only a few scientists, like Emil Cohn or Alfred Bucherer, considered the possibility of the abandonment of the aether hypothesis. Of particular interest was the possibility of \"aether entrainment\" or \"aether drag\", which would lower the magnitude of the measurement, perhaps enough to explain the results of the Michelson\u2013Morley experiment. However, as noted earlier, aether dragging already had problems of its own, notably aberration. In addition, the interference experiments of Lodge (1893, 1897) and Ludwig Zehnder (1895), aimed to show whether the aether is dragged by various, rotating masses, showed no aether drag. A more precise measurement was made in the Hammar experiment (1935), which ran a complete MM experiment with one of the \"legs\" placed between two massive lead blocks. If the aether was dragged by mass then this experiment would have been able to detect the drag caused by the lead, but again the null result was achieved. The theory was again modified, this time to suggest that the entrainment only worked for very large masses or those masses with large magnetic fields. This too was shown to be incorrect by the Michelson\u2013Gale\u2013Pearson experiment, which detected the Sagnac effect due to Earth's rotation (see Aether drag hypothesis).\nAnother completely different attempt to save \"absolute\" aether was made in the Lorentz\u2013FitzGerald contraction hypothesis, which posited that \"everything\" was affected by travel through the aether. In this theory, the reason that the Michelson\u2013Morley experiment \"failed\" was that the apparatus contracted in length in the direction of travel. That is, the light was being affected in the \"natural\" manner by its travel through the aether as predicted, but so was the apparatus itself, cancelling out any difference when measured. FitzGerald had inferred this hypothesis from a paper by Oliver Heaviside. Without referral to an aether, this physical interpretation of relativistic effects was shared by Kennedy and Thorndike in 1932 as they concluded that the interferometer's arm contracts and also the frequency of its light source \"very nearly\" varies in the way required by relativity.\nSimilarly, the Sagnac effect, observed by G. Sagnac in 1913, was immediately seen to be fully consistent with special relativity. In fact, the Michelson\u2013Gale\u2013Pearson experiment in 1925 was proposed specifically as a test to confirm the relativity theory, although it was also recognized that such tests, which merely measure absolute rotation, are also consistent with non-relativistic theories.\nDuring the 1920s, the experiments pioneered by Michelson were repeated by Dayton Miller, who publicly proclaimed positive results on several occasions, although they were not large enough to be consistent with any known aether theory. However, other researchers were unable to duplicate Miller's claimed results. Over the years the experimental accuracy of such measurements has been raised by many orders of magnitude, and no trace of any violations of Lorentz invariance has been seen. (A later re-analysis of Miller's results concluded that he had underestimated the variations due to temperature.)\nSince the Miller experiment and its unclear results there have been many more experimental attempts to detect the aether. Many experimenters have claimed positive results. These results have not gained much attention from mainstream science, since they contradict a large quantity of high-precision measurements, all the results of which were consistent with special relativity.\nLorentz aether theory.\nBetween 1892 and 1904, Hendrik Lorentz developed an electron\u2013aether theory, in which he avoided making assumptions about the aether. In his model the aether is completely motionless, and by that he meant that it could not be set in motion in the neighborhood of ponderable matter. Contrary to earlier electron models, the electromagnetic field of the aether appears as a mediator between the electrons, and changes in this field cannot propagate faster than the speed of light. A fundamental concept of Lorentz's theory in 1895 was the \"theorem of corresponding states\" for terms of order v/c. This theorem states that an observer moving relative to the aether makes the same observations as a resting observer, after a suitable change of variables. Lorentz noticed that it was necessary to change the space-time variables when changing frames and introduced concepts like physical length contraction (1892) to explain the Michelson\u2013Morley experiment, and the mathematical concept of local time (1895) to explain the aberration of light and the Fizeau experiment. This resulted in the formulation of the so-called Lorentz transformation by Joseph Larmor (1897, 1900) and Lorentz (1899, 1904), whereby (it was noted by Larmor) the complete formulation of local time is accompanied by some sort of time dilation of electrons moving in the aether. As Lorentz later noted (1921, 1928), he considered the time indicated by clocks resting in the aether as \"true\" time, while local time was seen by him as a heuristic working hypothesis and a mathematical artifice. Therefore, Lorentz's theorem is seen by modern authors as being a mathematical transformation from a \"real\" system resting in the aether into a \"fictitious\" system in motion.\nThe work of Lorentz was mathematically perfected by Henri Poincar\u00e9, who formulated on many occasions the Principle of Relativity and tried to harmonize it with electrodynamics. He declared simultaneity only a convenient convention which depends on the speed of light, whereby the constancy of the speed of light would be a useful postulate for making the laws of nature as simple as possible. In 1900 and 1904 he physically interpreted Lorentz's local time as the result of clock synchronization by light signals. In June and July 1905 he declared the relativity principle a general law of nature, including gravitation. He corrected some mistakes of Lorentz and proved the Lorentz covariance of the electromagnetic equations. However, he used the notion of an aether as a perfectly undetectable medium and distinguished between apparent and real time, so most historians of science argue that he failed to invent special relativity.\nEnd of aether.\nSpecial relativity.\nAether theory was dealt another blow when the Galilean transformation and Newtonian dynamics were both modified by Albert Einstein's special theory of relativity, giving the mathematics of Lorentzian electrodynamics a new, \"non-aether\" context. Unlike most major shifts in scientific thought, special relativity was adopted by the scientific community remarkably quickly, consistent with Einstein's later comment that the laws of physics described by the Special Theory were \"ripe for discovery\" in 1905. Max Planck's early advocacy of the special theory, along with the elegant formulation given to it by Hermann Minkowski, contributed much to the rapid acceptance of special relativity among working scientists.\nEinstein based his theory on Lorentz's earlier work. Instead of suggesting that the mechanical properties of objects changed with their constant-velocity motion through an undetectable aether, Einstein proposed to deduce the characteristics that any successful theory must possess in order to be consistent with the most basic and firmly established principles, independent of the existence of a hypothetical aether. He found that the Lorentz transformation must transcend its connection with Maxwell's equations, and must represent the fundamental relations between the space and time coordinates of inertial frames of reference. In this way he demonstrated that the laws of physics remained invariant as they had with the Galilean transformation, but that light was now invariant as well.\nWith the development of the special theory of relativity, the need to account for a single universal frame of reference had disappeared \u2013 and acceptance of the 19th-century theory of a luminiferous aether disappeared with it. For Einstein, the Lorentz transformation implied a conceptual change: that the concept of position in space or time was not absolute, but could differ depending on the observer's location and velocity.\nMoreover, in another paper published the same month in 1905, Einstein made several observations on a then-thorny problem, the photoelectric effect. In this work he demonstrated that light can be considered as particles that have a \"wave-like nature\". Particles obviously do not need a medium to travel, and thus, neither did light. This was the first step that would lead to the full development of quantum mechanics, in which the wave-like nature \"and\" the particle-like nature of light are both considered as valid descriptions of light. A summary of Einstein's thinking about the aether hypothesis, relativity and light quanta may be found in his 1909 (originally German) lecture \"The Development of Our Views on the Composition and Essence of Radiation\".\nLorentz on his side continued to use the aether hypothesis. In his lectures of around 1911, he pointed out that what \"the theory of relativity has to say ... can be carried out independently of what one thinks of the aether and the time\". He commented that \"whether there is an aether or not, electromagnetic fields certainly exist, and so also does the energy of the electrical oscillations\" so that, \"if we do not like the name of 'aether', we must use another word as a peg to hang all these things upon\". He concluded that \"one cannot deny the bearer of these concepts a certain substantiality\".\nNevertheless, in 1920, Einstein gave an address at Leiden University in which he commented \"More careful reflection teaches us however, that the special theory of relativity does not compel us to deny ether. We may assume the existence of an ether; only we must give up ascribing a definite state of motion to it, i.e. we must by abstraction take from it the last mechanical characteristic which Lorentz had still left it. We shall see later that this point of view, the conceivability of which I shall at once endeavour to make more intelligible by a somewhat halting comparison, is justified by the results of the general theory of relativity\". He concluded his address by saying that \"according to the general theory of relativity space is endowed with physical qualities; in this sense, therefore, there exists an ether. According to the general theory of relativity space without ether is unthinkable.\"\nOther models.\nIn later years there have been a few individuals who advocated a neo-Lorentzian approach to physics, which is Lorentzian in the sense of positing an absolute true state of rest that is undetectable and which plays no role in the predictions of the theory. (No violations of Lorentz covariance have ever been detected, despite strenuous efforts.) Hence these theories resemble the 19th century aether theories in name only. For example, the founder of quantum field theory, Paul Dirac, stated in 1951 in an article in Nature, titled \"Is there an Aether?\" that \"we are rather forced to have an aether\". However, Dirac never formulated a complete theory, and so his speculations found no acceptance by the scientific community.\nEinstein's views on the aether.\nWhen Einstein was still a student in the Zurich Polytechnic in 1900, he was very interested in the idea of aether. His initial proposal of research thesis was to do an experiment to measure how fast the Earth was moving through the aether. \"The velocity of a wave is proportional to the square root of the elastic forces which cause [its] propagation, and inversely proportional to the mass of the aether moved by these forces.\"\nIn 1916, after Einstein completed his foundational work on general relativity, Lorentz wrote a letter to him in which he speculated that within general relativity the aether was re-introduced. In his response Einstein wrote that one can actually speak about a \"new aether\", but one may not speak of motion in relation to that aether. This was further elaborated by Einstein in some semi-popular articles (1918, 1920, 1924, 1930).\nIn 1918, Einstein publicly alluded to that new definition for the first time. Then, in the early 1920s, in a lecture which he was invited to give at Lorentz's university in Leiden, Einstein sought to reconcile the theory of relativity with Lorentzian aether. In this lecture Einstein stressed that special relativity took away the last mechanical property of the aether: immobility. However, he continued that special relativity does not necessarily rule out the aether, because the latter can be used to give physical reality to acceleration and rotation. This concept was fully elaborated within general relativity, in which physical properties (which are partially determined by matter) are attributed to space, but no substance or state of motion can be attributed to that \"aether\" (by which he meant curved space-time).\nIn another paper of 1924, named \"Concerning the Aether\", Einstein argued that Newton's absolute space, in which acceleration is absolute, is the \"Aether of Mechanics\". And within the electromagnetic theory of Maxwell and Lorentz one can speak of the \"Aether of Electrodynamics\", in which the aether possesses an absolute state of motion. As regards special relativity, also in this theory acceleration is absolute as in Newton's mechanics. However, the difference from the electromagnetic aether of Maxwell and Lorentz lies in the fact that \"because it was no longer possible to speak, in any absolute sense, of simultaneous states at different locations in the aether, the aether became, as it were, four-dimensional since there was no objective way of ordering its states by time alone\". Now the \"aether of special relativity\" is still \"absolute\", because matter is affected by the properties of the aether, but the aether is not affected by the presence of matter. This asymmetry was solved within general relativity. Einstein explained that the \"aether of general relativity\" is not absolute, because matter is influenced by the aether, just as matter influences the structure of the aether.\nThe only similarity of this relativistic aether concept with the classical aether models lies in the presence of physical properties in space, which can be identified through geodesics. As historians such as John Stachel argue, Einstein's views on the \"new aether\" are not in conflict with his abandonment of the aether in 1905. As Einstein himself pointed out, no \"substance\" and no state of motion can be attributed to that new aether. Einstein's use of the word \"aether\" found little support in the scientific community, and played no role in the continuing development of modern physics.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "18408", "revid": "1126265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18408", "title": "LAME", "text": "MPEG-1 Audio Layer 3 (MP3) audio encoder\n \nLAME is a software encoder that converts digital audio into the MP3 audio coding format. LAME is a free software project that was first released in 1998 and has incorporated many improvements since then, including an improved psychoacoustic model. The LAME encoder outperforms early encoders like L3enc and possibly the \"gold standard encoder\" MP3enc, both marketed by Fraunhofer.\nLAME was required by some programs released as free software, in which LAME was linked for MP3 support. This avoided including LAME itself, which used patented techniques and so required patent licenses in some countries. All relevant patents have since expired, and LAME is now bundled with Audacity.\nHistory.\nEarliest versions.\nAround mid-1998, Mike Cheng created LAME 1.0 as a set of modifications against the 8\u00a0Hz-MP3 encoder source code, and named the resulting encoder LAME, as a recursive acronym for \"LAME Ain't an MP3 Encoder\", as initial releases of the software lacked the ability to produce encoded MP3 streams without third-party code. \"(Later releases allowed LAME to function as a standalone MP3 encoder.)\"\nAfter some quality concerns were raised by others, he decided to start again from scratch based on the dist10 MPEG reference software sources. His goal was only to speed up the dist10 sources, and leave its quality untouched. That branch (a patch against the reference sources) became Lame 2.0 in October 1998. The project started to attract other contributors. Mike Cheng eventually left leadership and started working on tooLAME (an MP2 encoder).\nModern versions.\nMark Taylor then started pursuing increased quality in addition to better speed, and released in May 1999 version 3.0 featuring gpsycho, a new psychoacoustic model he developed, along with a GTK-based graphical frame analyser, MP3x, providing a tool which would significantly help developers to work on the encoder.\nThis initial focus on quality by Mark Taylor quickly gathered interest from other people, who also started to bring quality and speed improvements. Within the most notable contributors are (in alphabetical order): Gabriel Bouvigne, Mike Cheng, Robert Hegemann, Frank Klemm, Alexander Leidinger, Naoki Shibata, Mark Taylor, Takehiro Tominaga.\nOver time, LAME evolved on the SourceForge website until it became the de facto CBR MP3 encoder. Later an ABR mode was added. Work progressed on true variable bit rate using a quality goal between 0 and 10. Eventually, numbers (such as -V 9.600) could generate excellent quality low bit rate voice encoding at only 41 kbit/s using the MPEG-2.5 extensions.\nA few key improvements since LAME 3.x, in chronological order:\nAudio quality.\nAudio quality is usually assessed through double blind listening tests, over a group of participants testing multiple samples. Lame has been tested in several such tests.\nAt around 128k bit/s, it proved to be quite competitive, outperforming several other encoders:\nAt low bitrates, LAME is of significantly lower quality than encoders using other formats:\nVoice coding.\nFor the general field of human speech reproduction, a bandwidth of 5,512\u00a0Hz is sufficient to produce excellent results (for voice) using the sampling rate of 11,025 and VBR encoding from 44,100 (standard) WAV file. English speakers average 41\u201342 kbit/s with -V 9.6 setting but this may vary with the amount of silence recorded or the rate of delivery (wpm). Resampling to 12,000 (6K bandwidth) is selected by the LAME parameter -V 9.4. Likewise -V 9.2 selects a 16,000 sample rate and a resultant 8K lowpass filtering. Older versions of LAME and FFmpeg only support integer arguments for the variable bit rate quality selection parameter. The n.nnn quality parameter (-V) is documented at lame.sourceforge.net but is only supported in LAME with the new style VBR variable bit rate quality selector\u2014not average bit rate (ABR).\nPatents and legal issues.\nLike all MP3 encoders, LAME implemented techniques covered by patents owned by the Fraunhofer Society and others. The developers of LAME did not license the technology described by these patents. Distributing compiled binaries of LAME, its libraries, or programs that derive from LAME in countries where those patents have been granted may have constituted infringement, but since 23 April 2017, all of these patents have expired.\nThe LAME developers stated that, since their code was only released in source code form, it should only be considered as an educational description of an MP3 encoder, and thus did not infringe any patent in itself. They also advised users to obtain relevant patent licenses before including a compiled version of the encoder in a product. Some software was released using this strategy: companies used the LAME library, but obtained patent licenses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18411", "revid": "111703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18411", "title": "Linux-Mandrake", "text": ""}
{"id": "18413", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18413", "title": "Lesbianism", "text": ""}
{"id": "18414", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18414", "title": "Leszek Miller", "text": "49th Prime Minister of Poland from 2001 to 2004\nLeszek Cezary Miller ( ; born 3 July 1946) is a Polish politician who served as prime minister of Poland from 2001 to 2004. He served a single term in the European Parliament from 2019 to 2024. \nFrom 1989 to 1990, Miller was a member of the Politburo of the Polish United Workers' Party. He was the leader of the Democratic Left Alliance from 1999 to 2004 and again from 2011 to 2016.\nEarly life.\nLeszek Miller was born in \u017byrard\u00f3w to a poor, working-class family. When he was six months old, his parents separated. His father did not remain in his life thereafter. He was raised by his mother in the Catholic faith, and served as an altar boy at their church. \nAfter graduating from school, 17-year-old Miller got a job in the Textile Linen Plant in \u017byrard\u00f3w while continuing his education in the evenings at the Vocational Secondary School of Electric Power Engineering. He later completed his military service on the ORP Bielik submarine.\nPolitical career.\nBefore 1990.\nMiller started his political career as an activist of the Socialist Youth Union, where he held the position of Chairman of the Plant Board, soon becoming a member of the Town Committee. After the military service, in 1969, he joined the Polish United Workers' Party (PZPR), People's Poland's communist party. \nMany people were pressured to join PZPR in order to advance in their careers or to pursue higher education. Miller used his affiliation with the Communist party to effectively advance in his studies and professional goals.\nIn 1973 and 1974, Miller was the Secretary of the PZPR Plant Committee. With the party's recommendation, he started political sciences studies at the party's Higher School of Political Sciences (\"Wy\u017csza Szko\u0142a Nauk Spo\u0142ecznych\"), graduating in 1977. After graduation, Miller worked at the PZPR Central Committee, supervising the Group, and later on the Department of Youth, Physical Education and Tourism.\nIn July 1986, Miller was elected as First Secretary of the PZPR Provincial Committee in Skierniewice. In December 1988, he returned to Warsaw, due to his promotion to the position of the Secretary of the PZPR Central Committee. As a representative of the government side, he took part in the session of the historic \"Round Table\", where, together with Andrzej Celi\u0144ski, he co-chaired the sub-team for youth issues (the only one that closed the session without signing the agreement). In 1989, he became a member of the PZPR Political Bureau.\nAfter 1990.\nAfter the PZPR was dissolved, Miller became a co-founder of the Social Democracy of the Polish Republic (till March 1993, he was Secretary General, then Deputy Chairman and, from December 1997, the Chairman of that party). In December 1999, at the Founding Congress of the Democratic Left Alliance (SLD), he was elected its Chairman, holding the function continuously until February 2004. In 1997-2001 he was the Chairman of the SLD\u2019s caucus.\nIn 1989, he ran unsuccessfully for the Senate as a representative of Skierniewice Province. In subsequent elections (1991), Miller was a leader on the election list of the Social Democracy of the Polish Republic in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a and, following a considerable success in elections, he won a seat in the Sejm, becoming Chairman of the Parliamentary Group of the Social Democracy of the Polish Republic. In three subsequent elections to the Sejm, he ran each time from \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, each time gaining more and more votes (from 50 thousand in 1991 up to 146 thousand in 2001); he held a seat in Parliament until 2005.\nThrough all that time he remained one of the leading politicians on the left wing. In the early 1990s, together with Mieczys\u0142aw Rakowski, he was suspected in the case of the so-called \"Moscow loan\". After revealing that affair in 1991, W\u0142odzimierz Cimoszewicz called Miller to abstain from taking an MP's oath due to accusations laid against him. When Miller was cleared of the charges, Prime Minister Cimoszewicz appointed him later as the Minister in Charge of the Office of the Council of Ministers and in 1997 the Minister of Internal Affairs and Administration in his government. In turn, Cimoszewicz later became the Minister of Foreign Affairs in Miller\u2019s cabinet.\nFrom 1993 to 1996, Miller was the Minister of Labour and Social Policy in the governments of Waldemar Pawlak and J\u00f3zef Oleksy respectively. In 1996, he was nominated as Senior Minister in charge of the Office of the Council of Ministers. He then got the nickname \u201cThe Chancellor\u201d.\nMiller played an important role in concluding the case of Colonel Ryszard Kukli\u0144ski, for which he was severely criticised within his political circle. A similar disapproval was expressed after Miller\u2019s support for the Concordat and the candidature of Leszek Balcerowicz to the position of President of the National Bank of Poland.\nDuring the period of the Solidarity Electoral Action\u2019s government, Miller was in charge of the parliamentary opposition, leading the political fight with the governing party. He was also consolidating the majority of significant left-wing groups around his person. In 1999, he succeeded in establishing one uniform political party \u2013 the Democratic Left Alliance \u2013 which turned out to be very successful in following elections.\nPrime Minister (2001-2004).\nFollowing the victory of the Left (41% vs. 12% of the subsequent party) in the Parliamentary Election in 2001, on 19 October 2001, President Aleksander Kwa\u015bniewski appointed Miller Prime Minister and obliged to nominate the government. The new government won the parliamentary vote of confidence on 26 October 2001 (306:140 votes with one abstention). The 16-person cabinet of Prime Minister Miller has been the smallest government of the Polish Republic so far.\nMiller\u2019s government faced a difficult economic situation in Poland, including an unemployment rate above 18%, a high level of public debt, and economic stagnation. At the end of Miller\u2019s term, economic growth exceeded 6%; still, it was too slow to reduce the unemployment rate. During his term, the unpopular program of cuts in public expenses was implemented, together with a hardly successful reform of health care financing. The reforms of the tax system and of the Social Insurance Institution were continued, and the attempt to settle the mass-media market failed. Taxes were significantly lowered \u2013 to 19% for companies and for persons running business activity \u2013 and the act of freedom in business activity was voted through. A radical, structural reform of secret services was implemented (the State Security Office was dissolved and replaced by the Internal Security Agency and the Intelligence Agency).\nSimultaneously, institutional and legal adjustments were continued, resulting from the accession to the European Union. The Accession conditions were negotiated, being the main strategic goal of Miller\u2019s cabinet. On 13 December 2002, at the summit in Copenhagen (Denmark), Prime Minister Leszek Miller completed the negotiations with the European Union. On 16 April 2003 in Athens, Miller, together with Cimoszewicz, signed the Accession Treaty, bringing Poland into the European Union. Miller\u2019s government, in collaboration with various political and social forces, organized the accession referendum with a successful outcome. On 7 and 8 June 2003, 77.45% of the referendum participants voted in favor of Poland\u2019s accession to the European Union. The referendum turn-out reached 58.85%.\nMiller\u2019s government, together with President Kwa\u015bniewski, made a decision (March 2003) to join the international coalition and deploy Polish troops to Iraq, targeting at overthrowing Saddam Hussein\u2019s government. Miller was also a co-signatory of \"the letter of 8\", signed by eight European prime ministers, supporting the US position on Iraq. Already in 2002, Miller gave permission to the U.S. government to run a secret CIA prison at Stare Kiejkuty military training center, three hours north of Warsaw. Years later he is facing accusations of acting anti-constitutionally by having tolerated the imprisonment and torture of prisoners.\nOn 4 December 2003, Leszek Miller suffered injuries in a helicopter crash near Warsaw.\nAt the end of its term of office, Miller\u2019s government had the lowest public support of any government since 1989. It was mainly caused by the continuing high unemployment rate, corruption scandals, with Rywingate on top, and by the attempt of fulfilling the plan of reducing social spending (the Hausner\u2019s plan). In result of criticism in his own party, the Democratic Left Alliance, in February 2004, Miller resigned from chairing the party. Miller was criticized for an excessively liberal approach and for stressing the role of free-market mechanisms in economy. He was reproached for his acceptance of a flat tax, which ran counter to the left-wing doctrine. He was also identified with the \u201cchieftain-like style\u201d of leadership. On 26 March 2004, following the decision of the Speaker of the Parliament, Marek Borowski, to found a new dissenting party, the Social Democracy of Poland, Miller decided to resign from the position of Prime Minister on 2 May 2004, one day after Poland\u2019s accession to the EU. On 1 May 2004, together with President Kwa\u015bniewski, he was in Dublin, taking part in the Grand Ceremony of the accession of 10 states, including Poland, to the European Union.\nLater career.\nIn 2005, despite the support of the \u0141\u00f3d\u017a Branch of the Democratic Left Alliance, Miller was not registered on the election list to the Parliament. At the same time, he was offered to run for Senate but refused. Retirement of the old activists was presented in media as \u201cinflow of new blood into the Democratic Left Alliance\u201d. After the election, Miller became active in journalism, writing mainly for the \u201cWprost\u201d weekly on liberal economic concepts and current political issues. In the first half of 2005, he stayed at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, D.C., implementing a research project: \u201cStatus of the new Poland in the Eastern Europe\u2019s space\u201d.\nIn September 2007, Leszek Miller become affiliated with Samoobrona, when he decided to run for the Sejm from their lists. In January 2008, at the first congress of the newly founded Polish Left party, he became its chairman. In December 2009, he submitted a membership declaration to the SLD. In January 2010, he resigned from the Polish Left and was admitted to the SLD in the same month. In 2010 he became a columnist of the Wednesday edition of \"Super Express\". In the parliamentary elections in 2015, he was not re-elected as an MP (the United Left, co-created by the SLD, did not pass the electoral threshold). He did not run for re-election as chairman of the SLD on 23 January 2016, and he was replaced in this function by W\u0142odzimierz Czarzasty. On 8 March 2021, after the legally binding judicial re-registration of the Democratic Left Alliance to New Left (as part of the final project of merging SLD and Spring), he announced his departure from the party.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1969, Miller married Aleksandra, three years his junior, in church. They had a son, Leszek Junior (d. August 2018), and a granddaughter, Monika.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18416", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18416", "title": "Linear algebra/Subspace", "text": ""}
{"id": "18418", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18418", "title": "Generating a vector space", "text": ""}
{"id": "18419", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18419", "title": "Linear algebra/Linearly independent vectors", "text": ""}
{"id": "18420", "revid": "50588183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18420", "title": "Basis (linear algebra)", "text": "Set of vectors used to define coordinates\nIn mathematics, a set B of elements of a vector space \"V\" is called a basis (pl.: bases) if every element of \"V\" can be written in a unique way as a finite linear combination of elements of B. The coefficients of this linear combination are referred to as components or coordinates of the vector with respect to B. The elements of a basis are called &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;basis vectors.\nEquivalently, a set B is a basis if its elements are linearly independent and every element of V is a linear combination of elements of B. In other words, a basis is a linearly independent spanning set.\nA vector space can have several bases; however all the bases have the same number of elements, called the dimension of the vector space.\nThis article deals mainly with finite-dimensional vector spaces. However, many of the principles are also valid for infinite-dimensional vector spaces.\nBasis vectors find applications in the study of crystal structures and frames of reference.\nDefinition.\nA basis \"B\" of a vector space \"V\" over a field \"F\" (such as the real numbers R or the complex numbers C) is a linearly independent subset of \"V\" that spans \"V\". This means that a subset B of \"V\" is a basis if it satisfies the two following conditions:\nThe scalars formula_6 are called the coordinates of the vector v with respect to the basis \"B\", and by the first property they are uniquely determined.\nA vector space that has a finite basis is called finite-dimensional. In this case, the finite subset can be taken as \"B\" itself to check for linear independence in the above definition.\nIt is often convenient or even necessary to have an ordering on the basis vectors, for example, when discussing orientation, or when one considers the scalar coefficients of a vector with respect to a basis without referring explicitly to the basis elements. In this case, the ordering is necessary for associating each coefficient to the corresponding basis element. This ordering can be done by numbering the basis elements. In order to emphasize that an order has been chosen, one speaks of an ordered basis, which is therefore not simply an unstructured set, but a sequence, an indexed family, or similar; see below.\nExamples.\nThe set R2 of the ordered pairs of real numbers is a vector space under the operations of component-wise addition\nformula_7 \nand scalar multiplication\nformula_8 \nwhere formula_9 is any real number. A simple basis of this vector space consists of the two vectors e1 = (1, 0) and e2 = (0, 1). These vectors form a basis (called the standard basis) because any vector v = (\"a\", \"b\") of R2 may be uniquely written as formula_10 Any other pair of linearly independent vectors of R2, such as (1, 1) and (\u22121, 2), forms also a basis of R2.\nMore generally, if F is a field, the set formula_11 of n-tuples of elements of F is a vector space for similarly defined addition and scalar multiplication. Let formula_12 be the n-tuple with all components equal to 0, except the ith, which is 1. Then formula_13 is a basis of formula_14 which is called the \"standard basis\" of formula_15\nA different flavor of example is given by polynomial rings. If F is a field, the collection \"F\"[\"X\"] of all polynomials in one indeterminate X with coefficients in F is an F-vector space. One basis for this space is the monomial basis B, consisting of all monomials: formula_16 Any set of polynomials such that there is exactly one polynomial of each degree (such as the Bernstein basis polynomials or Chebyshev polynomials) is also a basis. (Such a set of polynomials is called a polynomial sequence.) But there are also many bases for \"F\"[\"X\"] that are not of this form.\nProperties.\nMany properties of finite bases result from the Steinitz exchange lemma, which states that, for any vector space V, given a finite spanning set S and a linearly independent set L of n elements of V, one may replace n well-chosen elements of S by the elements of L to get a spanning set containing L, having its other elements in S, and having the same number of elements as S.\nMost properties resulting from the Steinitz exchange lemma remain true when there is no finite spanning set, but their proofs in the infinite case generally require the axiom of choice or a weaker form of it, such as the ultrafilter lemma.\nIf V is a vector space over a field F, then:\nIf V is a vector space of dimension n, then:\nCoordinates.\nLet V be a vector space of finite dimension n over a field F, and \nformula_18\nbe a basis of V. By definition of a basis, every v in V may be written, in a unique way, as\nformula_19\nwhere the coefficients formula_20 are scalars (that is, elements of F), which are called the \"coordinates\" of v over B. However, if one talks of the \"set\" of the coefficients, one loses the correspondence between coefficients and basis elements, and several vectors may have the same \"set\" of coefficients. For example, formula_21 and formula_22 have the same set of coefficients {2, 3}, and are different. It is therefore often convenient to work with an ordered basis; this is typically done by indexing the basis elements by the first natural numbers. Then, the coordinates of a vector form a sequence similarly indexed, and a vector is completely characterized by the sequence of coordinates. An ordered basis, especially when used in conjunction with an origin, is also called a coordinate frame or simply a \"frame\" (for example, a Cartesian frame or an affine frame).\nLet, as usual, formula_11 be the set of the n-tuples of elements of F. This set is an F-vector space, with addition and scalar multiplication defined component-wise. The map \nformula_24\nis a linear isomorphism from the vector space formula_11 onto V. In other words, formula_11 is the coordinate space of V, and the n-tuple formula_27 is the coordinate vector of v.\nThe inverse image by formula_28 of formula_29 is the n-tuple formula_30 all of whose components are 0, except the ith that is 1. The formula_30 form an ordered basis of formula_11, which is called its standard basis or canonical basis. The ordered basis B is the image by formula_28 of the canonical basis of formula_11.\nIt follows from what precedes that every ordered basis is the image by a linear isomorphism of the canonical basis of formula_11, and that every linear isomorphism from formula_11 onto V may be defined as the isomorphism that maps the canonical basis of formula_11 onto a given ordered basis of V. In other words, it is equivalent to define an ordered basis of V, or a linear isomorphism from formula_11 onto V.\nChange of basis.\nLet \"V\" be a vector space of dimension n over a field \"F\". Given two (ordered) bases formula_39 and formula_40 of \"V\", it is often useful to express the coordinates of a vector x with respect to formula_41 in terms of the coordinates with respect to formula_42 This can be done by the \"change-of-basis formula\", that is described below. The subscripts \"old\" and \"new\" have been chosen because it is customary to refer to formula_41 and formula_44 as the \"old basis\" and the \"new basis\", respectively. It is useful to describe the old coordinates in terms of the new ones, because, in general, one has expressions involving the old coordinates, and if one wants to obtain equivalent expressions in terms of the new coordinates; this is obtained by replacing the old coordinates by their expressions in terms of the new coordinates.\nTypically, the new basis vectors are given by their coordinates over the old basis, that is, \nformula_45\nIf formula_46 and formula_47 are the coordinates of a vector x over the old and the new basis respectively, the change-of-basis formula is \nformula_48\nfor \"i\" = 1, ..., \"n\".\nThis formula may be concisely written in matrix notation. Let A be the matrix of the formula_49, and\nformula_50\nbe the column vectors of the coordinates of v in the old and the new basis respectively, then the formula for changing coordinates is\nformula_51\nThe formula can be proven by considering the decomposition of the vector x on the two bases: one has \nformula_52\nand\nformula_53\nThe change-of-basis formula results then from the uniqueness of the decomposition of a vector over a basis, here formula_54; that is\nformula_55\nfor \"i\" = 1, ..., \"n\".\nRelated notions.\nFree module.\nIf one replaces the field occurring in the definition of a vector space by a ring, one gets the definition of a module. For modules, linear independence and spanning sets are defined exactly as for vector spaces, although \"generating set\" is more commonly used than that of \"spanning set\".\nLike for vector spaces, a \"basis\" of a module is a linearly independent subset that is also a generating set. A major difference with the theory of vector spaces is that not every module has a basis. A module that has a basis is called a \"free module\". Free modules play a fundamental role in module theory, as they may be used for describing the structure of non-free modules through free resolutions.\nA module over the integers is exactly the same thing as an abelian group. Thus a free module over the integers is also a free abelian group. Free abelian groups have specific properties that are not shared by modules over other rings. Specifically, every subgroup of a free abelian group is a free abelian group, and, if G is a subgroup of a finitely generated free abelian group H (that is an abelian group that has a finite basis), then there is a basis formula_13 of H and an integer 0 \u2264 \"k\" \u2264 \"n\" such that formula_57 is a basis of G, for some nonzero integers formula_58. For details, see .\nAnalysis.\nIn the context of infinite-dimensional vector spaces over the real or complex numbers, the term &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Hamel basis (named after Georg Hamel) or algebraic basis can be used to refer to a basis as defined in this article. This is to make a distinction with other notions of \"basis\" that exist when infinite-dimensional vector spaces are endowed with extra structure. The most important alternatives are orthogonal bases on Hilbert spaces, Schauder bases, and Markushevich bases on normed linear spaces. In the case of the real numbers R viewed as a vector space over the field Q of rational numbers, Hamel bases are uncountable, and have specifically the cardinality of the continuum, which is the cardinal number formula_59, where formula_60 (aleph-nought) is the smallest infinite cardinal, the cardinal of the integers.\nThe common feature of the other notions is that they permit the taking of infinite linear combinations of the basis vectors in order to generate the space. This, of course, requires that infinite sums are meaningfully defined on these spaces, as is the case for topological vector spaces \u2013 a large class of vector spaces including e.g. Hilbert spaces, Banach spaces, or Fr\u00e9chet spaces.\nThe preference of other types of bases for infinite-dimensional spaces is justified by the fact that the Hamel basis becomes \"too big\" in Banach spaces: If \"X\" is an infinite-dimensional normed vector space that is complete (i.e. \"X\" is a Banach space), then any Hamel basis of \"X\" is necessarily uncountable. This is a consequence of the Baire category theorem. The completeness as well as infinite dimension are crucial assumptions in the previous claim. Indeed, finite-dimensional spaces have by definition finite bases and there are infinite-dimensional (\"non-complete\") normed spaces that have countable Hamel bases. Consider formula_61, the space of the sequences formula_62 of real numbers that have only finitely many non-zero elements, with the norm x\\ Its standard basis, consisting of the sequences having only one non-zero element, which is equal to 1, is a countable Hamel basis.\nExample.\nIn the study of Fourier series, one learns that the functions {1} \u222a { sin(\"nx\"), cos(\"nx\") : \"n\" = 1, 2, 3, ... } are an \"orthogonal basis\" of the (real or complex) vector space of all (real or complex valued) functions on the interval [0, 2\u03c0] that are square-integrable on this interval, i.e., functions \"f\" satisfying\nformula_63\nThe functions {1} \u222a { sin(\"nx\"), cos(\"nx\") : \"n\" = 1, 2, 3, ... } are linearly independent, and every function \"f\" that is square-integrable on [0, 2\u03c0] is an \"infinite linear combination\" of them, in the sense that\nformula_64\nfor suitable (real or complex) coefficients \"a\"\"k\", \"b\"\"k\". But many square-integrable functions cannot be represented as \"finite\" linear combinations of these basis functions, which therefore \"do not\" comprise a Hamel basis. Every Hamel basis of this space is much bigger than this merely countably infinite set of functions. Hamel bases of spaces of this kind are typically not useful, whereas orthonormal bases of these spaces are essential in Fourier analysis.\nGeometry.\nThe geometric notions of an affine space, projective space, convex set, and cone have related notions of \"basis\". An affine basis for an \"n\"-dimensional affine space is formula_65 points in general linear position. A &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;projective basis is formula_66 points in general position, in a projective space of dimension \"n\". A &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;convex basis of a polytope is the set of the vertices of its convex hull. A &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;cone basis consists of one point by edge of a polygonal cone. See also a Hilbert basis (linear programming).\nRandom basis.\nFor a probability distribution in R\"n\" with a probability density function, such as the equidistribution in an \"n\"-dimensional ball with respect to Lebesgue measure, it can be shown that n randomly and independently chosen vectors will form a basis with probability one, which is due to the fact that n linearly dependent vectors x1, ..., x\"n\" in R\"n\" should satisfy the equation det[x1 \u22ef x\"n\"] = 0 (zero determinant of the matrix with columns x\"i\"), and the set of zeros of a non-trivial polynomial has zero measure. This observation has led to techniques for approximating random bases.\nIt is difficult to check numerically the linear dependence or exact orthogonality. Therefore, the notion of \u03b5-orthogonality is used. For spaces with inner product, \"x\" is \u03b5-orthogonal to \"y\" if formula_67 (that is, cosine of the angle between x and y is less than \u03b5).\nIn high dimensions, two independent random vectors are with high probability almost orthogonal, and the number of independent random vectors, which all are with given high probability pairwise almost orthogonal, grows exponentially with dimension. More precisely, consider equidistribution in \"n\"-dimensional ball. Choose \"N\" independent random vectors from a ball (they are independent and identically distributed). Let \"\u03b8\" be a small positive number. Then for\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nN random vectors are all pairwise \u03b5-orthogonal with probability 1 \u2212 \"\u03b8\". This N growth exponentially with dimension n and formula_68 for sufficiently big n. This property of random bases is a manifestation of the so-called measure concentration phenomenon.\nThe figure (right) illustrates distribution of lengths N of pairwise almost orthogonal chains of vectors that are independently randomly sampled from the \"n\"-dimensional cube [\u22121, 1]\"n\" as a function of dimension, \"n\". A point is first randomly selected in the cube. The second point is randomly chosen in the same cube. If the angle between the vectors was within \u03c0/2 \u00b1 0.037\u03c0/2 then the vector was retained. At the next step a new vector is generated in the same hypercube, and its angles with the previously generated vectors are evaluated. If these angles are within \u03c0/2 \u00b1 0.037\u03c0/2 then the vector is retained. The process is repeated until the chain of almost orthogonality breaks, and the number of such pairwise almost orthogonal vectors (length of the chain) is recorded. For each \"n\", 20 pairwise almost orthogonal chains were constructed numerically for each dimension. Distribution of the length of these chains is presented.\nProof that every vector space has a basis.\nLet V be any vector space over some field F. Let X be the set of all linearly independent subsets of V.\nThe set X is nonempty since the empty set is an independent subset of V, and it is partially ordered by inclusion, which is denoted, as usual, by \u2286.\nLet Y be a subset of X that is totally ordered by \u2286, and let LY be the union of all the elements of Y (which are themselves certain subsets of V).\nSince (Y, \u2286) is totally ordered, every finite subset of LY is a subset of an element of Y, which is a linearly independent subset of V, and hence LY is linearly independent. Thus LY is an element of X. Therefore, LY is an upper bound for Y in (X, \u2286): it is an element of X, that contains every element of Y.\nAs X is nonempty, and every totally ordered subset of (X, \u2286) has an upper bound in X, Zorn's lemma asserts that X has a maximal element. In other words, there exists some element Lmax of X satisfying the condition that whenever Lmax \u2286 L for some element L of X, then L = Lmax.\nIt remains to prove that Lmax is a basis of V. Since Lmax belongs to X, we already know that Lmax is a linearly independent subset of V.\nIf there were some vector w of V that is not in the span of Lmax, then w would not be an element of Lmax either. Let Lw = Lmax \u222a {w}. This set is an element of X, that is, it is a linearly independent subset of V (because w is not in the span of Lmax, and Lmax is independent). As Lmax \u2286 Lw, and Lmax \u2260 Lw (because Lw contains the vector w that is not contained in Lmax), this contradicts the maximality of Lmax. Thus this shows that Lmax spans V.\nHence Lmax is linearly independent and spans V. It is thus a basis of V, and this proves that every vector space has a basis.\nThis proof relies on Zorn's lemma, which is equivalent to the axiom of choice. Conversely, it has been proved that if every vector space has a basis, then the axiom of choice is true. Thus the two assertions are equivalent.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18421", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18421", "title": "Linear algebra/Dimension of a vector space", "text": ""}
{"id": "18422", "revid": "51046602", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18422", "title": "Linear algebra", "text": "Branch of mathematics\nLinear algebra is the branch of mathematics concerning linear equations such as\nformula_1\nlinear maps such as\nformula_2\nand their representations in vector spaces and through matrices.\nLinear algebra is central to almost all areas of mathematics. For instance, linear algebra is fundamental in modern presentations of geometry, including for defining basic objects such as lines, planes and rotations. Also, functional analysis, a branch of mathematical analysis, may be viewed as the application of linear algebra to function spaces.\nLinear algebra is also used in most sciences and fields of engineering because it allows modeling many natural phenomena, and computing efficiently with such models. For nonlinear systems, which cannot be modeled with linear algebra, it is often used for dealing with first-order approximations, using the fact that the differential of a multivariate function at a point is the linear map that best approximates the function near that point.\nHistory.\nThe procedure (using counting rods) for solving simultaneous linear equations now called Gaussian elimination appears in the ancient Chinese mathematical text Chapter Eight: \"Rectangular Arrays\" of \"The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art\". Its use is illustrated in eighteen problems, with two to five equations.\nSystems of linear equations arose in Europe with the introduction in 1637 by Ren\u00e9 Descartes of coordinates in geometry. In fact, in this new geometry, now called Cartesian geometry, lines and planes are represented by linear equations, and computing their intersections amounts to solving systems of linear equations.\nThe first systematic methods for solving linear systems used determinants and were first considered by Leibniz in 1693. In 1750, Gabriel Cramer used them for giving explicit solutions of linear systems, now called Cramer's rule. Later, Gauss further described the method of elimination, which was initially listed as an advancement in geodesy.\nIn 1844 Hermann Grassmann published his \"Theory of Extension\" which included foundational new topics of what is today called linear algebra. In 1848, James Joseph Sylvester introduced the term \"matrix\", which is Latin for \"womb\".\nLinear algebra grew with ideas noted in the complex plane. For instance, two numbers w and z in formula_3 have a difference \"w\" \u2013 \"z\", and the line segments and are of the same length and direction. The segments are equipollent. The four-dimensional system formula_4 of quaternions was discovered by W.R. Hamilton in 1843. The term \"vector\" was introduced as v \n \"xi + \"yj + \"z\"k representing a point in space. The quaternion difference \"p\" \u2013 \"q\" also produces a segment equipollent to . Other hypercomplex number systems also used the idea of a linear space with a basis.\nArthur Cayley introduced matrix multiplication and the inverse matrix in 1856, making possible the general linear group. The mechanism of group representation became available for describing complex and hypercomplex numbers. Crucially, Cayley used a single letter to denote a matrix, thus treating a matrix as an aggregate object. He also realized the connection between matrices and determinants and wrote \"There would be many things to say about this theory of matrices which should, it seems to me, precede the theory of determinants\".\nBenjamin Peirce published his \"Linear Associative Algebra\" (1872), and his son Charles Sanders Peirce extended the work later.\nThe telegraph required an explanatory system, and the 1873 publication by James Clerk Maxwell of \"A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism\" instituted a field theory of forces and required differential geometry for expression. Linear algebra is flat differential geometry and serves in tangent spaces to manifolds. Electromagnetic symmetries of spacetime are expressed by the Lorentz transformations, and much of the history of linear algebra is the history of Lorentz transformations.\nThe first modern and more precise definition of a vector space was introduced by Peano in 1888; by 1900, a theory of linear transformations of finite-dimensional vector spaces had emerged. Linear algebra took its modern form in the first half of the twentieth century when many ideas and methods of previous centuries were generalized as abstract algebra. The development of computers led to increased research in efficient algorithms for Gaussian elimination and matrix decompositions, and linear algebra became an essential tool for modeling and simulations.\nVector spaces.\nUntil the 19th century, linear algebra was introduced through systems of linear equations and matrices. In modern mathematics, the presentation through \"vector spaces\" is generally preferred, since it is more synthetic, more general (not limited to the finite-dimensional case), and conceptually simpler, although more abstract.\nA vector space over a field \"F\" (often the field of the real numbers or of the complex numbers) is a set \"V\" equipped with two binary operations. Elements of \"V\" are called \"vectors\", and elements of \"F\" are called \"scalars\". The first operation, \"vector addition\", takes any two vectors v and w and outputs a third vector v + w. The second operation, \"scalar multiplication\", takes any scalar \"a\" and any vector v and outputs a new . The axioms that addition and scalar multiplication must satisfy are the following. (In the list below, u, v and w are arbitrary elements of \"V\", and \"a\" and \"b\" are arbitrary scalars in the field \"F\".)\nThe first four axioms mean that \"V\" is an abelian group under addition.\nThe elements of a specific vector space may have various natures; for example, they could be tuples, sequences, functions, polynomials, or a matrices. Linear algebra is concerned with the properties of such objects that are common to all vector spaces.\nLinear maps.\nLinear maps are mappings between vector spaces that preserve the vector-space structure. Given two vector spaces \"V\" and \"W\" over a field F, a linear map (also called, in some contexts, linear transformation or linear mapping) is a map\n formula_5\nthat is compatible with addition and scalar multiplication, that is\n formula_6\nfor any vectors u,v in \"V\" and scalar \"a\" in F.\nAn equivalent condition is that\n formula_7\nfor any vectors u, v in \"V\" and scalars \"a\", \"b\" in F.\nWhen \"V\" = \"W\" are the same vector space, a linear map \"T\" : \"V\" \u2192 \"V\" is also known as a \"linear operator\" on V.\nA bijective linear map between two vector spaces (that is, every vector from the second space is associated with exactly one in the first) is an isomorphism. Because an isomorphism preserves linear structure, two isomorphic vector spaces are \"essentially the same\" from the linear algebra point of view, in the sense that they cannot be distinguished by using vector space properties. An essential question in linear algebra is testing whether a linear map is an isomorphism or not, and, if it is not an isomorphism, finding its range (or image) and the set of elements that are mapped to the zero vector, called the kernel of the map. All these questions can be solved by using Gaussian elimination or some variant of this algorithm.\nSubspaces, span, and basis.\nThe study of those subsets of vector spaces that are in themselves vector spaces under the induced operations is fundamental, similarly as for many mathematical structures. These subsets are called linear subspaces. More precisely, a linear subspace of a vector space V over a field F is a subset W of V such that u + v and \"a\"u are in W, for every u, v in W, and every a in F. (These conditions suffice for implying that W is a vector space.)\nFor example, given a linear map \"T\" : \"V\" \u2192 \"W\", the image \"T\"(\"V\") of V, and the inverse image \"T\"\u22121(0) of 0 (called kernel or null space), are linear subspaces of W and V, respectively.\nAnother important way of forming a subspace is to consider linear combinations of a set S of vectors: the set of all sums \n formula_8\nwhere v1, v2, ..., v\"k\" are in S, and \"a\"1, \"a\"2, ..., \"a\"\"k\" are in F form a linear subspace called the span of S. The span of S is also the intersection of all linear subspaces containing S. In other words, it is the smallest (for the inclusion relation) linear subspace containing S.\nA set of vectors is linearly independent if none is in the span of the others. Equivalently, a set S of vectors is linearly independent if the only way to express the zero vector as a linear combination of elements of S is to take zero for every coefficient ai.\nA set of vectors that spans a vector space is called a spanning set or generating set. If a spanning set S is \"linearly dependent\" (that is not linearly independent), then some element w of S is in the span of the other elements of S, and the span would remain the same if one were to remove w from S. One may continue to remove elements of S until getting a \"linearly independent spanning set\". Such a linearly independent set that spans a vector space V is called a basis of \"V\". The importance of bases lies in the fact that they are simultaneously minimal-generating sets and maximal independent sets. More precisely, if S is a linearly independent set, and T is a spanning set such that \"S\" \u2286 \"T\", then there is a basis B such that \"S\" \u2286 \"B\" \u2286 \"T\".\nAny two bases of a vector space \"V\" have the same cardinality, which is called the dimension of \"V\"; this is the dimension theorem for vector spaces. Moreover, two vector spaces over the same field F are isomorphic if and only if they have the same dimension.\nIf any basis of \"V\" (and therefore every basis) has a finite number of elements, \"V\" is a \"finite-dimensional vector space\". If \"U\" is a subspace of \"V\", then dim \"U\" \u2264 dim \"V\". In the case where \"V\" is finite-dimensional, the equality of the dimensions implies \"U\" = \"V\".\nIf \"U\"1 and \"U\"2 are subspaces of \"V\", then\nformula_9\nwhere \"U\"1 + \"U\"2 denotes the span of \"U\"1 \u222a \"U\"2.\nMatrices.\nMatrices allow explicit manipulation of finite-dimensional vector spaces and linear maps. Their theory is thus an essential part of linear algebra.\nLet V be a finite-dimensional vector space over a field \"F\", and (v1, v2, ..., v\"m\") be a basis of \"V\" (thus m is the dimension of \"V\"). By definition of a basis, the map\nformula_10\nis a bijection from \"Fm\", the set of the sequences of m elements of F, onto V. This is an isomorphism of vector spaces, if \"Fm\" is equipped with its standard structure of vector space, where vector addition and scalar multiplication are done component by component.\nThis isomorphism allows representing a vector by its inverse image under this isomorphism, that is by the coordinate vector (\"a\"1, ..., \"am\") or by the column matrix\nformula_11\nIf W is another finite dimensional vector space (possibly the same), with a basis (w1, ..., w\"n\"), a linear map f from W to V is well defined by its values on the basis elements, that is (\"f\"(w1), ..., \"f\"(w\"n\")). Thus, f is well represented by the list of the corresponding column matrices. That is, if \nformula_12 \nfor \"j\" = 1, ..., \"n\", then f is represented by the matrix\nformula_13\nwith m rows and n columns.\nMatrix multiplication is defined in such a way that the product of two matrices is the matrix of the composition of the corresponding linear maps, and the product of a matrix and a column matrix is the column matrix representing the result of applying the represented linear map to the represented vector. It follows that the theory of finite-dimensional vector spaces and the theory of matrices are two different languages for expressing the same concepts.\nTwo matrices that encode the same linear transformation in different bases are called similar. It can be proved that two matrices are similar if and only if one can transform one into the other by elementary row and column operations. For a matrix representing a linear map from W to V, the row operations correspond to change of bases in V and the column operations correspond to change of bases in W. Every matrix is similar to an identity matrix possibly bordered by zero rows and zero columns. In terms of vector spaces, this means that, for any linear map from W to V, there are bases such that a part of the basis of W is mapped bijectively on a part of the basis of V, and that the remaining basis elements of W, if any, are mapped to zero. Gaussian elimination is the basic algorithm for finding these elementary operations, and proving these results.\nLinear systems.\nA finite set of linear equations in a finite set of variables, for example, \"x\"1, \"x\"2, ..., \"xn\", or \"x\", \"y\", ..., \"z\" is called a system of linear equations or a linear system.\nSystems of linear equations form a fundamental part of linear algebra. Historically, linear algebra and matrix theory have been developed for solving such systems. In the modern presentation of linear algebra through vector spaces and matrices, many problems may be interpreted in terms of linear systems.\nFor example, let\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nbe a linear system.\nTo such a system, one may associate its matrix \nformula_14\nand its right member vector\nformula_15\nLet T be the linear transformation associated with the matrix M. A solution of the system (S) is a vector \nformula_16 \nsuch that \nformula_17\nthat is an element of the preimage of v by T.\nLet (S\u2032) be the associated homogeneous system, where the right-hand sides of the equations are put to zero:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe solutions of (S\u2032) are exactly the elements of the kernel of T or, equivalently, M.\nThe Gaussian-elimination consists of performing elementary row operations on the augmented matrix\nformula_18\nfor putting it in reduced row echelon form. These row operations do not change the set of solutions of the system of equations. In the example, the reduced echelon form is \nformula_19\nshowing that the system (S) has the unique solution\nformula_20\nMore generally, a system of formula_21 linear equations in formula_22 variables can be written as\nformula_23\nwhere\nformula_24\nformula_25\nformula_26\nIf formula_27 and the matrix formula_28 is invertible, then the system has the unique solution\nformula_29.\nIt follows from this matrix interpretation of linear systems that the same methods can be applied for solving linear systems and for many operations on matrices and linear transformations, which include the computation of the ranks, kernels, matrix inverses.\nEndomorphisms and square matrices.\nA linear endomorphism is a linear map that maps a vector space V to itself. \nIf V has a basis of n elements, such an endomorphism is represented by a square matrix of size n.\nConcerning general linear maps, linear endomorphisms, and square matrices have some specific properties that make their study an important part of linear algebra, which is used in many parts of mathematics, including geometric transformations, coordinate changes, quadratic forms, and many other parts of mathematics.\nDeterminant.\nThe \"determinant\" of a square matrix A is defined to be\nformula_30\nwhere \"Sn\" is the group of all permutations of n elements, \u03c3 is a permutation, and (\u22121)\"\u03c3\" the parity of the permutation. A matrix is invertible if and only if the determinant is invertible (i.e., nonzero if the scalars belong to a field).\nCramer's rule is a closed-form expression, in terms of determinants, of the solution of a system of n linear equations in n unknowns. Cramer's rule is useful for reasoning about the solution, but, except for \"n\" = 2 or 3, it is rarely used for computing a solution, since Gaussian elimination is a faster algorithm.\nThe \"determinant of an endomorphism\" is the determinant of the matrix representing the endomorphism in terms of some ordered basis. This definition makes sense since this determinant is independent of the choice of the basis.\nEigenvalues and eigenvectors.\nIf f is a linear endomorphism of a vector space V over a field F, an \"eigenvector\" of f is a nonzero vector v of V such that \"f\"(\"v\") = \"av\" for some scalar a in F. This scalar a is an \"eigenvalue\" of f.\nIf the dimension of V is finite, and a basis has been chosen, f and v may be represented, respectively, by a square matrix M and a column matrix z; the equation defining eigenvectors and eigenvalues becomes\nformula_31\nUsing the identity matrix I, whose entries are all zero, except those of the main diagonal, which are equal to one, this may be rewritten\nformula_32\nAs z is supposed to be nonzero, this means that \"M\" \u2013 \"aI\" is a singular matrix, and thus that its determinant det (\"M\" \u2212 \"aI\") equals zero. The eigenvalues are thus the roots of the polynomial\nformula_33\nIf V is of dimension n, this is a monic polynomial of degree n, called the characteristic polynomial of the matrix (or of the endomorphism), and there are, at most, n eigenvalues.\nIf a basis exists that consists only of eigenvectors, the matrix of f on this basis has a very simple structure: it is a diagonal matrix such that the entries on the main diagonal are eigenvalues, and the other entries are zero. In this case, the endomorphism and the matrix are said to be diagonalizable. More generally, an endomorphism and a matrix are also said diagonalizable, if they become diagonalizable after extending the field of scalars. In this extended sense, if the characteristic polynomial is square-free, then the matrix is diagonalizable.\nA symmetric matrix is always diagonalizable. There are non-diagonalizable matrices, the simplest being\nformula_34\n(it cannot be diagonalizable since its square is the zero matrix, and the square of a nonzero diagonal matrix is never zero).\nWhen an endomorphism is not diagonalizable, there are bases on which it has a simple form, although not as simple as the diagonal form. The Frobenius normal form does not need to extend the field of scalars and makes the characteristic polynomial immediately readable on the matrix. The Jordan normal form requires to extension of the field of scalar for containing all eigenvalues and differs from the diagonal form only by some entries that are just above the main diagonal and are equal to 1.\nDuality.\nA linear form is a linear map from a vector space V over a field F to the field of scalars F, viewed as a vector space over itself. Equipped by pointwise addition and multiplication by a scalar, the linear forms form a vector space, called the dual space of V, and usually denoted V* or .\nIf v1, ..., v\"n\" is a basis of V (this implies that V is finite-dimensional), then one can define, for \"i\" = 1, ..., \"n\", a linear map \"vi\"* such that \"vi\"*(v\"i\") \n 1 and \"vi\"*(v\"j\") \n 0 if \"j\" \u2260 \"i\". These linear maps form a basis of \"V\"*, called the dual basis of v1, ..., v\"n\". (If V is not finite-dimensional, the \"vi\"* may be defined similarly; they are linearly independent, but do not form a basis.)\nFor v in V, the map\nformula_35\nis a linear form on V*. This defines the canonical linear map from V into (\"V\"*)*, the dual of V*, called the double dual or bidual of V. This canonical map is an isomorphism if V is finite-dimensional, and this allows identifying V with its bidual. (In the infinite-dimensional case, the canonical map is injective, but not surjective.)\nThere is thus a complete symmetry between a finite-dimensional vector space and its dual. This motivates the frequent use, in this context, of the bra\u2013ket notation\nformula_36\nfor denoting \"f\"(x).\nDual map.\nLet \nformula_37\nbe a linear map. For every linear form h on W, the composite function \"h\" \u2218 \"f\" is a linear form on V. This defines a linear map\nformula_38\nbetween the dual spaces, which is called the dual or the transpose of f.\nIf V and W are finite-dimensional, and M is the matrix of f in terms of some ordered bases, then the matrix of f* over the dual bases is the transpose \"M\"T of M, obtained by exchanging rows and columns.\nIf elements of vector spaces and their duals are represented by column vectors, this duality may be expressed in bra\u2013ket notation by \nformula_39\nTo highlight this symmetry, the two members of this equality are sometimes written \nformula_40\nInner-product spaces.\nBesides these basic concepts, linear algebra also studies vector spaces with additional structure, such as an inner product. The inner product is an example of a bilinear form, and it gives the vector space a geometric structure by allowing for the definition of length and angles. Formally, an \"inner product\" is a map.\nformula_41\nthat satisfies the following three axioms for all vectors u, v, w in \"V\" and all scalars \"a\" in \"F\":\nIn formula_43, it is symmetric.\nwith equality only for v \n 0.\nWe can define the length of a vector v in \"V\" by\nformula_46\nand we can prove the Cauchy\u2013Schwarz inequality:\nformula_47\nIn particular, the quantity\nformula_48\nand so we can call this quantity the cosine of the angle between the two vectors.\nTwo vectors are orthogonal if \u27e8u, v\u27e9 \n 0. An orthonormal basis is a basis where all basis vectors have length 1 and are orthogonal to each other. Given any finite-dimensional vector space, an orthonormal basis could be found by the Gram\u2013Schmidt procedure. Orthonormal bases are particularly easy to deal with, since if v = \"a\"1 v1 + \u22ef + \"an\" v\"n\", then\nformula_49\nThe inner product facilitates the construction of many useful concepts. For instance, given a transform \"T\", we can define its Hermitian conjugate \"T*\" as the linear transform satisfying\nformula_50\nIf \"T\" satisfies \"TT*\" \n \"T*T\", we call \"T\" normal. It turns out that normal matrices are precisely the matrices that have an orthonormal system of eigenvectors that span \"V\".\nRelationship with geometry.\nThere is a strong relationship between linear algebra and geometry, which started with the introduction by Ren\u00e9 Descartes, in 1637, of Cartesian coordinates. In this new (at that time) geometry, now called Cartesian geometry, points are represented by Cartesian coordinates, which are sequences of three real numbers (in the case of the usual three-dimensional space). The basic objects of geometry, which are lines and planes are represented by linear equations. Thus, computing intersections of lines and planes amounts to solving systems of linear equations. This was one of the main motivations for developing linear algebra.\nMost geometric transformation, such as translations, rotations, reflections, rigid motions, isometries, and projections transform lines into lines. It follows that they can be defined, specified, and studied in terms of linear maps. This is also the case of homographies and M\u00f6bius transformations when considered as transformations of a projective space.\nUntil the end of the 19th century, geometric spaces were defined by axioms relating points, lines, and planes (synthetic geometry). Around this date, it appeared that one may also define geometric spaces by constructions involving vector spaces (see, for example, Projective space and Affine space). It has been shown that the two approaches are essentially equivalent. In classical geometry, the involved vector spaces are vector spaces over the reals, but the constructions may be extended to vector spaces over any field, allowing considering geometry over arbitrary fields, including finite fields.\nPresently, most textbooks introduce geometric spaces from linear algebra, and geometry is often presented, at the elementary level, as a subfield of linear algebra.\nUsage and applications.\nLinear algebra is used in almost all areas of mathematics, thus making it relevant in almost all scientific domains that use mathematics. These applications may be divided into several wide categories.\nFunctional analysis.\nFunctional analysis studies function spaces. These are vector spaces with additional structure, such as Hilbert spaces. Linear algebra is thus a fundamental part of functional analysis and its applications, which include, in particular, quantum mechanics (wave functions) and Fourier analysis (orthogonal basis).\nScientific computation.\nNearly all scientific computations involve linear algebra. Consequently, linear algebra algorithms have been highly optimized. BLAS and LAPACK are the best known implementations. For improving efficiency, some of them configure the algorithms automatically, at run time, to adapt them to the specificities of the computer (cache size, number of available cores,\u00a0...).\nSince the 1960s there have been processors with specialized instructions for optimizing the operations of linear algebra, optional array processors under the control of a conventional processor, supercomputers designed for array processing and conventional processors augmented with vector registers.\nSome contemporary processors, typically graphics processing units (GPU), are designed with a matrix structure, for optimizing the operations of linear algebra.\nGeometry of ambient space.\nThe modeling of ambient space is based on geometry. Sciences concerned with this space use geometry widely. This is the case with mechanics and robotics, for describing rigid body dynamics; geodesy for describing Earth shape; perspectivity, computer vision, and computer graphics, for describing the relationship between a scene and its plane representation; and many other scientific domains.\nIn all these applications, synthetic geometry is often used for general descriptions and a qualitative approach, but for the study of explicit situations, one must compute with coordinates. This requires the heavy use of linear algebra.\nStudy of complex systems.\nMost physical phenomena are modeled by partial differential equations. To solve them, one usually decomposes the space in which the solutions are searched into small, mutually interacting cells. For linear systems this interaction involves linear functions. For nonlinear systems, this interaction is often approximated by linear functions.This is called a linear model or first-order approximation. Linear models are frequently used for complex nonlinear real-world systems because they make parametrization more manageable. In both cases, very large matrices are generally involved. Weather forecasting (or more specifically, parametrization for atmospheric modeling) is a typical example of a real-world application, where the whole Earth atmosphere is divided into cells of, say, 100\u00a0km of width and 100\u00a0km of height.\nFluid mechanics, fluid dynamics, and thermal energy systems.\nLinear algebra, a branch of mathematics dealing with vector spaces and linear mappings between these spaces, plays a critical role in various engineering disciplines, including fluid mechanics, fluid dynamics, and thermal energy systems. Its application in these fields is multifaceted and indispensable for solving complex problems.\nIn fluid mechanics, linear algebra is integral to understanding and solving problems related to the behavior of fluids. It assists in the modeling and simulation of fluid flow, providing essential tools for the analysis of fluid dynamics problems. For instance, linear algebraic techniques are used to solve systems of differential equations that describe fluid motion. These equations, often complex and non-linear, can be linearized using linear algebra methods, allowing for simpler solutions and analyses.\nIn the field of fluid dynamics, linear algebra finds its application in computational fluid dynamics (CFD), a branch that uses numerical analysis and data structures to solve and analyze problems involving fluid flows. CFD relies heavily on linear algebra for the computation of fluid flow and heat transfer in various applications. For example, the Navier\u2013Stokes equations, fundamental in fluid dynamics, are often solved using techniques derived from linear algebra. This includes the use of matrices and vectors to represent and manipulate fluid flow fields.\nFurthermore, linear algebra plays a crucial role in thermal energy systems, particularly in power systems analysis. It is used to model and optimize the generation, transmission, and distribution of electric power. Linear algebraic concepts such as matrix operations and eigenvalue problems are employed to enhance the efficiency, reliability, and economic performance of power systems. The application of linear algebra in this context is vital for the design and operation of modern power systems, including renewable energy sources and smart grids.\nOverall, the application of linear algebra in fluid mechanics, fluid dynamics, and thermal energy systems is an example of the profound interconnection between mathematics and engineering. It provides engineers with the necessary tools to model, analyze, and solve complex problems in these domains, leading to advancements in technology and industry.\nExtensions and generalizations.\nThis section presents several related topics that do not appear generally in elementary textbooks on linear algebra but are commonly considered, in advanced mathematics, as parts of linear algebra.\nModule theory.\nThe existence of multiplicative inverses in fields is not involved in the axioms defining a vector space. One may thus replace the field of scalars by a ring R, and this gives the structure called a module over R, or R-module.\nThe concepts of linear independence, span, basis, and linear maps (also called module homomorphisms) are defined for modules exactly as for vector spaces, with the essential difference that, if R is not a field, there are modules that do not have any basis. The modules that have a basis are the free modules, and those that are spanned by a finite set are the finitely generated modules. Module homomorphisms between finitely generated free modules may be represented by matrices. The theory of matrices over a ring is similar to that of matrices over a field, except that determinants exist only if the ring is commutative, and that a square matrix over a commutative ring is invertible only if its determinant has a multiplicative inverse in the ring.\nVector spaces are completely characterized by their dimension (up to an isomorphism). In general, there is not such a complete classification for modules, even if one restricts oneself to finitely generated modules. However, every module is a cokernel of a homomorphism of free modules.\nModules over the integers can be identified with abelian groups, since the multiplication by an integer may be identified as a repeated addition. Most of the theory of abelian groups may be extended to modules over a principal ideal domain. In particular, over a principal ideal domain, every submodule of a free module is free, and the fundamental theorem of finitely generated abelian groups may be extended straightforwardly to finitely generated modules over a principal ring.\nThere are many rings for which there are algorithms for solving linear equations and systems of linear equations. However, these algorithms have generally a computational complexity that is much higher than similar algorithms over a field. For more details, see Linear equation over a ring.\nMultilinear algebra and tensors.\nIn multilinear algebra, one considers multivariable linear transformations, that is, mappings that are linear in each of several different variables. This line of inquiry naturally leads to the idea of the dual space, the vector space \"V*\" consisting of linear maps \"f\" : \"V\" \u2192 \"F\" where \"F\" is the field of scalars. Multilinear maps \"T\" : \"Vn\" \u2192 \"F\" can be described via tensor products of elements of \"V*\".\nIf, in addition to vector addition and scalar multiplication, there is a bilinear vector product \"V\" \u00d7 \"V\" \u2192 \"V\", the vector space is called an algebra; for instance, associative algebras are algebras with an associate vector product (like the algebra of square matrices, or the algebra of polynomials).\nTopological vector spaces.\nVector spaces that are not finite-dimensional often require additional structure to be tractable. A normed vector space is a vector space along with a function called a norm, which measures the \"size\" of elements. The norm induces a metric, which measures the distance between elements, and induces a topology, which allows for a definition of continuous maps. The metric also allows for a definition of limits and completeness \u2013 a normed vector space that is complete is known as a Banach space. A complete metric space along with the additional structure of an inner product (a conjugate symmetric sesquilinear form) is known as a Hilbert space, which is in some sense a particularly well-behaved Banach space. Functional analysis applies the methods of linear algebra alongside those of mathematical analysis to study various function spaces; the central objects of study in functional analysis are Lp spaces, which are Banach spaces, and especially the \"L\"2 space of square-integrable functions, which is the only Hilbert space among them. Functional analysis is of particular importance to quantum mechanics, the theory of partial differential equations, digital signal processing, and electrical engineering. It also provides the foundation and theoretical framework that underlies the Fourier transform and related methods.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18423", "revid": "17529998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18423", "title": "Labia majora", "text": "Folds of skin that contain and protect the vulva's other parts\nIn primates, and specifically in humans, the labia majora (sg.: labium majus), also known as the outer lips or outer labia, are two prominent longitudinal skin folds that extend downward and backward from the mons pubis to the perineum. Together with the labia minora, they form the labia of the vulva.\nThe labia majora are homologous to the male scrotum.\nEtymology.\n\"Labia majora\" is the Latin plural for big (\"major\") lips. The Latin term \"labium/labia\" is used in anatomy for a number of usually paired parallel structures, but in English, it is mostly applied to two pairs of parts of the vulva\u2014labia majora and labia minora. Traditionally, to avoid confusion with other lip-like structures of the body, the vulvar labia were termed by anatomists in Latin as \"labia majora (\"or \"minora) pudendi.\"\nEmbryology.\nEmbryologically, they develop from labioscrotal folds.\nThe labia majora after puberty may become of a darker color than the skin outside them and grow pubic hair on their external surface.\nFunction and structure.\nThe main function of the labia majora is to cover and protect the other parts of the vulva. The labia majora contain the labia minora, interlabial sulci, clitoral hood, clitoral glans, frenulum clitoridis, the Hart's Line, and the vulval vestibule, where the external openings of the urethra and the vagina are located. Each labium majus has two surfaces, an outer, pigmented and covered with strong, pubic hair; and an inner, smooth and beset with large sebaceous follicles. The labia majora are covered with squamous epithelium. Between the two, there is a considerable quantity of areolar tissue and fat, besides vessels, nerves, and glands. Below the skin of the labia majora, there is a tissue called the \"dartos muliebris\", which gives them a wrinkled appearance.\nPudendal cleft.\nThe labia majora constitute the lateral boundaries of the pudendal cleft. The pudendal cleft, also known as the vulvar cleft or cleft of Venus (rima vulvae or rima pudendi in Latin), is a vertical fissure between the labia majora starting at the basal point of the mons pubis. After puberty, the clitoral hood and the labia minora can protrude into the pudendal cleft to a variable degree.\nCommissures.\nThe labia majora are thicker in front, and form the anterior labial commissure where they meet below the mons pubis. Posteriorly, they are not really joined, but appear to become lost in the neighboring integument, ending close to, and nearly parallel to, each other. Together with the connecting skin between them, they form another commissure, the posterior labial commissure, which is also the posterior boundary of the vulva. The interval between the posterior commissure and the anus, from 2.5 to 3\u00a0cm in length, constitutes the perineum. The anterior region of the perineum is known as the urogenital triangle, which separates it from the anal region. Between the labia majora and the inner thighs are the labiocrural folds. Between the labia majora and labia minora are the interlabial sulci. Labia majora atrophy after menopause.\nIn non-human primates.\nWhile the labia majora is present in all female primates, many have them until adulthood or become inconspicuous around that period. Primates besides humans that always have visible labia majora are bonobos, strepsirrhines, tarsiers, cebid monkeys, and gibbons.\nIn non-primate female mammals, the labia majora are absent since the labioscrotal swellings have disappeared as a fetus. Because of this, the pudendal cleft refers to the slit between the labia vulvae in those mammals.\nUse in grafting.\nThe fat pad of the labia majora can be used as a graft, often as a so-called \"Martius labial fat pad graft\", and can be used, for example, in urethrolysis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18424", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18424", "title": "Labia minora", "text": "Flaps of skin on either side of the vaginal opening in the vulva\nThe labia minora (Latin for 'smaller lips', sg.: labium minus), also known as the inner labia, inner lips, or nymphae, are two flaps of skin that are part of the primate vulva, extending outwards from the inner vaginal and urethral openings to encompass the vestibule. At the glans clitoridis, each labium splits, above forming the clitoral hood, and below the frenulum of the clitoris. At the bottom, the labia meet at the \"labial commissure\". The labia minora vary widely in size, color and shape from individual to individual.\nThe labia minora are situated between the labia majora and together form the labia. The labia minora are homologous to the penile raphe and ventral penile skin in males.\nStructure and functioning.\nThe labia minora extend from the clitoris obliquely downward, laterally, and backward on either side of the vulval vestibule, ending between the bottom of the vulval vestibule and the labia majora. The posterior ends (bottom) of the labia minora are usually joined across the middle line by a flap of skin, named the frenulum of labia minora.\nOn the front, each lip forks dividing into two portions surrounding the clitoris. The upper part of each lip passes above the clitoris to meet the upper part of the other lip\u2014which will often be a little larger or smaller\u2014forming a fold which overhangs the glans clitoris (clitoral tip or head); this fold is named the clitoral hood. The lower part passes beneath the glans clitoridis and becomes united to its under surface, forming, with the inner lip of the opposite side, the \"frenulum clitoridis\".\nThe clitoral hood typically covers the shaft and sometimes the glans \u2014 which is highly sensitive to touch \u2014 helping protect the clitoris from mechanical irritation and dryness. However, the hood is movable and can slide during clitoral erection or be gently pulled back to increase exposure of the clitoris to sexual stimulation.\nHistology.\nOn the opposed surfaces of the labia minora are numerous sebaceous glands not associated with hair follicles. They are lined by stratified squamous epithelium on those surfaces.\nLike the whole area of the vulval vestibule, the mucus secreted by those glands protects the labia from dryness and mechanical irritation.\nVariation.\nBeing thinner than the outer labia, the inner labia can be also more narrow than the former, or wider than the labia majora, thus protruding in the pudendal cleft and making the term \"minora\" (Latin for smaller) essentially inapplicable in these cases. They can also be smooth or frilled, the latter being more typical of longer or wider inner labia.\nFrom 2003 to 2004, researchers from the Department of Gynaecology, Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital in London, measured the labia and other genital structures of 50 women from the age of 18 to 50, with a mean age of 35.6. The study has since been criticized for its \"small and homogenous sample group\" consisting primarily of white women. The results were:\nDue to the frequent portrayal of the pudendal cleft without protrusion in art and pornography, there has been a rise in the popularity of labiaplasty, surgery to alter the labia\u2014usually, to make them smaller. On the other hand, there is an opposite movement of labia stretching. Its proponents stress the beauty of long labia and their positive role in sexual stimulation of both partners.\nLabiaplasty is also sometimes sought by women who have asymmetrical labia minora to adjust the shape of the structures towards identical size.\nLabia stretching has traditionally been practised in some African nations in the East and South and the South Pacific.\nFunctioning.\nThe inner lips serve to protect from mechanical irritation, dryness and infections of the highly sensitive area of the vulval vestibule with vaginal and urethral openings in it between them. During vaginal intercourse, they may contribute to stimulation of the whole vestibule area, the clitoris and the vagina of the woman and the penis of her partner. Stimulation of the clitoris may occur through tension of the clitoral hood and its frenulum by the inner labia pulling at them. During sexual arousal, they are lubricated by the mucus secreted in the vagina and around it to make penetration painless and protect them from irritation.\nAs the female external urethral opening (meatus) is also situated between labia minora, they may play a role in guiding the stream of the urine during female urination.\nMedical conditions.\nBeing very sensitive by their structure to any irritation, and situated in the excretion area where traces of urine, vaginal discharge, smegma and even feces may be present, the inner lips may be susceptible to inflammatory infections of the vulva such as vulvitis.\nThe likelihood of inflammation may be reduced through appropriate regular hygienic cleansing of the whole vulval vestibule, using water and medically tested cleansing agents designed for vulvas. To avoid contamination of the vulva with fecal bacteria, it is recommended that the vulva is washed only from front to back, from mons pubis to the perineum and anus. Apart from water and special liquid cleansing agents (lotions), there are commercially available wet wipes for female intimate hygiene. Some women wipe the vulval vestibule dry with toilet tissue after urination to avoid irritation and infections from residual drops of the urine in the area.\nHowever, incorrect choice of cleansing agents, or their incorrect application, may itself cause labial irritation and require medical attention. Over-vigorous rubbing of the labia of little girls while washing, combined with the lack of estrogen in their bodies, may lead to the mostly pediatric condition known as labial fusion. If fused labia prevent urination, urine may accumulate and cause pain and inflammation.\nIn adult females, irritation of the area may be caused by wearing too-tight underwear (especially where wider inner labia protrude in the pudendal cleft); while G-strings, which rub against the labia during body movements, may cause irritation or lead to infection from bacteria transferred from either the external environment or the anus.\nOther animals.\nThe labia minora in non-primate placental mammals (namely Euungulata and Carnivora) are a sole pair of small labia that protect the internal vestibule and are rather called the labia vulvae or simply \"labia\". In primates, they are called \"labia minora\" to differentiate them from the labia majora, the latter of which are a feature only present in the Primates order.\nWhen the labia vulvae are closed together, they form a pudendal cleft. The joining of the labia vulvae top and bottom are respectively referred to as the anterior and posterior commissures.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18425", "revid": "50520298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18425", "title": "Leopold von Sacher-Masoch", "text": "Austrian author (1836\u20131895)\nLeopold Ritter von Sacher-Masoch (; 27 January 1836 \u2013 9 March 1895) was an Austrian nobleman, writer and journalist, who gained renown for his romantic stories of Galician life. The term \"masochism\" is derived from his name, invented by his contemporary, the Austrian psychiatrist Richard von Krafft-Ebing. Masoch did not approve of this use of his name.\nDuring his lifetime, Sacher-Masoch was well known as a man of letters, in particular a utopian thinker who espoused socialist and humanist ideals in his fiction and non-fiction. Most of his works remain untranslated into English.\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nVon Sacher-Masoch was born in the city of Lemberg, the capital of the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria (now Lviv, Ukraine), at the time a province of the Austrian Empire, into the Roman Catholic family. His father was an Austrian civil servant, Leopold Johann Nepomuk Ritter von Sacher, and his mother Charlotte Josepha von Masoch, a Ukrainian noblewoman. The father later combined his surname with his wife's \"von Masoch\", at the request of her family (she was the last of the line). Von Sacher served as a Commissioner of the Imperial Police Forces in Lemberg, and he was recognised with a new title of Austrian nobility as Sacher-Masoch awarded by the Austrian Emperor.\nLeopold studied law, history and mathematics at Graz University (where he obtained a doctorate in history in 1856), and after graduating he became a lecturer there.\nGalician storyteller.\nHis early, non-fictional publications dealt mostly with Austrian history. At the same time, Masoch turned to the folklore and culture of his homeland, Galicia. Soon he abandoned lecturing and became a free man of letters. Within a decade his short stories and novels prevailed over his historical non-fiction works, though historical themes continued to imbue his fiction.\nPanslavist ideas were prevalent in Masoch's literary work, and he found a particular interest in depicting picturesque types among the various ethnicities that inhabited Galicia. From the 1860s to the 1880s he published a number of volumes of \"Jewish Short Stories\", \"Polish Short Stories\", \"Galician Short Stories\", \"German Court Stories\" and \"Russian Court Stories\".\n\"The Legacy of Cain\".\nIn 1869, Sacher-Masoch conceived a grandiose series of short stories under the collective title \"Legacy of Cain\" that would represent the author's aesthetic \"Weltanschauung\" (worldview). The cycle opened with the manifesto \"The Wanderer\" that brought out misogynist themes that became peculiar to Masoch's writings. Of the six planned volumes, only the first two were ever completed. By the middle of the 1880s, Masoch abandoned the \"Legacy of Cain\". Nevertheless, the published volumes of the series included Masoch's best-known stories, and of them, \"Venus in Furs\" (published 1870) is the most famous today. The novella expressed Sacher-Masoch's fantasies and fetishes (especially for dominant women wearing fur). He did his best to live out his fantasies with his mistresses and wives. In 1873 he married Angelika Aurora von R\u00fcmelin.\nPrivate life and inspiration for \"Venus in Furs\".\nFanny Pistor was an emerging literary writer. She met Sacher-Masoch after she contacted him, under the assumed name and fictitious title of Baroness Bogdanoff, for suggestions on improving her writing to make it suitable for publication. She was the inspiration for \"Venus im Pelz\" (Venus in Furs). The erotic novel spawned the word masochism.\nLater years.\nIn 1874, Masoch wrote the novel \"Die Ideale unserer Zeit\" (\"The Ideals of Our Time\"), an attempt to give a portrait of German society during its Gr\u00fcnderzeit period.\nIn his late fifties, his mental health began to deteriorate, and he spent the last years of his life under psychiatric care. According to official reports, he died in Lindheim in 1895. (Lindheim, at that time near Altenstadt, was incorporated into the municipality of Altenstadt in 1971.) It is also claimed that Masoch died in an asylum in Mannheim in 1905.\nTrivia.\nSacher-Masoch is the great-great-uncle, through her Austrian-born mother Eva von Sacher-Masoch, Baroness Erisso, of the late English Rock star and film actress Marianne Faithfull. She died in January of 2025. \nMasochism.\nThe term \"masochism\" was coined in 1886 by the Austrian psychiatrist Richard Freiherr von Krafft-Ebing (1840\u20131902) in his book \"Psychopathia Sexualis\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...I feel justified in calling this sexual anomaly \"Masochism\", because the author Sacher-Masoch frequently made this perversion, which up to his time was quite unknown to the scientific world as such, the substratum of his writings. I followed thereby the scientific formation of the term \"Daltonism\", from Dalton, the discoverer of colour-blindness.&lt;br&gt;\nDuring recent years facts have been advanced which prove that Sacher-Masoch was not only the poet of Masochism, but that he himself was afflicted with the anomaly. Although these proofs were communicated to me without restriction, I refrain from giving them to the public. I refute the accusation that \"I have coupled the name of a revered author with a perversion of the sexual instinct\", which has been made against me by some admirers of the author and by some critics of my book. As a man, Sacher-Masoch cannot lose anything in the estimation of his cultured fellow-beings simply because he was afflicted with an anomaly of his sexual feelings. As an author, he suffered severe injury so far as the influence and intrinsic merit of his work is concerned, for so long and whenever he eliminated his perversion from his literary efforts he was a gifted writer, and as such would have achieved real greatness had he been actuated by normally sexual feelings. In this respect he is a remarkable example of the powerful influence exercised by the \"vita sexualis\" be it in the good or evil sense over the formation and direction of man's mind.\nSacher-Masoch was not pleased with Krafft-Ebing's assertions. Nevertheless, details of Masoch's private life were obscure until Aurora von R\u00fcmelin's memoirs, \"Meine Lebensbeichte\" (My Life Confession; 1906), were published in Berlin under the pseudonym Wanda v. Dunajew (the name of a leading character in his \"Venus in Furs\"). The following year, a French translation, \"Confession de ma vie\" (1907) by \"Wanda von Sacher-Masoch\", was printed in Paris by Mercure de France. An English translation of the French edition was published as \"The Confessions of Wanda von Sacher-Masoch\" (1991) by RE/Search Publications.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18426", "revid": "382591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18426", "title": "Lithography", "text": "Printing technique\nLithography (from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'stone' and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'to write') is a planographic method of printing originally based on the immiscibility of oil and water. The printing is from a stone (lithographic limestone) or a metal plate with a smooth surface. It was invented in 1796 by the German author and actor Alois Senefelder and was initially used mostly for musical scores and maps. Lithography can be used to print text or images onto paper or other suitable material. A lithograph is something printed by lithography, but this term is only used for fine art prints and some other, mostly older, types of printed matter, not for those made by modern commercial lithography.\nTraditionally, the image to be printed was drawn with a greasy substance, such as oil, fat, or wax onto the surface of a smooth and flat limestone plate. The stone was then treated with a mixture of weak acid and gum arabic (\"etch\") that made the parts of the stone's surface that were not protected by the grease more hydrophilic (water attracting). For printing, the stone was first moistened. The water adhered only to the etched, hydrophilic areas, making them even more oil-repellant. An oil-based ink was then applied, and would stick only to the original drawing. The ink would finally be transferred to a blank sheet of paper, producing a printed page. This traditional technique is still used for fine art printmaking.\nIn modern commercial lithography, the image is transferred or created as a patterned polymer coating applied to a flexible plastic or metal plate. The printing plates, made of stone or metal, can be created by a photographic process, a method that may be referred to as \"photolithography\" (although the term usually refers to a vaguely similar microelectronics manufacturing process). Offset printing or \"offset lithography\" is an elaboration of lithography in which the ink is transferred from the plate to the paper indirectly by means of a rubber plate or cylinder, rather than by direct contact. This technique keeps the paper dry and allows fully automated high-speed operation. It has mostly replaced traditional lithography for medium- and high-volume printing: since the 1960s, most books and magazines, especially when illustrated in colour, are printed with offset lithography from photographically created metal plates.\nAs a printing technology, lithography is different from intaglio printing (gravure), wherein a plate is engraved, etched, or stippled to score cavities to contain the printing ink; and woodblock printing or letterpress printing, wherein ink is applied to the raised surfaces of letters or images.\nPrinciple.\nLithography uses simple chemical processes to create an image. For instance, the positive part of an image is a water-repelling (\"hydrophobic\") substance, while the negative image would be water-retaining (\"hydrophilic\"). Thus, when the plate is introduced to a compatible printing ink and water mixture, the ink will adhere to the positive image and the water will clean the negative image. This allows a flat print plate to be used, enabling much longer and more detailed print runs than the older physical methods of printing (e.g., intaglio printing, letterpress printing).\nLithography was invented by Alois Senefelder in the Electorate of Bavaria in 1796. In the early days of lithography, a smooth piece of limestone was used (hence the name \"lithography\": () is the Ancient Greek word for 'stone'). After the oil-based image was put on the surface, a solution of gum arabic in water was applied, the gum sticking only to the non-oily surface. During printing, water adhered to the gum arabic surfaces and was repelled by the oily parts, while the oily ink used for printing did the opposite.\nLithography on limestone.\nLithography works because of the mutual repulsion of oil and water. The image is drawn on the surface of the print plate with a fat or oil-based medium (hydrophobic) such as a wax crayon, which may be pigmented to make the drawing visible. A wide range of oil-based media is available, but the durability of the image on the stone depends on the lipid content of the material being used, and its ability to withstand water and acid. After the drawing of the image, an aqueous solution of gum arabic, weakly acidified with nitric acid (HNO3) is applied to the stone. The function of this solution is to create a hydrophilic layer of calcium nitrate salt, Ca(NO3)2, and gum arabic on all non-image surfaces. The gum solution penetrates into the pores of the stone, completely surrounding the original image with a hydrophilic layer that will not accept the printing ink. Using lithographic turpentine, the printer then removes any excess of the greasy drawing material, but a hydrophobic molecular film of it remains tightly bonded to the surface of the stone, rejecting the gum arabic and water, but ready to accept the oily ink.\nWhen printing, the stone is kept wet with water. The water is naturally attracted to the layer of gum and salt created by the acid wash. Printing ink based on drying oils such as linseed oil and varnish loaded with pigment is then rolled over the surface. The water repels the greasy ink but the hydrophobic areas left by the original drawing material accept it. When the hydrophobic image is loaded with ink, the stone and paper are run through a press that applies even pressure over the surface, transferring the ink to the paper and off the stone.\nSenefelder had experimented during the early 19th century with multicolor lithography; in his 1819 book, he predicted that the process would eventually be perfected and used to reproduce paintings. Multi-color printing was introduced by a new process developed by Godefroy Engelmann (France) in 1837 known as chromolithography. A separate stone was used for each color, and a print went through the press separately for each stone. The main challenge was to keep the images aligned (\"in register\"). This method lent itself to images consisting of large areas of flat color, and resulted in the characteristic poster designs of this period.\n\"Lithography, or printing from soft stone, largely took the place of engraving in the production of English commercial maps after about 1852. It was a quick, cheap process and had been used to print British army maps during the Peninsular War. Most of the commercial maps of the second half of the 19th century were lithographed and unattractive, though accurate enough.\"\nModern lithographic process.\nHigh-volume lithography is used to produce posters, maps, books, newspapers, and packaging\u2014just about any smooth, mass-produced item with print and graphics on it. Most books, indeed all types of high-volume text, are printed using offset lithography.\nFor offset lithography, which depends on photographic processes, flexible aluminum, polyester, mylar or paper printing plates are used instead of stone tablets. Modern printing plates have a brushed or roughened texture and are covered with a photosensitive emulsion. A photographic negative of the desired image is placed in contact with the emulsion and the plate is exposed to ultraviolet light. After development, the emulsion shows a reverse of the negative image, which is thus a duplicate of the original (positive) image. The image on the plate emulsion can also be created by direct laser imaging in a CTP (computer-to-plate) device known as a platesetter. The positive image is the emulsion that remains after imaging. Non-image portions of the emulsion have traditionally been removed by a chemical process, though in recent times, plates have become available that do not require such processing.\nThe plate is affixed to a cylinder on a printing press. Dampening rollers apply water, which covers the blank portions of the plate but is repelled by the emulsion of the image area. Hydrophobic ink, which is repelled by the water and only adheres to the emulsion of the image area, is then applied by the inking rollers.\nIf this image were transferred directly to paper, it would create a mirror-type image and the paper would become too wet. Instead, the plate rolls against a cylinder covered with a rubber \"blanket\", which squeezes away the water, picks up the ink and transfers it to the paper with uniform pressure. The paper passes between the blanket cylinder and a counter-pressure or impression cylinder and the image is transferred to the paper. Because the image is first transferred, or \"offset\" to the rubber blanket cylinder, this reproduction method is known as \"offset lithography\" or \"offset printing\".\nMany innovations and technical refinements have been made in printing processes and presses over the years, including the development of presses with multiple units (each containing one printing plate) that can print multi-color images in one pass on both sides of the sheet, and presses that accommodate continuous rolls (\"webs\") of paper, known as web presses. Another innovation was the continuous dampening system first introduced by Dahlgren, instead of the old method (conventional dampening) which is still used on older presses, using rollers covered with molleton (cloth) that absorbs the water. This increased control of the water flow to the plate and allowed for better ink and water balance. Recent dampening systems include a \"delta effect or vario\", which slows the roller in contact with the plate, thus creating a sweeping movement over the ink image to clean impurities known as \"hickies\".\nThis press is also called an ink pyramid because the ink is transferred through several layers of rollers with different purposes. Fast lithographic 'web' printing presses are commonly used in newspaper production.\nThe advent of desktop publishing made it possible for type and images to be modified easily on personal computers for eventual printing by desktop or commercial presses. The development of digital imagesetters enabled print shops to produce negatives for platemaking directly from digital input, skipping the intermediate step of photographing an actual page layout. The development of the digital platesetter during the late 20th century eliminated film negatives altogether by exposing printing plates directly from digital input, a process known as computer-to-plate printing.\nLithography as an artistic medium.\nDuring the early years of the 19th century, lithography had only a limited effect on printmaking, mainly because technical difficulties remained to be overcome. Germany was the main center of production in this period. Godefroy Engelmann, who moved his press from Mulhouse to Paris in 1816, largely succeeded in resolving the technical problems, and during the 1820s lithography was adopted by artists such as Delacroix and G\u00e9ricault. After early experiments such as \"Specimens of Polyautography\" (1803), which had experimental works by a number of British artists including Benjamin West, Henry Fuseli, James Barry, Thomas Barker of Bath, Thomas Stothard, Henry Richard Greville, Richard Cooper, Henry Singleton, and William Henry Pyne, London also became a center, and some of G\u00e9ricault's prints were in fact produced there. Goya in Bordeaux produced his last series of prints by lithography\u2014\"The Bulls of Bordeaux\" of 1828. By the mid-century the initial enthusiasm had somewhat diminished in both countries, although the use of lithography was increasingly favored for commercial applications, which included the prints of Daumier, published in newspapers. Rodolphe Bresdin and Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Millet also continued to practice the medium in France, and Adolph Menzel in Germany. In 1862 the publisher Cadart tried to initiate a portfolio of lithographs by various artists, which was not successful but included several prints by Manet. The revival began during the 1870s, especially in France with artists such as Odilon Redon, Henri Fantin-Latour and Degas producing much of their work in this manner. The need for strictly limited editions to maintain the price had now been realized, and the medium became more accepted.\nIn the 1890s, color lithography gained success in part by the emergence of Jules Ch\u00e9ret, known as the \"father of the modern poster\", whose work went on to inspire a new generation of poster designers and painters, most notably Toulouse-Lautrec, and former student of Ch\u00e9ret, Georges de Feure. By 1900 the medium in both color and monotone was an accepted part of printmaking.\nDuring the 20th century, a group of artists, including Braque, Calder, Chagall, Dufy, L\u00e9ger, Matisse, Mir\u00f3, and Picasso, rediscovered the largely undeveloped artform of lithography thanks to the Mourlot Studios, also known as \"Atelier Mourlot\", a Parisian printshop founded in 1852 by the Mourlot family. The Atelier Mourlot originally specialized in the printing of wallpaper; but it was transformed when the founder's grandson, Fernand Mourlot, invited a number of 20th-century artists to explore the complexities of fine art printing. Mourlot encouraged the painters to work directly on lithographic stones in order to create original artworks that could then be executed under the direction of master printers in small editions. The combination of modern artist and master printer resulted in lithographs that were used as posters to promote the artists' work.\nGrant Wood, George Bellows, Alphonse Mucha, Max Kahn, Pablo Picasso, Eleanor Coen, Jasper Johns, David Hockney, Susan Dorothea White, and Robert Rauschenberg are a few of the artists who have produced most of their prints in the medium. M. C. Escher is considered a master of lithography, and many of his prints were created using this process. More than other printmaking techniques, printmakers in lithography still largely depend on access to good printers, and the development of the medium has been greatly influenced by when and where these have been established. An American scene for lithography was founded by Robert Blackburn in New York City.\nAs a special form of lithography, the serilith or seriolithograph is a mixed-media original print that combines both lithography and serigraphy (screen printing). In this technique, the artist hand-draws the separations for each process, ensuring a high level of craftsmanship. Seriliths are typically produced as limited-edition fine art prints and are published by artists and publishers around the world. They are widely recognized and collected within the art community.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18428", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18428", "title": "Lebesgue-integrable", "text": ""}
{"id": "18429", "revid": "8029", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18429", "title": "List of obsolete country codes", "text": ""}
{"id": "18430", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18430", "title": "Library management", "text": "Oversight and management of libraries\nLibrary management is a sub-discipline of institutional management that focuses on specific issues faced by libraries and library management professionals. Library management encompasses normal managerial tasks, as well as intellectual freedom and fundraising responsibilities. Issues faced in library management frequently overlap with those faced in managing non-profit organizations.\nThe basic functions of library management include overseeing all library operations, managing the library budget, planning and negotiating the acquisition of materials, interlibrary loan requests, stacks maintenance, overseeing fee collection, event planning, fundraising, and human resources.\nCommon library construct.\nMost of the libraries that store physical media like books, periodicals, film, and other objects adhere to some derivative of the Dewey Decimal System as their method for tagging, storing, and retrieving materials based on unique identifiers. The use of such systems have caused librarians to develop and leverage common constructs that act as tools for both library professionals and library users alike. These constructs include master catalogs, domain catalogs, indexes, unique identifiers, unique identifier tokens, and artifacts.\nPlanning and maintaining library facilities.\nAn important aspect of library management is planning and maintaining library facilities. Successful planning is defined as \"active planning that ensures an organization will have the right people in the right place at the right time for [the] right job\". Planning the construction of new libraries or remodeling those that exist is integral since user needs are often changing. To supplement their operating budget, managers often secure funding through donor gifts and fundraising. Many facilities have begun including cafes, Friends of the Library spaces, and even exhibits to help generate additional revenue. These areas should be taken into account when planning for building expansions.\nThe site for new construction must be found, and then the building must be designed, constructed, and eventually evaluated. Once established, it is important that the building is regularly maintained. This may be completed by delegating tasks to maintenance personnel or by hiring an outside company through bids.\nDisaster planning must be taken into account in the library context as well: not only the impact of a disaster on the library, but the library's potential role as a support service just after a disaster.\nAssociations and publications.\nThe Library Leadership and Management Association (LLAMA) is a division of the American Library Association that provides leaders with webinars, conferences, and a variety of industry publications, in addition to funding through awards and grants. LLAMA membership includes a free subscription to the online quarterly magazine \"Library Leadership &amp; Management\", as well as discounts on other publications and related conferences. In 2020 LLAMA merged with two other divisions of the ALA to form Core: Leadership, Infrastructure, Futures.\nThe \"Journal of Library Administration\" began in 1980 and is currently published by Routledge eight times per year. It is a peer-reviewed academic journal that discusses issues pertaining to library management.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18432", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18432", "title": "English longbow", "text": "Type of ranged weapon\nThe English longbow was a powerful medieval type of bow, about long. While it is debated whether it originated in England or in Wales from the Welsh bow, by the 14th century the longbow was being used by both the English and the Welsh as a weapon of war and for hunting. English longbows were effective against the French during the Hundred Years' War, particularly in the battles of Sluys (1340), Cr\u00e9cy (1346), Poitiers (1356), and Agincourt (1415). They were less successful later on, as longbowmen had their lines broken at the Battle of Verneuil (1424), although the English won a decisive victory there; they were completely routed at the Battle of Patay (1429) when they were charged by the French mounted men-at-arms before they had prepared the terrain and finished defensive arrangements. The Battle of Pontvallain (1370) had also previously shown longbowmen were not particularly effective when not given the time to set up defensive positions.\nNo English longbows survive from the period when the longbow was dominant (c. 1250\u20131450), probably because bows became weaker, broke, and were replaced rather than being handed down through generations. More than 130 bows survive from the Renaissance period, however. More than 3,500 arrows and 137 whole longbows were recovered from the \"Mary Rose\", a ship of Henry VIII's navy that sank at Portsmouth in 1545.\nDescription.\nLength.\nA longbow must be long enough to allow its user to draw the string to a point on the face or body, and the length therefore varies with the user. In continental Europe it was generally seen as any bow longer than . The Society of Antiquaries of London says it is of in length. Richard Bartelot, of the Royal Artillery Institution, said that the bow was of yew, long, with a arrow. Gaston III, Count of Foix, wrote in 1388 that a longbow should be \"of yew or boxwood, seventy inches () between the points of attachment for the cord\". Historian Jim Bradbury said they were an average of about . All but the last estimate were made before the excavation of the \"Mary Rose\", where bows were found ranging from with an average length of .\nDraw weights.\nEstimates for the draw of these bows varies considerably. Before the recovery of the \"Mary Rose\", Count M. Mildmay Stayner, recorder of the British Long Bow Society, estimated the bows of the medieval period drew maximum; W. F. Paterson, Chairman of the Society of Archer-Antiquaries, believed the weapon had a maximum draw weight of . Other sources suggest significantly higher draw weights. The original draw forces of examples from the \"Mary Rose\" are estimated by Robert Hardy at at a draw length; the full range of draw weights was between . The draw length was used because that is the length allowed by the arrows commonly found on the \"Mary Rose\".\nA modern longbow's draw is typically or less, and by modern convention measured at . Historically, hunting bows usually had draw weights of , which is enough for all but the very largest game and which most reasonably fit adults can manage with practice. Today, there are few modern longbow archers capable of using bows accurately.\nA record of how boys and men trained to use the bows with high draw weights survives from the reign of Henry VII.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[My yeoman father] taught me how to draw, how to lay my body in my bow ... not to draw with strength of arms as divers other nations do ... I had my bows bought me according to my age and strength, as I increased in them, so my bows were made bigger and bigger. For men shall never shoot well unless they be brought up to it.\u2014\u200a\nWhat Latimer means when he describes laying his body into the bow is described thus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the Englishman did not keep his left hand steady, and draw his bow with his right; but keeping his right at rest upon the nerve, he pressed the whole weight of his body into the horns of his bow. Hence probably arose the phrase \"bending the bow\", and the French of \"drawing\" one.\u2014\u200a\nConstruction and materials.\nBowstave.\nThe preferred material to make the longbow was yew, although ash, elm, and other hardwoods were also used. Gerald of Wales speaking of the bows used by the Welsh men of Gwent, says: \"They are made neither of horn, ash nor yew, but of elm; ugly unfinished-looking weapons, but astonishingly stiff, large and strong, and equally capable of use for long or short shooting\". The traditional way of making a longbow requires drying the yew wood for 1 to 2 years, then slowly working it into shape, with the entire process taking up to four years. The bow stave is shaped to have a \"D\" cross-section. The outer \"back\" of sapwood, approximately flat, follows the natural growth rings; modern bowyers often thin the sapwood, while in the \"Mary Rose\" bows the back of the bow was the natural surface of the wood, only the bark is removed. The inner side (\"belly\") of the bow stave consists of rounded heartwood. The heartwood resists compression, and the outer sapwood performs better in tension. This combination in a single piece of wood (a self bow) forms a natural \"laminate\", somewhat similar in effect to the construction of a composite bow. Longbows last a long time if protected with a water-resistant coating, traditionally of \"wax, resin and fine tallow\".\nThe trade of yew wood to England for longbows was such that it depleted the stocks of yew over a huge area. The first documented import of yew bowstaves to England was in 1294. In 1470 compulsory practice was renewed, and hazel, ash, and laburnum were specifically allowed for practice bows. Supplies still proved insufficient, until by the Statute of Westminster 1472, every ship coming to an English port had to bring four bowstaves for every tun. Richard III of England increased this to ten for every tun. This stimulated a vast network of extraction and supply, which formed part of royal monopolies in southern Germany and Austria. In 1483, the price of bowstaves rose from two to eight pounds per hundred, and in 1510 the Venetians obtained sixteen pounds per hundred.\nIn 1507 the Holy Roman Emperor asked the Duke of Bavaria to stop cutting yew, but the trade was profitable, and in 1532 the royal monopoly was granted for the usual quantity \"if there are that many\". In 1562, the Bavarian government sent a long plea to the Holy Roman Emperor asking him to stop the cutting of yew and outlining the damage done to the forests by its selective extraction, which broke the canopy and allowed wind to destroy neighbouring trees. In 1568, despite a request from Saxony, no royal monopoly was granted because there was no yew to cut, and the next year Bavaria and Austria similarly failed to produce enough yew to justify a royal monopoly. Forestry records in this area in the 17th century do not mention yew, and it seems that no mature trees were to be had. The English tried to obtain supplies from the Baltic, but in this period bows were being replaced by guns in any case.\nString.\nBowstrings are made of hemp, flax or silk, and attached to the wood via horn \"nocks\" that fit onto the end of the bow. Modern synthetic materials (often Dacron) are now commonly used for strings.\nArrows.\nA wide variety of arrows were shot from the English longbow. Variations in length, fletching and heads are all recorded. Perhaps the greatest diversity lies in hunting arrows, with varieties like broad-arrow, wolf-arrow, dog-arrow, Welsh arrow and Scottish arrow being recorded. War arrows were ordered in the thousands for medieval armies and navies, supplied in sheaves normally of 24 arrows. For example, between 1341 and 1359 the English crown is known to have obtained 51,350 sheaves (1,232,400 arrows).\nOnly one significant group of arrows, found at the wreck of the \"Mary Rose\", has survived. Over 3,500 arrows were found, mainly made of poplar but also of ash, beech and hazel. Analysis of the intact specimens shows their lengths to range from , with an average of . Because of the preservation conditions of the \"Mary Rose\", no arrowheads survived. However, many heads have survived in other places, which has allowed typologies of arrowheads to be produced, the most modern being the Jessop typology. The most common arrowheads in military use were the short bodkin point (Jessop M10) and a small barbed arrow (Jessop M4).\nUse and performance.\nTraining.\nLongbows were very difficult to master because the force required to deliver an arrow through the improving armour of medieval Europe was very high by modern standards. Although the draw weight of a typical English longbow is disputed, it was at least and possibly more than . Considerable practice was required to produce the swift and effective combat shooting required. Skeletons of longbow archers are recognisably affected, with enlarged left arms and often osteophytes on left wrists, left shoulders and right fingers.\nIt was the difficulty in using the longbow that led various monarchs of England to issue instructions encouraging their ownership and practice, including the Assize of Arms of 1252 and Edward III of England's declaration of 1363:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whereas the people of our realm, rich and poor alike, were accustomed formerly in their games to practise archery \u2013 whence by God's help, it is well known that high honour and profit came to our realm, and no small advantage to ourselves in our warlike enterprises... that every man in the same country, if he be able-bodied, shall, upon holidays, make use, in his games, of bows and arrows... and so learn and practise archery.\nIf the people practised archery, it would be that much easier for the king to recruit the proficient longbowmen he needed for his wars. Along with the improving ability of gunfire to penetrate plate armour, it was the long training needed by longbowmen that eventually led to their being replaced by musketeers.\nRange.\nThe range is not accurately known, with much depending on both the bow and the type of arrow. It has been suggested that a flight arrow of a professional archer of Edward III's time would reach . The longest mark shot at on the London practice ground of Finsbury Fields in the 16th century was . In 1542, Henry VIII set a minimum practice range for adults using flight arrows of ; ranges below this had to be shot with heavy arrows. Modern experiments broadly concur with these historical ranges. A \"Mary Rose\" replica longbow was able to shoot a arrow and a a distance of . In 2012, Joe Gibbs shot a livery arrow with a yew bow. In 2017, Hungarian master archer J\u00f3zsef M\u00f3nus set a flight world record with a traditional English longbow of .\nThe effective combat range of longbowmen was generally lower than what could be achieved on the practice range as sustained shooting was tiring and the rigors of campaigning would sap soldiers' strength. Writing 30 years after the \"Mary Rose\" sank, Barnabe Rich estimated that if a thousand English archers were mustered, after one week only one hundred of them would be able to shoot farther than two hundred paces (), and two hundred of the others would not be able to shoot farther than 180 paces.\nArmour penetration.\nModern testing.\nIn an early modern test by Saxton Pope, a direct hit from a steel bodkin point penetrated Damascus mail armour. A 2006 test was made by Matheus Bane using a draw (at ) bow, shooting at ; according to Bane's calculations, this would be approximately equivalent to a bow at . Measured against a replica of the thinnest contemporary gambeson (padded jacket) armour, a needle bodkin and a 935 grain curved broadhead penetrated over . (gambeson armour could be up to twice as thick as the coat tested; in Bane's opinion such a thick coat would have stopped bodkin arrows but not the cutting force of broadhead arrows.) Against high quality riveted mail, the needle bodkin and curved broadhead penetrated . Against a coat of plates, the needle bodkin achieved penetration. The curved broadhead did not penetrate but caused 0.3\u00a0in of deformation of the metal. Results against plate armour of thickness were similar to the coat of plates, in that the needle bodkin penetrated to a shallow depth, the other arrows not at all. In Bane's view, the plate armour would have kept out all the arrows if thicker or worn with more padding.\nOther modern tests described by Bane include those by Williams (which concluded that longbows could \"not\" penetrate mail, but in Bane's view did not use a realistic arrow tip), Robert Hardy's tests (which achieved broadly similar results to Bane), and a \"Primitive Archer\" test which demonstrated that a longbow could penetrate a plate armour breastplate. However, the \"Primitive Archer\" test used a longbow at very short range, generating 160 joules (vs. 73 for Bane and 80 for Williams), so probably not representative of battles of the time.\nTests conducted by Mark Stretton examined the effects of heavier war shafts (as opposed to lighter hunting or distance-shooting 'flight arrows'). The quarrel-like arrow from a yew 'self bow' (with a draw weight of at ) while travelling at yielded 113.76\u00a0joules, more kinetic energy than the lighter broadheads while achieving 90% of the range. The short, heavy quarrel-form bodkin could penetrate a replica brigandine at up to 40\u00b0 from perpendicular.\nIn 2011, Mike Loades conducted an experiment in which short bodkin arrows were shot at a range of by bows of \u2013 powerful bows at less than normal battlefield range. The target was covered in a riveted mail over a fabric armour of deerskin over 24 linen layers. While most arrows went through the mail layer, none fully penetrated the textile armour. Other research has concluded that later medieval armour, such as that of the Italian city-state mercenary companies, was effective at stopping contemporary arrows.\nComputer analysis by Warsaw University of Technology in 2017 has estimated that heavy bodkin point arrows could penetrate typical plate armour of the time at up to . However, the depth of penetration would be slight at that range, a mere on average; penetration increased as the range closed or against armour lesser than the best quality available at the time, but stopped at , the highest penetration depth estimated at range, it was unlikely to be deadly.\nIn August 2019, the blacksmith YouTube channel 'Tod's Workshop', together with historian Tobias Capwell (curator at the Wallace collection), Joe Gibbs (archer), Will Sherman (fletcher) and Kevin Legg (armourer) ran a practical test using as close a recreation of 15th century plate armour (made with materials and techniques fitting to the time period) over a chainmail and gambeson against a longbow. They shot a variety of arrows at the target, and the results showed that the arrows shot by a 160\u00a0lb longbow were unable to penetrate the front of the armour at any range, but the arrow that struck below the harness went right through the underlying protection.\nContemporary accounts.\nAgainst massed men in armour, massed longbows were murderously effective on many battlefields. Strickland and Hardy suggest that \"even at a range of , heavy war arrows shot from bows of poundages in the mid- to upper range possessed by the \"Mary Rose\" bows would have been capable of killing or severely wounding men equipped with armour of wrought iron. Higher-quality armour of steel would have given considerably greater protection, which accords well with the experience of Oxford's men against the elite French vanguard at the Battle of Poitiers in 1356, and des Ursin's statement that the French knights of the first ranks at Agincourt, which included some of the most important (and thus best-equipped) nobles, remained comparatively unhurt by the English arrows\".\nArchery was described by contemporaries as ineffective against steel plate armour in the Battle of Neville's Cross (1346), the siege of Bergerac (1345), and the Battle of Poitiers; such armour became available to European knights and men at arms of fairly modest means by the middle of the 14th century, although never to all soldiers in any army. Longbowmen were, however, effective at Poitiers, and this success stimulated changes in armour manufacture partly intended to make armoured men less vulnerable to archery. Nevertheless, at Agincourt in 1415 and for some decades thereafter, English longbowmen continued to be an effective battlefield force.\nFollowing the Battle of Cr\u00e9cy, the longbow did not always prove as effective. For example, at Poitiers the French men-at-arms formed a shield wall with which Geoffrey le Baker recounts \"protecting their bodies with joined shields, [and] turned their faces away from the missiles. So the archers emptied their quivers in vain\".\nSummary.\nModern tests and contemporary accounts agree therefore that well-made plate armour could protect against longbows. However, this did not necessarily make the longbow ineffective; thousands of longbowmen were deployed in the English victory at Agincourt against plate armoured French knights in 1415. Clifford Rogers has argued that while longbows might not have been able to penetrate steel breastplates at Agincourt they could still penetrate the thinner armour on the limbs. Most of the French knights advanced on foot but, exhausted by walking across wet muddy terrain in heavy armour enduring a \"terrifying hail of arrow shot\", they were overwhelmed in the melee.\nLess heavily armoured soldiers were more vulnerable than knights. For example, enemy crossbowmen were forced to retreat at Cr\u00e9cy when deployed without their protecting pavises. Horses were generally less well protected than the knights themselves; shooting the French knights' horses from the side (where they were less well armoured) is described by contemporary accounts of the Battle of Poitiers (1356), and at Agincourt John Keegan has argued that the main effect of the longbow would have been in injuring the horses of the mounted French knights.\nShooting rate.\nA typical military longbow archer would be provided with between 60 and 72 arrows at the time of battle. Most archers would not shoot arrows at the maximum rate, as it would exhaust even the most experienced man. \"With the heaviest bows [a modern war bow archer] does not like to try for more than six a minute.\" During repeated firing, the arms and shoulder muscles tire from the exertion, and the fingers holding the bowstring become strained; therefore, actual rates of shooting in combat would vary considerably. Ranged volleys at the beginning of the battle would differ markedly from the closer, aimed shots as the battle progressed and the enemy neared. Archers stored their arrows stabbed upright into the ground at their feet, reducing the time it took to nock, draw and loose. Massed longbowmen could produce a \"storm\" of arrows. Arrows were limited, so archers and their commanders rationed their use to the situation at hand. Nonetheless, resupply during battle was available. Young boys were often employed to run additional arrows to longbow archers while in their positions on the battlefield.\nIn tests against a moving target simulating a galloping knight it took some approximately seven seconds to draw, aim and loose an armour-piercing heavy arrow using a replica war bow. It was found that in the seven seconds between the first and second shots the target advanced and that the second shot occurred at such close range that, if it was a realistic contest, running away was the only option.\nA Tudor English author expects eight shots from a longbow in the same time as five from a musket. He points out that the musket also shoots at a flatter trajectory, so is more likely to hit its target and its shot is likely to be more damaging in the event of a hit. The advantage of early firearms lay in the lower training requirements, the opportunity to take cover while shooting, flatter trajectory, and greater penetration.\nTreating arrow wounds.\nSpecialised medical tools designed for arrow wounds have existed since ancient times: Diocles (successor of Hippocrates) devised the graphiscos, a form of cannula with hooks, and duck-billed forceps (allegedly invented by Heras of Cappadocia) were employed to extract arrows. While armour-piercing \"bodkin\" points were relatively easy (if painful) to remove, barbed points required the flesh to be cut or pulled aside. An arrow would be pushed through and taken out the other side of the body only in the worst cases, as this would cause even more tissue damage and risk cutting through major blood vessels.\nHenry, Prince of Wales, later Henry V, was wounded in the face by an arrow at the Battle of Shrewsbury. The royal physician John Bradmore had a tool made that consisted of a pair of smooth tongs. Once carefully inserted into the socket of the arrowhead, the tongs screwed apart until they gripped its walls and allowed the head to be extracted from the wound. Prior to the extraction, the hole made by the arrow shaft was widened by inserting larger and larger dowels of elder pith wrapped in linen down into the entry wound. The dowels were soaked in honey, now known to have antiseptic properties. The wound was then dressed with a poultice of barley and honey mixed in turpentine (pre-dating Ambroise Par\u00e9 but whose therapeutic use of turpentine was inspired by Roman medical texts that may have been familiar to Bradmore). After 20 days, the wound was free of infection.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nThe word may have been coined to distinguish the longbow from the crossbow. The first recorded use of the term \"longbow\", as distinct from simply 'bow', is possibly in a 1386 administrative document which refers in Latin to \"arcus vocati longbowes\", \"bows called 'longbows'\", though the reading of the last word in the original document is not certain. A 1444 will proved in York bequeaths \"a sadil, alle my longe bowis, a bedde\".\nOrigins.\nThe origins of the English longbow are disputed. While it is difficult to assess the significance of military archery in pre-Norman Conquest Anglo-Saxon warfare, it is clear that archery played a prominent role under the Normans, as the story of the Battle of Hastings shows. Their Anglo-Norman descendants also made use of military archery, as exemplified by their victory at the Battle of the Standard in 1138.\nDuring the Anglo-Norman invasions of Wales, Welsh bowmen took a heavy toll of the invaders, and Welsh archers would feature in English armies from this point on. Giraldus Cambrensis toured Wales in 1188, recording that the bows of Gwent were \"stiff and strong, not only for missiles to be shot from a distance, but also for sustaining heavy blows in close quarters.\" He gave examples of the performance of the Welsh bow :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[I]n the war against the Welsh, one of the men of arms was struck by an arrow shot at him by a Welshman. It went right through his thigh, high up, where it was protected inside and outside the leg by his iron chausses, and then through the skirt of his leather tunic; next it penetrated that part of the saddle which is called the alva or seat; and finally it lodged in his horse, driving so deep that it killed the animal.\nHowever, historians dispute whether this archery used a different kind of bow from the later English longbow. Traditionally it has been argued that prior to the beginning of the 14th century, the weapon was a self bow between four and five feet in length, known since the 19th century as the shortbow. This weapon, drawn to the chest rather than the ear, was much weaker. However, in 1985, Jim Bradbury reclassified this weapon as the \"ordinary wooden bow\", reserving the term shortbow for short composite bows and arguing that longbows were a developed form of this ordinary bow. Strickland and Hardy in 2005 took this argument further, suggesting that the shortbow was a myth and all early English bows were a form of longbow. In 2011, Clifford Rogers restated the traditional case based upon a variety of evidence, including a large scale iconographic survey. In 2012, Richard Wadge added to the debate with an extensive survey of record, iconographic and archaeological evidence, concluding that longbows co-existed with shorter self-wood bows in England in the period between the Norman conquest and the reign of Edward III, but that powerful longbows shooting heavy arrows were a rarity until the later 13th century. \nWhether there was a technological revolution at the end of the 13th century therefore remains in dispute. What is agreed, however, is that an effective tactical system that included powerful longbows used in mass was developed in the late 13th and early 14th centuries.\nIn 1295, Edward I began to better organize his armed forces, creating uniformly-sized units and a clear chain of command. He introduced the combined use of an initial assault by archers followed by a cavalry attack and infantry. The technique was later used effectively at the Battle of Falkirk in 1298.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The rising importance of foot troops, then, brought not only the opportunity but also the need to expand armies substantially. Then as early as the late 13th century, we can observe Edward I campaigning at the head of armies incorporating tens of thousands of paid archers and spearmen. This represented a major change in approaches to recruitment, organization, and above all pay.\n14th and 15th centuries.\nThe longbow decided many medieval battles fought by the English and Welsh, the most significant of which were the Battle of Cr\u00e9cy (1346) and the Battle of Agincourt (1415), during the Hundred Years' War; these followed earlier successes, notably at the Battle of Falkirk (1298) and the Battle of Halidon Hill (1333) during the Wars of Scottish Independence. They were less successful after this, with longbowmen having their lines broken at the Battle of Verneuil (1424), and being routed at the Battle of Patay (1429) when they were charged before they had set up their defences, and with the war-ending Battle of Castillon (1453) being decided by the French artillery.\nAlthough longbows were much faster and more accurate than the black-powder weapons which replaced them, longbowmen took a long time to train because of the years of practice necessary before a war longbow could be used effectively. In an era in which warfare was usually seasonal, and non-noble soldiers spent part of the year working at farms, the year-round training required for the effective use of the longbow was a challenge. A standing army was an expensive proposition to a medieval ruler. Mainland European armies seldom trained a significant longbow corps. \nDue to their specialized training, English longbowmen were sought as mercenaries in other European countries, most notably in the Italian city-states and in Spain. The White Company, comprising men-at-arms and longbowmen and commanded by Sir John Hawkwood, is the best known English Free Company of the 14th century. The presence of English mercenaries led to a limited diffusion of the longbow until around 1430 in northern and central Italy, to the extent that in Milan and Florence there were craftsmen capable of producing bows and arrows \u201cin the English manner.\u201d In 1373, the podest\u00e0 of Reggio Emilia (then under Visconti control) requested that Ambrogio Visconti grant the inhabitants of the city and its countryside permission to equip themselves with bows and arrows \u201cin the English manner\u201d in order to defend themselves against enemy raids. King Louis I of Hungary used longbowmen in his Italian campaigns.\n16th century and later.\nLongbows remained in use until around the 16th century, when advances in firearms made gunpowder weapons a significant factor in warfare and such units as arquebusiers and grenadiers began appearing. Despite this, the English Crown made numerous efforts to continue to promote archery practice by banning other sports and fining people for not possessing bows. Indeed, just before the English Civil War, a pamphlet by William Neade entitled \"The Double-Armed Man\" advocates that soldiers be trained in both the longbow and pike; although this advice was disregarded by other writers of the day, who accepted that firearms had supplanted the role of archery.\nAt the Battle of Flodden in 1513, wind and rain may have contributed to the ineffectiveness of the English archers against the Scottish nobles in full armour who formed the front rank of their advance, but when the opportunity arose to shoot at less well protected foot soldiers, the result was devastating. Despite his armour, King James IV of Scotland received several arrow wounds in the fighting, one of which may have caused his death. Flodden was the last major British battle in which the longbow played a significant part, even if not a decisive one. Longbows remained the main weapon of the trained bands (the home-defence militia of the Tudor period) until they were disbanded by Queen Elizabeth I in 1598. The last recorded use of bows in an English battle may have been a skirmish at Bridgnorth in October 1642 during the Civil War, when an impromptu town militia armed with bows proved effective against un-armoured musketeers. Longbowmen remained a feature of the Royalist Army but were not used by the Roundheads.\nLongbows have been in continuous production and use for sport and for hunting to the present day, but since 1642 they have been a minority interest, and very few have had the high draw weights of the medieval weapons. Other differences include the use of a stiffened non-bending centre section, rather than a continuous bend.\nSerious military interest in the longbow faded after the 17th century, but occasionally schemes to resurrect its military use were proposed. Benjamin Franklin was a proponent in the 1770s; the Honourable Artillery Company had an archer company between 1784 and 1794, and a man named Richard Mason wrote a book proposing the arming of militia with pike and longbow in 1798. Donald Featherstone also records a Lt. Col. Richard Lee of 44th Foot advocated the military use of the longbow in 1792. Winston Churchill, in \"A History of the English-Speaking Peoples\", writes:\nThe War Office has among its records a treatise written during the peace after Waterloo by a general officer of long experience in the Napoleonic wars recommending that muskets should be discarded in favour of the long-bow on account of its superior accuracy, rapid discharge, and effective range.\nThere is a record of the use of the longbow in action as late as WWII, when Jack Churchill is credited with a longbow kill in France in 1940. The weapon was certainly considered for use by Commandos during the war, but it is not known whether it was used in action.\nTactics.\nBattle formations.\nThe idea that there was a standard formation for English longbow armies was argued by Alfred Byrne in his influential work on the battles of the Hundred Years' War, \"The Crecy War\". This view was challenged by Jim Bradbury in his book \"The Medieval Archer,\" and more modern works are more ready to accept a variety of formations.\nIn summary, however, the usual English deployment in the 14th and 15th centuries was as follows:\nIn the 16th century, these formations evolved in line with new technologies and techniques from the continent. Formations with a central core of pikes and bills were flanked by companies of \"shot\" made up of a mixture of archers and arquebusiers, sometimes with a skirmish screen of archers and arquebusiers in front.\nSurviving bows and arrows.\nMore than 3,500 arrows and 137 whole longbows were recovered from the \"Mary Rose\", a ship of Henry VIII's navy that capsized and sank at Portsmouth in 1545. It is an important source for the history of the longbow, as the bows, archery implements and the skeletons of archers have been preserved. The bows range in length from with an average length of . The majority of the arrows are made of poplar, others are of beech, ash and hazel. Draw lengths of the arrows vary between with the majority having a draw length of . The head would add depending on type, though some must be allowed for the insertion of the shaft into the socket.\nThe longbows on the \"Mary Rose\" were in excellent finished condition. There were enough bows to test some to destruction which resulted in draw forces of on average. However, analysis of the wood indicated that they had degraded significantly in the seawater and mud, which had weakened their draw forces. Replicas were made and when tested had draw forces of .\nIn 1980, before the finds from the \"Mary Rose\", Robert E. Kaiser published a paper stating that there were five known surviving longbows. One was from the Battle of Hedgeley Moor in 1464, during the Wars of the Roses. A family who lived at Alnwick Castle since the battle had preserved it to modern times. It is and a draw force. A bow hung in the rafters at the headquarters of the Royal Scottish Archers in Edinburgh, dating to the Battle of Flodden, which had a draw force of . A longbow was in the armoury of the church in Mendlesham, Suffolk, and is believed to date either from the period of Henry VIII or Queen Elizabeth I. The Mendlesham Bow is broken but has an estimated length of and draw force of .\nSocial importance.\nThe importance of the longbow in English culture can be seen in the legends of Robin Hood, which increasingly depicted him as a master archer, and also in the \"Song of the Bow\", a poem from \"The White Company\" by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. The Assize of Arms of 1252 required that all \"citizens, burgesses, free tenants, villeins and others from 15 to 60 years of age\" should be armed. The poorest of them were expected to have a halberd and a knife, and a bow if they owned land worth more than \u00a32. This made it easier for the king to raise an army, but it also meant that the bow was a weapon commonly used by rebels during the Peasants' Revolt. From the time that the yeoman class of England became proficient with the longbow, the nobility in England had to be careful not to push them into open rebellion.\nThe importance of the longbow can also be seen in concerns at different points in time about a perceived decline in shooting skill. In the 16th century, commentators like the scholar and educationalist Roger Ascham, writing in his \"Toxophilus\", published in 1545, were concerned that shooting proficiency was on a downward trajectory. Commentators like Ascham viewed archery as providing vital benefits, such as those to personal development and national security. Ascham's anxieties fitted into a trend of concern in English society for the state of archery going back to the 14th century.\nIt has been conjectured that yew trees were commonly planted in English churchyards to have readily available longbow wood.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18433", "revid": "50957854", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18433", "title": "Lee Marvin", "text": "American actor (1924\u20131987)\nLamont Warren Marvin Jr. (February 19, 1924\u00a0\u2013 August 29, 1987), known as \nLee Marvin, was an American film and television actor. Known for his bass voice and prematurely white hair, he is best remembered for playing hardboiled \"tough guy\" characters. He received various accolades including an Academy Award, a Golden Globe Award, and two BAFTA Awards. He was also a decorated United States Marine during the Second World War.\nAlthough initially typecast as the \"heavy\" (i.e. villainous character), he later gained prominence for portraying anti-heroes, such as Detective Lieutenant Frank Ballinger on the television series \"M Squad\" (1957\u20131960). Marvin's notable roles in film included Liberty Valance in \"The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance\" (1962), Charlie Strom in \"The Killers\" (1964), Rico Fardan in \"The Professionals\" (1966), Major John Reisman in \"The Dirty Dozen\" (1967), Walker in \"Point Blank\" (1967), Ben Rumson in \"Paint Your Wagon\" (1969), the Sergeant in \"The Big Red One\" (1980), and Jack Osborne in \"Gorky Park\" (1983).\nMarvin achieved numerous accolades when he portrayed a dual role as gunfighter Kid Shelleen and criminal Tim Strawn for the comedy Western film \"Cat Ballou\" (1965), alongside Jane Fonda, a surprise hit which won him the Oscar for Best Actor, along with a BAFTA Award, a Golden Globe Award, an NBR Award, and the Silver Bear for Best Actor.\nEarly life.\nLamont Waltman Marvin Jr. was born in New York City to Lamont Waltman Marvin \u2013 a World War I veteran of the Army Corps of Engineers and an advertising executive \u2013 and Courtenay Washington (n\u00e9e Davidge), a fashion writer. Confederate General Robert E. Lee was his first cousin, four times removed. He was also a second cousin six times removed of first U.S. President George Washington. His father was a direct descendant of Matthew Marvin Sr., who emigrated from Great Bentley, Essex, England, in 1635, and helped found Hartford, Connecticut. Marvin studied violin when he was young. Marvin did not enjoy school and performed poorly. As a teenager, Marvin \"spent weekends and spare time hunting deer, puma, wild turkey, and bobwhite in the wilds of the then-uncharted Everglades\".\nHe attended Manumit School, a Christian socialist boarding school in Pawling, New York, during the late 1930s, and Peekskill Military Academy in Peekskill, New York. He later attended St. Leo College Preparatory School, a Catholic school in St. Leo, Florida, after being expelled from several other schools for bad behavior (smoking cigarettes, truancy of lessons and fights).\nMilitary service.\nWorld War II.\nMarvin enlisted in the United States Marine Corps on August 12, 1942. Before finishing the School of Infantry, he served as a quartermaster. Marvin served in the 4th Marine Division as a scout sniper in the Pacific Theater during World War II, including assaults on Kwajalein, Eniwetok, and Saipan-Tinian. While serving as a member of Item (\"I\") Company, 3rd Battalion, 24th Marines, 4th Marine Division, Marvin participated in 21 amphibious assaults on Japanese-held islands. He was wounded in action on June 18, 1944, while taking part in the assault on Mount Tapochau during the Battle of Saipan, during which most of his company became casualties. He was hit by machine gun fire, which severed his sciatic nerve, and then was hit in the foot by a sniper. After over a year of medical treatment in naval hospitals, Marvin was given a medical discharge with the rank of private first class. He had previously held the rank of corporal before being demoted for troublemaking.\nMarvin's decorations include the Purple Heart Medal, the Presidential Unit Citation, the American Campaign Medal, the Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal, the World War II Victory Medal, and the Combat Action Ribbon.\nActing career.\nEarly acting career.\nAfter the war, while working as a plumber's assistant in the artist village of Woodstock in upstate New York, Marvin was asked to replace an actor who had fallen ill during rehearsals. He caught the acting bug and got a job with the company for $7 a week. He moved to Greenwich Village and used the G.I. Bill to study at the American Theatre Wing.\nHe appeared on stage in a production of \"Uniform of Flesh\", the original version of \"Billy Budd\" (1949). It was performed at the Experimental Theatre, where a few months later, Marvin also appeared in \"The Nineteenth Hole of Europe\" (1949).\nMarvin began appearing on television shows like \"Escape\", \"The Big Story\", and \"Treasury Men in Action\".\nHe made it to Broadway with a small role in a production of \"Uniform of Flesh\", now titled \"Billy Budd\", in February 1951.\nHollywood.\nMarvin's film debut was in \"You're in the Navy Now\" (1951), directed by Henry Hathaway, a movie that also marked the debuts of Charles Bronson and Jack Warden. This required some filming in Hollywood and Marvin decided to stay in California.\nHe had a similarly small part in \"Teresa\" (1951), directed by Fred Zinnemann. As a decorated combat veteran, Marvin was a natural in war dramas, where he frequently assisted the director and other actors in realistically portraying infantry movement, arranging costumes, and the use of firearms.\nHe guest starred on episodes of \"Fireside Theatre\", \"Suspense,\" and \"Rebound\". Hathaway used him again on \"Diplomatic Courier\" (1952) and he could be seen in \"Down Among the Sheltering Palms\" (1952), directed by Edmund Goulding; \"We're Not Married!\" (1952), also for Goulding; \"The Duel at Silver Creek\" (1952), directed by Don Siegel; and \"Hangman's Knot\" (1952), directed by Roy Huggins.\nHe guest starred on \"Biff Baker, U.S.A.\" and \"Dragnet\", and had a showcase role as the squad leader in a feature titled \"Eight Iron Men\" (1952), a war film directed by Edward Dmytryk and produced by Stanley Kramer (Marvin's role had been played on Broadway by Burt Lancaster).\nHe was a sergeant in \"Seminole\" (1953), a Western directed by Budd Boetticher, and was a corporal in \"The Glory Brigade\" (1953), a Korean War film.\nMarvin guest starred in \"The Doctor\", \"The Revlon Mirror Theater\", \"Suspense,\" and \"The Motorola Television Hour\".\nHe was now in much demand for Westerns and starred in \"The Stranger Wore a Gun\" (1953) with Randolph Scott and \"Gun Fury\" (1953) with Rock Hudson.\n\"The Big Heat\" and \"The Wild One\".\nMarvin received much acclaim for his portrayal of villains in Fritz Lang's \"The Big Heat\" (1953), where he played Gloria Grahame's vicious boyfriend and \"The Wild One\" (1953), opposite Marlon Brando (Marvin's gang in the film was named \"The Beetles\"), produced by Stanley Kramer.\nHe continued in TV shows such as \"The Plymouth Playhouse\" and \"The Pepsi-Cola Playhouse\". He had supporting roles in \"Gorilla at Large\" (1954) and had a notable small role in \"The Caine Mutiny\" (1954), also produced by Kramer, as the smart-aleck sailor Meatball.\nIn 1954, Marvin was in \"The Raid\" and on TV in \"Center Stage\", \"Medic\" and \"TV Reader's Digest\".\nIn 1955, he was cast as Hector, the small-town hood in \"Bad Day at Black Rock\" which starred Spencer Tracy. He played a conflicted, brutal bank-robber in \"Violent Saturday\". Of Marvin's performance, one critic wrote that \"Marvin brings a multi-faceted complexity to the role and gives a great example of the early promise that launched his long and successful career.\"\nMarvin played Robert Mitchum's and Frank Sinatra's friend in \"Not as a Stranger\" (1955), a medical drama produced and directed by Stanley Kramer. He had good supporting roles in \"A Life in the Balance\" (1955) (he was third billed), and \"Pete Kelly's Blues\" (1955) and appeared on TV in \"Jane Wyman Presents The Fireside Theatre\" and \"Studio One in Hollywood.\"\nMarvin was in \"I Died a Thousand Times\" (1955) with Jack Palance, \"Shack Out on 101\" (1955), \"Kraft Theatre\", and \"Front Row Center.\"\nMarvin was the villain in \"Seven Men from Now\" (1956) starring Randolph Scott and directed by Boetticher. He was second-billed to Palance in \"Attack\" (1956) directed by Robert Aldrich.\nMarvin had roles in \"Pillars of the Sky\" (1956) with Jeff Chandler, \"The Rack\" (1956) with Paul Newman, \"Raintree County\" (1957) with Elizabeth Taylor and Montgomery Clift and a leading role in \"The Missouri Traveler\" (1958). He also guest starred on \"Climax!\" (several times), \"Studio 57\", \"The United States Steel Hour\" and \"Schlitz Playhouse\".\n\"M Squad\".\nMarvin debuted as a leading man in \"M Squad\" as Chicago cop Frank Ballinger in 100 episodes of the successful 1957\u20131960 television series. One critic described the show as \"a hyped-up, violent \"Dragnet\" ...with a hard-as-nails Marvin\" playing a tough police lieutenant. Marvin received the role after guest-starring in a \"Dragnet\" episode as a serial killer.\nWhen the series ended Marvin appeared on \"Westinghouse Desilu Playhouse\", \"NBC Sunday Showcase\", \"The Barbara Stanwyck Show\", \"The Americans\", \"Wagon Train\", \"Checkmate\", \"General Electric Theater, Alcoa Premiere\", \"The Investigators\", \"Route 66\" (he was injured during a fight scene), \"Ben Casey\", \"Bonanza\", \"The Untouchables\" (several times), \"The Virginian\", \"The Twilight Zone\" (\"The Grave\" and \"Steel\"), and \"The Dick Powell Theatre\".\nEarly 1960s.\n\"The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance\".\nMarvin returned to feature films with a prominent role in \"The Comancheros\" (1961) starring John Wayne and Stuart Whitman. He played in two more films with Wayne, both directed by John Ford: \"The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance\" (1962), and \"Donovan's Reef\" (1963). As the vicious Liberty Valance, Marvin held his own with two of the screen's biggest stars, Wayne and James Stewart.\nTelevision.\nIn 1962 Marvin appeared as Martin Kalig on the TV Western \"The Virginian\" in the episode titled \"It Tolls for Thee.\" He continued to guest star on shows like \"Combat!\", \"Dr. Kildare\" and \"The Great Adventure\". He did \"The Case Against Paul Ryker\" for \"Kraft Suspense Theatre.\" Also in 1962, Marvin appeared as Peter Kane on the TV Western \"Bonanza\" in the 28th episode of season 3 titled \"The Crucible\".\n\"The Killers\".\nFor director Don Siegel, Marvin appeared in \"The Killers\" (1964) playing an efficient professional assassin alongside Clu Gulager, grappling with villains Ronald Reagan and Angie Dickinson. The film is a remake of \"The Killers\" by Richard Siodmak, made in 1946 and starring Burt Lancaster and Ava Gardner. \"The Killers\" was the first film in which Marvin received top billing. Originally made as a TV-movie, the film was deemed so entertaining that it was exhibited in theaters instead.\nIn January 1965, he guest starred on \"Bob Hope Presents the Chrysler Theatre\".\n\"Cat Ballou\" and stardom.\nMarvin finally became a star for his dual role in the offbeat comedic Western \"Cat Ballou\" (1965) starring Jane Fonda. This was a surprise hit, and Marvin won the Academy Award for Best Actor. He also won the Silver Bear for Best Actor at the 15th Berlin International Film Festival in 1965.\nPlaying alongside Vivien Leigh and Simone Signoret, Marvin won the 1966 National Board of Review Award for male actors for his role in \"Ship of Fools\" (1965) directed by Kramer.\n\"The Professionals\".\nMarvin next performed in the highly regarded Western \"The Professionals\" (1966), in which he played the leader of a small band of skilled mercenaries (Burt Lancaster, Robert Ryan, and Woody Strode) rescuing a kidnap victim (Claudia Cardinale) shortly after the Mexican Revolution. He had top billing to Lancaster.\n\"The Dirty Dozen\".\nHe followed that film with the hugely successful World War II epic \"The Dirty Dozen\" (1967) in which top-billed Marvin again portrayed an intrepid commander of a colorful group (played by John Cassavetes, Charles Bronson, Telly Savalas, Jim Brown, and Donald Sutherland) performing an almost impossible mission. Robert Aldrich directed. In an interview, Marvin stated his time in the Marine Corps helped shape that role \"by playing an officer how I felt it should have been seen, from the bias of an enlisted man's viewpoint\".\n\"Point Blank\".\nIn the wake of these films and after having received his Oscar, Marvin was a huge star, given enormous control over his next film \"Point Blank\" (1967). In \"Point Blank\", an influential film from director John Boorman, he portrayed a hard-nosed criminal bent on revenge. Marvin, who had selected Boorman for the director's slot, had a central role in the film's development, plot, and staging.\n\"Hell in the Pacific\" and \"Sergeant Ryker\".\nIn 1968, Marvin also appeared in another Boorman film, the critically acclaimed but commercially unsuccessful World War II character study \"Hell in the Pacific\", also starring famed Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune. Boorman recounted his work with Lee Marvin on these two films and Marvin's influence on his career in the 1998 documentary \"\". \"The Case Against Paul Ryker\" with Bradford Dillman, which Marvin shot for TV's \"Kraft Suspense Theatre\" and had been telecast in 1963, was released theatrically as \"Sergeant Ryker\" in 1968 after the runaway success of \"The Dirty Dozen\".\n\"Paint Your Wagon\".\nMarvin was originally cast as Pike Bishop (ultimately played by William Holden) in \"The Wild Bunch\" (1969), but fell out with director Sam Peckinpah and pulled out to star in the Western musical \"Paint Your Wagon\" (1969), in which he was top-billed over a singing Clint Eastwood. Despite his limited singing ability, he had a hit with the song \"Wand'rin' Star\". By this time, he was getting paid $1 million per film, $200,000 less than top star Paul Newman was making at the time, yet he was ambivalent about the movie business, even with its financial rewards:\nYou spend the first forty years of your life trying to get in this business, and the next forty years trying to get out. And then when you're making the bread, who needs it?\n1970s.\nMarvin had a much greater variety of roles in the 1970s, with fewer 'bad-guy' roles than in earlier years. His 1970s movies included \"Monte Walsh\" (1970), a Western with Palance and Jeanne Moreau; the violent \"Prime Cut\" (1972) with Gene Hackman; \"Pocket Money\" (1972) with Paul Newman, for Stuart Rosenberg; \"Emperor of the North\" (1973) opposite Ernest Borgnine for Aldrich; as Hickey in \"The Iceman Cometh\" (1973) with Fredric March and Robert Ryan, for John Frankenheimer.\nIn 1974, Marvin acted in Richard Fleischer's \"The Spikes Gang\", and in Terence Young's \"The Klansman\" in a shared top billing with Richard Burton.\nDuring this time, Marvin was offered the role of Quint in \"Jaws\" (1975) but declined, stating \"What would I tell my fishing friends who'd see me come off as a hero against a dummy shark?\"\nIn 1976, Marvin co-lead with Roger Moore in the film \"Shout at the Devil\", a World War I adventure, directed by Peter Hunt. While the reviews were mixed, the film was a commercial success. Both stars were offered to return to their roles in a sequel that never happened.\nAlso that year, he was a lead in Don Taylor's \"The Great Scout &amp; Cathouse Thursday\", a comic Western with Oliver Reed. The film was a critical disappointment.\nIn 1979, Marvin co-lead with Robert Shaw in Mark Robson's Cold War thriller \"Avalanche Express\", his co-star and the director both died from heart related illness shortly after production.\n1980s.\nIn 1980, Marvin's last big role was in Samuel Fuller's \"The Big Red One\", a war film based on Fuller's own war experiences. Fuller said that Marvin character was the \"carpenter of death, the sergeants of this world have been dealing death to young men for 10,000 years.\" Matthew Carey Salyer who liked the film said that \"it's one of Lee Marvin's most brilliant performances, in part because of its restraint.\"\nIn 1981, Marvin co-led with Charles Bronson in Peter Hunt's adventure film \"Death Hunt\". It is a fictionalized account of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) pursuit of a man named Albert Johnson. In Vincent Canby's review for \"The New York Times\", he recognized that two old pros were at work. \"Mr. Bronson and Mr. Marvin are such old hands at this sort of movie that each can create a character with ease, out of thin, cold air.\" The film grossed $5,000,000 at the US box-office.\nIn 1984, Marvin acted in Michael Apted's \"Gorky Park\", which stars William Hurt. Film critic Roger Ebert liked the film; he felt Marvin was typecast, but perfect as the businessman. The film grossed $15,856,028 at the US box-office.\nIn 1984, Marvin played an American bank robber in Yves Boisset's French film \"Canicule\". Of the project Marvin said \"I pull this job and I get trapped by farmers I have the money on me so that brings out their evil \u2014 the evil that lurks in men\".\nIn 1985, Marvin acted in \"\", a television film sequel to \"The Dirty Dozen\" that picked up where his character had left off. The TV film featured some other original cast members as well as new characters. Fred Rothenberg in his review published in \"The Grand Island Independent\" said \"Lee Marvin, the gruff, throw-out-the-book major, may be nearly 20 years older since the last \"Dirty Dozen,\" but he can still deliver the lines and the goods.\"\nIn 1986, Marvin made his final appearance, co-leading with Chuck Norris, in Menahem Golan's action film \"The Delta Force.\" The role was initially written for Charles Bronson who had other commitments, which lead to Marvin's hiring. The film grossed $17,768,900 at the US box-office.\nPersonal life.\nMarvin was a Democrat. He publicly endorsed John F. Kennedy in the 1960 presidential election. In a 1969 Playboy interview, Marvin said he supported gay rights.\nMarriages, children and partners.\nMarvin married Betty Ebeling in April 1952 and together they had four children: a son Christopher Lamont (1952 \u2013 2013), and three daughters: Courtenay Lee, Cynthia Louise, and Claudia Leslie (1958 - 2012). After a separation of two years, they divorced in January 1967. In her 2010 book, \"Tales of a Hollywood Housewife: A Memoir by the First Mrs. Lee Marvin\", Betty claimed that Lee had an affair with actress Anne Bancroft.\nAfter his famous relationship with Michelle Triola, Marvin reconnected with his childhood sweetheart Pamela Feeley, whom he married in 1970. They remained married until his death in 1987. After his death, Pamela wrote and published \"Lee: A Romance\" in 1997.\n\"See also Marvin v. Marvin\"\nCommunity property case.\nIn 1971, Marvin was sued by Michelle Triola, his live-in girlfriend from 1965 to 1970, who legally changed her surname to \"Marvin\". Although the couple never married, she sought financial compensation similar to that available to spouses under California's alimony and community property laws. Triola claimed Marvin made her pregnant three times and paid for two abortions, while one pregnancy ended in miscarriage. She claimed the second abortion left her unable to bear children. The result was the landmark \"palimony\" case, \"Marvin v. Marvin\", 18 Cal. 3d 660 (1976).\nIn 1979, Marvin was ordered to pay $104,000 to Triola for \"rehabilitation purposes\", but the court denied her community property claim for half of the $3.6 million Marvin had earned during their six years of cohabitation \u2013 distinguishing nonmarital relationship contracts from marriage, with community property rights only attaching to the latter by operation of law. Rights equivalent to community property only apply in nonmarital relationship contracts when the parties expressly, whether orally or in writing, contract for such rights to operate between them. In August 1981, the California Court of Appeal found that no such contract existed between them and nullified the award she had received. Michelle Triola died of lung cancer on October 30, 2009, having been with actor Dick Van Dyke since 1976.\nLater there was controversy after Marvin characterized the trial as a \"circus\", saying \"everyone was lying, even I lied\". There were official comments about possibly charging Marvin with perjury, but no charges were filed.\nThis case was used as fodder for a mock debate skit on \"Saturday Night Live\" called \"Point Counterpoint\" and a skit on \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\" with Carson as Adam, and Betty White as Eve.\nDeath.\nA heavy smoker and drinker, Marvin had health problems by the end of his life. In December 1986, Marvin was hospitalized for more than two weeks because of a condition related to coccidioidomycosis. He went into respiratory distress and was administered steroids to help his breathing. He had major intestinal ruptures as a result, and underwent a colectomy. Marvin died of a heart attack on August 29, 1987, aged 63. He was buried with full military honors at Arlington National Cemetery.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18434", "revid": "46778971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18434", "title": "Lead Belly", "text": "American folk and blues musician (1888\u20131949)\nHuddie William Ledbetter ( ; January 1888 or 1889 \u2013 December 6, 1949), better known by the stage name Lead Belly, was an American folk and blues singer notable for his strong vocals, virtuosity on the twelve-string guitar, and the folk standards he introduced, including his renditions of \"In the Pines\" (also known as \"Where Did You Sleep Last Night?\"), \"Pick a Bale of Cotton\", \"Goodnight, Irene\", \"Black Betty\", \"Midnight Special\", \"Cotton Fields\", and \"Boll Weevil\".\nLedbetter usually played a twelve-string guitar, but he also played the piano, mandolin, harmonica, violin, and windjammer (accordion). In some recordings he also used clapping or stomping to accompany his singing.\nLedbetter's songs covered a wide range of genres, including gospel music, blues, and folk music, as well as a number of topics, including women, liquor, prison life, racism, cowboys, work, sailors, cattle herding, and dancing. He also wrote songs about people in the news, such as Franklin D. Roosevelt, Adolf Hitler, Jean Harlow, Jack Johnson, the Scottsboro Boys and Howard Hughes. Ledbetter was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988 and the Louisiana Music Hall of Fame in 2008.\nThough many releases credit him as \"Leadbelly\", he wrote his stage name as \"Lead Belly\". This is the spelling on his tombstone and is used by the Lead Belly Foundation. He did not care for the \"Lead Belly\" stage name and always introduced himself by his given name, Huddie Ledbetter.\nBiography.\nPersonal life.\nThe only son of Sallie Brown and Wesley Ledbetter (she had an older son, and the couple adopted a daughter when Huddie was a toddler), Huddie Ledbetter was born on a plantation near Mooringsport, Louisiana. On his World War II draft registration card in 1942, he gave his birthplace as \"Freeport\" (Shreveport), Louisiana. There is uncertainty over his precise date and year of birth. The Lead Belly Foundation gives his birth date as January 20, 1889, his grave marker gives the year 1889, and his 1942 draft registration card states January 23, 1889.\nThe 1900 United States census lists \"Hudy Ledbetter\" as 12 years old, born January 1888, and the 1910 and 1930 censuses also give his age as corresponding to a birth in 1888. The 1940 census lists his age as 51, with information supplied by wife Martha. These records were made by census takers, and ages and dates were defined in terms of the census date. The books \"Blues: A Regional Experience\" by Eagle and LeBlanc and \"Encyclopedia of Louisiana Musicians\" by Tomko give January 23, 1888, while the \"Encyclopedia of the Blues\" gives January 20, 1888.\nHis parents had cohabited for several years. They married on February 26, 1888, perhaps after his birth that year. When Huddie was five years old, the family settled in Bowie County, Texas, where they eventually became landowners.\nBy the 1910 census of Harrison County, Texas, \"Hudy Ledbetter\" was living next door to his parents in a separate household with his first wife, Aletha \"Lethe\" Henderson. Aletha is recorded as age 19 and married one year. Others say she was 15 when they married in 1908. Ledbetter received his first instrument in Texas, an accordion, from his uncle Terrell. Ledbetter and his wife had at least two children when they left for the Dallas/Fort Worth area, working as farm laborers while Ledbetter, in his early twenties, sought opportunities as a musician.\nMusic career.\nBy 1903, Huddie was already a \"musicianer\", a singer and guitarist of some note. He performed to Shreveport audiences in St. Paul's Bottoms, a notorious red-light district. He began to develop his own style of music after exposure to the various musical influences on Shreveport's Fannin Street, a row of saloons, brothels, and dance halls in the Bottoms. This area is now referred to as Ledbetter Heights.\nIn 1915, Ledbetter briefly served on a Texas chain gang, from which he escaped. In 1918, under the name of Walter Boyd, he was convicted of murder in Texas and sentenced to 30 years in prison. After writing a song pleading for clemency, Ledbetter was pardoned by Governor Pat Morris Neff in 1925. In 1930, he was arrested, convicted of attempted murder, and sentenced to the Louisiana State Penitentiary, also known as the Angola Penitentiary, where he was \"discovered\" in a 1933 visit by folklorists John Lomax and his teenaged son, Alan Lomax. They were recording varieties of local music in the South as a project to preserve traditional music for the Library of Congress. This was one of numerous cultural projects during the Great Depression.\nDeeply impressed by Ledbetter's vibrant tenor and extensive repertoire, the Lomaxes recorded him in 1933 on portable aluminum disc recording equipment for the Library of Congress project. They returned with new and better equipment in July 1934, recording numerous songs. While in prison, Ledbetter may have first heard the traditional prison song \"Midnight Special\"; his versions became famous. On August 1, Ledbetter was released after having served nearly all of his minimum sentence. The Lomaxes had taken a record and a petition seeking his release to Louisiana Governor Oscar K. Allen at Ledbetter's request, but there is no evidence that this had any effect on his release. In fact, a prison official later wrote to John Lomax denying that Ledbetter's singing had anything to do with his release from prison. (State prison records confirm he was eligible for this due to good behavior.) But, both Ledbetter and the Lomaxes promoted the idea that Ledbetter had yet again sung his way to freedom.\nWith the Great Depression ongoing and Alan Lomax ill and unable to assist his father in song collecting, Ledbetter and Lomax teamed up in September, 1934. For three months, Ledbetter, forty-six years old, assisted the 67-year-old Lomax in his folk song collecting around the South.\nIn December 1934, Ledbetter participated in a \"smoker\" (group sing-along) at a Modern Language Association meeting at a hotel in Philadelphia. He was written up in the press as a convict who had sung his way out of prison. On New Year's Day, 1935, the pair arrived in New York City, where Lomax was scheduled to meet with his publisher, Macmillan, about a new collection of folk songs. The newspapers were eager to write about the \"singing convict\". \"Time\" magazine made one of its first \"March of Time\" newsreels about him. Lead Belly attained fame\"\u2014\"although not fortune.\nOn January 23\u201325, 1935, Ledbetter had the first of several recording sessions with American Record Corporation (ARC). These sessions, combined with two others on February 5 and March 25, yielded 53 takes. Of those recordings, only six were ever released during Ledbetter's lifetime. ARC decided to simultaneously release these songs on six different labels they owned: Banner, Melotone, Oriole, Perfect, Romeo, and Paramount. These recordings achieved little commercial success. Part of the reason for the poor sales may have been that ARC released only his blues songs rather than the folk songs for which he would later become better known. Ledbetter continued to struggle financially. Like many performers, what income he made during his career came from touring, not from record sales. In February 1935, he married his girlfriend, Martha Promise, who came north from Louisiana to join him.\nDuring February Ledbetter recorded his repertoire with Alan Lomax, who also recorded other African Americans. Lomax interviewed Ledbetter about his life for their forthcoming book, \"Negro Folk Songs As Sung by Lead Belly\" (1936). The Lomax book contains numerous sensational accounts of uncertain authenticity. According to the authors, the work was not an \"accurate biography\" but a \"loosely woven texture of unreconstructed stories.\"\nIn March 1935, Ledbetter accompanied John Lomax on a previously scheduled two-week lecture tour of colleges and universities in the Northeast, culminating at Harvard. At the end of the month, John Lomax decided he could no longer work with Ledbetter. He gave him and Martha enough money to return by bus to Louisiana. He also gave Martha the money her husband had earned during three months of performing, but in installments, on the pretext that Lead Belly would spend it all on drinking if he was given a lump sum. From Louisiana, Ledbetter successfully sued Lomax for both the full amount of his earnings and release from his management contract. The quarrel was bitter, with hard feelings on both sides. In the midst of the legal wrangling, Ledbetter wrote to Lomax proposing they team up again, but this did not happen. The book that the Lomaxes published about Lead Belly in the fall of 1936 proved a commercial failure.\nIn January 1936, Ledbetter returned to New York on his own, without John Lomax, in an attempted comeback. He performed twice a day at Harlem's Apollo Theater during the Easter season. He developed a live dramatic recreation of the \"March of Time\" newsreel (itself a recreation), which was about his prison encounter with John Lomax, when he was still wearing uniform stripes. By this time, he was no longer associated with Lomax.\n\"Life\" magazine ran a three-page article titled \"Lead Belly: Bad Nigger Makes Good Minstrel\" in its issue of April 19, 1937. It included a full-page, color (rare in those days) picture of him sitting on grain sacks playing his guitar and singing. Also included was a striking photograph of his wife Martha Promise (identified in the article as his manager). Other photos showed Ledbetter's hands playing the guitar (with the caption \"these hands once killed a man\"), Texas Governor Pat M. Neff, and the \"ramshackle\" Texas State Penitentiary. The article attributes both of his pardons to his singing his petitions to the governors, who were so moved that they pardoned him. The article closed by saying that Lead Belly \"may well be on the brink of a new and prosperous period.\"\nLedbetter failed to stir the enthusiasm of Harlem audiences. Instead, he attained success playing at concerts and benefits for an audience of folk music aficionados. He developed his own style of singing and explaining his repertoire in the context of Southern black culture, having learned from his participation in Lomax's college lectures. He was especially successful with his repertoire of children's game songs (as a younger man in Louisiana he had sung regularly at children's birthday parties in the black community). Black novelist Richard Wright wrote about him as a heroic figure in the \"Daily Worker,\" of which Wright was the Harlem editor. The two men became personal friends. In contrast to Wright, who was then a communist, commentators described Ledbetter as apolitical. He was known to support Wendell Willkie, the centrist Republican candidate for president, for whom he wrote a campaign song. Ledbetter also wrote the song \"The Bourgeois Blues\", which has class-conscious and anti-racist lyrics.\nIn 1939, Ledbetter was involved in an altercation after a small gathering in New York City and accused of stabbing a man. Alan Lomax, then 24, took him under his wing and helped raise money for his legal expenses, dropping out of graduate school to do so. But, based in part on Ledbetter's apparent notoriety, the judge sentenced him to a year in Rikers. After gaining release, Ledbetter appeared as a regular on Lomax and Nicholas Ray's groundbreaking CBS radio show \"Back Where I Come From\", broadcast nationwide.\nHe also performed in nightclubs with Josh White, becoming a fixture in New York City's surging folk music scene and befriending the likes of Sonny Terry, Brownie McGhee, Woody Guthrie, and Pete Seeger, all fellow performers on \"Back Where I Come From\".\nIn 1940, Ledbetter recorded for RCA Victor, one of the biggest record companies at the time. These sessions in California were held on June 15 and 17, with the Golden Gate Quartet accompanying some songs. The recordings resulted in the album, \"The Midnight Special and Other Southern Prison Songs\", being issued by Victor Records. The album included sheets with extensive notes and song texts prepared by Alan Lomax. According to Charles Wolfe and Kip Lornell, \"it was one of the finest public presentations of Leadbelly's music: well recorded, well advertised, well documented. And the album justified its reputation as a landmark in African American folk music.\" Several of the recordings from these sessions were also issued as singles by Bluebird Records.\nIn 1941, Ledbetter was introduced to Moses \"Moe\" Asch by mutual friends. Asch owned a recording studio and small record label, which mainly released folk records for the local New York City market. He later founded Folkways Records. Between 1941 and 1944, Ledbetter released three albums under the Asch Recordings label. During the first half of the 1940s, Ledbetter also recorded for the Library of Congress.\nLedbetter frequently performed \"Southern Blues\" at concerts by Si-lan Chen.\nIn 1944, he went to California, where he recorded strong sessions for Capitol Records. He lodged with a studio guitar player on Merrywood Drive in Laurel Canyon. Later he returned to New York City. In 1949, Lead Belly had a regular radio show, \"Folk Songs of America\", broadcast on station WNYC in New York, on Henrietta Yurchenco's show on Sunday nights. Later in the year, he began his first European tour with a trip to France, but fell ill before its completion and was diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), or Lou Gehrig's disease (a motor neuron disease). Ledbetter was the first American country blues musician to achieve success in Europe. His final concert was at the University of Texas at Austin in a tribute to his former mentor, John Lomax, who had died the previous year. Martha also performed at that concert, singing spirituals with Ledbetter.\nLedbetter died later that year in New York City. He was buried in the Shiloh Baptist Church cemetery, in Mooringsport, Louisiana, west of Blanchard, in Caddo Parish. He is honored with a statue across from the Caddo Parish Courthouse, in Shreveport. Ledbetter's niece, activist Greshun De Bouse, founded National Huddie Ledbetter Day (August 1 annually), and received proclamations from the mayors of Oil City, LA (where Ledbetter worked) and Shreveport, LA in 2023.\nLegal issues.\nLedbetter was imprisoned multiple times beginning in 1915, when he was convicted of carrying a pistol and sentenced to time on the Harrison County chain gang. He later escaped and found work in nearby Bowie County under the assumed name of Walter Boyd.\nIn January 1918, he was imprisoned at the Imperial Farm (Central Unit) in Sugar Land, Texas, after being convicted of killing a relative, Will Stafford. In 1925, he was pardoned and released after writing a song to Texas Governor Pat Morris Neff seeking his freedom, having served the minimum seven years of a 7-to-35-year sentence. He was credited with good behavior, which included entertaining the guards and fellow prisoners. He also appealed for mercy to Neff's known religious beliefs. It was a testament to his persuasive powers, as Neff had run for governor on a pledge not to issue pardons (most Southern judicial systems had no provision for approving parole from prison). After meeting Ledbetter in 1924, Neff returned to the prison several times after he was incarcerated again. He brought guests to the prison on Sunday picnics to hear Ledbetter perform.\nIn 1930, Ledbetter was sentenced to Louisiana State Penitentiary (nicknamed \"Angola\") after a summary trial for attempted homicide for stabbing a man in a fight. In 1939, Ledbetter served his final jail term for assault after stabbing a man in a fight in Manhattan.\nNickname \"Lead Belly\".\nThere are several conflicting stories about how Ledbetter acquired the nickname \"Lead Belly\", it probably happened while he was in prison. Some claim his fellow inmates called him \"Lead Belly\" as a play on his family name and his physical toughness. Others say he earned the name after being wounded in the stomach with buckshot. Another theory is that the name refers to his ability to drink moonshine, the homemade liquor that Southern farmers, black and white, made to supplement their incomes.\nBlues singer Big Bill Broonzy thought it came from a supposed tendency to lie about as if \"with a stomach weighted down by lead\" in the shade when the chain gang was supposed to be working.\nTechnique.\nLead Belly styled himself \"King of the Twelve-String Guitar\", and despite his use of other instruments, such as the accordion, the most enduring image of Lead Belly as a performer is wielding his unusually large Stella twelve-string. This guitar had a slightly longer scale length than a standard guitar, increasing the tension on the instrument, which, given the added tension of the six extra strings, meant that a trapeze-style tailpiece was needed to help resist bridge lifting. It had slotted tuners and ladder bracing.\nLedbetter played with finger picks much of the time, using a thumb pick to provide walking bass lines described as \"tricky\" and \"inventive\", and occasionally to strum. This technique, combined with low tunings and heavy strings, gives many of his recordings a piano-like sound. Scholars have suggested much of his guitar playing was inspired equally by barrelhouse piano and the Mexican Bajo Sexto, a type of guitar that he encountered in Texas and Louisiana.\nLedbetter's tunings are debated by both modern and contemporary musicians and blues enthusiasts alike, but it seems to be a down-tuned variant of standard tuning. Footage of his chording is scarce, so trying to decode his chords is difficult. It is likely that he tuned his guitar strings relative to one another, so that the actual notes shifted as the strings wore. Such down-tuning was a common technique before the development of truss rods, and was intended to prevent the instrument's neck from warping.\nLedbetter's playing style was popularized by Pete Seeger, who adopted the twelve-string guitar in the 1950s and released an instructional LP and book using Lead Belly as an exemplar of technique. In an April 1963 interview on Folk Music Worldwide, Seeger characterized Lead Belly as his silent mentor: \"Yeah, and when I stop to think of it, he was my main music teacher although he didn't know it. I'd follow him around and watch his hands closely. I admired him so.\"\nIn some of the recordings in which Ledbetter accompanied himself, he made an unusual type of grunt between his verses, sometimes described as \"haah!\" Songs such as \"Looky Looky Yonder\", \"Take This Hammer\", \"Linin' Track\", and \"Julie Ann Johnson\" feature this unusual vocalization. In \"Take This Hammer\", Lead Belly explained: \"Every time the men say, 'Haah,' the hammer falls. The hammer rings, and we swing, and we sing.\" The \"haah\" sound can also be heard in work chants sung by Southern railroad section workers, \"gandy dancers\", in which it was used to coordinate work crews as they laid and maintained tracks.\nLegacy.\nIn 1976, a highly fictionalized biopic titled \"Leadbelly\" was released, directed by Gordon Parks and featuring Roger E. Mosley as Lead Belly.\nRichard Walters portrays Lead Belly in episode 21 of season 15 \"Devil Music\" (March 21, 2022) of the Canadian television period detective series Murdoch Mysteries.\nIn 1950, The Weavers' recording of their arrangement of Lead Belly's \"Irene\", released as \"Good Night, Irene\", was the first folk song to reach #1 on the U.S. charts, selling some two million copies.\nKurt Cobain promoted the legacy of Lead Belly, and some modern rock audiences owe their familiarity with Lead Belly to Nirvana's performance of \"Where Did You Sleep Last Night\" (which Lead Belly called \"In the Pines\") on a televised concert later released as \"MTV Unplugged in New York\". Cobain refers to his attempt to convince David Geffen to purchase Lead Belly's guitar for him in an interval before the song is played. In his notebooks, Cobain listed Lead Belly's \"Last Session Vol. 1\" as one of the 50 albums most influential in the formation of Nirvana's sound. It was included in \"NME's\" \"The 100 Greatest Albums You've Never Heard list\".\nRam Jam, an American rock band, had a hit with the song \"Black Betty\", which they adapted into a rock song in 1977. \"Black Betty\" was recorded by Lead Belly in 1939.\nBob Dylan credits Ledbetter for getting him into folk music. In his Nobel Prize lecture, Dylan said \"somebody \u2013 somebody I'd never seen before \u2013 handed me a Lead Belly record with the song 'Cotton Fields' on it. And that record changed my life right then and there. Transported me into a world I'd never known. It was like an explosion went off. Like I'd been walking in darkness and all of the sudden the darkness was illuminated. It was like somebody laid hands on me. I must have played that record a hundred times.\" Dylan also pays homage to him in \"Song to Woody\" on his self-titled debut album.\nLead Belly recordings were instrumental in starting the British skiffle revival, which in turn produced several musicians prominent during the British Invasion. Lonnie Donegan's recording of \"Rock Island Line\", released as a single in late 1955, signaled the start of the skiffle craze. George Harrison of The Beatles was quoted as saying, \"if there was no Lead Belly, there would have been no Lonnie Donegan; no Lonnie Donegan, no Beatles. Therefore no Lead Belly, no Beatles.\" In a BBC tribute in 1999, which marked the 50th anniversary of Ledbetter's death, Van Morrison \u2013 while sitting alongside Ronnie Wood of The Rolling Stones \u2013 claimed that the British popular music scene of the 1960s wouldn't have happened if it weren't for Lead Belly's influence. \"I'd put my money on that,\" he said. Wood concurred.\nIndian singer Bhupen Hazarika\u2014who was, in general, influenced by spirituals during his days as a student in the US\u2014transcreated Lead Belly's singing of \"We're in the Same Boat Brother\" into the Assamese language as \"\"Ami ekekhon nawore zatri\" (\u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u098f\u0995\u09c7\u0996\u09a8 \u09a8\u09be\u09f1\u09f0\u09c7 \u09af\u09be\u09a4\u09cd\u09f0\u09c0). Later, he also released a Bengali language version as \"Mora jatri eki toronir\"\" (\u09ae\u09cb\u09b0\u09be \u09af\u09be\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09c0 \u098f\u0995\u0987 \u09a4\u09b0\u09a3\u09c0\u09b0).\nIn 2001, English-Canadian blues singer Long John Baldry released his final studio album, \"Remembering Leadbelly\". It contains cover versions of Lead Belly songs, and features a six-minute Alan Lomax interview.\nGeorge Ezra developed his singing style from trying to sing like Lead Belly. \"On the back of the record, it said his voice was so big, you had to turn your record player down,\" Ezra says. \"I liked the idea of singing with a big voice, so I tried it, and I could.\"\nIn 2015, in celebration of Lead Belly's 125th birthday, several events were held. The Kennedy Center, in collaboration with the Grammy Museum held \"Lead Belly at 125: A Tribute to an American Songster,\" a musical event featuring Robert Plant, Alison Krauss, and Buddy Miller with Viktor Krauss as headliners and Dom Flemons as host, with special appearances by Lucinda Williams, Alvin Youngblood Hart, Billy Hector, Valerie June, Shannon McNally, Josh White Jr., and Dan Zanes, among others. Also, in Washington, D.C., \"Bourgeois Town: Lead Belly in Washington DC\" by the Library of Congress was held where Todd Harvey interviewed Ledbetter's family members about their relative, his contributions to American culture and world music and an overview of the significant Lead Belly materials in the center's archive. In London, England, the Royal Albert Hall held \"Lead Belly Fest\", a musical event featuring Van Morrison, Eric Burdon, Jools Holland, Billy Bragg, Paul Jones, and more.\nThe Titanic.\nInfluenced by the sinking of the \"Titanic\" in April 1912, Ledbetter wrote the song \"The Titanic\", his first composition on the twelve-string guitar, which later became his signature instrument. Initially played when performing with Blind Lemon Jefferson (1893\u20131929) in and around Dallas, Texas, the song is about champion African-American boxer Jack Johnson's being denied passage on the \"Titanic\". Johnson had in fact been denied passage on a ship for being black, but it was not the \"Titanic\". Still, the song includes the lyric \"Jack Johnson tried to get on board. The Captain, he says, 'I ain't haulin' no coal!' Fare thee, \"Titanic\"! Fare thee well!\" Ledbetter later noted he had to leave out this passage when playing in front of white audiences.\n\"Stay woke\".\nIn possibly the earliest audio recording of the phrase, Ledbetter urged Black listeners to \"stay woke\" in the spoken afterword to a 1938 recording of his song \"Scottsboro Boys\". The song tells the story of nine Black teenagers and young men falsely accused of raping two white women in Alabama in 1931. Ledbetter warns his listeners, \"So I advise everybody, be a little careful when they go along through there\u2014best stay woke, keep their eyes open.\"\nPosthumous discography.\nThe Library of Congress recordings.\nThe Library of Congress recordings, made by John and Alan Lomax from 1934 to 1943, were released in a six-volume series by Rounder Records:\nFolkways recordings.\nThe Folkways recordings, done for Moses Asch from 1941 to 1947, were released in a three-volume series by Smithsonian Folkways:\nSmithsonian Folkways has released several other collections of his recordings:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18435", "revid": "8087765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18435", "title": "Lower Saxony", "text": "State in Germany\nLower Saxony is a German state (') in northwestern Germany. It is the second-largest state by land area, with , and fourth-largest in population (8 million in 2021) among the 16 ' of the Federal Republic of Germany. In rural areas, Northern Low Saxon and Saterland Frisian are still spoken, though by declining numbers of people.\nLower Saxony borders on (from north and clockwise) the North Sea, the states of Schleswig-Holstein, Hamburg, , Brandenburg, Saxony-Anhalt, Thuringia, Hesse and North Rhine-Westphalia, and the Netherlands. Furthermore, the state of Bremen forms two enclaves within Lower Saxony, one being the city of Bremen, the other its seaport, Bremerhaven (which is a semi-exclave, as it has a coastline). Lower Saxony thus borders more neighbours than any other single \". The state's largest cities are the state capital Hanover, Braunschweig (Brunswick), Oldenburg, Osnabr\u00fcck, Wolfsburg, G\u00f6ttingen, Salzgitter, Hildesheim, mainly situated in its central and southern parts, except Oldenburg.\nLower Saxony is the only \" that encompasses both maritime and mountainous areas. The northwestern area of the state, on the coast of the North Sea, is called East Frisia and the seven East Frisian Islands offshore are popular with tourists. In the extreme west of Lower Saxony is the Emsland, an economically emerging but rather sparsely populated area, once dominated by inaccessible swamps. The northern half of Lower Saxony, also known as the North German Plain, is almost invariably flat except for the gentle hills around the Bremen geestland. Towards the south and southwest lie the northern parts of the Central Uplands: the Weser Uplands and the Harz Mountains. Between these two lie the Lower Saxon Hills, a range of low ridges.\nThe region in the northeast, the L\u00fcneburg Heath ('), is the largest heathland area of Germany. In the Middle Ages, the town of L\u00fcneburg was wealthy due to salt-mining and the salt trade. To the north the Elbe valley separates Lower Saxony from Hamburg, Schleswig-Holstein, , and Brandenburg. The left banks of the Elbe downstream Hamburg are known as the ' (Old Country). Due to its gentle local climate and fertile soil, it is the state's largest area of fruit farming, its chief produce being apples.\nMost of the state's territory was part of the historic Kingdom of Hanover, and the state of Lower Saxony has adopted the coat of arms and other symbols of the former kingdom. It was created by the merger of the State of Hanover with three smaller states on 1 November 1946.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nLower Saxony has a natural boundary in the north in the North Sea and the lower and middle reaches of the River Elbe, although parts of the city of Hamburg lie south of the Elbe. The state and city of Bremen is an enclave entirely surrounded by Lower Saxony. The Bremen/Oldenburg Metropolitan Region is a cooperative body for the enclave area. To the southeast, the state border runs through the Harz, low mountains that are part of the German Central Uplands. The northeast and west of the state, which form roughly three-quarters of its land area, belong to the North German Plain, while the south is in the Lower Saxon Hills, including the Weser Uplands, Leine Uplands, Schaumburg Land, Brunswick Land, Untereichsfeld, Elm, and Lappwald. In the northeast of Lower Saxony is the L\u00fcneburg Heath. The heath is dominated by the poor, sandy soils of the geest, while in the central-east and southeast in the loess \"b\u00f6rde\" zone, productive soils with high natural fertility occur. Under these conditions\u2014with loam and sand-containing soils\u2014the land is well-developed agriculturally. In the west lie the County of Bentheim, Osnabr\u00fcck Land, Emsland, Oldenburg Land, Ammerland, Oldenburg M\u00fcnsterland, and on the coast East Frisia.\nThe state is dominated by several large northwards-flowing rivers, including the Ems, Weser, Aller, and the Elbe.\nThe highest point in Lower Saxony is the Wurmberg () in the Harz. Most of the significant hills and mountains are found in the southeastern part of the state. The lowest point in the state, at about below sea level, is a depression near Freepsum in East Frisia.\nThe state's economy, population, and infrastructure are centred on the cities and towns of Hanover, Stadthagen, Celle, Braunschweig, , Hildesheim, and Salzgitter. Together with G\u00f6ttingen in southern Lower Saxony, they form the core of the Hannover\u2013Braunschweig\u2013G\u00f6ttingen\u2013Wolfsburg Metropolitan Region.\nRegions.\nGeneral.\nLower Saxony has clear regional divisions that manifest themselves geographically, as well as historically and culturally. In the regions that used to be independent, especially the heartlands of the former states of Brunswick, Hanover, Oldenburg and Schaumburg-Lippe, a marked local regional awareness exists. By contrast, the areas surrounding the Hanseatic cities of Bremen and Hamburg are much more oriented towards those centres.\nList of regions.\nSometimes, overlaps and transition areas happen between the various regions of Lower Saxony. Several of the regions listed here are part of other, larger regions, that are also included in the list.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJust under 20% of the land area of Lower Saxony is designated as nature parks, i.e.: D\u00fcmmer, Elbh\u00f6hen-Wendland, Elm-Lappwald, Harz, L\u00fcneburger Heide, M\u00fcnden, Terra.vita, Solling-Vogler, Lake Steinhude, S\u00fcdheide, Weser Uplands, Wildeshausen Geest, Bourtanger Moor-Bargerveen.\nClimate.\nLower Saxony falls climatically into the north temperate zone of central Europe that is affected by prevailing Westerlies and is located in a transition zone between the maritime climate of Western Europe and the continental climate of Eastern Europe. This transition is clearly noticeable within the state: while the northwest experiences an Atlantic (North Sea coastal) to Sub-Atlantic climate, with comparatively low variations in temperature during the course of the year and a surplus water budget, the climate towards the southeast is increasingly affected by the Continent. This is clearly shown by greater temperature variations between the summer and winter halves of the year and in lower and more variable amounts of precipitation across the year. This sub-continental effect is most sharply seen in the Wendland, in the Weser Uplands (Hamelin to G\u00f6ttingen) and in the area of Helmstedt. The highest levels of precipitation are experienced in the Harz because the Lower Saxon part forms the windward side of this mountain range against which orographic rain falls. The average annual temperature is ; in the and in the district of Cloppenburg.\nAdministration.\nLower Saxony is divided into 37 districts (\"Landkreise\" or simply \"Kreise\"):\nFurthermore, there are eight urban districts and two cities with special status:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical subdivisions.\nBetween 1946 and 2004, the state's districts and independent towns were grouped into eight regions, with a different status for two regions (\"Verwaltungsbezirke\"), comprising the formerly free states of Brunswick and Oldenburg. In 1978 these regions were merged into four governorates (\"Regierungsbezirke\"). In 2005 the Bezirksregierungen (regional governments) were again split into separate bodies.\n1946\u20131978:\n1978\u20132004:\nOn 1 January 2005 the four administrative regions or governorates (\"Regierungsbezirke\"), into which Lower Saxony had been hitherto divided, were dissolved. These were the governorates of Braunschweig, Hanover, L\u00fcneburg and Weser-Ems.\nLargest towns.\nThe largest towns in Lower Saxony as of 31 December 2017:\nHistory.\nRegional history prior to foundation of Lower Saxony.\nThe name of Saxony derives from that of the Germanic confederation of tribes called the Saxons. Before the late medieval period, there was a single Duchy of Saxony. The term \"Lower Saxony\" was used after the dissolution of the stem duchy in the late 13th century to distinguish the parts of the former duchy ruled by the House of Welf from the Electorate of Saxony on one hand, and from the Duchy of Westphalia on the other.\nMedieval and early modern period.\nThe name and coat of arms of the present state go back to the Germanic tribe of Saxons. During the Migration Period some of the Saxon peoples left their homeland in Holstein about the 3rd century and pushed southwards over the Elbe, where they expanded into the sparsely populated regions in the rest of the lowlands, in present-day Northwest Germany and the northeastern part of what is now the Netherlands. From about the 7th century the Saxons had occupied a settlement area that roughly corresponds to the present state of Lower Saxony, of Westphalia and a number of areas to the east, for example, in what is now west and north Saxony-Anhalt. The land of the Saxons was divided into about 60\u00a0\"Gaue\". The Frisians had not moved into this region; for centuries they preserved their independence in the most northwesterly region of the present-day Lower Saxon territory. The original language of the folk in the area of Old Saxony was West Low German, one of the varieties of language in the Low German dialect group.\nThe establishment of permanent boundaries between what later became Lower Saxony and Westphalia began in the 12th century. In 1260, in a treaty between the Archbishopric of Cologne and the Duchy of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg the lands claimed by the two territories were separated from each other. The border ran along the Weser to a point north of Nienburg. The northern part of the Weser-Ems region was placed under the rule of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg.\nThe word \"Niedersachsen\" was first used before 1300 in a Dutch rhyming chronicle (\"Reimchronik\"). From the 14th century it referred to the Duchy of Saxe-Lauenburg (as opposed to Saxe-Wittenberg). On the creation of the imperial circles in 1500, a Lower Saxon Circle was distinguished from a Lower Rhenish\u2013Westphalian Circle. The latter included the following territories that, in whole or in part, belong today to the state of Lower Saxony: the Bishopric of Osnabr\u00fcck, the Bishopric of M\u00fcnster, the County of Bentheim, the County of Hoya, the Principality of East Frisia, the Principality of Verden, the County of Diepholz, the County of Oldenburg, the County of Schaumburg and the County of Spiegelberg. At the same time a distinction was made with the eastern part of the old Saxon lands from the central German principalities later called Upper Saxony for dynastic reasons.\nThe close historical links between the domains of the Lower Saxon Circle now in modern Lower Saxony survived for centuries especially from a dynastic point of view. The majority of historic territories whose land now lies within Lower Saxony were sub-principalities of the medieval, Welf estates of the Duchy of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg. All the Welf princes called themselves dukes \"of Brunswick and L\u00fcneburg\" despite often ruling parts of a duchy that was forever being divided and reunited as various Welf lines multiplied or died out.\nCongress of Vienna to Second World War (1815\u20131945).\nTwo major principalities survived east of the Weser after the Napoleonic Wars: the Kingdom of Hanover and the Duchy of Brunswick (after 1866 Hanover became a Prussian province; after 1919 Brunswick became a free state). Historically a close tie existed between the royal house of Hanover (Electorate of Hanover) and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland as a result of their personal union in the 18th century (the personal union was dissolved when Victoria became the Queen of the United Kingdom in 1837 because Hanover did not allow female rulers).\nWest of the River Hunte a \"de-Westphalianising process\" began in 1815. After the Congress of Vienna the territories of the later administrative regions (\"Regierungsbezirke\") of Osnabr\u00fcck and Aurich transferred to the Kingdom of Hanover. The Grand Duchy of Oldenburg and the Principality of Schaumburg-Lippe retained state autonomy. Nevertheless, the entire Weser-Ems region (including the city of Bremen) were grouped in 1920 into a Lower Saxon Constituency Association (\"Wahlkreisverband IX (Niedersachsen)\"). This indicates that at that time the western administrations of the Prussian Province of Hanover and the state of Oldenburg were perceived as being \"Lower Saxon\".\nThe forerunners of today's state of Lower Saxony were lands that were geographically and, to some extent, institutionally interrelated from very early on. The County of Schaumburg (not to be confused with the Principality of Schaumburg-Lippe) around the towns of Rinteln and Hessisch Oldendorf did indeed belong to the Prussian province of Hesse-Nassau until 1932, a province that also included large parts of the present state of Hesse, including the cities of Kassel, Wiesbaden and Frankfurt am Main; but in 1932 the County of Schaumburg became part of the Prussian Province of Hanover.\nWhen the Nazi Party seized power in 1933, they quickly transformed Germany into a highly centralised state and divided the entire Third Reich into \"Gaue\" which largely superseded (but did not outright replace) Germany's traditional federal system. Nevertheless, some changes to the old state and provincial borders were made in 1937, notably including the city of Cuxhaven being fully integrated into the Prussian Province of Hanover under the Greater Hamburg Act. The effect of this Nazi-era change was that in 1946, after the Third Reich had collapsed and when state of Lower Saxony was founded, only four states needed to be merged. With the exception of Bremen and the areas that were ceded to the Soviet Occupation Zone in 1945, all those areas allocated to the new state of Lower Saxony in 1946, had already been merged into the \"Constituency Association of Lower Saxony\" in 1920.\nIn a lecture on 14 September 2007, Dietmar von Reeken described the emergence of a \"Lower Saxony consciousness\" in the 19th century, the geographical basis of which was used to invent a territorial construct: the resulting local heritage societies (\"Heimatvereine\") and their associated magazines routinely used the terms \"Lower Saxony\" or \"Lower Saxon\" in their names. At the end of the 1920s in the context of discussions about a reform of the Reich, and promoted by the expanding local heritage movement (\"Heimatbewegung\"), a 25-year conflict started between \"Lower Saxony\" and \"Westphalia\". The supporters of this dispute were administrative officials and politicians, but regionally focussed scientists of various disciplines were supposed to have fuelled the arguments. In the 1930s, a real Lower Saxony did not yet exist, but there were a plethora of institutions that would have called themselves \"Lower Saxon\". The motives and arguments in the disputes between \"Lower Saxony\" and \"Westphalia\" were very similar on both sides: economic interests, political aims, cultural interests and historical aspects.\nFormation of the state (1945\u20131946).\nAfter the Second World War most of Northwest Germany lay within the British Zone of Occupation. On 23 August 1946, the British Military Government issued Ordinance No. 46 \"Concerning the dissolution of the provinces of the former state of Prussia in the British Zone and their reconstitution as independent states\", which initially established the State of Hanover on the territory of the former Prussian Province of Hanover. Its minister president, Hinrich Wilhelm Kopf, had already suggested in June 1945 the formation of a state of Lower Saxony, that was to include the largest possible region in the middle of the British Zone. In addition to the regions that actually became Lower Saxony subsequently, Kopf asked, in a memorandum dated April 1946, for the inclusion of the former Prussian district of Minden-Ravensberg (i.e. the Westphalian city of Bielefeld as well as the Westphalian districts of Minden, L\u00fcbbecke, Bielefeld, Herford and Halle), the district of Tecklenburg and the state of Lippe. Kopf's plan was ultimately based on a draft for the reform of the German Empire from the late 1920s by Georg Schnath and Kurt Br\u00fcning. The strong Welf connotations of this draft, according to Thomas Vogtherr, did not simplify the development of a Lower Saxon identity after 1946.\nAn alternative model, proposed by politicians in Oldenburg and Brunswick, envisaged the foundation of the independent state of \"Weser-Ems\", that would be formed from the state of Oldenburg, the Hanseatic City of Bremen and the administrative regions of Aurich and Osnabr\u00fcck. Several representatives of the state of Oldenburg even demanded the inclusion of the Hanoverian districts of Diepholz, Syke, Osterholz-Scharmbeck and Weserm\u00fcnde in the proposed state of \"Weser-Ems\". Likewise an enlarged State of Brunswick was proposed in the southeast to include the \"Regierungsbezirk\" of Hildesheim and the district of Gifhorn. Had this plan come to fruition, the territory of the present Lower Saxony would have consisted of three states of roughly equal size.\nThe district council of Vechta protested on 12 June 1946 against being incorporated into the metropolitan area of Hanover (\"Gro\u00dfraum Hannover\"). If the State of Oldenburg was to be dissolved, Vechta District would much rather be included in the Westphalian region. Particularly in the districts where there was a political Catholicism the notion was widespread, that Oldenburg M\u00fcnsterland and the \"Regierungsbezirk\" of Osnabr\u00fcck should be part of a newly formed State of Westphalia.\nSince the foundation of the states of North Rhine-Westphalia and Hanover on 23 August 1946 the northern and eastern border of North Rhine-Westphalia has largely been identical with that of the Prussian Province of Westphalia. Only the Free State of Lippe was not incorporated into North Rhine-Westphalia until January 1947. With that the majority of the regions left of the Upper Weser became North Rhine-Westphalian.\nIn the end, at the meeting of the Zone Advisory Board on 20 September 1946, Kopf's proposal with regard to the division of the British occupation zone into three large states proved to be capable of gaining a majority. Because this division of their occupation zone into relatively large states also met the interests of the British, on 8 November 1946 Regulation No.\u00a055 of the British military government was issued, by which the State of Lower Saxony with its capital Hanover were founded, backdated to 1 November 1946. The state was formed by a merger of the Free States of Brunswick, of Oldenburg and of Schaumburg-Lippe with the previously formed State of Hanover. But there were exceptions:\nThe demands of Dutch politicians that the Netherlands should be given the German regions east of the Dutch-German border as war reparations, were roundly rejected at the London Conference of 26 March 1949. In fact only about of west Lower Saxony was transferred to the Netherlands, in 1949.\n\"\u2192 see main article Dutch annexation of German territory after World War II\"\nHistory of Lower Saxony as a state.\nThe first Lower Saxon parliament or \"Landtag\" met on 9 December 1946. It was not elected; rather it was established by the British Occupation Administration (a so-called \"appointed parliament\"). That same day the parliament elected the Social Democrat, Hinrich Wilhelm Kopf, the former Hanoverian president (\"Regierungspr\u00e4sident\") as their first minister-president. Kopf led a five-party coalition, whose basic task was to rebuild a state afflicted by the war's rigours. Kopf's cabinet had to organise an improvement of food supplies and the reconstruction of the cities and towns destroyed by Allied air raids during the war years. Hinrich Wilhelm Kopf remained \u2013 interrupted by the time in office of Heinrich Hellwege (1955\u20131959) \u2013 as the head of government in Lower Saxony until 1961.\nThe greatest problem facing the first state government in the immediate post-war years was the challenge of integrating hundreds of thousands of refugees from Germany's former territories in the east (such as Silesia and East Prussia), which had been annexed by Poland and the Soviet Union. Lower Saxony was at the western end of the direct escape route from East Prussia and had the longest border with the Soviet Zone. On 3 October 1950 Lower Saxony took over the sponsorship of the very large number of refugees from Silesia. In 1950 there was still a shortage of 730,000 homes according to official figures.\nDuring the period when Germany was divided, the Lower Saxon border crossing at Helmstedt found itself on the main transport artery to West Berlin and, from 1945 to 1990 was the busiest European border crossing point.\nOf economic significance for the state was the \"Volkswagen\" concern, that restarted the production of civilian vehicles in 1945, initially under British management, and in 1949 transferred into the ownership of the newly founded country of West Germany and state of Lower Saxony. Overall, Lower Saxony, with its large tracts of rural countryside and few urban centres, was one of the industrially weaker regions of the federal republic for a long time. In 1960, 20% of the working population worked on the land. In the rest of the federal territory the figure was just 14%. Even in economically prosperous times the jobless totals in Lower Saxony are constantly higher than the federal average.\nIn 1961 Georg Diederichs took office as the minister president of Lower Saxony as the successor to Hinrich Wilhelm Kopf. He was replaced in 1970 by Alfred Kubel. The arguments about the Gorleben Nuclear Waste Repository, that began during the time in office of minister president Ernst Albrecht (1976\u20131990), have played an important role in state and federal politics since the end of the 1970s.\nIn 1990 Gerhard Schr\u00f6der entered the office of minister-president. On 1 June 1993, the new Lower Saxon constitution entered force, replacing the \"Provisional Lower Saxon Constitution\" of 1951. It enables referendums and plebiscites and establishes environmental protection as a fundamental state principle.\nThe former Hanoverian Amt Neuhaus with its parishes of Dellien, Haar, Kaar\u00dfen, Neuhaus (Elbe), Stapel, S\u00fcckau, Sumte and Tripkau as well as the villages of Neu Bleckede, Neu Wendischthun and Stiepelse in the parish of Teldau and the historic Hanoverian region in the forest district of Bohldamm in the parish of Garlitz transferred with effect from 30 June 1993 from to Lower Saxony (L\u00fcneburg district). From these parishes the new municipality of Amt Neuhaus was created on 1 October 1993.\nIn 1998 Gerhard Glogowski succeeded Gerhard Schr\u00f6der who became Federal Chancellor. Because he had been linked with various scandals in his home city of Brunswick, he resigned in 1999 and was replaced by Sigmar Gabriel.\nFrom 2003 to his election as Federal President in 2010 Christian Wulff was minister president in Lower Saxony. The Osnabr\u00fccker headed a CDU-led coalition with the FDP as does his successor, David McAllister. After the elections on 20 January 2013 McAllister was deselected.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAt the end of 2014, there were almost 571,000 non-German citizens in Lower Saxony. \nAt the end of 2023, there were almost 1,085,315 non-German citizens in Lower Saxony. \nThe highest share of migrants to Germans in Lower Saxony is in the urban agglomeration of Braunschweig (44.8%) which consists the most populated parts of Salzgitter e.g Lebenstedt or Thiede, the town Wolfenb\u00fcttel, parts of the districts Landkreis Peine, Landkreis Gifhorn, Landkreis Helmstedt and Landkreis Wolfenb\u00fcttel. 57.5% of Salzgitter have a migration background, which has the highest percentage of people with a foreign background in Lower Saxony. \nThe following table illustrates the largest minority groups in Lower Saxony:\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe 2011 census stated that a majority of the population were Christians (71.93%); 51.48% of the total population were members of the Protestant Church in Germany, 18.34% were Catholics, 2.11% were members of other Christian denominations, 2.27% were members of other religions. 25.8% have no denomination. Even though there is a high level of official belonging to a Christian denomination, the people\u00a0\u2013 especially in the cities\u00a0\u2013 are highly secular in behaviour.\nAs of 2020, the Protestant Church in Germany was the faith of 41.1% of the population. It is organised in the five Landeskirchen named Evangelical Lutheran State Church in Brunswick (comprising the former Free State of Brunswick), Evangelical Lutheran Church of Hanover (comprising the former Province of Hanover), Evangelical Lutheran Church in Oldenburg (comprising the former Free State of Oldenburg), Evangelical Lutheran Church of Schaumburg-Lippe (comprising the former Free State of Schaumburg-Lippe), and Evangelical Reformed Church (covering all the state).\nTogether, these member churches of the Protestant Church in Germany gather a substantial part of the Protestant population in Germany.\nThe Catholic Church was the faith of 16.3% of the population in 2020. It is organised in the three dioceses of Osnabr\u00fcck (western part of the state), M\u00fcnster (comprising the former Free State of Oldenburg) and Hildesheim (northern and eastern part of the state). The Catholic faith is mainly concentrated to the regions of Oldenburger M\u00fcnsterland, the region of Osnabr\u00fcck, the region of Hildesheim and in the Western Eichsfeld.\n42.6% of the Low Saxons were irreligious or adhere to other religions. Judaism, Islam and Buddhism are minority faiths.\nEconomy.\nThe gross domestic product (GDP) of the state was 229.5 billion euros in 2018, accounting for 8.7% of German economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 33,700 euros or 112% of the EU27 average in the same year. The GDP per employee was 100% of the EU average.\nAgriculture, strongly weighted towards the livestock sector, has always been a very important economic factor in the state. The north and northwest of Lower Saxony are mainly made up of coarse sandy soil that makes crop farming difficult and therefore grassland and cattle farming are more prevalent in those areas. Lower Saxony is home, in 2017, to one in five of Germany's cattle, one in three of the country's pigs, and 50% of its hens. Wheat, potatoes, rye, and oats are among the state's present-day arable crops. Towards the south and southeast, extensive loess layers in the soil left behind by the last ice age allow high-yield crop farming. One of the principal crops there is sugar beet. Consequently, the Land has a big food industry, mainly organised in small and medium-sized enterprises (SME). Big players are Deutsches Milchkontor and PHW Group (biggest German poultry farmer and producer).\nMining has also been an important source of income in Lower Saxony for centuries. Silver ore became a foundation of notable economic prosperity in the Harz Mountains as early as the 12th century, while iron mining in the Salzgitter area and salt mining in various areas of the state became another important economic backbone. Although overall yields are comparatively low, Lower Saxony is also an important supplier of crude oil in the European Union. Mineral products still mined today include iron.\nRadioactive waste is frequently transported in the area to the city of Salzgitter, for the deep geological repository Schacht Konrad and between Schacht Asse II in the Wolfenb\u00fcttel district and Lindwedel and H\u00f6fer.\nManufacturing is another large part of the regional economy. Despite decades of gradual downsizing and restructuring, the carmaker Volkswagen with its five production plants within the state's borders still remains the single biggest private-sector employer, its world headquarters in . Due to the Volkswagen Law, which has recently been ruled illegal by the European Union's high court, the state of Lower Saxony is still the second-largest shareholder, owning 20.3% of the company. Thanks to the importance of car manufacturing in Lower Saxony, a thriving supply industry is centred around its regional focal points. Other mainstays of the Lower Saxon industrial sector include aviation (the region of Stade is called CFK-Valley), shipbuilding (such as Meyer Werft), biotechnology, and steel. Medicine plays a major role; Hanover and G\u00f6ttingen have two large University Medical Schools and hospitals, and Otto Bock in Duderstadt is the largest producer of prosthetics and associated componentry in the world.\nThe service sector has gained importance following the demise of manufacturing in the 1970s and 1980s. Important branches today are the tourism industry with TUI AG in Hanover, one of Europe's largest travel companies, as well as trade and telecommunications. Hanover is one of Germany's main hubs for insurance and financial-services companies, for example Talanx and Hannover Re.\nIn October 2018, the Lower Saxony unemployment rate stood at 5.0% and was marginally higher than the national average.\nWorld Heritage Sites.\nLower Saxony has four World Heritage Sites.\nTransport.\nThe state's main airport is Hannover Airport which provides flights to other parts of Germany and other European destinations.\nPolitics.\nSince 1948, politics in the state have been dominated by the centre-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and the centre-left Social Democratic Party. Lower Saxony was one of the origins of the German environmentalist movement in reaction to the state government's support for underground nuclear waste disposal. This led to the formation of the German Green Party in 1980. Germany's multi-party system generally requires coalitions to be made because parties usually do not have outright majorities.\nThe Minister-President heads the state government, acting as a head of state (even if the federated states have the status of a state do not establish the office of a head of state but merge the functions with the head of the executive branch) as well as the government leader. They are elected by the Landtag of Lower Saxony.\nThe former Minister-President, Christian Wulff, led a coalition of his CDU with the Free Democratic Party between 2003 and 2010. In the 2008 election, the ruling CDU held on to its position as the leading party in the state, despite losing votes and seats. The CDU's coalition with the Free Democratic Party retained its majority although it was cut from 29 to 10. The election also saw the entry into the state parliament for the first time of the leftist The Left party. On 1 July 2010 David McAllister was elected Minister-President.\nAfter the state election on 20 January 2013, Stephan Weil of the Social Democrats was elected as the new Minister-President. He governed in coalition with the Greens. After the state election in September 2017, Stephan Weil remained Minister-President, with the SDP in coalition with the CDU. After the 2022 Election, Weil was once again elected as Minister-President with an SDP-Greens coalition. \nConstitution.\nThe state of Lower Saxony was formed after World War II by merging the former states of Hanover, Oldenburg, Brunswick and Schaumburg-Lippe. Hanover, a former kingdom, is by far the largest of these contributors by area and population and has been a province of Prussia since 1866. The city of Hanover is the largest and capital city of Lower Saxony.\nThe constitution states that Lower Saxony be a free, republican, democratic, social and environmentally sustainable state inside the Federal Republic of Germany; universal human rights, peace and justice are preassigned guidelines of society, and the human rights and civil liberties proclaimed by the constitution of the Federal Republic are genuine constituents of the constitution of Lower Saxony. Each citizen is entitled to education and there is universal compulsory school attendance.\nAll government authority is to be sanctioned by the will of the people, which expresses itself via elections and plebiscites. The legislative assembly is a unicameral parliament elected for terms of five years. The composition of the parliament obeys the principle of proportional representation of the participating political parties, but it is also ensured that each constituency delegates one directly elected representative. If a party wins more constituency delegates than their statewide share among the parties would determine, it can keep all these constituency delegates.\nThe states of the Federal Republic of Germany, and so Lower Saxony, have legislative responsibility and power mainly reduced to the policy fields of the school system, higher education, culture and media and police, while other policy fields like economic and social policies, foreign policy are a prerogative of the federal government. Hence the probably most important function of the federal states is their representation in the Federal Council (Bundesrat), where their approval on many crucial federal policy fields, including the tax system, is required for laws to become enacted.\nCoat of arms.\nThe coat of arms shows a white horse (Saxon Steed) against a red background, which is an old symbol of the Saxon people. Legend has it that the horse was a symbol of the Saxon leader Widukind, albeit a black horse against a yellow background. The colours changed after the Christian baptism of Widukind. White and red are colours (besides black and gold) of the Holy Roman Empire symbolising Christ as the saviour, who is still shown with a red cross against a white background.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18437", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18437", "title": "Linnaeus", "text": ""}
{"id": "18439", "revid": "50889471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18439", "title": "LTJ Bukem", "text": "British musician, producer and DJ\nDaniel Andrew Williamson (born 20 September 1967), better known as LTJ Bukem (), is a British jungle musician, producer and DJ. He and his record label Good Looking are most associated with the jazzy, atmospheric side of Jungle music.\nLife and career.\nLTJ Bukem was trained as a classical pianist and discovered jazz fusion in his teenage years, having a jazz funk band at one stage. By the late 1980s, he decided to become a DJ and gained fame in the rave scene of the early 1990s. The \"Bukem\" portion of his stage name came from his nickname \"Book 'em\" which derived from the TV show Hawaii Five-O where the character Steve McGarrett would say \"Book 'em, Danno\" when someone was arrested. The \"LTJ\" portion doesn't stand for anything. As a producer, he released a series of drum and bass tracks such as \"Logical Progression\" (1991), \"Demon's Theme\" (1992), \"Atlantis\" and \"Music\" (1993). His most notable release was the track \"Horizons\" (1995) which attained considerable popularity, using the main melody from Lemon Sol's song \"Sunflash\".\nHe then dipped in visibility as a producer, with his work running the London night club Speed and his record label Good Looking Records, coming to the fore. A series of compilations entitled \"Logical Progression\" highlighted a jazz and ambient influenced side of drum and bass; the style became widely known as intelligent drum and bass. Bukem also explored the downtempo end of electronic lounge music, with sister label Cookin' and the \"Earth\" series of compilations. Some of the artists who rose to fame under Good Looking in this period include Blame, Seba, Big Bud, Blu Mar Ten, DJ Dream (Aslan Davis), Future Engineers, Tayla, Aquarius (an alias of Photek), Peshay, Source Direct and Artemis.\nOn 16 July 1995, he did an Essential Mix alongside MC Conrad. In 1997, he remixed the James Bond theme for David Arnold's concept album of James Bond music \"\". In 2000, he finally released a debut solo album, the double-CD \"Journey Inwards\". The album heavily emphasised his jazz fusion influences. 2001 saw a remix of Herbie Hancock.\nHe ran the Speed nightclub in London with fellow drum and bass DJ Fabio.\nHe DJs extensively around the world, often under the 'Progression Sessions' or 'Bukem in Session' banners. However, his former companion and vocalist, MC Conrad left the label and ultimately their musical partnership in 2012.\nDaniel Williamson was adopted from birth. In 2007, he revealed that he had found his biological birth mother, an Ugandan woman living in Paris. She told him that his father was Egyptian.\nStyle and influences.\nViewed as an innovator in the drum and bass style, Bukem is known for developing an accessible alternative to that hardcore genre's speedy, assaultive energies. His style pays homage to the Detroit-based sound of early techno, but Bukem also incorporates still earlier influences, particularly the mellow, melodic sonorities of 1970s era jazz fusion as exemplified by Lonnie Liston Smith and Roy Ayers. Early in his career, Bukem was identified for his response to the \"almost paranoid hyperkinesis\" of breakbeat-based house music, and specifically for his reservations regarding the overbearing force of the hardcore mentality.\nBukem's music from the early 1990s onward represents his efforts to map out an alternative future for drum and bass by incorporating softer-edged influences culled from London's 1980s rare groove and acid jazz scenes. Music on \"Logical Progression\" reveals these influences, as does his approach on 1993's \"Music / Enchanted\", which features string arrangements and sounds from nature. His use of keyboards, live vocals and slow-motion breaks on these and future releases earned Bukem's music the tag intelligent drum and bass. While this designation caused controversy within the drum and bass community, it also influenced the popularisation of hardcore music in the UK during the mid-1990s.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18441", "revid": "37284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18441", "title": "Law of gravitation", "text": ""}
{"id": "18443", "revid": "32005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18443", "title": "Lindsay Anderson", "text": "British feature-film, theatre and documentary director, and film critic (1923\u20131994)\nLindsay Gordon Anderson (17 April 1923 \u2013 30 August 1994) was a British feature-film, theatre and documentary director, film critic, and leading light of the Free Cinema movement and of the British New Wave. He is most widely remembered for his 1968 film \"if...\", which won the \"Palme d'Or\" at Cannes Film Festival in 1969 and marked Malcolm McDowell's cinematic debut.\nHe is also notable, though not a professional actor, for playing a minor role in the Academy Award-winning 1981 film \"Chariots of Fire\". McDowell produced a 2007 documentary about his experiences with Anderson, \"Never Apologize\".\nEarly life.\nLindsay Gordon Anderson was born in Bangalore, South India, where his father was stationed with the Royal Engineers, on 17 April 1923. His father Captain (later Major General) Alexander Vass Anderson was a British Army officer who had come from Scotland. His mother Estelle Bell Gasson was born in Queenstown, South Africa, the daughter of a wool merchant. Lindsay was the second son. His parents separated in 1926, and Estelle returned to England with the two boys. In 1932 the couple tried to reconcile in Bangalore, and when Estelle returned to England she was pregnant with their third son, who was named Alexander Vass Anderson after his father. The Andersons divorced. Estelle married again in 1936, to Major Cuthbert Sleigh. Lindsay's father remarried while in India. Gavin Lambert writes, in \"Mainly About Lindsay Anderson: A Memoir\" (Faber and Faber, 2000, p.\u00a018), that the father Alexander Vass Anderson \"cut (his first family) out of his life\", making no reference to them in his \"Who's Who\" entry. But Lindsay often saw his father and looked after his house and dogs when he was away.\nBoth Lindsay and his older brother Murray Anderson (1919\u20132016) were educated at Saint Ronan's School in Worthing, West Sussex, and at Cheltenham College. It was at Cheltenham that Lindsay met his lifelong friend Gavin Lambert, who became a screenwriter and novelist, and later the director's biographer.\nThe UK had been at war for years when Anderson won a scholarship in 1942 for classical studies at Wadham College at the University of Oxford. The next year he entered World War II, serving in the Army from 1943 until 1946, first with the 60th King's Royal Rifle Corps. In the final year of the war, he was a cryptographer for the Intelligence Corps, based at the Wireless Experimental Centre in Delhi.\nIn August 1945, Anderson assisted in nailing the Red flag to the roof of the Junior Officers' mess in Annan Parbat, after the victory of the Labour Party in the general election was confirmed. Their colonel did not approve, he recalled a decade later, but took no disciplinary action against the junior officers.\nLindsay returned to Oxford in 1946 but changed from classical studies to English; he graduated in 1948.\nCareer.\nFilm criticism.\nAnderson was passionate about film and with his friend Gavin Lambert, and Peter Ericsson and Karel Reisz, co-founded \"Sequence\" magazine (1947\u201352), which became influential. Anderson became a prominent film critic. He also later wrote for the British Film Institute's journal \"Sight and Sound\" and the left-wing political weekly, the \"New Statesman\".\nIn a 1956 polemical article, \"Stand Up, Stand Up\" published in \"Sight and Sound\", Anderson attacked contemporary critical practices, in particular the pursuit of objectivity. Taking as an example some comments made by Alistair Cooke in 1935, in which Cooke had claimed to be without politics as a critic, Anderson responded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The problems of commitment are directly stated, but only apparently faced. \u2026The denial of the critic's moral responsibility is specific; but only at the cost of sacrificing his dignity. \u2026 [These assumptions:] the holding of liberal, or humane, values; the proviso that these must not be taken too far; the adoption of a tone which enables the writer to evade through humour [mean] the fundamental issues are balked.\"\nFollowing a series of screenings which he and the National Film Theatre programmer Karel Reisz organized for the venue of independently produced short films by himself and others, he developed a philosophy of cinema that was expressed in what became known, by the late-1950s, as the Free Cinema movement. He and other leaders in the field believed that the British cinema must break away from its class-bound attitudes and that non-metropolitan Britain ought to be shown on the nation's screens. Anderson had already begun to make films himself, starting in 1948 with \"Meet the Pioneers\", a documentary about a conveyor-belt factory.\nAnderson was invited to join the British Film Institute's Board of Governors in 1969 with the aim of bolstering support for independent British directors, but left the role after a year.\nFilmmaking.\nAlong with Karel Reisz, Tony Richardson, and others, he secured funding from a variety of sources (including Ford of Britain). Each of these founders made a series of short documentaries on a variety of subjects. One of Anderson's early short films, \"Thursday's Children\" (1954), concerning the education of deaf children, was made in collaboration with Guy Brenton, a friend from his Oxford days; it won an Oscar for Best Documentary Short in 1954. \"Thursday's Children\" was preserved by the Academy Film Archive in 2005.\nThese films, influenced by one of Anderson's heroes, the French filmmaker Jean Vigo, and made in the tradition of the British documentaries of Humphrey Jennings, foreshadowed much of the social realism of British dramatic cinema that emerged in the next decade. These included Reisz's \"Saturday Night and Sunday Morning\" (1960), Richardson's \"The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner\" (1962), and Anderson's own \"This Sporting Life\" (1963), produced by Reisz. Anderson's film met with mixed reviews at the time, and was not a commercial success.\nAnderson is perhaps best remembered as a filmmaker for his \"Mick Travis trilogy\", all of which star Malcolm McDowell as the title character: \"if...\" (1968), a satire on public schools; \"O Lucky Man!\" (1973) a \"Pilgrim's Progress\"-inspired road movie; and \"Britannia Hospital\" (1982), a fantasia taking stylistic influence from the populist wing of British cinema represented by Hammer horror films and Carry On comedies.\nIn 1981, Anderson played the role of the Master of Caius College at Cambridge University in the film \"Chariots of Fire\".\nAnderson developed an acquaintance from 1950 with John Ford. Anderson wrote what has come to be regarded as one of the standard books on that director, \"About John Ford\" (1983). Based on half a dozen meetings over more than two decades, and Anderson's lifetime study of the man's work, the book has been described as \"One of the best books published by a film-maker on a film-maker\".\nIn 1985, producer Martin Lewis invited Anderson to chronicle Wham!'s visit to China, among the first-ever visits by Western pop artists. Anderson made the film \"\". He admitted in his diary on 31 March 1985, to having \"no interest in Wham!\", or China, and he was simply \"doing this for the money\". Anderson's own cut of the tour, titled \"If You Were There\", was never released after George Michael objected to this version. It featured only four songs from the tour. Anderson was fired from the project, and Michael turned out the film that was entitled \"Wham! in China: Foreign Skies\".\nIn 1986, Anderson served as a member of the jury at the 36th Berlin International Film Festival, by invitation.\nAnderson was also a significant British theatre director. He was long associated with London's Royal Court Theatre, where he was Co-Artistic Director 1969\u201370, and Associate Artistic Director 1971\u201375. He directed premiere productions of plays by David Storey, among others.\nIn 1992, as a close friend of the late actresses Jill Bennett and Rachel Roberts, Anderson arranged a boat trip to scatter the women's ashes in the Thames River. Professional colleagues and friends were also on the boat and musician Alan Price sang the song \"Is That All There Is?\". Anderson included this event in his autobiographical BBC film \"Is That All There Is?\"\nEvery year, the International Documentary Festival in Amsterdam (IDFA) gives an acclaimed filmmaker the chance to screen his or her personal Top 10 favorite films. In 2007, Iranian filmmaker Maziar Bahari selected two of Anderson's short documentaries, \"O Dreamland\" and \"Every Day Except Christmas\" (1957), a record of a day in the old Covent Garden market, for his top 10 classics from the history of documentary.[3]\nPersonal life.\nGavin Lambert's memoir \"Mainly About Lindsay Anderson\" wrote that Anderson was homosexual and repressed his orientation, which was seen as a betrayal by his other friends. This caused him intense grief by his later years, with writer David Storey stating, \"Lindsay had a great battle with his homosexuality throughout his life. He just couldn't come to terms with it. This conflict was central to his life, and out of it came a terrible cynicism and an attitude that was more and more sour and embittered.\"\nIn November 2006, Malcolm McDowell told \"The Independent\" that he believed Anderson was gay, stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I know that he was in love with Richard Harris the star of Anderson's first feature, \"This Sporting Life\". I am sure that it was the same with me and Albert Finney and the rest. It wasn't a physical thing. But I suppose he always fell in love with his leading men. He would always pick someone who was unattainable because he was heterosexual.\nDeath and legacy.\nAnderson died from a heart attack on 30 August 1994 at the age of 71.\nFollowing the publication of Anderson's diaries and collected writings in 2004, there has been a revival of interest in Anderson scholarship, including several edited collections and monographs addressing his work from a variety of critical perspectives. The centenary of Anderson's birth in 2023 was marked by special events at the University of Stirling, where the Anderson papers are currently held.\nTheatre productions.\nAll Royal Court, London, unless otherwise indicated:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18444", "revid": "21054272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18444", "title": "Loch", "text": "Irish and Scottish Gaelic word for a lake or sea inlet\nLoch ( ) is a word meaning \"lake\" or \"sea inlet\" in Scottish and Irish Gaelic, subsequently borrowed into English. In Irish contexts, it often appears in the anglicized form \"lough\". A small loch is sometimes called a lochan. Lochs which connect to the sea may be called \"sea lochs\" or \"sea loughs\". \nBackground.\nThis name for a body of water is Insular Celtic in origin and is applied to most lakes in Scotland and to many sea inlets in the west and north of Scotland.\nMany of the loughs in Northern England have also previously been called \"meres\" (a Northern English dialect word for \"lake\", and an archaic Standard English word meaning \"a lake that is broad in relation to its depth\"), similar to the Dutch , such as the \"Black Lough\" in Northumberland. \nSome lochs in Southern Scotland have a Brythonic, rather than Goidelic, etymology, such as Loch Ryan, where the Gaelic has replaced a Cumbric equivalent of Welsh . The same is, perhaps, the case for bodies of water in Northern England named with 'Low' or 'Lough', or else represents a borrowing of the Brythonic word into the Northumbrian dialect of Old English.\nScottish lakes.\nScotland has very few bodies of water called lakes. The Lake of Menteith, an Anglicisation of the Scots \"Laich o Menteith\" meaning a \"low-lying bit of land in Menteith\", is applied to the loch there because of the similarity of the sounds of the words \"laich\" and \"lake\". Until the 19th century the body of water was known as the \"Loch of Menteith\". The Lake of the Hirsel, Pressmennan Lake, Lake Louise and Raith Lake are man-made bodies of water in Scotland, referred to as lakes.\nLochs outside Scotland and Ireland.\nAs \"loch\" is a common Gaelic word, it is found as the root of several Manx place names.\nThe United States naval port of Pearl Harbor, on the south coast of the main Hawaiian island of O\u02bbahu, is one of a complex of sea inlets. It contains three subareas called 'lochs' named East, Middle, and West or Kaihuopala\u2018ai, Wai\u2018awa, and Komoawa.\nLoch Raven Reservoir is a reservoir in Baltimore County, Maryland.\nBrenton Loch in the Falkland Islands is a sea loch, near Lafonia, East Falkland.\nIn the Scottish settlement of Glengarry County in present-day Eastern Ontario, there is a lake called Loch Garry. Loch Garry was named by those who settled in the area, Clan MacDonell of Glengarry, after the well-known loch their clan is from, Loch Garry in Scotland. Similarly, lakes named Loch Broom, Big Loch, Greendale Loch, and Loch Lomond can be found in Nova Scotia, along with Loch Leven in Newfoundland, and Loch Leven in Saskatchewan.\nLoch Fyne is a fjord in Greenland named by Douglas Clavering in 1823.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18445", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18445", "title": "Leopold Samuel Marks", "text": ""}
{"id": "18446", "revid": "49829305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18446", "title": "Leo Marks", "text": "British cryptographer and writer (1920\u20132001)\nLeopold Samuel Marks, (24 September 1920 \u2013 15 January 2001) was an English writer, screenwriter, and cryptographer. During the Second World War he headed the codes office supporting resistance agents in occupied Europe for the secret Special Operations Executive organisation. After the war, Marks became a playwright and screenwriter, writing scripts that frequently utilised his war-time cryptographic experiences. He wrote the script for \"Peeping Tom\", the controversial film directed by Michael Powell that had a disastrous effect on Powell's career, but was later described by Martin Scorsese as a masterpiece. In 1998, towards the end of his life, Marks published a personal history of his experiences during the war, \"Between Silk and Cyanide\", which was critical of the leadership of SOE.\nEarly life.\nMarks was born into a devout Jewish family. He was the son of Benjamin Marks, the joint owner of Marks &amp; Co, an antiquarian bookseller in Charing Cross Road, London. He was introduced at an early age to cryptography when his father showed him Edgar Allan Poe's story, \"The Gold-Bug\".\nFrom this early interest, he demonstrated his skill at codebreaking by deciphering the secret price codes that his father wrote inside the covers of books. The bookshop subsequently became famous as a result of the book \"84, Charing Cross Road\", which was based on correspondence between American writer Helene Hanff and the shop's chief buyer, Frank Doel.\nWork in cryptography.\nMarks was conscripted into the British Army in January 1942 and trained as a cryptographer; apparently he demonstrated the ability to complete one week's work in decipherment exercise in a few hours. Unlike the rest of his intake, who were sent to the main British codebreaking centre at Bletchley Park, Marks was regarded as a misfit and he was assigned to the newly formed Special Operations Executive (SOE) in Baker Street, which was set up to train agents to operate behind enemy lines and to assist local resistance groups in occupied Europe. SOE has been described as \"a mixture of brilliant brains and bungling amateurs\". Marks wrote that he had an inauspicious arrival at SOE when it took him all day to decipher a code he had been expected to finish in 20 minutes, because, not atypically, SOE had forgotten to supply the cipher key, and he had to break the code which SOE had regarded as secure.\nMarks briefed many Allied agents sent into occupied Europe, including Noor Inayat Khan, the Grouse/Swallow team of four Norwegian Telemark saboteurs and his own close friend 'Tommy' Yeo-Thomas, nicknamed \"the White Rabbit.\" In an interview which accompanied the DVD of the film \"Peeping Tom\", Marks quoted General Eisenhower as saying that his group's work shortened the war by three months, saving countless lives.\nMarks was portrayed by Anton Lesser in David Morley's BBC Radio drama \"A Cold Supper Behind Harrods\". The fictional play was inspired by conversations between Marks and David Morley and real events in SOE. It featured David Jason, and Stephanie Cole as Vera Atkins.\nDevelopments of cryptographic practice.\nOne of Marks's first challenges was to phase out double transposition ciphers using keys based on poems. These poem ciphers had the limited advantage of being easy to memorise, but significant disadvantages, including limited cryptographic security, substantial minimum message sizes (short ones were easy to crack), and the fact that the method's complexity caused encoding errors. Cryptographic security was enhanced by Marks's innovations, especially \"worked-out keys.\" He was credited with inventing the letter one-time pad, but while he did independently discover the method, he later found it already in use at Bletchley.\nPreference for original code poems.\nWhile attempting to relegate poem codes to emergency use, he enhanced their security by promoting the use of original poems in preference to widely known ones, forcing a cryptanalyst to work it out the hard way for each message instead of guessing an agent's entire set of keys after breaking the key to a single message (or possibly just part of the key.) Marks wrote many poems later used by agents, the most famous being one he gave to the agent Violette Szabo, \"The Life That I Have\", which gained popularity when it was used in the 1958 film about her, \"Carve Her Name With Pride\". According to his book, Marks wrote the poem in Christmas 1943 about a girlfriend, Ruth, who had recently died in an air crash in Canada; supposedly the god-daughter of the head of SOE, Sir Charles Jocelyn Hambro.\nThe life that I have\nIs all that I have\nAnd the life that I have\nIs yours.\nThe love that I have\nOf the life that I have\nIs yours and yours and yours.\nA sleep I shall have\nA rest I shall have\nYet death will be but a pause.\nFor the peace of my years\nIn the long green grass\nWill be yours and yours and yours.\nGestapo activities and \"Indecipherables\".\nGestapo signal tracers endangered clandestine radio operators, and their life expectancy in occupied France averaged about six weeks. Therefore, short and less frequent transmissions from the codemaster were of value. The pressure could cause agents to make mistakes encoding messages, and the practice was for the home station to tell them to recode it (usually a safe activity) and retransmit it (dangerous, and increasingly so the longer it took). In response to this problem, Marks established, staffed and trained a group based at Grendon Underwood, Buckinghamshire to cryptanalyse garbled messages (\"indecipherables\") so they could be dealt with in England without forcing the agent to risk retransmitting from the field. Other innovations of his simplified encoding in the field, which reduced errors and made shorter messages possible, both of which reduced transmission time.\n\"Das Englandspiel\" in the Netherlands.\nThe Germans generally did not execute captured radio operators out of hand. The goal was to turn and use them, or to extract enough information to imitate them. For the safety of entire underground \"circuits\", it was important to determine if an operator was genuine and still free, but means of independently checking were primitive. Marks claims that he became convinced (but was unable to prove) that their agents in the Netherlands had been compromised by the German counter-intelligence Abwehr. The Germans referred to their operation as \"a game\"\u2014Das Englandspiel. Marks's warnings fell on deaf ears and perhaps as many as 50 further agents were sent to meet their deaths in Holland. The other side of this story was published in 1953 by Marks's German opposite number in the Netherlands, Hermann Giskes, in his book \"London Calling North Pole\".\nReporting to Brigadier Gubbins.\nIn his book (pp.\u00a0222\u20133), Marks describes the memorandum he wrote detailing his conviction that messages from the Netherlands were being sent either by Germans or by agents who had been turned. He argued that, despite harrowing circumstances, \"not a single Dutch agent has been so overwrought that he's made a mistake in his coding...\" Marks had to face Brigadier (later Sir) Colin Gubbins:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Described by Tommy [Marks' closest friend] as 'a real Highland toughie, bloody brilliant, should be the next CD', he was short enough to make me feel average, with a moustache which was as clipped as his delivery and eyes which didn't mirror his soul or any other such trivia. The general's eyes reflected the crossed swords on his shoulders, warning all comers not to cross them with him. It was a shock to realize they were focused on me.\nGubbins grills Marks. In particular he wants to know who has seen this report, who typed it (Marks did):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There was a warning gleam in those forbidding eyes. 'What did you tell Colonel Tiltman about the Dutch situation?'\n'Nothing, sir, I was instructed not to discuss the country sections.'\n'And you always obey your instructions?'\n'No, sir. But in this instance I did.'\nThere was silence as Celt met Jew on the frontier of instinct. We then went our separate ways.\nLater life.\nAfter the war, Marks went on to write plays and films, including \"The Girl Who Couldn't Quite!\" (1947), \"Cloudburst\" (1951), \"The Best Damn Lie\" (1957), \"Guns at Batasi\" (co-writer) (1964), \"Sebastian\" (1968), and \"Twisted Nerve\" (1968).\nMarks wrote the script for Michael Powell's film \"Peeping Tom\" (1960), the story of a serial killer who films his victims while stabbing them. The film provoked critical revulsion at the time, and was described as \"evil and pornographic.\" The film was critically rehabilitated when younger directors, including Martin Scorsese, expressed admiration for it and for Marks's script. Scorsese subsequently asked Marks to supply the voice of Satan in his 1988 film \"The Last Temptation of Christ.\"\nMarks and his wife Elena feature prominently in Hanff's 1973 book \"The Duchess of Bloomsbury Street\", her memoir of her trip to England in 1971 in the wake of the success of \"84, Charing Cross Road\".\nIn 1998, Marks published his account of his work in SOE \u2013 \"Between Silk and Cyanide: A Codemaker's Story 1941\u20131945.\" The book was written in the early 1980s, but didn't receive UK Government approval for publication until 1998. Three of the poems published in the book were scrambled into the song \"Dead Agents\" by John Cale performed at the Institute of Contemporary Arts, London, in April 1999.\nMarks described himself as an agnostic in \"Between Silk and Cyanide,\" but frequently referred to his Jewish heritage.\nMarriage and death.\nElena Gaussen (born 1938) is a portrait artist noted for the silkscreen \"Dinner, Chelsea Arts Club\",&lt;ref name=\"roseberys/a0756-lot-602020\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and the oil on canvas \"Russell Square, 1985\"&lt;ref name=\"roseberys/a0751-lot-594377\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; She studied at Southern College of Art, Portsmouth; Royal Academy Schools; and Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts. From 1973\u20139 she was head of the art department at Queen's College.\nMarks was married to Gaussen from 1966 to 2000.&lt;ref name=\"artuk/elena-gaussen\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The marriage lasted until shortly before his death at home from cancer in January 2001.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18448", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18448", "title": "Livonia", "text": "Historical region on the eastern shores of the Baltic Sea\nLivonia, known in earlier records as Livland, is a historical region on the eastern shores of the Baltic Sea. It is named after the Livonians, who lived on the shores of present-day Latvia.\nBy the end of the 13th century, the name was extended to most of present-day Estonia and Latvia, which the Livonian Brothers of the Sword had conquered during the Livonian Crusade (1193\u20131290). Medieval Livonia, or \"Terra Mariana\", reached its greatest extent after the Saint George's Night Uprising (1343\u20131345), which forced Denmark to sell the Duchy of Estonia (northern Estonia conquered by Denmark in the 13th century) to the State of the Teutonic Order in 1346. Livonia, as understood after the retreat of Denmark in 1346, bordered on the Gulf of Finland in the north, Lake Peipus and Russia to the east, and Lithuania to the south.\nAs a consequence of the Livonian War (1558\u20131583), the territory of Livonia was reduced to the southern half of Estonia and the northern half of Latvia.\nThe indigenous inhabitants of Livonia were various Finnic tribes in the north and Baltic tribes in the south. The descendants of the crusaders formed the nucleus of the new ruling class of Livonia after the Livonian Crusade, and they eventually became known as Baltic Germans.\nHistory.\nBeginning in the 12th century, Livonia became a target for economic and political expansion by Danes and Germans, particularly for the Hanseatic League and the Cistercian Order. \nAround 1160, Hanseatic traders from L\u00fcbeck established a trading post on the site of the future city of Riga, which Bishop Albrecht von Buxthoeven founded in 1201.\nLivonian Crusade and the Livonian Brothers of the Sword (1198\u20131229).\nThe \"Livonian Chronicle of Henry\" from the 1220s gives a firsthand account of the Christianization of Livonia, granted as a fief by the Hohenstaufen (\"de facto\" but not known as) the King of Germany, Philip of Swabia (r.\u20091198\u00a0\u2013\u00a01208), to Bishop Albert of Riga (Albert of Buxhoeveden), nephew of Hartwig II, the Archbishop of Bremen, who sailed (1200) with a convoy of ships filled with armed crusaders to carve out a Catholic territory in the east as part of the Livonian Crusade. Bishop Albert founded the military order of the Livonian Brothers of the Sword (, ) in 1202; Pope Innocent III sanctioned the establishment in 1204. Albert did so in order to aid the Bishopric of Riga in the conversion of the pagan Curonians, Livonians, Semigallians, and Latgalians living on the shores of the Gulf of Riga. The membership of the order comprised German \"warrior monks\". Alternative names of the order include the Christ Knights, Sword Brethren, and the Militia of Christ of Livonia. From its foundation, the undisciplined Order tended to ignore its supposed vassalage to the bishops. In 1215, Albert ordered the construction of a cathedral in Riga. In 1218, he asked King Valdemar II of Denmark for assistance, but Valdemar instead arranged a deal with the Brotherhood and conquered the north of Estonia for Denmark. The Brotherhood had its headquarters at Fellin (Viljandi) in present-day Estonia, where the walls of the Master's castle still[ [update]] stand. Other strongholds included Wenden (C\u0113sis), Segewold (Sigulda) and Ascheraden (Aizkraukle). The commanders of Fellin, Goldingen (Kuld\u012bga), Marienburg (Al\u016bksne), Reval (Tallinn), and the bailiff of Wei\u00dfenstein (Paide) belonged to the five-member entourage of the Order's Master.\nPope Gregory IX asked the Brothers to defend Finland from Novgorodian attacks in his letter of 24 November 1232; however, no known information regarding the knights' possible activities in Finland has survived. (Sweden eventually took over Finland after the Second Swedish Crusade in 1249.) In the Battle of Saule in 1236 the Lithuanians and Semigallians decimated the Order. This disaster led the surviving Brothers to become incorporated into the Order of Teutonic Knights in the following year, and from that point on they became known as the Livonian Order. They continued, however, to function in all respects (rule, clothing and policy) as an autonomous branch of the Teutonic Order, headed by their own Master (himself \"de jure\" subject to the Teutonic Order's Grand Master).\nInternal conflicts in Livonia (1229\u20131236).\nThe January 1229 death of Albert of Riga caused a diocesan feud in the Archbishopric of Riga, as two rival candidates were elected. Pope Gregory IX, through cardinal Otto of Tonengo, tasked Baldwin of Alna as papal legate to resolve the dispute. After securing the submission of Courland, Baldwin soon found himself in conflict with various factions in Livonia, fleeing to D\u00fcnam\u00fcnde and temporarily leaving Livonia in early 1232. The pope made him bishop of Semigallia and gave him papal legation throughout much of Livonia, and Baldwin returned by 1233. He tried to take the castle of Reval (modern Tallinn) from the Sword Brothers, but in c. August\u2013September 1233 they defeated Baldwin, who excommunicated many Sword Brothers in retaliation.\nAt that point, Livonia was divided into two camps: Baldwin's Bishopric of Semigallia, the Bishopric of Dorpat and the late Albert of Riga's Buxh\u00f6veden family plus several monasteries, most Estonians and Curonians, versus the Livonian Sword Brothers, Nicholas' Bishopric of Riga, and the city of Riga. Previous generations of historians have argued that Baldwin attempted to make the whole Baltic region an ecclesiastical state, but Manfred Hellmann (1993) refuted this idea as \"fanciful speculation\". Similarly, the traditional assertion that Baldwin had extensive plans to conquer and convert eastwards into parts of Pskov and Novgorod do not stand up under scrutiny, showing that papal correspondence with Baldwin was primarily concerned with ending the internal conflict in Livonia on terms favourable to Rome. Therefore, no Livonian faction was allowed to form an alliance with an external power, be they pagan or Novgorodian, to prevent the internal conflict from spilling over and threaten Livonia's external security.\nIn 1234, the pope recalled Baldwin, and replaced him with William of Modena. The pope did not give a verdict until April 1236, when the Sword Brothers were tasked to return Reval to the Danish king. The terms of the agreement were not finalised until the Treaty of Stensby (7 June 1238), when the Livonian Sword Brothers, crushed at Saule and now submitted to the Teutonic Order, relinquished their claims to Reval and much of northern Estonia to Denmark, and to share future territorial gains with two-thirds for the Danish king and one third for the Livonian Order.\nLivonian Order, the Bishoprics and Riga from 1237 until 1418.\nThe Livonian Order was a largely autonomous branch of the Teutonic Knights (or Teutonic Order) and a member of the Livonian Confederation from 1418 to 1561. After being defeated by Lithuanian forces in the 1236 Battle of Saule, the remnants of the Livonian Brothers of the Sword were incorporated into the Teutonic Knights as the Livonian Order in 1237. Between 1237 and 1290, the Livonian Order conquered all of Courland, Livonia, and Semigallia, but their attack on northern Russia was repelled in the Battle of Rakvere (1268). In 1346, after the St. George's Night Uprising the Order purchased the rest of Estonia from King Valdemar IV of Denmark. The \"Chronicle of Henry of Livonia\" and the \"Livonian Rhymed Chronicle\" describe conditions within the Order's territory. The Teutonic Order fell into decline following its defeat in the Battle of Grunwald in 1410 and the secularization of its Prussian territories by Albert of Brandenburg in 1525, but the Livonian Order managed to maintain an independent existence.\nLivonian Confederation (1418\u20131561).\nIn 1418, the Archbishop of Riga, Johannes Ambundii, organised the five ecclesiastical states of the Holy Roman Empire in Medieval Livonia (Livonian Order, Courland, \u00d6sel\u2013Wiek, Dorpat and Riga) into the Livonian Confederation.\nA diet or \"Landtag\" was formed in 1419. The city of Walk was chosen as the site of the diet.\nFrom the 14th to the 16th centuries, Middle Low German \u2013 as spoken in the towns of the Hanseatic League \u2014 functioned as the established language of the Livonian lands, but High German subsequently succeeded it as the official language in the course of the 16th and 17th centuries.\nLivonian War (1558\u20131583).\nFerdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor once again asked for help of Gustav I of Sweden, and the Kingdom of Poland also began direct negotiations with Gustav, but nothing resulted because on 29 September 1560, Gustav I Vasa died. The chances for success of Magnus, (who had become Bishop of Courland and of \u00d6sel-Wiek) in 1560 and his supporters looked particularly good in 1560 (and in 1570). In 1560 he had been recognised as their sovereign by the Bishopric of \u00d6sel-Wiek and by the Bishopric of Courland, and as their prospective ruler by the authorities of the Bishopric of Dorpat; the Bishopric of Reval with the Harrien-Wierland gentry were on his side; the Livonian Order conditionally recognised his right of ownership of the (future) Duchy of Estonia. Then along with Archbishop Wilhelm von Brandenburg of the Archbishopric of Riga and his Coadjutor Christoph von Mecklenburg, Kettler, the last Master of the Teutonic Order, gave to Magnus the portions of the Kingdom of Livonia which he had taken possession of, but they refused to give him any more land.\nOnce Eric XIV of Sweden became king in September 1560 he took quick actions to get involved in the war. He negotiated a continued peace with Muscovy and spoke to the burghers of Reval city. He offered them goods to submit to him as well as threatening them. By 6 June 1561,they submitted to him contrary to the persuasions of Kettler to the burghers. King Eric's brother and future King Johan married the Polish-Lithuanian princess Catherine Jagiellon in 1562. Wanting to obtain his own land in Livonia, he loaned Poland money and then claimed the castles that they had pawned as his own instead of using them to pressure Poland. After Johan returned to Finland, Erik XIV forbade him to deal with any foreign countries without his consent.\nShortly after that, Erik XIV quickly lost any allies that he was about to obtain, either in the form of Magnus or of the Archbishop of Riga. Magnus was upset that he had been tricked out of his inheritance of Holstein. After Sweden occupied Reval, Frederick II of Denmark made a treaty with Erik XIV of Sweden in August 1561. Magnus and his brother Frederick II were in great disagreement, and Frederick II negotiated a treaty with Ivan IV on 7 August 1562 to help his brother obtain more land and to stall further Swedish advances. Erik XIV did not like this, and the Northern Seven Years' War (1563\u20131570) broke out, with Sweden pitted against the Free City of L\u00fcbeck, Denmark, and Poland-Lithuania. While only losing land and trade, Frederick II and Magnus were not faring well. But in 1568 Erik XIV became insane and his brother Johan took his place as King John III of Sweden.\nJohan III, due to his friendship with Poland-Lithuania, began a policy against Muscovy. He would try to obtain more land in Livonia and to dominate Denmark. After all parties had been financially drained, Frederick II let his ally, King Sigismund II Augustus of Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, know that he was ready for peace. On 15 December 1570, the Treaty of Stettin concluded the Northern Seven Years' War.\nIt is, however, more difficult to estimate the scope and magnitude of the support Magnus received in Livonian cities. Compared to the Harrien-Wierland gentry, the Reval city council, and hence probably the majority of citizens, demonstrated a much more reserved attitude towards Denmark and towards King Magnus of Livonia. Nevertheless, there is no reason to speak about any strong pro-Swedish sentiments among the residents of Reval. The citizens who had fled to the Bishopric of Dorpat or had been deported to Muscovy hailed Magnus as their saviour until 1571. Analysis indicates that during the Livonian War a pro-independence wing emerged among the Livonian gentry and townspeople, forming the so-called \"Peace Party\". Dismissing hostilities, these forces perceived an agreement with Muscovy as a chance to escape the atrocities of war and to avoid the division of Livonia. Thus Magnus, who represented Denmark and later struck a deal with Ivan IV, proved a suitable figurehead for this faction.\nThe Peace Party, however, had its own armed forces \u2013 scattered bands of household troops (\"Hofleute\") under diverse command, which only united in action in 1565 (Battle of P\u00e4rnu and Siege of Reval), in 1570\u20131571 (Siege of Reval; 30 weeks), and in 1574\u20131576 (first on Sweden's side, then came the sale of \u00d6sel\u2013Wiek to the Danish Crown, and the loss of territory to Tsardom of Russia). In 1575, after Muscovy attacked Danish claims in Livonia, Frederick II dropped out of the competition, as did the Holy Roman Emperor. After this Johan III held off on his pursuit for more land due to Muscovy obtaining lands that Sweden controlled. He used the next two years of truce to get in a better position. In 1578, he resumed the fight, not only for Livonia, but also for everywhere due to an understanding that he made with the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. In 1578, Magnus retired to the Commonwealth and his brother all but gave up the land in Livonia.\nDuring the many years of the Livonian War (1558\u20131582), the Livonian Order suffered a decisive defeat at the hands of troops of Muscovite Russia in the Battle of Ergeme in 1560 and continued living under great threat. Letters to the Holy Roman Emperor arrived from many European countries, warning \"that Moscow has its eyes on much more than only a few harbors or the province of Liefland\" ... the East Sea (Ostsee-Baltic Sea) and the West Sea (Atlantic) are equally in danger. Barnim the Elder, Duke of Pomerania for almost 50 years, warned \"that never before did he experience the fear than now, where people sent by Moscow are everywhere even in his land\". At stake was the Narva-trade-route and practically all trade in the North, and with that all of Europe. Due to the religious upheavals of the Reformation the distant Holy Roman Empire could not send troops, which it could not afford anyway. The Duchy of Prussia was not able to help for much of the same reason, and Duke Albrecht (r.\u20091525\u00a0\u2013\u00a01568) was under continuous ban by the Empire. The Hanseatic League was greatly weakened by this and the city state of Luebeck fought its last great war. The emperor Maximilian II (r.\u20091564\u00a0\u2013\u00a01576) diffused the greatest threat by remaining on friendly terms with Tsar Ivan IV of Russia (r.\u20091533\u00a0\u2013\u00a01584), but not sending Ivan IV troops as requested in his struggles with the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth.\nIn 1570, Tsar Ivan IV of Russia installed Duke Magnus as King of Livonia. The other forces opposed this appointment. The Livonian Order saw no other way than to seek protection from Sigismund II Augustus (King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania), who had intervened in a war between Bishop William of Riga and the Brothers in 1557. After coming to an agreement with Sigismund II Augustus and his representatives (especially Miko\u0142aj \"the Black\" Radziwi\u0142\u0142), the last Livonian Master, Gotthard Kettler, secularized the Order and converted to Lutheranism. In the southern part of the Brothers' lands, he set up the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia for his family. Most of the remaining lands were seized by the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. Denmark and Sweden re-occupied the north of Estonia.\nDuchy of Livonia (1561\u20131621).\nIn 1561, during the Livonian War, Livonia fell to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and became a dependent vassal of Lithuania. Eight years later, in 1569, when the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the Kingdom of Poland formed the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, Livonia became a joint domain administered directly by the king and grand duke. \nHaving rejected peace proposals from its enemies, Ivan the Terrible found himself in a difficult position by 1579, when Crimean Khanate devastated Muscovian territories and burnt down Moscow (see Russo-Crimean Wars), the drought and epidemics have fatally affected the economy, Oprichnina had thoroughly disrupted the government, while The Grand Principality of Lithuania had united with The Kingdom of Poland (1385\u20131569) and acquired an energetic leader, Stefan Batory, supported by Ottoman Empire (1576). Stefan Batory replied with a series of three offensives against Muscovy, trying to cut The Kingdom of Livonia from Muscovian territories. During his first offensive in 1579, with 22,000 men, he retook Polotsk; during the second, in 1580, with 29,000-strong army, he took Velikie Luki, and in 1581 with a 100,000-strong army he started the Siege of Pskov. Frederick II of Denmark and Norway had trouble continuing the fight against Muscovy unlike Sweden and Poland. He came to an agreement with John III in 1580, giving him the titles in Livonia. That war would last from 1577 to 1582. Muscovy recognized Polish\u2013Lithuanian control of Ducatus Ultradunensis only in 1582. After Magnus von Lyffland died in 1583, Poland invaded his territories in The Duchy of Courland, and Frederick II decided to sell his rights of inheritance. Except for the island of \u0152sel, Denmark was out of the Baltic by 1585. As of 1598 Inflanty Voivodeship was divided onto:\nBased on a guarantee by Sigismund II Augustus from the 1560s, the German language retained its official status.\nKingdom of Livonia (1570\u20131578).\nThe armies of Ivan the Terrible were initially successful, taking Polotsk (1563) and Parnawa (1575) and overrunning much of Grand Duchy of Lithuania up to some proximity of Vilnius. Eventually, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Kingdom of Poland formed the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1569 under the Union of Lublin. Eric XIV of Sweden did not like this, and the Northern Seven Years' War between the Free City of L\u00fcbeck, Denmark, Poland, and Sweden broke out. While only losing land and trade, Frederick II of Denmark and Magnus von Lyffland of the \u0152sel-Wiek did not fare well. But, in 1569, Erik XIV became insane and his brother John III of Sweden took his place. After all parties had been financially drained, Frederick II let his ally, King Zygmunt II August, know that he was ready for peace. On 15 December 1570, the Treaty of Stettin was concluded.\nIn the next phase of the conflict, in 1577, Ivan IV took advantage of the Commonwealth's internal strife following the Danzig rebellion during the reign of Stefan Batory and invaded Livonia, quickly taking almost the entire territory, with the exception of Riga and Reval. In 1578, Magnus of Livonia recognized the sovereignty of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth (not ratified by the Sejm of Poland-Lithuania, nor recognized by Denmark). The Kingdom of Livonia was beaten back by Muscovy on all fronts. In 1578, Magnus of Livonia retired to the Bishopric of Courland, and his brother all but gave up the land in Livonia.\nSwedish Livonia (1629\u20131721).\nSweden was given roughly the same area as the former Duchy of Livonia after the 1626\u20131629 Polish\u2013Swedish War. The area, usually known as Swedish Livonia, became a very important Swedish dominion, with Riga being the second largest Swedish city and Livonia paying for one third of the Swedish war costs. Sweden lost Swedish Livonia, Duchy of Estonia and Swedish Ingria to the Russian Empire almost 100 years later, by the Capitulation of Estonia and Livonia in 1710 and the Treaty of Nystad in 1721.\nLivonian Voivodeship (1620s\u20131772).\nThe Livonian Voivodeship (; ) was a unit of administrative division and local government in the Duchy of Livonia, part of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, since it was formed in the 1620s out of the Wenden Voivodeship until the First Partition of Poland in 1772.\nRiga Governorate (1721\u20131796).\nThe Russian Empire conquered Swedish Livonia during the course of the Great Northern War and acquired the province in the Capitulation of Estonia and Livonia in 1710, confirmed by the Treaty of Nystad in 1721. Peter the Great confirmed German as the exclusive official language. Russia then added Polish Livonia in 1772 during the Partitions of Poland.\nGovernorate of Livonia (1796\u20131918).\nIn 1796, the Riga Governorate was renamed as the Governorate of Livonia ( / , , ). From 1845 to 1876, the Baltic governorates of Estonia, Livonia, and Courland \u2014 an area roughly corresponding to the historical medieval Livonia \u2014 were administratively subordinated to a common Governor-General. Among the holders of this post were Count Alexander Arkadyevich Suvorov and Count Pyotr Andreyevich Shuvalov.\nLivonia remained within the Russian Empire until the end of World War I, when it was split between the newly independent states of Latvia and Estonia. The United Baltic Duchy, alternately known as the \"Grand Duchy of Livonia\", proclaimed by the Baltic German nobility on 12 April 1918, was never recognised by any state, and dissolved at the German surrender in November 1918. Livonia had ceased to exist. From 1918 to 1920, both Soviet troops and German Freikorps fought against Latvian and Estonian troops for control over former Livonia, but their attempts were defeated.\nLegacy.\nThe historical land of Livonia has been split between Latvia and Estonia ever since 1918. The Livonian language is spoken by fewer than 100 individuals as a second language, and is understood to be fast approaching extinction. The last native Livonian speaker died in June 2013.\nThe unofficial anthem of the Livonians, \"Min iz\u0101m\u014d\", shares the melody of the Finnish and Estonian national anthems.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18450", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18450", "title": "Lung cancer", "text": "Malignant tumor characterized by uncontrolled cell growth in lung tissue\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nLung cancer, also called lung carcinoma, is a malignant tumor that originates in the tissues of the lungs. Lung cancer is caused by genetic damage to the DNA of cells in the airways, often caused by cigarette smoking or inhaling damaging chemicals. Damaged airway cells gain the ability to multiply unchecked, causing the growth of a tumor. Without treatment, tumors spread throughout the lung, damaging lung function. Eventually lung tumors metastasize, spreading to other parts of the body.\nEarly lung cancer often has no symptoms and can only be detected by medical imaging. As the cancer progresses, most people experience nonspecific respiratory problems: coughing, shortness of breath, or chest pain. Other symptoms depend on the location and size of the tumor. Those suspected of having lung cancer typically undergo a series of imaging tests to determine the location and extent of any tumors. Definitive diagnosis of lung cancer requires a biopsy of the suspected tumor be examined by a pathologist under a microscope. In addition to recognizing cancerous cells, a pathologist can classify the tumor according to the type of cells it originates from. Around 15% of cases are small-cell lung cancer (SCLC), and the remaining 85% (the non-small-cell lung cancers or NSCLC) are adenocarcinomas, squamous-cell carcinomas, and large-cell carcinomas. After diagnosis, further imaging and biopsies are done to determine the cancer's stage based on how far it has spread.\nTreatment for early stage lung cancer includes surgery to remove the tumor, sometimes followed by radiation therapy and chemotherapy to kill any remaining cancer cells. Later stage cancer is treated with radiation therapy and chemotherapy alongside drug treatments that target specific cancer subtypes. Even with treatment, only around 20% of people survive five years on from their diagnosis. Survival rates are higher in those diagnosed at an earlier stage, diagnosed at a younger age, and in women compared to men.\nMost lung cancer cases are caused by tobacco smoking. The remainder are caused by exposure to hazardous substances like asbestos and radon gas, or by genetic mutations that arise by chance. Consequently, lung cancer prevention efforts encourage people to avoid hazardous chemicals and quit smoking. Quitting smoking both reduces one's chance of developing lung cancer and improves treatment outcomes in those already diagnosed with lung cancer.\nLung cancer is the most diagnosed and deadliest cancer worldwide, with 2.2 million cases in 2020 resulting in 1.8 million deaths. Lung cancer is rare in those younger than 40; the average age at diagnosis is 70 years, and the average age at death 72. Incidence and outcomes vary widely across the world, depending on patterns of tobacco use. Prior to the advent of cigarette smoking in the 20th century, lung cancer was a rare disease. In the 1950s and 1960s, increasing evidence linked lung cancer and tobacco use, culminating in declarations by most large national health bodies discouraging tobacco use.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nEarly lung cancer often has no symptoms. When symptoms do arise they are often nonspecific respiratory problems \u2013 coughing, shortness of breath, or chest pain \u2013 that can differ from person to person. Those who experience coughing tend to report either a new cough, or an increase in the frequency or strength of a pre-existing cough. Around one in four cough up blood, ranging from small streaks in the sputum to large amounts. Around half of those diagnosed with lung cancer experience shortness of breath, while 25\u201350% experience a dull, persistent chest pain that remains in the same location over time. In addition to respiratory symptoms, some experience systemic symptoms including loss of appetite, weight loss, general weakness, fever, and night sweats.\nSome less common symptoms suggest tumors in particular locations. Tumors in the thorax can cause breathing problems by obstructing the trachea or disrupting the nerve to the diaphragm; difficulty swallowing by compressing the esophagus; hoarseness by disrupting the nerves of the larynx; and Horner's syndrome by disrupting the sympathetic nervous system. Horner's syndrome is also common in tumors at the top of the lung, known as Pancoast tumors, which also cause shoulder pain that radiates down the little-finger side of the arm as well as destruction of the topmost ribs. Swollen lymph nodes above the collarbone can indicate a tumor that has spread within the chest. Tumors obstructing bloodflow to the heart can cause superior vena cava syndrome (swelling of the upper body and shortness of breath), while tumors infiltrating the area around the heart can cause fluid buildup around the heart, arrhythmia (irregular heartbeat), and heart failure.\nAbout one in three people diagnosed with lung cancer have symptoms caused by metastases in sites other than the lungs. Lung cancer can metastasize anywhere in the body, with different symptoms depending on the location. Brain metastases can cause headache, nausea, vomiting, seizures, and neurological deficits. Bone metastases can cause pain, bone fractures, and compression of the spinal cord. Metastasis into the bone marrow can deplete blood cells and cause leukoerythroblastosis (immature cells in the blood). Liver metastases can cause liver enlargement, pain in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen, fever, and weight loss.\nLung tumors often cause the release of body-altering hormones, which cause unusual symptoms, called paraneoplastic syndromes. Inappropriate hormone release can cause dramatic shifts in concentrations of blood minerals. Most common is hypercalcemia (high blood calcium) caused by over-production of parathyroid hormone-related protein or parathyroid hormone. Hypercalcemia can manifest as nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, constipation, increased thirst, frequent urination, and altered mental status. Those with lung cancer also commonly experience hypokalemia (low potassium) due to inappropriate secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone, as well as hyponatremia (low sodium) due to overproduction of antidiuretic hormone or atrial natriuretic peptide. About one of three people with lung cancer develop nail clubbing, while up to one in ten experience hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy (nail clubbing, joint soreness, and skin thickening). A variety of autoimmune disorders can arise as paraneoplastic syndromes in those with lung cancer, including Lambert\u2013Eaton myasthenic syndrome (which causes muscle weakness), sensory neuropathies, muscle inflammation, brain swelling, and autoimmune deterioration of cerebellum, limbic system, or brainstem. Up to one in twelve people with lung cancer have paraneoplastic blood clotting, including migratory venous thrombophlebitis, clots in the heart, and disseminated intravascular coagulation (clots throughout the body). Paraneoplastic syndromes involving the skin and kidneys are rare, each occurring in up to 1% of those with lung cancer.\nDiagnosis.\nA person suspected of having lung cancer will have imaging tests done to evaluate the presence, extent, and location of tumors. First, many primary care providers perform a chest X-ray to look for a mass inside the lung. The X-ray may reveal an obvious mass, the widening of the mediastinum (suggestive of spread to lymph nodes there), atelectasis (lung collapse), consolidation (pneumonia), or pleural effusion; however, some lung tumors are not visible by X-ray. Next, many undergo computed tomography (CT) scanning, which can reveal the sizes and locations of tumors.\nA definitive diagnosis of lung cancer requires a biopsy of the suspected tissue be histologically examined for cancer cells. Given the location of lung cancer tumors, biopsies can often be obtained by minimally invasive techniques: a fiberoptic bronchoscope that can retrieve tissue (sometimes guided by endobronchial ultrasound), fine needle aspiration, or other imaging-guided biopsy through the skin. Those who cannot undergo a typical biopsy procedure may instead have a liquid biopsy taken (that is, a sample of some body fluid) which may contain circulating tumor DNA that can be detected.\nImaging is also used to assess the extent of cancer spread. Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning or combined PET-CT scanning is often used to locate metastases in the body. Since PET scanning is less sensitive in the brain, the National Comprehensive Cancer Network recommends magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) \u2013 or CT where MRI is unavailable \u2013 to scan the brain for metastases in those with NSCLC and large tumors, or tumors that have spread to the nearby lymph nodes. When imaging suggests the tumor has spread, the suspected metastasis is often biopsied to confirm that it is cancerous. Lung cancer most commonly metastasizes to the brain, bones, liver, and adrenal glands.\nLung cancer can often appear as a solitary pulmonary nodule on a chest radiograph or CT scan. In lung cancer screening studies as many as 30% of those screened have a lung nodule, the majority of which turn out to be benign. Besides lung cancer many other diseases can also give this appearance, including hamartomas, and infectious granulomas caused by tuberculosis, histoplasmosis, or coccidioidomycosis.\nClassification.\nAt diagnosis, lung cancer is classified based on the type of cells the tumor is derived from; tumors derived from different cells progress and respond to treatment differently. There are two main types of lung cancer, categorized by the size and appearance of the malignant cells seen by a histopathologist under a microscope: small cell lung cancer (SCLC; 15% of cases) and non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC; 85% of cases). SCLC tumors are often found near the center of the lungs, in the major airways. Their cells appear small with ill-defined boundaries, not much cytoplasm, many mitochondria, and have distinctive nuclei with granular-looking chromatin and no visible nucleoli. NSCLCs comprise a group of three cancer types: adenocarcinoma, squamous-cell carcinoma, and large-cell carcinoma. Nearly 40% of lung cancers are adenocarcinomas. Their cells grow in three-dimensional clumps, resemble glandular cells, and may produce mucin. About 30% of lung cancers are squamous-cell carcinomas. They typically occur close to large airways. The tumors consist of sheets of cells, with layers of keratin. A hollow cavity and associated cell death are commonly found at the center of the tumor. Less than 10% of lung cancers are large-cell carcinomas, so named because the cells are large, with excess cytoplasm, large nuclei, and conspicuous nucleoli. Around 10% of lung cancers are rarer types. These include mixes of the above subtypes like adenosquamous carcinoma, and rare subtypes such as carcinoid tumors, and sarcomatoid carcinomas.\nSeveral lung cancer types are subclassified based on the growth characteristics of the cancer cells. Adenocarcinomas are classified as lepidic (growing along the surface of intact alveolar walls), acinar and papillary, or micropapillary and solid pattern. Lepidic adenocarcinomas tend to be least aggressive, while micropapillary and solid pattern adenocarcinomas are most aggressive.\nIn addition to examining cell morphology, biopsies are often stained by immunohistochemistry to confirm lung cancer classification. SCLCs bear the markers of neuroendocrine cells, such as chromogranin, synaptophysin, and CD56. Adenocarcinomas tend to express Napsin-A and TTF-1; squamous cell carcinomas lack Napsin-A and TTF-1, but express p63 and its cancer-specific isoform p40. CK7 and CK20 are also commonly used to differentiate lung cancers. CK20 is found in several cancers, but typically absent from lung cancer. CK7 is present in many lung cancers, but absent from squamous cell carcinomas.\nStaging.\nLung cancer staging is an assessment of the degree of spread of the cancer from its original source. It is one of the factors affecting both the prognosis and the treatment of lung cancer.\nSCLC is typically staged with a relatively simple system: limited stage or extensive stage. Around a third of people are diagnosed at the limited stage, meaning cancer is confined to one side of the chest, within the scope of a single radiotherapy field. The other two thirds are diagnosed at the extensive stage, with cancer spread to both sides of the chest, or to other parts of the body.\nNSCLC \u2013 and sometimes SCLC \u2013 is typically staged with the American Joint Committee on Cancer's Tumor, Node, Metastasis (TNM) staging system. The size and extent of the tumor (T), spread to regional lymph nodes (N), and distant metastases (M) are scored individually, and combined to form stage groups.\nRelatively small tumors are designated T1, which are subdivided by size: tumors \u2264 1 centimeter (cm) across are T1a; 1\u20132 cm T1b; 2\u20133 cm T1c. Tumors up to 5 cm across, or those that have spread to the visceral pleura (tissue covering the lung) or main bronchi, are designated T2. T2a designates 3\u20134 cm tumors; T2b 4\u20135 cm tumors. T3 tumors are up to 7 cm across, have multiple nodules in the same lobe of the lung, or invade the chest wall, diaphragm (or the nerve that controls it), or area around the heart. Tumors that are larger than 7 cm, have nodules spread in different lobes of a lung, or invade the mediastinum (center of the chest cavity), heart, largest blood vessels that supply the heart, trachea, esophagus, or spine are designated T4. Lymph node staging depends on the extent of local spread: with the cancer metastasized to no lymph nodes (N0), pulmonary or hilar nodes (along the bronchi) on the same side as the tumor (N1), mediastinal or subcarinal lymph nodes (in the middle of the lungs, N2), or lymph nodes on the opposite side of the lung from the tumor (N3). Metastases are staged as no metastases (M0), nearby metastases (M1a; the space around the lung or the heart, or the opposite lung), a single distant metastasis (M1b), or multiple metastases (M1c).\nThese T, N, and M scores are combined to designate a stage grouping for the cancer. Cancer limited to smaller tumors is designated stage I. Disease with larger tumors or spread to the nearest lymph nodes is stage II. Cancer with the largest tumors or extensive lymph node spread is stage III. Cancer that has metastasized is stage IV. Each stage is further subdivided based on the combination of T, N, and M scores.\nScreening.\nSome countries recommend that people who are at a high risk of developing lung cancer be screened at different intervals using low-dose CT lung scans. Screening programs may result in early detection of lung tumors in people who are not yet experiencing symptoms of lung cancer, ideally, early enough that the tumors can be successfully treated and result in decreased mortality. There is evidence that regular low-dose CT scans in people at high risk of developing lung cancer reduces total lung cancer deaths by as much as 20%. Despite evidence of benefit in these populations, potential harms of screening include the potential for a person to have a 'false positive' screening result that may lead to unnecessary testing, invasive procedures, and distress. Although rare, there is also a risk of radiation-induced cancer. The United States Preventive Services Task Force recommends yearly screening using low-dose CT in people between 55 and 80 who have a smoking history of at least 30 pack-years. The European Commission recommends that cancer screening programs across the European Union be extended to include low-dose CT lung scans for current or previous smokers. Similarly, The Canadian Task Force for Preventative Health recommends that people who are current or former smokers (smoking history of more than 30 pack years) and who are between the ages of 55\u201374 years be screened for lung cancer.\nTreatment.\nTreatment for lung cancer depends on the cancer's specific cell type, how far it has spread, and the person's health. Common treatments for early stage cancer includes surgical removal of the tumor, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy. For later-stage cancer, chemotherapy and radiation therapy are combined with newer targeted molecular therapies and immune checkpoint inhibitors. All lung cancer treatment regimens are combined with lifestyle changes and palliative care to improve quality of life.\nSmall-cell lung cancer.\nLimited-stage SCLC is typically treated with a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. For chemotherapy, the National Comprehensive Cancer Network and American College of Chest Physicians guidelines recommend four to six cycles of a platinum-based chemotherapeutic \u2013 cisplatin or carboplatin \u2013 combined with either etoposide or irinotecan. This is typically combined with thoracic radiation therapy \u2013 45 Gray (Gy) twice-daily \u2013 alongside the first two chemotherapy cycles. First-line therapy causes remission in up to 80% of those who receive it; however most people relapse with chemotherapy-resistant disease. Those who relapse are given second-line chemotherapies. Topotecan and lurbinectedin are approved by the US FDA for this purpose. Irinotecan, paclitaxel, docetaxel, vinorelbine, etoposide, and gemcitabine are also sometimes used, and are similarly efficacious. Prophylactic cranial irradiation can reduce the risk of brain metastases and improve survival in those with limited-stage disease.\nExtensive-stage SCLC is treated first with etoposide along with either cisplatin or carboplatin. Radiotherapy is used only to shrink tumors that are causing particularly severe symptoms. Combining standard chemotherapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor can improve survival for a minority of those affected, extending the average person's lifespan by around 2 months.\nNon-small-cell lung cancer.\nFor stage I and stage II NSCLC the first line of treatment is often surgical removal of the affected lobe of the lung. For those not well enough to tolerate full lobe removal, a smaller chunk of lung tissue can be removed by wedge resection or segmentectomy surgery. Those with centrally located tumors and otherwise-healthy respiratory systems may have more extreme surgery to remove an entire lung (pneumonectomy). Experienced thoracic surgeons, and a high-volume surgery clinic improve chances of survival. Those who are unable or unwilling to undergo surgery can instead receive radiation therapy. Stereotactic body radiation therapy is best practice, typically administered several times over 1\u20132 weeks. Chemotherapy has little effect in those with stage I NSCLC, and may worsen disease outcomes in those with the earliest disease. In those with stage II disease, chemotherapy is usually initiated six to twelve weeks after surgery, with up to four cycles of cisplatin \u2013 or carboplatin in those with kidney problems, neuropathy, or hearing impairment \u2013 combined with vinorelbine, pemetrexed, gemcitabine, or docetaxel.\nTreatment for those with stage III NSCLC depends on the nature of their disease. Those with more limited spread may undergo surgery to have the tumor and affected lymph nodes removed, followed by chemotherapy and potentially radiotherapy. Those with particularly large tumors (T4) and those for whom surgery is impractical are treated with combination chemotherapy and radiotherapy along with the immunotherapy durvalumab. Combined chemotherapy and radiation enhances survival compared to chemotherapy followed by radiation, though the combination therapy comes with harsher side effects.\nThose with stage IV disease are treated with combinations of pain medication, radiotherapy, immunotherapy, and chemotherapy. Many cases of advanced disease can be treated with targeted therapies depending on the genetic makeup of the cancerous cells. Up to 30% of tumors have mutations in the \"EGFR\" gene that result in an overactive EGFR protein; these can be treated with EGFR inhibitors osimertinib, erlotinib, gefitinib, afatinib, or dacomitinib \u2013 with osimertinib known to be superior to erlotinib and gefitinib, and all superior to chemotherapy alone. Up to 7% of those with NSCLC harbor mutations that result in hyperactive ALK protein, which can be treated with ALK inhibitors crizotinib, or its successors alectinib, brigatinib, and ceritinib. Those treated with ALK inhibitors who relapse can then be treated with the third-generation ALK inhibitor lorlatinib. Up to 5% with NSCLC have overactive MET, which can be inhibited with MET inhibitors capmatinib or tepotinib. Targeted therapies are also available for some cancers with rare mutations. Cancers with hyperactive BRAF (around 2% of NSCLC) can be treated by dabrafenib combined with the MEK inhibitor trametinib; those with activated ROS1 (around 1% of NSCLC) can be inhibited by crizotinib, lorlatinib, or entrectinib; overactive NTRK (&lt;1% of NSCLC) by entrectinib or larotrectinib; active RET (around 1% of NSCLC) by selpercatinib.\nPeople whose NSCLC is not targetable by current molecular therapies instead can be treated with combination chemotherapy plus immune checkpoint inhibitors, which prevent cancer cells from inactivating immune T cells. The chemotherapeutic agent of choice depends on the NSCLC subtype: cisplatin plus gemcitabine for squamous cell carcinoma, cisplatin plus pemetrexed for non-squamous cell carcinoma. Immune checkpoint inhibitors are most effective against tumors that express the protein PD-L1, but are sometimes effective in those that do not. Treatment with pembrolizumab, atezolizumab, or combination nivolumab plus ipilimumab are all superior to chemotherapy alone against tumors expressing PD-L1. Those who relapse on the above are treated with second-line chemotherapeutics docetaxel and ramucirumab.\nPalliative care.\nIntegrating palliative care (medical care focused on improving symptoms and lessening discomfort) into lung cancer treatment from the time of diagnosis improves the survival time and quality of life of those with lung cancer. Particularly common symptoms of lung cancer are shortness of breath and pain. Supplemental oxygen, improved airflow, re-orienting an affected person in bed, and low-dose morphine can all improve shortness of breath. In around 20 to 30% of those with lung cancer \u2013 particularly those with late-stage disease \u2013 growth of the tumor can narrow or block the airway, causing coughing and difficulty breathing. Obstructing tumors can be surgically removed where possible, though typically those with airway obstruction are not well enough for surgery. In such cases the American College of Chest Physicians recommends opening the airway by inserting a stent, attempting to shrink the tumor with localized radiation (brachytherapy), or physically removing the blocking tissue by bronchoscopy, sometimes aided by thermal or laser ablation. Other causes of lung cancer-associated shortness of breath can be treated directly, such as antibiotics for a lung infection, diuretics for pulmonary edema, benzodiazepines for anxiety, and steroids for airway obstruction.\nUp to 92% of those with lung cancer report pain, either from tissue damage at the tumor site(s) or nerve damage. The World Health Organization (WHO) has developed a three-tiered system for managing cancer pain. For those with mild pain (tier one), the WHO recommends acetominophen or a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug. Around a third of people experience moderate (tier two) or severe (tier three) pain, for which the WHO recommends opioid painkillers. Opioids are typically effective at easing nociceptive pain (pain caused by damage to various body tissues). Opioids are occasionally effective at easing neuropathic pain (pain caused by nerve damage). Neuropathic agents such as anticonvulsants, tricyclic antidepressants, and serotonin\u2013norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, are often used to ease neuropathic pain, either alone or in combination with opioids. In many cases, targeted radiotherapy can be used to shrink tumors, reducing pain and other symptoms caused by tumor growth.\nIndividuals who have advanced disease and are approaching end-of-life can benefit from dedicated end-of-life care to manage symptoms and ease suffering. As in earlier disease, pain and difficulty breathing are common, and can be managed with opioid pain medications, transitioning from oral medication to injected medication if the affected individual loses the ability to swallow. Coughing is also common, and can be managed with opioids or cough suppressants. Some experience terminal delirium \u2013 confused behavior, unexplained movements, or a reversal of the sleep-wake cycle \u2013 which can be managed by antipsychotic drugs, low-dose sedatives, and investigating other causes of discomfort such as low blood sugar, constipation, and sepsis. In the last few days of life, many develop terminal secretions \u2013 pooled fluid in the airways that can cause a rattling sound while breathing. This is thought not to cause respiratory problems, but can distress family members and caregivers. Terminal secretions can be reduced by anticholinergic medications. Even those who are non-communicative or have reduced consciousness may be able to experience cancer-related pain, so pain medications are typically continued until the time of death.\nPrognosis.\nAround 19% of people diagnosed with lung cancer survive five years from diagnosis, though prognosis varies based on the stage of the disease at diagnosis and the type of lung cancer. Prognosis is better for people with lung cancer diagnosed at an earlier stage; those diagnosed at the earliest TNM stage, IA1 (small tumor, no spread), have a two-year survival of 97% and five-year survival of 92%. Those diagnosed at the most-advanced stage, IVB, have a two-year survival of 10% and a five-year survival of 0%. Five-year survival is higher in women (22%) than men (16%). Women tend to be diagnosed with less-advanced disease, and have better outcomes than men diagnosed at the same stage. Average five-year survival also varies across the world, with particularly high five-year survival in Japan (33%), and five-year survival above 20% in 12 other countries: Mauritius, Canada, the US, China, South Korea, Taiwan, Israel, Latvia, Iceland, Sweden, Austria, and Switzerland.\nSCLC is particularly aggressive. 10\u201315% of people survive five years after a SCLC diagnosis. As with other types of lung cancer, the extent of disease at diagnosis also influences prognosis. The average person diagnosed with limited-stage SCLC survives 12\u201320 months from diagnosis; with extensive-stage SCLC around 12 months. While SCLC often responds initially to treatment, most people eventually relapse with chemotherapy-resistant cancer, surviving an average 3\u20134 months from the time of relapse. Those with limited stage SCLC that go into complete remission after chemotherapy and radiotherapy have a 50% chance of brain metastases developing within the next two years \u2013 a chance reduced by prophylactic cranial irradiation.\nSeveral other personal and disease factors are associated with improved outcomes. Those diagnosed at a younger age tend to have better outcomes. Those who smoke or experience weight loss as a symptom tend to have worse outcomes. Tumor mutations in KRAS are associated with reduced survival.\nExperience.\nThe uncertainty of lung cancer prognosis often causes stress, and makes future planning difficult, for those with lung cancer and their families. Those whose cancer goes into remission often experience fear of their cancer returning or progressing, associated with poor quality of life, negative mood, and functional impairment. This fear is exacerbated by frequent or prolonged surveillance imaging, and other reminders of cancer risks.\nCauses.\nLung cancer is caused by genetic damage to the DNA of lung cells. In general, this damage causes loss of function of tumor suppressor genes, or gain in function of oncogenes. These changes are sometimes random, but are typically induced by breathing in toxic substances such as cigarette smoke. Cancer-causing genetic changes affect the cell's normal functions, including cell proliferation, programmed cell death (apoptosis), and DNA repair. Eventually, cells gain enough genetic changes to grow uncontrollably, forming a tumor, and eventually spreading within and then beyond the lung. Rampant tumor growth and spread causes the symptoms of lung cancer. If unstopped, the spreading tumor will eventually cause the death of affected individuals.\nSmoking.\nTobacco smoking is by far the major contributor to lung cancer, causing 80% to 90% of cases. Lung cancer risk increases with quantity of cigarettes consumed. Tobacco smoking's carcinogenic effect is due to various chemicals in tobacco smoke that cause DNA mutations, increasing the chance of cells becoming cancerous. The International Agency for Research on Cancer identifies at least 50 chemicals in tobacco smoke as carcinogenic, and the most potent is tobacco-specific nitrosamines. Exposure to these chemicals causes several kinds of DNA damage: DNA adducts, oxidative stress, and breaks in the DNA strands. Being around tobacco smoke \u2013 called passive smoking \u2013 can also cause lung cancer. Living with a tobacco smoker increases one's risk of developing lung cancer by 24%. An estimated 17% of lung cancer cases in those who do not smoke are caused by high levels of environmental tobacco smoke.\nVaping may be a risk factor for lung cancer, but less than that of cigarettes, and further research as of 2021 is necessary due to the length of time it can take for lung cancer to develop following an exposure to carcinogens.\nThe smoking of non-tobacco products is not known to be associated with lung cancer development. Marijuana smoking does not seem to independently cause lung cancer \u2013 despite the relatively high levels of tar and known carcinogens in marijuana smoke. The relationship between smoking cocaine and developing lung cancer has not been studied as of 2020.\nEnvironmental exposures.\nExposure to a variety of other toxic chemicals \u2013 typically encountered in certain occupations \u2013 is associated with an increased risk of lung cancer. Occupational exposures to carcinogens cause 9\u201315% of lung cancer. A prominent example is asbestos, which causes lung cancer either directly or indirectly by inflaming the lung. Exposure to all commercially available forms of asbestos increases cancer risk, and cancer risk increases with time of exposure. Asbestos and cigarette smoking increase risk synergistically \u2013 that is, the risk of someone who smokes and has asbestos exposure dying from lung cancer is much higher than would be expected from adding the two risks together. Similarly, exposure to radon, a naturally occurring breakdown product of the Earth's radioactive elements, is associated with increased lung cancer risk. Radon levels vary with geography. Underground miners have the greatest exposure; however even the lower levels of radon that seep into residential spaces can increase occupants' risk of lung cancer. Like asbestos, cigarette smoking and radon exposure increase risk synergistically. Radon exposure is responsible for between 3% and 14% of lung cancer cases.\nSeveral other chemicals encountered in various occupations are also associated with increased lung cancer risk including arsenic used in wood preservation, pesticide application, and some ore smelting; ionizing radiation encountered during uranium mining; vinyl chloride in papermaking; beryllium in jewelers, ceramics workers, missile technicians, and nuclear reactor workers; chromium in stainless steel production, welding, and hide tanning; nickel in electroplaters, glass workers, metal workers, welders, and those who make batteries, ceramics, and jewelry; and diesel exhaust encountered by miners.\nExposure to air pollution, especially particulate matter released by motor vehicle exhaust and fossil fuel-burning power plants, increases the risk of lung cancer. Indoor air pollution from burning wood, charcoal, or crop residue for cooking and heating has also been linked to an increased risk of developing lung cancer. The International Agency for Research on Cancer has classified emission from household burning of coal and biomass as \"carcinogenic\" and \"probably carcinogenic\" respectively.\nOther diseases.\nSeveral other diseases that cause inflammation of the lung increase one's risk of lung cancer. This association is strongest for chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder \u2013 the risk is highest in those with the most inflammation, and reduced in those whose inflammation is treated with inhaled corticosteroids. Other inflammatory lung and immune system diseases such as alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, interstitial fibrosis, scleroderma, \"Chlamydia pneumoniae\" infection, tuberculosis, and HIV infection are associated with increased risk of developing lung cancer. Epstein\u2013Barr virus is associated with the development of the rare lung cancer lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma in people from Asia, but not in people from Western nations. A role for several other infectious agents \u2013 namely human papillomaviruses, BK virus, JC virus, human cytomegalovirus, SV40, measles virus, and Torque teno virus \u2013 in lung cancer development has been studied but remains inconclusive as of 2020.\nGenetics.\nParticular gene combinations may make some people more susceptible to lung cancer. Close family members of those with lung cancer have around twice the risk of developing lung cancer as an average person, even after controlling for occupational exposure and smoking habits. Genome-wide association studies have identified many gene variants associated with lung cancer risk, each of which contributes a small risk increase. Many of these genes participate in pathways known to be involved in carcinogenesis, namely DNA repair, inflammation, the cell division cycle, cellular stress responses, and chromatin remodeling. Some rare genetic disorders that increase the risk of various cancers also increase the risk of lung cancer, namely retinoblastoma and Li\u2013Fraumeni syndrome.\nPathogenesis.\nAs with all cancers, lung cancer is triggered by mutations that allow tumor cells to endlessly multiply, stimulate blood vessel growth, avoid apoptosis (programmed cell death), generate pro-growth signalling molecules, ignore anti-growth signalling molecules, and eventually spread into surrounding tissue or metastasize throughout the body. Different tumors can acquire these abilities through different mutations, though generally cancer-contributing mutations activate oncogenes and inactivate tumor suppressors. Some mutations \u2013 called \"driver mutations\" \u2013 are particularly common in adenocarcinomas, and contribute disproportionately to tumor development. These typically occur in the receptor tyrosine kinases EGFR, BRAF, MET, KRAS, and PIK3CA. Similarly, some adenocarcinomas are driven by chromosomal rearrangements that result in overexpression of tyrosine kinases ALK, ROS1, NTRK, and RET. A given tumor will typically have just one driver mutation. In contrast, SCLCs rarely have these driver mutations, and instead often have mutations that have inactivated the tumor suppressors p53 and RB. A cluster of tumor suppressor genes on the short arm of chromosome 3 are often lost early in the development of all lung cancers.\nPrevention.\nSmoking cessation.\nThose who smoke can reduce their lung cancer risk by quitting smoking \u2013 the risk reduction is greater the longer a person goes without smoking. Self-help programs tend to have little influence on success of smoking cessation, whereas combined counseling and pharmacotherapy improve cessation rates. The US FDA has approved antidepressant therapies and the nicotine replacement varenicline as first-line therapies to aid in smoking cessation. Clonidine and nortriptyline are recommended second-line therapies. The majority of those diagnosed with lung cancer attempt to quit smoking; around half succeed. Even after lung cancer diagnosis, smoking cessation improves treatment outcomes, reducing cancer treatment toxicity and failure rates, and lengthening survival time.\nAt a societal level, smoking cessation can be promoted by tobacco control policies that make tobacco products more difficult to obtain or use. Many such policies are mandated or recommended by the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, ratified by 182 countries, representing over 90% of the world's population. The WHO groups these policies into six intervention categories, each of which has been shown to be effective in reducing the cost of tobacco-induced disease burden on a population: \nPolicies implementing each intervention are associated with decreases in tobacco smoking prevalence. The more policies implemented, the greater the reduction. Reducing access to tobacco for adolescents is particularly effective at decreasing uptake of habitual smoking, and adolescent demand for tobacco products is particularly sensitive to increases in cost.\nDiet and lifestyle.\nSeveral foods and dietary supplements have been associated with lung cancer risk. High consumption of some animal products \u2013 red meat (but not other meats or fish), saturated fats, as well as nitrosamines and nitrites (found in salted and smoked meats) \u2013 is associated with an increased risk of developing lung cancer. In contrast, high consumption of fruits and vegetables is associated with a reduced risk of lung cancer, particularly consumption of cruciferous vegetables and raw fruits and vegetables. Based on the beneficial effects of fruits and vegetables, supplementation of several individual vitamins have been studied. Supplementation with vitamin A or beta-carotene had no effect on lung cancer, and instead slightly increased mortality. Dietary supplementation with vitamin E or retinoids similarly had no effect. Consumption of polyunsaturated fats, tea, alcoholic beverages, and coffee are all associated with reduced risk of developing lung cancer.\nAlong with diet, body weight and exercise habits are also associated with lung cancer risk. Being overweight is associated with a lower risk of developing lung cancer, possibly due to the tendency of those who smoke cigarettes to have a lower body weight. However, being underweight is also associated with a reduced lung cancer risk. Some studies have shown those who exercise regularly or have better cardiovascular fitness to have a lower risk of developing lung cancer.\nEpidemiology.\nWorldwide, lung cancer is the most diagnosed type of cancer, and the leading cause of cancer death. In 2020, 2.2\u00a0million new cases were diagnosed, and 1.8\u00a0million people died from lung cancer, representing 18% of all cancer deaths. Lung cancer deaths are expected to rise globally to nearly 3 million annual deaths by 2035, due to high rates of tobacco use and aging populations. Lung cancer is rare among those younger than 40; after that, cancer rates increase with age, stabilizing around age 80. The median age of a person diagnosed with lung cancer is 70; the median age of death is 72.\nLung cancer incidence varies by geography and sex, with the highest rates in Micronesia, Polynesia, Europe, Asia, and North America; and lowest rates in Africa and Central America. Globally, around 8% of men and 6% of women develop lung cancer in their lifetimes. The ratio of lung cancer cases in men to women varies considerably by geography, from as high as nearly 12:1 in Belarus, to 1:1 in Brazil, likely due to differences in smoking patterns.\nLung cancer risk is influenced by environmental exposure, namely cigarette smoking, as well as occupational risks in mining, shipbuilding, petroleum refining, and occupations that involve asbestos exposure. People who have smoked cigarettes account for 85\u201390% of lung cancer cases, and 15% of smokers develop lung cancer. Non-smokers' risk of developing lung cancer is also influenced by tobacco smoking; secondhand smoke (that is, being around tobacco smoke) increases risk of developing lung cancer around 30%, with risk correlated to duration of exposure. As the global incidence of lung cancer decreases in parallel with declining smoking rates in developed countries, the incidence of lung cancer in individuals who have never smoked is stable or increasing.\nHistory.\nLung cancer was uncommon before the advent of cigarette smoking. Surgeon Alton Ochsner recalled that as a Washington University medical student in 1919, his entire medical school class was summoned to witness an autopsy of a man who had died from lung cancer, and told they may never see such a case again. In Isaac Adler's 1912 \"Primary Malignant Growths of the Lungs and Bronchi\", he called lung cancer \"among the rarest forms of disease\"; Adler tabulated the 374 cases of lung cancer that had been published to that time, concluding the disease was increasing in incidence. By the 1920s, several theories had been put forward linking the increase in lung cancer to various chemical exposures that had increased including tobacco smoke, asphalt dust, industrial air pollution, and poisonous gasses from World War I.\nOver the following decades, growing scientific evidence linked lung cancer to cigarette consumption. Through the 1940s and early 1950s, several case-control studies showed that those with lung cancer were more likely to have smoked cigarettes compared to those without lung cancer. These were followed by several prospective cohort studies in the 1950s \u2013 including the first report of the British Doctors Study in 1954 \u2013 all of which showed that those who smoked tobacco were at dramatically increased risk of developing lung cancer.\nA 1953 study showing that tar from cigarette smoke could cause tumors in mice attracted attention in the popular press, with features in \"Life\" and \"Time\" magazines. Facing public concern and falling stock prices, the CEOs of six of the largest American tobacco companies gathered in December 1953. They enlisted the help of public relations firm Hill &amp; Knowlton to craft a multi-pronged strategy aiming to distract from accumulating evidence by funding tobacco-friendly research, declaring the link to lung cancer \"controversial\", and demanding ever-more research to settle this purported controversy. At the same time, internal research at the major tobacco companies supported the link between tobacco and lung cancer; though these results were kept secret from the public.\nAs evidence linking tobacco use with lung cancer mounted, various health bodies announced official positions linking the two. In 1962, the United Kingdom's Royal College of Physicians officially concluded that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, prompting the United States Surgeon General to empanel (enroll or enlist) an advisory committee, which deliberated in secret over nine sessions between November 1962 and December 1963. The committee's report, published in January 1964, firmly concluded that cigarette smoking \"far outweighs all other factors\" in causing lung cancer. The report received substantial coverage in the popular press, and is widely seen as a turning point for public recognition that tobacco smoking causes lung cancer.\nThe connection with radon gas was first recognized among miners in Germany's Ore Mountains. As early as 1500, miners were noted to develop a deadly disease called \"mountain sickness\" (\"Bergkrankheit\"), identified as lung cancer by the late 19th century. By 1938, up to 80% of miners in affected regions died from the disease. In the 1950s radon and its breakdown products became established as causes of lung cancer in miners. Based largely on studies of miners, the International Agency for Research on Cancer classified radon as \"carcinogenic to humans\" in 1988. In 1956, a study revealed radon in Swedish residences. Over the following decades, high radon concentrations were found in residences across the world; by the 1980s many countries had established national radon programs to catalog and mitigate residential radon.\nThe first successful pneumonectomy for lung cancer was performed in 1933 by Evarts Graham at Barnes Hospital in St. Louis, Missouri. Over the following decades, surgical development focused on sparing as much healthy lung tissue as possible, with the lobectomy surpassing the pneumectomy in frequency by the 1960s, and the wedge resection appearing in the early 1970s. This trend continued with the development of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery in the 1980s, now widely performed for many lung cancer surgeries.\nResearch.\nWhile lung cancer is the deadliest type of cancer, it receives the third-most funding from the US National Cancer Institute (NCI, the world's largest cancer research funder) behind brain cancers and breast cancer. Despite high levels of gross research funding, lung cancer funding per death lags behind many other cancers, with around $3,200 spent on lung cancer research in 2022 per US death, considerably lower than that for brain cancer ($22,000 per death), breast cancer ($14,000 per death), and cancer as a whole ($11,000 per death). A similar trend holds for private nonprofit organizations. Annual revenues of lung cancer-focused nonprofits rank fifth among cancer types, but lung cancer nonprofits have lower revenue than would be expected for the number of lung cancer cases, deaths, and potential years of life lost.\nDespite this, many investigational lung cancer treatments are undergoing clinical trials \u2013 with nearly 2,250 active clinical trials registered as of 2021. Of these, a large plurality are testing radiotherapy regimens (26% of trials) and surgical techniques (22%). Many others are testing targeted anticancer drugs, with targets including EGFR (17% of trials), microtubules (12%), VEGF (12%), immune pathways (10%), mTOR (1%), and histone deacetylases (&lt;1%).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks\nJournal articles"}
{"id": "18452", "revid": "4007668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18452", "title": "Lists of office-holders", "text": "These are lists of incumbents (individuals holding offices or positions), including heads of states or of subnational entities.\nA historical discipline, archontology, focuses on the study of past and current office holders.\nIncumbents may also be found in the countries' articles (main article and \"politics of\") and the list of national leaders, recent changes in 2024 in politics and government, and past leaders on state leaders by year and colonial governors by century.\nVarious articles group lists by title, function or topic: e.g. abdication, assassinated persons, cabinet (government), chancellor, ex-monarchs (20th century), head of government, head of state, lieutenant governor, mayor, military commanders, minister (and ministers by portfolio below), order of precedence, peerage, president, prime minister, Reichstag participants (1792), secretary of state.\nHeads of state or government.\nEurope.\nNorthern Europe.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOceania.\nAustralasia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n*List of patriarchs, archbishops and bishops\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes . &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "18453", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18453", "title": "Liberal Party of Australia", "text": "Australian conservative political party\nThe Liberal Party of Australia (LP) is the prominent centre-right to right-wing political party in Australia. It is considered one of the two major parties in Australian politics, the other being the Australian Labor Party (ALP). The Liberal Party was founded in 1944 as the successor to the United Australia Party. Historically the most electorally successful party in Australia, the Liberal Party is now in opposition at a federal level, although it presently holds government in the Northern Territory, Queensland and Tasmania at a state (sub-national) level.\nThe Liberal Party is the largest partner in a centre-right grouping known in Australian politics as the Coalition, accompanied by the regional-based National Party, which is typically focussed on issues pertinent to regional Australia. The Liberal Party last governed Australia, in coalition with the Nationals, between 2013 and 2022, forming the Abbott (2013\u20132015), Turnbull (2015\u20132018) and Morrison (2018\u20132022) governments. The Coalition has been suspended on occasion throughout the 20th and 21st centuries, though as of 2025 the two parties form a shadow ministry under the leadership of Sussan Ley.\nAs leader of the Liberal Party, Ley is also the Leader of the Opposition. A member of the party's Moderate faction, she was elected leader in May 2025 and is the first woman to hold the position. Two past leaders of the party, Sir Robert Menzies and John Howard, are Australia's two longest-serving Prime Ministers.\nThe Liberal Party has a federal structure, with autonomous divisions in all six states and the Australian Capital Territory (ACT). The Country Liberal Party (CLP) of the Northern Territory is an affiliate. Both the CLP and the Liberal National Party (LNP), the Queensland state division, were formed through mergers of the local Liberal and National parties. At state and territory level, the Liberal Party is in office in two states and one territory. The party is in opposition in the states of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and Western Australia, and in the ACT.\nThe party's ideology has been referred to as liberal, conservative, liberal-conservative, conservative-liberal, and classical liberal. The Liberal Party tends to promote economic liberalism and social conservatism. The Moderate faction has been referred to as centrist, while the National Right faction has also been referred to as right-wing.\nHistory.\nParty foundation.\nThe Liberals' immediate predecessor was the United Australia Party (UAP). More broadly, the Liberal Party's ideological ancestry stretched back to the anti-Labor groupings in the first Commonwealth parliaments. The Commonwealth Liberal Party was a fusion of the Free Trade (Anti-socialist) Party and the Protectionist Party in 1909 by the second prime minister, Alfred Deakin, in response to Labor's growing electoral prominence. The Commonwealth Liberal Party merged with several Labor dissidents (including Billy Hughes) to form the Nationalist Party of Australia in 1917. That party, in turn, merged with Labor dissidents to form the UAP in 1931.\nThe UAP had been formed as a new conservative alliance in 1931, with Labor defector Joseph Lyons as its leader. The stance of Lyons and other Labor rebels against the more radical proposals of the Labor movement to deal the Great Depression had attracted the support of prominent Australian conservatives. With Australia still suffering the effects of the Great Depression, the newly formed party won a landslide victory at the 1931 Election, and the Lyons government went on to win three consecutive elections. It largely avoided Keynesian pump-priming and pursued a more conservative fiscal policy of debt reduction and balanced budgets as a means of stewarding Australia out of the Depression. Lyons' death in 1939 saw Robert Menzies assume the prime ministership on the eve of war. Menzies served as Prime Minister from 1939 to 1941 but resigned as leader of the minority World War II government amidst an unworkable parliamentary majority. The UAP, led by Billy Hughes, disintegrated after suffering a heavy defeat in the 1943 election. In New South Wales, the party merged with the Commonwealth Party to form the Democratic Party, In Queensland the state party was absorbed into the Queensland People's Party.\nFrom 1942 onward Menzies had maintained his public profile with his series of \"The Forgotten People\" radio talks\u2014similar to Franklin D. Roosevelt's fireside chats of the 1930s\u2014in which he spoke of the middle class as the \"backbone of Australia\" but as nevertheless having been \"taken for granted\" by political parties.\nMenzies called a conference of conservative parties and other groups opposed to the ruling Australian Labor Party, which met in Canberra on 13 October 1944 and again in Albury, New South Wales in December 1944. Outlining his vision for a new political movement, Menzies said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[W]hat we must look for, and it is a matter of desperate importance to our society, is a true revival of liberal thought which will work for social justice and security, for national power and national progress, and for the full development of the individual citizen, though not through the dull and deadening process of socialism.\nThe formation of the party was formally announced at Sydney Town Hall on 31 August 1945. It took the name \"Liberal\" in honour of the old Commonwealth Liberal Party. The new party was dominated by the remains of the old UAP; with few exceptions, the UAP party room became the Liberal Party room. The Australian Women's National League, a powerful conservative women's organisation, also merged with the new party. A conservative youth group Menzies had set up, the Young Nationalists, was also merged into the new party. It became the nucleus of the Liberal Party's youth division, the Young Liberals. By September 1945 there were more than 90,000 members, many of whom had not previously been members of any political party.\nIn New South Wales, the New South Wales division of the Liberal Party replaced the Liberal Democratic Party and Democratic Party between January and April 1945. In Queensland, the Queensland People's Party did not become part of the Liberal Party until July 1949, when it became the Queensland division of the Liberal Party.\nMenzies era.\nAfter an initial loss to Labor at the 1946 election, Menzies led the Liberals to victory at the 1949 election, and the party stayed in office for a record 23 years\u2014 the longest unbroken run ever in government at the federal level. Australia experienced prolonged economic growth during the post-war boom period of the Menzies government (1949\u201366) and Menzies fulfilled his promises at the 1949 election to end rationing of butter, tea and petrol and provided a five-shilling endowment for first-born children, as well as for others. While Menzies himself was an unashamed Anglophile, his government concluded a number of major defence and trade treaties that set Australia on its post-war trajectory out of Britain's orbit; opened up Australia to multi-ethnic immigration; and instigated important legal reforms regarding Aboriginal Australians.\nMenzies was strongly opposed to Labor's plans under Ben Chifley to nationalise the Australian banking system and, following victory at the 1949 election, secured a double dissolution election for April 1951, after the Labor-controlled Senate rejected his banking legislation. The Liberal-Country Coalition was returned with control of the Senate. The Government was re-elected again at the 1954 election; the formation of the anti-Communist Democratic Labor Party (DLP) and the consequent split in the Australian Labor Party early in 1955 helped the Liberals to secure another victory in December 1955. John McEwen replaced Arthur Fadden as leader of the Country Party in March 1958 and the Menzies-McEwen Coalition was returned again at elections in November 1958\u2014their third victory against Labor's H. V. Evatt. The Coalition was narrowly returned against Labor's Arthur Calwell in the December 1961 election, in the midst of a credit squeeze. Menzies stood for office for the last time at the November 1963 election, again defeating Calwell, with the Coalition winning back its losses in the House of Representatives. Menzies went on to resign from parliament on 26 January 1966.\nMenzies came to power the year the Communist Party of Australia had led a coal strike to improve pit miners' working conditions. That same year Joseph Stalin's Soviet Union exploded its first atomic bomb, and Mao Zedong led the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) to power in China; a year later came the invasion of South Korea by Communist North Korea. Anti-Communism was a key political issue of the 1950s and 1960s. Menzies was firmly anti-Communist; he committed troops to the Korean War and attempted to ban the Communist Party of Australia in an unsuccessful referendum during the course of that war. The Labor Party split over concerns about the influence of the Communist Party over the trade union movement, leading to the foundation of the breakaway Democratic Labor Party whose preferences supported the Liberal and Country parties.\nIn 1951, during the early stages of the Cold War, Menzies spoke of the possibility of a looming third world war. The Menzies government entered Australia's first formal military alliance outside of the British Commonwealth with the signing of the ANZUS Treaty between Australia, New Zealand and the United States in San Francisco in 1951. External Affairs Minister Percy Spender had put forward the proposal to work along similar lines to the NATO Alliance. The Treaty declared that any attack on one of the three parties in the Pacific area would be viewed as a threat to each, and that the common danger would be met in accordance with each nation's constitutional processes. In 1954, the Menzies government signed the South East Asia Collective Defence Treaty (SEATO) as a South East Asian counterpart to NATO. That same year, Soviet diplomat Vladimir Petrov and his wife defected from the Soviet embassy in Canberra, revealing evidence of Russian spying activities; Menzies called a Royal Commission to investigate.\nIn 1956, a committee headed by Sir Keith Murray was established to inquire into the financial plight of Australia's universities, and Menzies injected funds into the sector under conditions which preserved the autonomy of universities.\nMenzies continued the expanded immigration programme established under Chifley, and took important steps towards dismantling the White Australia Policy. In the early-1950s, external affairs minister Percy Spender helped to establish the Colombo Plan for providing economic aid to underdeveloped nations in Australia's region. Under that scheme many future Asian leaders studied in Australia. In 1958, the government replaced the Immigration Act's arbitrarily applied European language dictation test with an entry permit system, that reflected economic and skills criteria. In 1962, Menzies' \"Commonwealth Electoral Act\" provided that all Indigenous Australians should have the right to enrol and vote at federal elections (prior to this, indigenous people in Queensland, Western Australia and some in the Northern Territory had been excluded from voting unless they were ex-servicemen). In 1949, the Liberals appointed Dame Enid Lyons as the first woman to serve in an Australian Cabinet. Menzies remained a staunch supporter of links to the monarchy and British Commonwealth but formalised an alliance with the United States and concluded the Agreement on Commerce between Australia and Japan which was signed in July 1957 and launched post-war trade with Japan, beginning a growth of Australian exports of coal, iron ore and mineral resources that would steadily climb until Japan became Australia's largest trading partner.\nMenzies retired in 1966 after serving 20 years in two separate stints, making him Australia's longest-serving prime minister in history. His second 17-year tenure is easily the longest unbroken tenure for a prime minister.\nHolt government.\nHarold Holt replaced the retiring Robert Menzies in 1966 and the Holt government went on to win 82 seats to Labor's 41 at the 1966 election. Holt remained prime minister until 19 December 1967, when he was declared presumed dead two days after disappearing in rough surf in which he had gone for a swim. His body has never been found.\nHolt's ministerial appointments showed strong continuity with the Menzies era, though whilst Dame Enid Lyons had served as the first woman member of Cabinet under Menzies with an honorary role, it was Holt's first ministry that included Australia's first female minister, with Senator (later Dame) Annabelle Rankin serving as Minister for Housing. \nHolt increased Australian commitment to the growing War in Vietnam, which met with some public opposition. His government oversaw conversion to decimal currency. Holt faced Britain's withdrawal from Asia by visiting and hosting many Asian leaders and by expanding ties to the United States, hosting the first visit to Australia by an American president, his friend Lyndon B. Johnson. Holt's government introduced the \"Migration Act 1966\", which effectively dismantled the White Australia Policy and increased access to non-European migrants, including refugees fleeing the Vietnam War. By the end of 1967, the Liberals' initially popular support for the war in Vietnam was causing increasing public protest.\nHolt also called the historic 1967 Referendum which transferred responsibility for Aboriginal Affairs to the Federal Parliament, and removed a discriminatory clause in the Australian Constitution excluding Indigenous Australians from the census. The referendum was one of the few to be overwhelmingly endorsed by the Australian electorate (over 90% voted \"Yes\"). Following the success of the referendum, Holt established an Office of Aboriginal Affairs under the prime minister's control, and set up the Council for Aboriginal Affairs, chaired by Reserve Bank of Australia Governor H. C. Coombs.\nGorton government.\nThe Liberals chose John Gorton to replace Holt. Gorton, a former World War II Royal Australian Air Force pilot, with a battle scarred face, said he was \"Australian to the bootheels\" and had a personal style which often affronted some conservatives.\nThe Gorton government increased funding for the arts, setting up the Australian Council for the Arts, the Australian Film Development Corporation and the National Film and Television Training School. The Gorton government passed legislation establishing equal pay for men and women and increased pensions, allowances and education scholarships, as well as providing free health care to 250,000 of the nation's poor (but not universal health care). Gorton's government kept Australia in the Vietnam War but stopped replacing troops at the end of 1970.\nFollowing the success of the Holt Government's 1967 Referendum which had transferred powers for Aboriginal Affairs to the Federal Government, Gorton established the role of Minister for Aboriginal Affairs with Bill Wentworth serving as the \"Minister in charge of Aboriginal Affairs under the Prime Minister\". Gorton considered that the \"primary aim\" of government policy should be to \"make Aboriginals self supporting\", and to end dependence on welfare and charity. The Government introduced the Aboriginal Study Grants Scheme (ABSTUDY) in 1969, as part of a commitment to assist Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to attain better educational, social and economic outcomes, and in response to low participation of Indigenous Australians in higher education, and to promote participation in secondary education, the Aboriginal Secondary Grants Scheme (ABSEG) was established.\nGorton maintained good relations with the United States and Britain, but pursued closer ties with Asia. The Gorton government experienced a decline in voter support at the 1969 election. State Liberal leaders saw his policies as too centralist, while other Liberals didn't like his personal behaviour. In 1971, Defence Minister Malcolm Fraser, resigned and said Gorton was \"not fit to hold the great office of Prime Minister\". In a vote on the leadership the Liberal Party split 50/50, and although this was insufficient to remove him as the leader, Gorton decided this was also insufficient support for him, and he resigned.\nMcMahon government and Snedden's opposition leadership.\nForeign Affairs minister William McMahon replaced Gorton as prime minister. Gorton initially served as McMahon's deputy leader as well as defence minister, although Gorton would be forced to resign in August 1971 by McMahon on the grounds of \"disloyalty\". Treasurer Billy Snedden replaced Gorton as deputy and Fraser was reinstated into the ministry, although Fraser remained unpopular within Liberal ranks for some time over the events of March 1971; Gorton never forgave Fraser and never spoke to him again.\nThe economy was weakening as the post-war economic boom was drawing to a close. McMahon withdrew Australia's remaining combat troops from Vietnam, but criticised Opposition leader Gough Whitlam for visiting the communist People's Republic of China (PRC) in July 1971 \u2014 only to have the US president Richard Nixon and his National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger announce a planned visit soon after.\nDuring McMahon's period in office, Neville Bonner joined the Senate and became the first Indigenous Australian in the Australian Parliament. Bonner was chosen by the Liberal Party to fill a Senate vacancy in 1971 and celebrated his maiden parliamentary speech with a boomerang throwing display on the lawns of Parliament. Bonner went on to win election at the 1972 election and served as a Liberal Senator for 12 years. He worked on Indigenous and social welfare issues and proved an independent minded Senator, often crossing the floor on Parliamentary votes.\nThe McMahon government ended when Gough Whitlam led the Australian Labor Party out of its 23-year period in Opposition at the 1972 election. Following Whitlam's victory, John Gorton played a further role in reform in October 1973 by successfully moving a motion, seconded by Labor minister Moss Cass, which decriminalised homosexuality on a federal and territory level.\nBilly Snedden led the party against Whitlam in the 1974 federal election, which saw a return of the Labor government. When Malcolm Fraser won the Liberal Party leadership from Snedden in 1975, Gorton walked out of the Party Room, and quit the party shortly afterwards; he would go on to denounce the dismissal of the Whitlam Government, and endorsed and voted for Labor in the 1975 election.\nFraser years.\nFollowing the 1974\u201375 Loans Affair, the Malcolm Fraser-led Liberal-Country Party Coalition argued that the Whitlam government was incompetent and so delayed passage of the Government's money bills in the Senate, until the government would promise a new election. Whitlam refused, yet Fraser insisted, leading to the divisive 1975 Australian constitutional crisis. The deadlock came to an end when the Whitlam government was controversially dismissed by the governor-general, Sir John Kerr on 11 November 1975 and Fraser was installed as caretaker prime minister, pending an election. Fraser won in a landslide at the resulting 1975 election.\nFraser maintained some of the social reforms of the Whitlam era, while seeking increased fiscal restraint. His majority included the first Aboriginal federal parliamentarian, Neville Bonner. In 1976, Parliament passed the \"Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976\", which, while limited to the Northern Territory, affirmed \"inalienable\" freehold title to some traditional lands:\nThe Australian Government grants Aboriginal land that can be successfully claimed under inalienable freehold title. This communal form of title cannot be bought, sold or mortgaged\u2026\u201d\nThe Fraser government also established the multicultural broadcaster SBS, accepted Vietnamese refugees, opposed minority white rule in apartheid South Africa and Rhodesia and opposed Soviet expansionism, but Liberal minister Don Chipp split off from the party to form a new centrist-social liberal party, the Australian Democrats in 1977.\nThe Liberals under Fraser won substantial majorities at the 1977 and 1980 elections, but a significant program of economic reform was never pursued. By 1983, the Australian economy was suffering with the early 1980s recession and amidst the effects of a severe drought. Fraser had promoted \"states' rights\" and his government refused to use Commonwealth powers to stop the construction of the Franklin Dam in Tasmania in 1982. The Liberal Party lost to the Bob Hawke-led Australian Labor Party in the 1983 election.\nOpposition (1983\u20131996).\nA period of division for the Liberals followed, with former Treasurer John Howard competing with former foreign minister Andrew Peacock for supremacy. The Australian economy was facing the early 1990s recession. Unemployment reached 11.4% in 1992. Under Dr John Hewson, in November 1991, the opposition launched the 650-page Fightback! policy document\u2014a radical collection of dry (economic liberal) measures including the introduction of a goods and services Tax (GST), various changes to Medicare including the abolition of bulk billing for non-concession holders, the introduction of a nine-month limit on unemployment benefits, various changes to industrial relations including the abolition of awards, a $13\u00a0billion personal income tax cut directed at middle and upper income earners, $10\u00a0billion in government spending cuts, the abolition of state payroll taxes and the privatisation of a large number of government owned enterprises \u2212 representing the start of a very different future direction to the keynesian economic policies practised by previous Liberal/National Coalition governments. \nThe 15 percent GST was the centrepiece of the policy document. Through 1992, Labor Prime Minister Paul Keating mounted a campaign against the Fightback package, and particularly against the GST, which he described as an attack on the working class in that it shifted the tax burden from direct taxation of the wealthy to indirect taxation as a broad-based consumption tax. Pressure group activity and public opinion was relentless, which led Hewson to exempt food from the proposed GST\u2014leading to questions surrounding the complexity of what food was and wasn't to be exempt from the GST. Hewson's difficulty in explaining this to the electorate was exemplified in the infamous birthday cake interview, considered by some as a turning point in the election campaign. Keating won a record fifth consecutive Labor term at the 1993 election. A number of the proposals were later adopted into law in some form, to a small extent during the Keating Labor government, and to a larger extent during the Howard Liberal government (most famously the GST), while unemployment benefits and bulk billing were re-targeted for a time by the Abbott Liberal government.\nHoward government.\nLabor's Paul Keating lost the 1996 Election to the Liberals' John Howard. The Liberals had been in Opposition for exactly 13 years. John Howard was sworn in as prime minister on 11 March, the 13th anniversary of the Liberals entering opposition following the swearing in of Bob Hawke. With Howard as prime minister, Peter Costello as treasurer and Alexander Downer as foreign minister, the Howard government remained in power until their electoral defeat to Kevin Rudd in 2007.\nHoward generally framed the Liberals as being conservative on social policy, debt reduction and matters like maintaining Commonwealth links and the American Alliance but his premiership saw booming trade with Asia and expanding multiethnic immigration. His government concluded the Australia-United States Free Trade Agreement with the Bush administration in 2004. Howard's premiership coincided with Al Qaeda's 11 September attacks on the United States. The Howard government invoked the ANZUS treaty in response to the attacks and supported America's campaigns in Afghanistan and Iraq.\nHoward differed from his Labor predecessor Paul Keating in that he supported traditional Australian institutions like the monarchy in Australia, the commemoration of ANZAC Day and the design of the Australian flag, but like Keating he pursued privatisation of public utilities and the introduction of a broad based consumption tax (although Keating had dropped support for a GST by the time of his 1993 election victory). Howard convened the 1998 Australian Constitutional Convention to discuss whether Australia should become a republic and called a referendum in 1999, which saw the minimalist republican model endorsed by the Convention rejected by voters. Howard did not support the republic, but proposed a new preamble to the Constitution that began by expressing hope in God and went on to \"honour\" Aboriginal and Torres Islander peoples \"for their deep kinship with their lands and for their ancient and continuing cultures which enrich the life of our country...\" This proposed preamble was also voted down in the referendum.\nIn the 2004 federal elections the party strengthened its majority in the lower house and, with its coalition partners, became the first federal government in twenty years to gain an absolute majority in the Senate. This control of both houses permitted their passing of legislation without the need to negotiate with independents or minor parties, exemplified by industrial relations legislation known as WorkChoices, a wide-ranging effort to increase deregulation of industrial laws in Australia.\nIn 2005, Howard reflected on his government's cultural and foreign policy outlook in oft repeated terms:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I became Prime Minister nine years ago, I believed that this nation was defining its place in the world too narrowly. My Government has rebalanced Australia's foreign policy to better reflect the unique intersection of history, geography, culture and economic opportunity that our country represents. Time has only strengthened my conviction that we do not face a choice between our history and our geography.\nThe 2007 federal election saw the defeat of the Howard federal government, and the Liberal Party was in opposition throughout Australia at the state and federal level; the highest Liberal office-holder at the time was Lord Mayor of Brisbane Campbell Newman. This ended after the 2008 Western Australian state election, when Colin Barnett became premier of that state.\nOpposition (2007\u20132013).\nFollowing the 2007 federal election, Dr Brendan Nelson was elected leader by the Parliamentary Liberal Party. On 16 September 2008, in a second contest following a spill motion, Nelson lost the leadership to Malcolm Turnbull. On 1 December 2009, a subsequent leadership election saw Turnbull lose the leadership to Tony Abbott by 42 votes to 41 on the second ballot. Abbott led the party to the 2010 federal election, which saw an increase in the Liberal Party vote and resulted in the first hung parliament since the 1940 election.\nThrough 2010, the party remained in opposition at the Tasmanian and South Australian state elections and achieved state government in Victoria. In March 2011, the New South Wales Liberal-National Coalition led by Barry O'Farrell won government with the largest election victory in post-war Australian history at the State Election. In Queensland, the Liberal and National parties merged in 2008 to form the new Liberal National Party of Queensland (registered as the Queensland Division of the Liberal Party of Australia). In March 2012, the new party achieved Government in an historic landslide, led by former Brisbane Lord Mayor, Campbell Newman.\nIn March 2013, the Western Australian Liberal-National government won re-election, and Tony Abbott led the party to government at the 2013 Australian federal election. As of 2025, The 2013 federal election was the most recent election the Liberal party and the Coalition saw an increase in the First preference vote in the House of Representatives\nAbbott, Turnbull and Morrison governments.\nIn economic policy, the Abbott government aimed to rein in a budget deficit that reached A$48.5\u00a0billion by June 2014. It concluded free trade agreements with China, Japan and South Korea. It removed the Rudd-Gillard era Resource Super Profits Tax and carbon pricing. It established the National Commission of Audit to advise on restoring the Budget to surplus; instituted the Royal Commission into trade union governance and corruption; founded the Medical Research Future Fund. \nAbbott campaigned in opposition and in office to halt the people smuggling trade, and unauthorised maritime arrivals ceased during his term of office under Operation Sovereign Borders. In foreign policy, Australia continued its military engagement in the Middle-East, amid the worsening Syrian conflict. In 2015, The Abbott government agreed to resettle an additional 12,000 refugees from the region. Abbott and Australia's first female foreign minister Julie Bishop challenged Russia at the United Nations over the shooting down of Malaysian Flight MH17 in Ukraine. The government launched the New Colombo Plan to encourage educational exchange with the Indo-Pacific region. Domestically, Abbott campaigned for recognition of Indigenous Australians in the Australian Constitution, flagging a referendum for 2017, and promised a plebiscite on the issue of same-sex marriage. Investments in air and road infrastructure were prioritised. \nTreasurer Joe Hockey delivered two Budgets, the first focused on expenditure reduction measures, but faced a hostile reception in the Senate and media. Partial deregulation of universities, and a $7 contribution to doctor visits were proposed, but blocked by the Senate. The second Budget emphasised stimulus for the small business sector. The Liberal Party faced Cabinet leaks and early leadership instability, after a poorly received first Budget and amid media criticism, with dissenters coalescing around Abbott's leadership rival Malcolm Turnbull. \nAbbott became the shortest-serving Australian prime minister since William McMahon, when Turnbull launched a challenge and won a September 2015 internal leadership ballot. Turnbull cited Newspoll results and \"economic leadership\" as reasons for mounting his challenge.\nTurnbull appointed Scott Morrison as Treasurer in an expanded ministry, promoting several key supporters. The Turnbull government continued a number of Abbott government initiatives, delivering a plebiscite approving legal recognition of same-sex marriage, and continuing initiatives on an anti-domestic violence campaign, funding the National Disability Insurance Scheme, signing the China free trade deal, and reforming Senate voting.\nThe April 2016 refusal of the Senate to pass the government's bill to re-establish Australian Building and Construction Commission provided Turnbull with a double dissolution trigger. An election was held on 2 July 2016, and the government was returned with its majority in the House of Representatives reduced to one seat. The now elected Turnbull government secured passage of the Registered Organisations and Australian Building and Construction Commission legislation. In 2017, it announced construction of the Snowy 2.0 Pumped Storage Power Station.\nTurnbull's ousting of Abbott had divided the Liberal Party rank and file and tensions continued in the parliamentary Party. The government reached the 30-consecutive-Newspoll-losses benchmark Turnbull had used to unseat Abbott, in April 2018. By-election losses in July 2018 further diminished Turnbull's authority. On 21 August 2018, Turnbull announced a leadership spill ahead of his 39th consecutive Newspoll loss. Turnbull narrowly won in a party room vote against Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton. Leadership tension continued, and the party voted to hold a second leadership ballot on 24 August, with Turnbull choosing not to stand. In that ballot, Treasurer Scott Morrison was seen as a compromise candidate and defeated both Dutton and Foreign Minister Julie Bishop to become leader of the Liberal Party. Morrison was elected as Turnbull's successor by 45 votes over Dutton with 40.\nIn the first Morrison Ministry, Josh Frydenberg succeeded Morrison as treasurer and Marise Payne succeeded Julie Bishop as foreign minister. Following his party room loss, Turnbull quit Parliament, plunging the Coalition into minority government following the 2018 Wentworth by-election. Morrison then restored the Coalition to majority government at the 2019 Election.\nFrydenberg and Payne remained in their posts in the Second Morrison Ministry, which was notable for including Ken Wyatt as Minister for Indigenous Australians \u2013 the first Aboriginal Australian to sit in Federal Cabinet \u2013 and seven women members, which was the largest number of women Cabinet members in Australian history.\nIn economic affairs, after producing the lowest federal budget deficit in a decade, Treasurer Frydenberg predicted a small surplus in the 2019 Federal Budget, however the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic led to a dramatic increase in government expenditure and a brief recession by September 2020. Pandemic management became a core focus of the Morrison government, which instigated tight border controls, convened a National Cabinet to co-ordinate State and Territory government responses, and initiated a program of income support for business and workers. Two years into the pandemic, Australia had achieved one of the lowest death rates and highest vaccination rates in the world. By the fourth Frydenberg Budget in March 2022 ahead of the 2022 Election, Australia\u2019s unemployment rate was at 4% and projected to drop to 3.75%, its lowest figure in 50 years.\nIn trade and international affairs, the Morrison government concluded free trade agreements with Indonesia, the United Kingdom and India. In the Indo-Pacific region, Morrison launched the Pacific Step-Up initiative to increase engagement with Pacific Island nations, and revived the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue with Japan, India and United States. He also signed the AUKUS trilateral security pact with the United Kingdom and the United States to increase defence co-operation. The period was marked by a deterioration in bilateral relations with the increasingly autocratic Xi Jinping regime in China, with Australia calling for an independent inquiry into the origins of COVID-19 and China responding with trade sanctions. Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, Morrison committed Australian military, diplomatic and humanitarian aid to support Ukraine's efforts to repel the Russian attack.\nThe Morrison government was defeated at the 2022 election, after which Peter Dutton was elected to succeed Morrison as party leader. After leaving office, Morrison faced criticism after he revealed that during the pandemic emergency he had secretly held several ministerial positions while serving as prime minister, which led to Parliament passing a censure motion against him.\nFederal Opposition (2022\u2013present).\nIn 2023, the incumbent minority Liberal/National coalition New South Wales government, led by Premier Dominic Perrottet, was defeated by the Labor Party, led by Opposition Leader Chris Minns. The outcome resulted in the first Labor government in the state in 12 years, ending the longest Coalition government in New South Wales history. \nIn 2024, the party won government in Tasmania, Queensland, and Northern Territory. At the start of election year 2025, polling had the Dutton-led Coalition favoured to win office, however the lead evaporated as the year progressed, influenced by poor domestic campaigning and chaotic centre-right party politics abroad as the second Trump administration took office in the United States.\nThe Liberal Party lost at the 2025 election, with Dutton losing his seat of Dickson in Brisbane. After this election Dutton then resigned as party leader and was replaced by Sussan Ley. Ley became the first woman to hold the position of leader of the Liberal Party and Leader of the Opposition, part of the Moderate faction.\nIn May 2025, the federal National party briefly dissolved the coalition agreement with the Liberal Party. This resulted in the two party's operating separately for the first time since the 1980s. The Liberal Party thus became the sole opposition party, however the coalition was returned on 28 May 2025 when the two parties agreed on several joint policies and unveiled a shadow ministry.\nWith her election as party leader, Sussan Ley became the first female Leader of any Opposition at a federal level in Australian history. In her https:// to the National Press Club of Australia as leader in June 2025, Ley said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Aspiration is the foundation of the Australian promise: that if you work hard, play by the rules, do your best for your kids and contribute to your community, you will be able to build a better life for yourself and your family. That promise feels distant for many Australians today... As we seek to regain trust with all voters across our great country, the task before me \u2013 and my team \u2013 is to lead a Liberal Party that respects modern Australia, reflects modern Australia and represents modern Australia.\u2014\u200a\nState and territory level.\nSince the Party's foundation, at the state level, the Liberals have been dominant for long periods in all states except Queensland, where they always held fewer seats than the National Party (though here the Coalition partners merged as the Liberal National Party of Queensland in 2008).\nFollowing the foundation of the Liberal Party in 1944, the governing Liberal and Country League (LCL), held office as a Liberal affiliated Party led by Premier Tom Playford, and changed its name to Liberal in 1974. Playford was premier from 1933 to the 1965 election, though with assistance from an electoral malapportionment, or gerrymander, known as the Playmander. The LCL's Steele Hall governed for one term from the 1968 election to the 1970 election and during this time began the process of dismantling the Playmander. \nLiberal David Tonkin became premier at the 1979 election for one term, losing office at the 1982 election. The Liberals returned to power at the 1993 election, led by Premiers Dean Brown, John Olsen and Rob Kerin through two terms, until their defeat at the 2002 election. They remained in opposition for 16 years, under a record five opposition leaders, until Steven Marshall led the party to victory in the 2018 election. Marshall was ousted after just one term in 2022 by Labor's Peter Malinauskas in 2022.\nSir Ross McLarty was the first Liberal premier of Western Australia, winning elections for the newly formed party in 1947 and 1950. Sir David Brand made his mark on the state as Liberal premier with four election victories from 1959 to 1968, finally losing to Labor in 1971. \nBrand continued as Liberal leader in Opposition until 1973, when he was succeeded by Sir Charles Court who went on to three election wins in 1974, 1977 and 1980 and was succeeded by Ray O'Connor who won in 1982, before being defeated by Labor's Brian Burke in 1983. Labor remained in office until 1990, a period marred by the WA Inc corruption scandals, and the Liberals returned to power in WA for much of the 1990s under Richard Court, who won in 1993 and 1996 and losing to Labor in 2001. \nThe Liberals returned to power in the 2008 election, which saw Labor defeated after seven years by Colin Barnett, who became premier after securing support from the WA Nationals and three independents in a hung parliament. Barnett then won a landslide majority for the Liberal-National Coalition in the subsequent 2013 election, with the Liberals attaining a majority in their own right. \nBarnett's Liberals suffered a heavy defeat in the 2017 election to Labor's Mark McGowan, who again won emphatically in 2021 following a period of popularity over his management of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Liberals were reduced to two Lower House seats, leaving the Nationals as the largest opposition party with four seats. In 2025, the Liberals under Libby Mettam won just seven seats in the Lower House, and the Nationals six, enabling the Liberals to reclaim formal status as the main Opposition Party.\nThe Liberals were in power in Victoria from 1955 to 1982. Jeff Kennett led the party back to office in that state in 1992, and remained premier until 1999. Ted Baillieu led the Liberal-National Coalition to government in Victoria in 2010, ending a decade of Labor rule, but announced his retirement from politics ahead of the 2014 election. He was succeeded briefly as Liberal premier by Denis Napthine, and the one-term government who was defeated by Dan Andrews, who went on to win three successive elections for Labor.\nIn New South Wales, the Liberal Party has not been in office as much as its Labor rival, and just three leaders have led the party from opposition to government in that state: Sir Robert Askin, who was premier from 1965 to 1975, Nick Greiner, who came to office in 1988 and resigned in 1992, and Barry O'Farrell who led the party out of 16 years in opposition in an historic landslide in 2011. The Coalition won a second consecutive landslide in March 2015, led by Premier Mike Baird, who ran for election offering an ambitious program of transport and infrastructure development. \nFollowing Mike Baird's resignation in 2017, Gladys Berejiklian was elected party leader, becoming the first female Liberal premier and leading the Coalition to victory in the 2019 New South Wales state election. Berejiklian and her successor Dominic Perrottet continued the Party's ambitious program of infrastructure development. The Coalition lost to Labor in the 2023 election.\nAngus Bethune was elected as the first Liberal premier of Tasmania in 1969 Tasmanian state election, but Labor was returned in 1972 and governed until Robin Gray led the Liberals out of the wilderness in 1982, and won again in 1986. Ray Groom won again for the Liberals in 1992 and 1996, before Labor enjoyed 16 years in power from 1998 until Will Hodgman won office for the Liberals in 2014, ushering in an extended period of Liberal government. Hodgman won the 2018 election, and his successors Peter Gutwein won in 2021, and Jeremy Rockliff in 2024.\nThe Liberals were for decades the junior Coalition partner in Queensland, where the Nationals were dominant in a state with a decentralised population. Following the amalgmation of the Liberal and National Parties into the Liberal National Party of Queensland (LNP) in 2008, Campbell Newman led the LNP to a landslide victory in 2012, ending 13 years of Labor rule. However, Labor returned in the 2015 Queensland state election and remained in power for nearly a decade until David Crisafulli's victory in October 2024.\nThe dual aligned Country Liberal Party governed the Northern Territory from 1978 to 2001. \nAfter Labor rule in the Northern Territory from 2001, the Liberal affiliated Country Liberal Party returned to office in the Northern Territory in 2012 under Terry Mills, and via a 2013 leadership spill, elected Adam Giles as party leader, the first Aboriginal Australian to lead an Australian State or Territory. Giles went on to lose the 2016 Territory Election, ushering in a decade of Labor rule. Lia Finocchiaro brought the Country Liberals back into office in 2024 election.\nWhile Labor won government in the Australian Capital Territory's inaugural election in 1989, the Liberals Trevor Kaine became the first male Chief Minister of the ACT after a vote of no-confidence in the Follett Government in December 1989, but lost the office by the same means, when Rosemary Follett returned in 1991. \nIn winning the 1995 election, Liberal Kate Carnell became the first woman to lead any party from Opposition to Government in Australian history, serving as Chief Minister of the ACT from 1995 to 1998, succeeded by Liberal Gary Humphries who kept the party in office until 2000. \nThe Liberals have remained out of office in the Australian Capital Territory since Gary Humphries' loss in 2000. In 2016 while the Federal Liberals narrowly won re-election in July 2016, the Canberra Liberals lost their fifth election in a row. Elizabeth Lee, a Korean-Australian, won the leadership of the ACT Liberals in 2020, becoming the first Australian of Asian background to lead a major party. Lee led the party to defeat in the 2024 ACT election.\nThe Liberal Party does not officially contest most local government elections, although many members do run for office in local government as independents. An exception is the Brisbane City Council, where both Sallyanne Atkinson and Campbell Newman have been elected Lord Mayor of Brisbane.\nIdeology.\nFrom its foundation, the Liberal Party has had a great internal diversity in policy positions among its members, primarily defining itself as an anti-Labor, anti-Socialist party that supports individual freedom and private enterprise.\nThe party's founder and longest-serving leader Robert Menzies envisaged that Australia's middle class would form its main constituency.\nTowards the end of his term as Prime Minister of Australia and in a final address to the Liberal Party Federal Council in 1964, Menzies spoke of the \"Liberal Creed\" as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSoon after the election of the Howard government the new prime minister John Howard, who was to become the second longest-serving Liberal prime minister, spoke of his interpretation of the \"Liberal Tradition\" in a Robert Menzies Lecture in 1996:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Menzies knew the importance for Australian Liberalism to draw upon both the classical liberal as well as the conservative political traditions. He believed in a liberal political tradition that encompassed both Edmund Burke and John Stuart Mill\u2014a tradition which I have described in contemporary terms as the broad church of Australian Liberalism.\nUntil the 2022 election, the Liberals were in electoral terms largely the party of the middle class (whom Menzies, in the era of the party's formation called \"The forgotten people\"), though such class-based voting patterns are no longer as clear as they once were. In the 1970s a left-wing middle class emerged that no longer voted Liberal. One effect of this was the success of a breakaway party, the Australian Democrats, founded in 1977 by former Liberal minister Don Chipp and members of minor liberal parties. During the prime ministership of John Howard, the Liberals did increasingly well among socially conservative working-class voters. Until 2022 the Liberal Party's key support base remained the upper-middle classes\u2014in 2010, 16 of the 20 richest federal electorates were held by the Liberals, most of which were safe seats. Following the 2022 election, 16 of the 20 poorest seats in Australia were held by the Liberal Party, while it held only five of the 20 wealthiest electorates. In country areas they either compete with or have a truce with the Nationals, depending on various factors.\nMenzies was an ardent constitutional monarchist, who supported the monarchy in Australia and links to the Commonwealth of Nations. Today the party is divided on the question of republicanism, with some (such as former leader Peter Dutton) being monarchists, while others (such as his successor Sussan Ley) are republicans. The Menzies government formalised Australia's alliance with the United States in 1951 and the party has remained a strong supporter of the mutual defence treaty.\nDomestically, Menzies presided over a fairly regulated economy in which utilities were publicly owned, and commercial activity was highly regulated through centralised wage-fixing and high tariff protection. Liberal leaders from Menzies to Malcolm Fraser generally maintained Australia's high tariff levels. At that time the Liberals' coalition partner, the Country Party, the older of the two in the coalition (now known as the National Party), had considerable influence over the government's economic policies. It was not until the late 1970s and through their period out of power federally in the 1980s that the party came to be influenced by what was known as the New Right\u2014a conservative liberal group who advocated market deregulation, privatisation of public utilities, reductions in the size of government programs and tax cuts.\nSocially, while liberty and freedom of enterprise form the basis of its beliefs, elements of the party include both what is termed \"small-l liberalism\" and social conservatism. Historically, Liberal governments have been responsible for the carriage of a number of notable socially liberal reforms, including the opening of Australia to multiethnic immigration under Menzies and Harold Holt; Holt's 1967 Referendum on Aboriginal Rights; John Gorton's support for cinema and the arts; and Malcolm Fraser's Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976.\nThe Liberal Party is a member of the International Democracy Union and the Asia Pacific Democrat Union.\nFactions.\nAccording to Ronald Mizen of \"The Australian Financial Review\", following the 2025 federal election there are two major factional groupings in the federal parliamentary Liberal Party: the Moderates and the National Right. Factional alignments are \"fluid and often built around personalities\", with several individuals either identifying with multiple factions or remaining unaligned. \nDuring the Morrison government years, the Liberal Party consisted of three broad factional groupings: a moderate wing, a centre-right wing and a right wing, led by Simon Birmingham, Scott Morrison and Peter Dutton respectively, with the Centre-Right being the largest faction, with 32 of 91 Liberal MPs belonging to the group. The 2022 Australian federal election saw a significant realignment of factional affiliations within the Liberal Party: the National Right became the largest faction with 27 of 65 Liberal MPs aligned with the faction, the Centre-Right went from being the largest faction to the smallest faction, plummeting from 32 members to just 6, the Moderates' membership dropped from 22 members to 14, while a Centrist faction emerged, comprising 11 members. In 2025, Ley of the moderate faction was elected leader of the party. Still, members of the Liberal Party often are grouped into the three-faction system.\nOrganisation.\nThe Liberal Party's organisation is dominated by the six autonomous state divisions, reflecting the party's original commitment to a federalised system of government (a commitment which was strongly maintained by all Liberal governments bar the Gorton government until 1983, but was to a large extent abandoned by the Howard government, which showed strong centralising tendencies).Party policy is made almost entirely by the parliamentary parties as opposed to the federal and state and territorial party organisations, although Liberal party members do have a degree of influence over party policy.\nThe Liberal Party's basic organisational unit is the \"branch\", which consists of party members in a particular locality. For each electorate there is a \"conference\"\u2014notionally above the branches\u2014which coordinates campaigning in the electorate and regularly communicates with the member (or candidate) for the electorate. As there are three levels of government in Australia, each branch elects delegates to a local, state, and federal conference.\nAll the branches in an Australian state are grouped into a \"Division\". The ruling body for the Division is a \"State Council\". There is also one \"Federal Council\" which represents the entire organisational Liberal Party in Australia. Branch executives are delegates to the Councils \"ex-officio\" and additional delegates are elected by branches, depending on their size.\nPreselection of electoral candidates is performed by a special electoral college convened for the purpose. Membership of the electoral college consists of head office delegates, branch officers, and elected delegates from branches.\nNetworks and party wings.\nThe Liberal Party has several party wings and networks. Major party wings include:\nOther networks include an overseas wing (Australian Liberals Abroad) and a Norfolk Island wing (operated by the Canberra Liberals).\nDonors.\nFor the 2015\u20132016 financial year, the top ten disclosed donors to the Liberal Party were: Paul Marks (Nimrod resources) ($1,300,000), Pratt Holdings ($790,000), Hong Kong Kingson Investment Company ($710,000), Aus Gold Mining Group ($410,000), Village Roadshow ($325,000), Waratah Group ($300,000), Walker Corporation ($225,000), Australian Gypsum Industries ($196,000), National Automotive Leasing and Salary Packaging Association ($177,000) and Westfield Corporation ($150,000).\nThe Liberal Party also receives undisclosed funding through several methods, such as \"associated entities\". Cormack Foundation, Eight by Five, Free Enterprise Foundation, Federal Forum and Northern Sydney Conservative forum are entities which have been used to funnel donations to the Liberal Party without disclosing the source.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18454", "revid": "17067340", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18454", "title": "Lindisfarne", "text": "Tidal island in northeast England\nLindisfarne, also known as Holy Island, is a tidal island off the northeast coast of England, which constitutes the civil parish of Holy Island in Northumberland. Holy Island has a recorded history from the 6th century AD; it was an important centre of Celtic Christianity under Saints Aidan, Cuthbert, Eadfrith, and Eadberht of Lindisfarne. The island was originally home to a monastery, which was destroyed during the Viking invasions but re-established as a priory following the Norman Conquest of England. Other notable sites built on the island are St Mary the Virgin parish church (originally built in 635 CE and restored in 1860), Lindisfarne Castle, several lighthouses and other navigational markers, and a complex network of lime kilns. In the present day, the island is an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and a hotspot for historical tourism and bird watching. As of February 2020, the island had three pubs, a hotel and a post office as well as a museum.\nName and etymology.\nName.\nBoth the Parker and Peterborough versions of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" for 793 record the Old English name .\nIn the 9th-century the island appears under its Old Welsh name . The philologist Andrew Breeze, following up on a suggestion by Richard Coates, proposes that the name derived from Latin (English: Healing [Island]), owing perhaps to the island's reputation for medicinal herbs.\nThe name Holy Island was in use by the 11th century when it appears in Latin as . The reference was to Saints Aidan and Cuthbert.\nIn the present day, Holy Island is the name of the civil parish and native inhabitants are known as Islanders. The Ordnance Survey uses Holy Island for both the island and the village, with Lindisfarne listed either as an alternative name for the island or as a name of 'non-Roman antiquity'. \"Locally the island is rarely referred to by its Anglo-Saxon name of Lindisfarne\" (according to the local community website). More widely, the two names are used somewhat interchangeably. Lindisfarne is invariably used when referring to the pre-conquest monastic settlement, the priory ruins and the castle. The combined phrase \"the Holy Island of Lindisfarne\" has begun to be used more frequently in recent times, particularly when promoting the island as a destination for tourists and pilgrims alike.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Lindisfarne\" has an uncertain origin. The \"-farne\" part of the name may be Old English \"fearena\", genitive plural of , meaning traveller. The first part, \"Lindis-\", may refer to people from the Kingdom of Lindsey in modern Lincolnshire, referring to either regular visitors or settlers. Another possibility is that Lindisfarne is Brittonic in origin, containing the element \"Lind-\" meaning stream or pool (Welsh ), with the nominal morpheme \"-as(t)\" and an unknown element identical to that in the Farne Islands. Further suggested is that the name may be a wholly Old Irish formation, from corresponding , plus meaning 'land, territory.' Such an Irish formation, however, could have been based on a pre-existing Brittonic name.\nThere is also a supposition that the nearby Farne Islands are fern-like in shape and the name may have come from there.\nGeography and population.\nThe island of Lindisfarne is located along the northeast coast of England, close to the border with Scotland. It measures from east to west and from north to south, and comprises approximately at high tide. The nearest point to the mainland is about . It is accessible at low tide by a modern causeway and an ancient pilgrims' path that both run over sand and mudflats and which are covered with water at high tide. Lindisfarne is surrounded by the Lindisfarne National Nature Reserve, which protects the island's sand dunes and the adjacent intertidal habitats. As of 2011[ [update]], the island had a population of 180.\nCommunity.\nA February 2020 report provided an update on the island. At the time, three pubs and a hotel were operating; the shop had closed but the post office remained in operation. No professional or medical services were available and residents were driving to Berwick-upon-Tweed for groceries and other supplies. Points of interest for visitors included Lindisfarne Castle operated by the National Trust, the priory, the historic church, the nature reserve and the beaches. At certain times of year, numerous migratory birds can be seen.\nCauseway safety.\nWarning signs urge visitors walking to the island to keep to the marked path, to check tide times and weather carefully, and to seek local advice if in doubt. For drivers, tide tables are prominently displayed at both ends of the causeway and also where the Holy Island road leaves the A1 Great North Road at Beal. The causeway is generally open from about three hours after high tide until two hours before the next high tide. Tide tables giving safe crossing periods are published by Northumberland County Council.\nDespite these warnings, about one vehicle each month is stranded on the causeway, requiring rescue by HM Coastguard and / or the Seahouses RNLI lifeboat. A sea rescue costs approximately \u00a31,900 (quoted in 2009, ), while an air rescue costs more than \u00a34,000 (also quoted in 2009, ). Local people have opposed a causeway barrier, primarily on convenience grounds. One cause of issues is that the causeway may flood before the end of an officially \"safe\" period due to stormy weather.\nHistory.\nEarly.\nThe north-east of England was largely not settled by Roman civilians apart from the Tyne valley and Hadrian's Wall. The area had been little affected during the centuries of nominal Roman occupation. The countryside had been subject to raids from both Scots and Picts and was \"not one to attract early Germanic settlement\". The Anglian King Ida (reigned from 547) started the sea-borne settlement of the coast, establishing an (meaning \"royal settlement\") at Bamburgh across the bay from Lindisfarne. The conquest was not straightforward, however. The recounts how, in the 6th century, Urien, prince of Rheged, with a coalition of North Brittonic kingdoms, besieged Angles led by Theodric of Bernicia on the island for three days and nights, until internal power struggles led to the Britons' defeat.\nLindisfarne Abbey.\nThe Lindisfarne Abbey was first established in 634 AD. The island served as the site of a monastery for roughly 900 years. The site, most of which has fallen into a state of ruin, has since become a popular tourist destination and focus of pilgrimage journeys. The church of St Mary the Virgin is the only original building that has been more or less continually maintained and which remains standing within the original monastic compound. Remains from the pre-Norman/Anglo-Saxon era can be found in the chancel wall of this church. The monastery was described as an abbey by Bede but when it was rebuilt after the Norman Conquest it was described as a (relatively smaller) priory.\nFounding and early years.\n The monastery of Lindisfarne was founded around 634 by the Irish monk Aidan, who had been sent from Iona off the west coast of Scotland to Northumbria at the request of King Oswald. The abbey was founded before the end of 634 and Aidan remained there until his death in 651 and it acted as a centre of the Christianisation of Northumbria. The abbey and its church remained the only seat of a bishopric in Northumbria for nearly thirty years. Finan (bishop 651\u2013661) built a timber church \"suitable for a bishop's seat\". Bede, however, was critical of the fact that the church was not built of stone but only of hewn oak thatched with reeds. A later bishop, Eadbert, removed the thatch and covered both walls and roof in lead. An abbot, who could be the bishop, was elected by the brethren and led the community. Bede comments on this:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And let no one be surprised that, though we have said above that in this island of Lindisfarne, small as it is, there is found the seat of a bishop, now we say also that it is the home of an abbot and monks; for it actually is so. For one and the same dwelling-place of the servants of God holds both; and indeed all are monks. Aidan, who was the first bishop of this place, was a monk and always lived according to monastic rule together with all his followers. Hence all the bishops of that place up to the present time exercise their episcopal functions in such a way that the abbot, who they themselves have chosen by the advice of the brethren, rules the monastery; and all the priests, deacons, singers and readers and other ecclesiastical grades, together with the bishop himself, keep the monastic rule in all things.\nFollowing the death of bishop Finan in 661, Colman became Bishop of Lindisfarne. There were significant liturgical and theological differences with the fledgling Roman party based at Canterbury. According to Frank Stenton: \"There is no trace of any intercourse between these bishops [the Mercians] and the see of Canterbury\". The Synod of Whitby in 663 changed this, as allegiance switched southwards to Canterbury and then to Rome. Colman departed his see for Iona, and for the next few years Lindisfarne had no bishop. Under a new line of bishops aligned with Canterbury Lindisfarne became the base for Christian evangelism in Northern England, and also sent a successful mission to Mercia. Monks from the Irish community of Iona settled on the island.\nCuthbert as bishop.\n Northumbria's patron saint, Cuthbert, was a monk and later abbot of the monastery. St Cuthbert has been described as \u201cpossibly the most venerated saint in England\u201d. Cuthbert's miracles and life are recorded by Bede. Cuthbert was Bishop of Lindisfarne from 684 until 686, shortly before his death. An anonymous \"Life of Cuthbert\" written at Lindisfarne is the oldest extant piece of English historical writing.\nFrom its reference to \"Aldfrith, who now reigns peacefully\", the \"Life of Cuthbert\" is considered to date from between 685 and 704. While bishop and abbot, Cuthbert took it upon himself to align his bishopric with the see of Canterbury, and therefore with Rome, while leaving its Celtic leanings and traditions behind. After his death in 687 Cuthbert was initially buried in Lindisfarne. Due to the claim that Cuthbert's body was untouched by 'corruption', and also due to there being several miracles associated with those who had come to visit Cuthbert's shrine, the island became a major destination for pilgrimages for the next few hundred years.\nDuring one of the many evacuations of Lindisfarne by the monks due to the increasing frequency of Viking raids upon the island at the time, in 793 Cuthbert's body was carried away by the monks, first to where they temporarily re-settled in the nearby village of Chester-le-Street, then to Durham Cathedral c.\u2009995. Eadberht of Lindisfarne, the next bishop (and later saint), was buried in the place from which Cuthbert's body had been exhumed earlier in the same year (793).\n8th and 9th centuries.\nIn 735, the northern ecclesiastical province of England was established, with the archbishopric at York. There were only three bishops under York: Hexham, Lindisfarne and Whithorn, whereas Canterbury had the 12 envisioned by St Augustine.\nAt that time the Diocese of York roughly encompassed the counties of Yorkshire and Lancashire. Hexham covered County Durham and the southern part of modern Northumberland up to the River Coquet, and eastwards into the Pennines. Whithorn covered most of Dumfries and Galloway region west of Dumfries itself. The remainder, Cumbria, northern Northumbria, Lothian and much of the Kingdom of Strathclyde formed the diocese of Lindisfarne.\nIn 737, Ceolwulf of Northumbria abdicated as King of Northumbria and entered the abbey at Lindisfarne. He died in 764 and was buried alongside Cuthbert. In 830, his body was moved to Norham-upon-Tweed, and later his head was translated to Durham Cathedral.\nLindisfarne Gospels.\nIn the early 8th century the illuminated manuscript known as the Lindisfarne Gospels, an illustrated Latin copy of the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, was made, probably at Lindisfarne. The artist was possibly Eadfrith, who became Bishop of Lindisfarne. It is also speculated that a team of illuminators and calligraphers (monks of Lindisfarne Abbey) worked on the text, but if so, their identities are unknown. In the second half of the 10th century, a monk named Aldred added an Old English gloss to the Latin text, producing the earliest surviving Old English/Northumbrian copies of the Gospels. Aldred attributed the original to Eadfrith (bishop 698\u2013721). The Gospels were written with a good hand, but it is the illustrations, done in an insular style containing a fusion of Celtic, Germanic and Roman elements, that are considered to be of the most value. According to Aldred, Eadfrith's successor \u00c6thelwald was responsible for pressing and binding the book, before it was covered with a fine metal case made by a hermit known as Billfrith. The Lindisfarne Gospels reside in the British Library in London, a location which has caused controversy amongst some Northumbrians. In 1971, professor Suzanne Kaufman of Rockford, Illinois presented a facsimile copy of the Gospels to the clergy of the island.\nViking raid on the monastery (793).\nIn 793, a Viking raid on Lindisfarne caused consternation throughout the Christian west, and is often taken as the beginning of the Viking Age. There had been other Viking raids, but according to English Heritage this one was particularly significant, because \"it attacked the sacred heart of the Northumbrian kingdom, desecrating 'the very place where the Christian religion began in our nation'\". The D and E versions of the West Saxon \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" record:\n&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt; (\"In this year fierce, foreboding omens came over the land of the Northumbrians, and the wretched people shook; there were excessive whirlwinds, lightning, and fiery dragons were seen flying in the sky. These signs were followed by great famine, and a little after those, that same year on 6th ides of January, the ravaging of wretched heathen men destroyed God's church at Lindisfarne.\")\nThe generally accepted date for the Viking raid on Lindisfarne is 8 June; Michael Swanton writes: \", presumably [is] an error for (8 June) which is the date given by the \"Annals of Lindisfarne\" (p. 505), when better sailing weather would favour coastal raids.\"\nAlcuin, a Northumbrian scholar in Charlemagne's court at the time, wrote: \"Never before has such terror appeared in Britain as we have now suffered from a pagan race\u00a0... The heathens poured out the blood of saints around the altar, and trampled on the bodies of saints in the temple of God, like dung in the streets.\" During the attack many of the monks were killed, or captured and enslaved. \nBiographer Peter Ackroyd suggests: \"The monasteries of Lindisfarne and Jarrow were not attacked at random; they were chosen as examples of revenge. The onslaught of the Christian Charlemagne on the \u2018pagans\u2019 of the north had led to the extirpation of their shrines and sanctuaries. The great king had cut down J\u00f4rmunr, the holy tree of the Norse people. What better form of retaliation than to lay waste the foundations devoted to the Christian God? The Christian missionaries to Norway had in fact set out from Lindisfarne.\" However, the raid on Lindisfarne took place decades after Charlemagne\u2019s campaigns against the Saxons. Neither the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle nor any surviving Norse document ascribes a motivation to the raid on the monastery. \nAs the English population became more settled, they seemed to have abandoned seafaring. Many monasteries were established on islands, peninsulas, river mouths and cliffs, as isolated communities were less susceptible to interference and the politics of the heartland. These preliminary raids, despite their brutal nature, were not followed up. The main body of the raiders passed north around Scotland. The 9th-century invasions came not from Norway, but from the Danes from around the entrance to the Baltic. The first Danish raids into England were in the Isle of Sheppey, Kent during 835 and from there their influence spread north. During this period religious art continued to flourish on Lindisfarne, and the of Durham began in the abbey. By 866, the Danes were in York, and in 873 the Danish army was moving into Northumberland. With the collapse of the Northumbrian kingdom, the monks of Lindisfarne fled the island in 875 taking with them St Cuthbert's bones (which are now buried at Durham Cathedral), who during his life had been prior and bishop of Lindisfarne; his body was buried on the island in the year 698.\nPrior to the 9th century, Lindisfarne Abbey had, in common with other such establishments, held large tracts of land which were managed directly or leased to farmers with a life interest only. Following the Danish occupation, land was increasingly owned by individuals, and could be bought, sold and inherited. Following the Battle of Corbridge in 914 Ragnald seized the land giving some to his followers Scula and Onlafbal.\nPrior to dissolution of the monasteries.\nOnce the region had been restored to political and military stability under the government of William the Conqueror, the prospects for the rebuilding of the island's monastery began to improve. The first Norman Bishop of Durham, William of St Calais endowed his new Benedictine monastery at Durham with land and property in Northumberland, including Holy Island and much of the surrounding mainland. Durham Priory then re-established a monastery on the island in 1093. The monastery was re-established as a smaller \"priory\" which was to be administered as a sub-monastery of the Durham priory. Smaller monasteries are often referred to as priories while larger monasteries are more commonly referred to as abbeys.\nUnder Norman rule, by 1150 the island's parish church had also been fully rebuilt over part of the site of the pre-Norman abbey. The newly constructed chapel included a cenotaph (an empty tomb) marking the spot where Cuthbert's body was believed to have been buried. Although his body by then had been relocated in Durham Cathedral, the place of his former primary shrine on Lindisfarne was still considered by many to be sacred ground and continued to draw pilgrims. The pre-Norman island bishopric of Lindisfarne was not restored under Norman rule, perhaps because the newer and more centrally located bishopric of Durham was then better able to meet the church's administrative needs in the area.\nAs such, the island's restored but slightly smaller Benedictine monastery (sized as a priory under Norman rule) was then able to continue in relative peace under the new Norman monarchy and its successor royal houses for the next four centuries until its final dissolution in 1536 as a result of Henry VIII's dissolution of the English church's ties to Rome, and his subsequent closing of the monasteries.\nAfter dissolution of the priory.\nEven with the closure of the island's priory in 1536, the tradition of making religious pilgrimages to the island never ceased. In the 20th century (c. 1980~1990), religious author and cleric David Adam reported that he had ministered to thousands of pilgrims and other visitors as rector of Holy Island. In the 21st century the tradition of making pilgrimage to Lindisfarne continues to be observed annually, as can be attested to by the Northern Cross Pilgrimage amongst others. The priory ruins which make for a popular tourist and pilgrimage destination, were built just after the Norman conquest, and date back to nearly 1,000 years ago. The chancel wall of the church dates back even further into Anglo-Saxon times.\nArchitecture and archaeology.\nIn 1838 Henry George Charles Clarke wrote a scholarly description of the priory. Clarke surmised that this Norman priory was unique in that the centre aisle had a vault of stone. Of the six arches, Clarke stated \"as if the architect had not previously calculated the space to be occupied by his arcade. The effect here has been to produce a horseshoe arch instead of a semicircular arch, from its being of the same height, but lesser span, than the others. This arch is very rare, even in Norman buildings\". The Lindisfarne Priory (ruin) is a Grade I listed building, List Entry Number 1042304. Other parts of the priory are a scheduled monument, List Entry Number 1011650. The latter are described as \"the site of the pre-Conquest monastery of Lindisfarne and the Benedictine cell of Durham Cathedral that succeeded it in the 11th century\".\nArchaeologists led by DigVentures and the University of Durham have been conducting community excavations since 2016 outside the priory. A total of nine consecutive field seasons (including those planned for 2024) have unearthed numerous insights for the site. Artefacts of note recovered included a rare board game piece, copper-alloy rings and Anglo-Saxon coins from both Northumbria and Wessex. The discovery of a cemetery led to finding commemorative markers \"unique to the 8th and 9th centuries\". The group also found evidence of an early medieval building, \"which seems to have been constructed on top of an even earlier industrial oven\" which was used to make copper or glass.\nHistorical island economy.\nMiddle Ages economy.\nMonastic records from the 14th to the 16th century provide evidence of an already well-established fishing economy on the island. Both line fishing and net fishing were practised, inshore in shallow waters and in the deep water offshore, using a variety of vessels: contemporary accounts differentiate between small 'cobles' and larger 'boats', as well as singling out certain specialised vessels (such as a 'herynger', sold for \u00a32 in 1404). As well as supplying food for the monastic community, the island's fisheries (together with those of nearby Farne) provided the mother house at Durham with fish, on a regular (sometimes weekly) basis. Fish caught included cod, haddock, herring, salmon, porpoise and mullet, among others. Shellfish of various types were also fished for, with lobster nets and oyster dredges being mentioned in the accounts. Fish surplus to the needs of the monastery was traded, but subject to a tithe. There is also evidence that the monks operated a lime kiln on the island.\nIn 1462, during the Wars of the Roses, Margaret of Anjou made an abortive attempt to seize the Northumbrian castles. Following a storm at sea 400 troops had to seek shelter on Holy Island, where they surrendered to the Yorkists.\nPost priory dissolution economy.\nAfter King Henry VIII's dissolution of the monasteries in 1536, Lindisfarne Priory was made to close its doors for the last time. The buildings of the old priory were then repurposed for use as a naval storehouse. As such, one of the economic focal points of the island became the military post which would be staffed by military personnel from time to time, instead of the former activities of the defunct monastery. Over the coming centuries, most of the priory complex buildings gradually fell into ruin. In 1613 ownership of the island (and other land in the area formerly pertaining to Durham Priory) was transferred to the Crown.\nIn the 1860s a Dundee firm built lime kilns on Lindisfarne, and lime was burnt on the island until at least the end of the 19th century. The kilns are among the most complex in Northumberland. Horses carried limestone, along the Holy Island Waggonway, from a quarry on the north side of the island to the lime kilns, where it was burned with coal transported from Dundee on the east coast of Scotland. There are still traces of the jetties by which the coal was imported and the lime exported close by at the foot of the crags. The remains of the waggonway between the quarries and the kilns makes for an easy walk.\nAt the peak of the limestone quarrying and processing operations on the island, over 100 men were employed by these operations. Crinoid columnals, a certain type of intricate fossil with a hole in the middle which is sometimes found in limestone, were separated from the quarried stone and then milled smooth into beads. The remaining quarried limestone material would then be processed into lime. These more valuable beads would then be threaded onto necklaces and rosaries and exported from the island. The beads became known as St Cuthbert's beads.\nThe large-scale quarrying in the 19th century had a devastating effect on the limestone caves, but eight sea caves remain at Coves Haven. Workings on the lime kilns stopped by the start of the 20th century. The lime kilns on Lindisfarne are among the few being actively preserved in Northumberland.\nHoly Island Golf Club was founded in 1907 but closed in the 1960s.\nPresent-day economy.\nThe island is within the Northumberland Coast National Landscape, an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. The ruined monastery is in the care of English Heritage, which also runs a museum/visitor centre nearby. The neighbouring parish church is still in use.\nHoly Island was considered part of the Islandshire unit along with several mainland parishes. This came under the jurisdiction of the County Palatine of Durham until the Counties (Detached Parts) Act 1844.\nLindisfarne was mainly a fishing community for many years, with farming and the production of lime also of some importance.\nLindisfarne is well known for mead. When monks inhabited the island, it was thought that if the soul was in God's keeping, the body must be fortified with Lindisfarne mead. Lindisfarne Mead is produced at St Aidan's Winery, and sold widely. The mead recipe remains a secret of the family which produces it.\nIt is possible to see old wooden boats turned upside down on the land, used as sheds. It is possible that this type of settlement was used by seafaring Vikings that exploited their ships as protection while away from home. These upturned boats near the foreshore provided the inspiration for Spanish architect Enric Miralles' Scottish Parliament Building in Edinburgh.\nAdditional points of interest.\nChurch of St Mary the Virgin.\nThe current parish church stands on the site of the wooden church built by St Aidan in AD 635. When the site was rebuilt by the Normans, the site of the original abbey church was redeveloped in stone as the parish church. It is the oldest building on the island that has been maintained in some fashion, and which has a roof on it. Remains of the Anglo-Saxon church exist as the chancel wall and arch. A Norman apse (subsequently replaced in the 13th\u00a0century) led eastwards from the chancel. The nave was extended in the 12th\u00a0century with a northern arcade, and in the following century with a southern arcade.\nAfter the Reformation the church slipped into disrepair until the restoration of 1860. The church is built of coloured sandstone which has had the Victorian plaster removed from it. The north aisle is known as the \"fishermen's aisle\" and houses the altar of St.\u00a0Peter. The south aisle used to hold the altar of St.\u00a0Margaret of Scotland, but now houses the organ.\nThe church is a Grade\u00a0I listed building number 1042304, listed as part of the whole priory. The church forms most of the earliest part of the site and is a scheduled ancient monument number 1011650. The Church of St Mary the Virgin has daily services of worship.\nSt Cuthbert's Isle (Hobthrush).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n . . . \"Now indeed&lt;br&gt;at the first beginning&lt;br&gt;of his solitary life,&lt;br&gt;he retired to&lt;br&gt;a certain place&lt;br&gt;in the outer precincts&lt;br&gt;of the monastery&lt;br&gt;\nwhich seemed to be&lt;br&gt;more secluded...\"\n&lt;br&gt;(Latin: \"s\u0113cr\u0113tus\") \n \u2014 Bede\nSt Cuthbert's Isle, also known as \"Hobthrush\", is a small islet of black dolerite rock, described by Bede as being&lt;br&gt;\"...in the outer precincts of the monastery...\"\nThe islet is reputed to be the place where Cuthbert spent&lt;br&gt;\"...the first beginning of his solitary life...\"\nThe islet is a short distance from Holy Island.\nIt is possible to walk across sand and rocks to the islet when tidal conditions allow.\nThere are the remains of a medieval chapel, designated as a scheduled monument: \nThe name \"\"Hobthrush\" relates to Hob (folklore) \u2013 the similarly named \"Hob-trush\"\" is also found in North Yorkshire. It is possible that the name was introduced by migrant workers while working on Holy Island.\nLindisfarne Castle.\nLindisfarne Castle was built in 1550, around the time that Lindisfarne Priory went out of use, and stones from the priory were used as building material. It is very small by the usual standards, and was more of a fort. The castle sits on the highest point of the island, a whinstone hill called Beblowe.\nAfter Henry VIII suppressed the priory, his troops used the remains as a naval store. In 1542 Henry VIII ordered the Earl of Rutland to fortify the site against possible Scottish invasion. Sir John Harington and the Master Mason of Berwick started to plan to build two earth bulwarks, although Rutland advised the use of stone from the priory. In September 1544 a Scottish fleet led by John Barton in the \"Mary Willoughby\" threatened the English coast. It was thought the Scottish ships might try to burn Lindisfarne, so orders were given to repair the decayed bulwark or blockhouse at Holy Island.\nBy December 1547, Ralph Cleisbye, Captain of the fort, had guns including a wheel-mounted demi-culverin, two brass sakers, a falcon, and another fixed demi-culverin. However, Beblowe Crag itself was not fortified until 1549 and Sir Richard Lee saw only a decayed platform and turf rampart there in 1565. Elizabeth I then had work carried out on the fort, strengthening it and providing gun platforms for the developments in artillery technology. When James VI and I came to power in England, he combined the Scottish and English thrones, and the need for the castle declined. At that time the castle was still garrisoned from Berwick and protected the small Lindisfarne Harbour.\nDuring the Jacobite rising of 1715 the Earl of Mar (later commander of the Jacobite army) planned for a Franco-Spanish invasion of North-East England to link up with indigenous Jacobites and the Scottish army marching south. Holy Island was regarded by Mar as the ideal place for a landing. The following day, however, he decided on a more southerly landing.\nLindisfarne was close to Bamburgh which at that time was owned by Thomas Forster who was a committed Jacobite. The Jacobites wanted to secure the castle on Holy Island so as \"to give signals to the ships from which they expected succours from abroad\". The castle was sealed but only held by around six men. The brigantine \"Mary\" of the Tyne, ex France was anchored in the bay. The master, Lancelot Errington, went ashore on 10 October 1715 to ask Samuel Phillipson, the castle's Master Gunner who also served as the unit's barber, for a shave. The men knew each other and so this seemed entirely innocent. Errington established that only two soldiers (Phillipson and Farggison) and Phillipson's wife were actually in the castle, the rest of the garrison being off duty. Errington returned with his nephew later in the day claiming to have lost the key to his watch then pulled a pistol on Phillipson and ejected the three people. Forster was expected to send reinforcements to the castle but never did.\nThe following day Colonel Laton with a hundred troops arrived from Berwick and was joined by 50 of the islanders in retaking the castle. The Erringtons fled, were caught and imprisoned in the tollbooth at Berwick but tunnelled their way out and escaped back to Bamburgh. On 14 October two French ships signalled to the castle, but on receiving no reply withdrew.\nThe castle was refurbished in the Arts and Crafts style by Sir Edwin Lutyens for the editor of \"Country Life\", Edward Hudson. Lutyens also designed the Holy Island War Memorial on the Heugh. \nOne of the most celebrated gardeners of modern times, Gertrude Jekyll (1843\u20131932), laid out a small walled garden just north of the castle in 1911. The castle, garden and nearby lime kilns are in the care of the National Trust and open to visitors.\nGreen Shiel.\nThis monument on the north coast includes a farmstead dated to the early medieval period. The stone-built foundations of five rectangular buildings have been uncovered by excavation within the dune system. The settlement at Green Shiel is a rare example of an early medieval farmstead in Northumberland. There are no other known examples of stone-built farmsteads of this period in the region, and as such it is of particular importance. The settlement has been dated to the 9th century.\nNavigational markers.\nThe Corporation of Trinity House maintains three beacons on or near the island, to guide vessels entering Holy Island Harbour: one is on Heugh Hill, the other two at Guile Point. Two of the three have navigation lights attached (and Trinity House classes them as 'lighthouses'). Until 1 November 1995 all three were operated by Newcastle-upon-Tyne Trinity House (a separate corporation, which formerly had responsibility for navigation marks along the coast from Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby), but on that day responsibility for marking the approach to the harbour was assumed by the London-based Corporation.\nGuile Point East and Guile Point West are two stone obelisks which function as leading marks, guiding vessels approaching the harbour from the east. The beacons, which stand on a small tidal island on the other side of the channel, were established in 1826 by Newcastle-upon-Tyne Trinity House (in whose ownership they remain). When aligned, they indicated the safe channel over a submerged bar. Since the early 1990s, a sector light has been fixed about one-third of the way up on the Guile Point East beacon.\nThe Heugh Hill Light is a metal framework tower with a black triangular day mark, situated on Heugh Hill (a ridge on the south edge of Lindisfarne). Prior to its installation, a wooden beacon with a triangle topmark had stood on the centre of Heugh Hill for many decades. When aligned with the church belfry (on a bearing of 310\u00b0), it indicated that the bar had been cleared and provided a line of approach into the harbour. \nNearby on Heugh Hill is a former coastguard station (recently refurbished and opened to the public as a viewing platform). An adjacent ruin is known as the Lantern Chapel; its origin is unknown, but the name may indicate an earlier navigation light on this site.\nOn the other side of the island, the Emmanuel Head daymark provides a visual navigational fix during daylight hours. It is a white brick pyramid, standing high, on Emmanuel Head at the north-eastern point of Lindisfarne. Built in 1810, it is said to be Britain's earliest purpose-built daymark.\nCommunity Trust Fund/Holy Island Partnership.\nIn response to the perceived lack of affordable housing on the isle of Lindisfarne, in 1996 a group of islanders established a charitable foundation known as the Holy Island of Lindisfarne Community Development Trust. They built a visitor centre on the island using the profits from sales. In addition, 11 community houses were built and are rented out to community members who want to continue to live on the island. The trust is also responsible for management of the inner harbour. The Holy Island Partnership was formed in 2009 by members of the community as well as organisations and groups operating on the island.\nTourism.\nTourism grew steadily throughout the 20th century, and the isle of Lindisfarne is now a popular destination for visitors. Those tourists staying on the island while it is cut off by the tide experience the island in a quieter state, as most day trippers leave before the tide rises. At low tide it is possible to walk across the sands following an ancient route known as the Pilgrims' Way (see the note about safety, above). This route is marked with posts and has refuge boxes for stranded walkers, just as the road has a refuge box for those who have left their crossing too late. The isle of Lindisfarne is surrounded by the Lindisfarne National Nature Reserve which attracts bird-watchers to the tidal island. The island's prominent position and varied habitat make it particularly attractive to tired avian migrants, and as of 2016[ [update]] 330 bird species had been recorded on the island.\nMedia.\nLocal news and television programmes are provided by BBC North East and Cumbria and ITV Tyne Tees. Television signals are received from Chatton transmitting station. Local radio stations are BBC Radio Newcastle, Capital North East, Heart North East, Smooth North East, Hits Radio North East, Greatest Hits Radio and Holy Island Radio, a community based station. The island is served by the local newspaper, \"Northumberland Gazette\".\nCulture.\nJ. M. W. Turner, Thomas Girtin and Charles Rennie Mackintosh all painted on Holy Island.\nThe island was featured on the television programme \"Seven Natural Wonders\" as one of the wonders of the north. The Lindisfarne Gospels have also featured on television among the Treasures of Britain. It also features in an ITV Tyne Tees programme \"Diary of an Island\" which started on 19 April 2007 and on a DVD of the same name.\nMusic.\nThe English folk-rock band Lindisfarne takes its name from the island. The English musician James Blake wrote two electronica songs named after Lindisfarne, both appearing on his 2011 album. The rock band Iona had a song called Lindisfarne on their 1996 album Journey into the Morn.\nThe opening track \"793 (Slaget om Lindisfarne)\" on Norwegian metal band Enslaved's 1997 album \"Eld\" deals with the 793 raid from the Viking invaders' perspective.\nIn popular fiction.\nMost of LJ Ross's crime novel \"Holy Island\" (2015) is set on Lindisfarne. Much of Ann Cleeves' mystery novel \"The Rising Tide\" is also located here and was filmed on the island for the TV series \"Vera\" based on the lead character in Cleeves' novels, DCI Vera Stanhope as played by Brenda Blethyn.\nThe Viking raid appears in season one of the television series \"Vikings\". A dramatised version of the first Viking raid on the island appears in the final episode of season 3 of the comedy series \"Norsemen\".\nIt is also mentioned as background in Anne Perry's novel \"A Question of Betrayal\" (2020).\nThe Viking raid appeared in the Big Finish Productions \"Doctor Who\" audio story \"Escape from Holy Island\" (2024), starring the Sixth Doctor and his companion Peri Brown.\nLindisfarne was the location for filming of director Roman Polanski's 1966 comedy thriller \"Cul-de-sac\" (starring Donald Pleasence, Fran\u00e7oise Dorl\u00e9ac, Lionel Stander and Jack MacGowran).\nDanny Boyle's film \"28 Years Later\" (2025) is set on Lindisfarne, although the aerial views of the island were CGI.\nThe island was the setting for season 1 episode 5 (2012) of \"Wolfblood\", a supernatural teen drama from Children's BBC.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18456", "revid": "50236370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18456", "title": "Literacy", "text": "Ability to read and write\nLiteracy is the ability to read and write, while illiteracy refers to an inability to read and write. Some researchers suggest that the study of literacy as a concept can be divided into two periods: the period before 1950, when literacy was understood solely as alphabetical literacy (word and letter recognition); and the period after 1950, when literacy slowly began to be considered as a wider concept and process, including the social and cultural aspects of reading, writing, and functional literacy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefinition.\nThe range of definitions of literacy used by NGOs, think tanks, and advocacy groups since the 1990s suggests that this shift in understanding from \"discrete skill\" to \"social practice\" is both ongoing and uneven. Some definitions remain fairly closely aligned with the traditional \"ability to read and write\" connotation, whereas others take a broader view:\nThe concept of multiliteracies has gained currency, particularly in English Language Arts curricula, on the grounds that reading \"is interactive and informative, and occurs in ever-increasingly technological settings where information is part of spatial, audio, and visual patterns (Rhodes &amp; Robnolt, 2009)\". Objections have been raised that this concept downplays the importance of reading instruction that focuses on \"alphabetic representations\". However, these are not mutually exclusive, as children can become proficient in word-reading while engaging with multiliteracies.\nWord reading is fundamental for multiple forms of communication. Beginning in the 1940s, the term literacy has often been used to mean having knowledge or skill in a particular field, such as:\nClassicist Eric Havelock developed a continuum for a culture's literacy, from pre-literate, through craft-literate, recitation-literate and script-literate to type-literate.\nFunctional illiteracy.\nFunctional illiteracy relates to adults and has been defined in different ways:\nFunctional illiteracy is distinguished from \"primary illiteracy\" (i.e., the inability to read and write a short, simple statement concerning one's own everyday life) and \"learning difficulties\" (e.g., dyslexia). These categories have been contested\u2014as has the concept of \"illiteracy\" itself\u2014for being predicated on narrow assumptions, primarily derived from school-based contexts, about what counts as reading and writing (e.g., comprehending and following instructions).\nHistorical overview.\nOrigins.\nScript is thought to have developed independently at least five times in human history: in Mesopotamia, Egypt, the Indus civilization, lowland Mesoamerica, and China.\nBetween 3500 BCE and 3000 BCE, in southern Mesopotamia, the ancient Sumerians invented writing. During this era, literacy was \"a largely functional matter, propelled by the need to manage the new quantities of information and the new type of governance created by trade and large scale production\". Early writing systems first emerged as a recording system in which people used tokens with impressed markings to manage trade and agricultural production. The token system served as a precursor to early cuneiform writing once people began recording information on clay tablets. Proto-Cuneiform texts exhibit not only numerical signs but also ideograms depicting objects being counted. Though the traditional view had been that cuneiform literacy was restricted to a class of scribes, assyriologists including Claus Wilcke and Dominique Charpin have argued that functional literacy was somewhat widespread by the Old Babylonian period. Nonetheless, professional scribes became central to law, finances, accounting, government, administration, medicine, magic, divination, literature, and prayers.\nEgyptian hieroglyphs emerged between 3300 BCE and 3100 BCE; the iconography emphasized power among royals and other elites. The Egyptian hieroglyphic writing system was the first notation system to have phonetic values; these symbols are called phonograms.\nWriting in lowland Mesoamerica was first used by the Olmec and Zapotec civilizations in 900\u2013400 BCE. These civilizations used glyphic writing and bar-and-dot numerical notation systems for purposes related to royal iconography and calendar systems.\nThe earliest written notations in China date back to the Shang dynasty in 1200 BCE. These systematic notations, inscribed on bones, recorded sacrifices made, tributes received, and animals hunted, which were activities of the elite. These oracle-bone inscriptions were the early ancestors of modern Chinese script and contained logosyllabic script and numerals. By the time of the consolidation of the Chinese Empire during the Qin and Han dynasties (c.\u2009200 BCE), written documents were central to the formation and policing of a hierarchical bureaucratic governance structure reinforced through law. Within this legal order, written records kept track of and controlled citizen movements, created records of misdeeds, and documented the actions and judgments of government officials.\nIndus script is largely pictorial and has not yet been deciphered; as such, it is unknown whether it includes abstract signs. It is thought that they wrote from right to left and that the script is logographic. Because it has not been deciphered, linguists disagree on whether it is a complete and independent writing system; however, it is generally thought to be an independent writing system that emerged in the Harappa culture.\nExisting evidence suggests that most early acts of literacy were, in some areas (such as Egypt), closely tied to power and chiefly used for management practices, and probably less than 1% of the population was literate, as it was confined to a very small group. Scholarship by others, such as Dominique Charpin and a project from the European Union, however, suggest that this was not the case in all ancient societies: both Charpin and the EU's emerging scholarship suggest that writing and literacy were far more widespread in Mesopotamia than scholars previously thought.\nAlphabetic writing.\nAccording to social anthropologist Jack Goody, there are two interpretations regarding the origin of the alphabet. Many classical scholars, such as historian Ignace Gelb, credit the Ancient Greeks for creating the first alphabetic system (c.\u2009750 BCE) that used distinctive signs for consonants and vowels. Goody contests:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMany scholars argue that the ancient Semitic-speaking peoples of northern Canaan invented the consonantal alphabet as early as 1500 BCE. Much of this theory's development is credited to English archeologist Flinders Petrie, who, in 1905, came across a series of Canaanite inscriptions in the turquoise mines of Serabit el-Khadem. Ten years later, English Egyptologist Alan Gardiner reasoned that these letters contain an alphabet as well as references to the Canaanite goddess Asherah. In 1948, William F. Albright deciphered the text using new evidence, including a series of inscriptions from Ugarit. Discovered in 1929 by French archaeologist Claude F. A. Schaeffer, some of these inscriptions were mythological texts (written in an early Canaanite dialect) that consisted of a 30-letter cuneiform consonantal alphabet.\nAnother significant discovery was made in 1953 when three arrowheads were uncovered, each containing identical Canaanite inscriptions from 12th century BCE. According to Frank Moore Cross, these inscriptions consisted of alphabetic signs that originated during the transitional development from pictographic script to a linear alphabet. Moreover, he asserts, \"These inscriptions also provided clues to extend the decipherment of earlier and later alphabetic texts\".\nThe Canaanite script's consonantal system inspired alphabetical developments in later systems. During the Late Bronze Age, successor alphabets appeared throughout the Mediterranean region and were used in Phoenician, Hebrew, and Aramaic.\nAccording to Goody, these cuneiform scripts may have influenced the development of the Greek alphabet several centuries later. Historically, the Greeks contended that their writing system was modeled after the Phoenicians. However, many Semitic scholars now believe that Ancient Greek is more consistent with an early form of Canaanite that was used c.\u20091100 BCE. While the earliest Greek inscriptions are dated circa 8th century BCE, epigraphical comparisons to Proto-Canaanite suggest that the Greeks may have adopted the consonantal alphabet as early as 1100 BCE and later \"added in five characters to represent vowels\".\nPhoenician, which is considered to contain the first linear alphabet, rapidly spread to Mediterranean port cities in northern Canaan. Some archeologists believe that Phoenician influenced the Hebrew and Aramaic alphabets, as these languages evolved during the same time period, share similar features, and are commonly categorized into the same language group.\nWhen the Israelites migrated to Canaan between 1200 and 1000 BCE, they adopted a variation of the Canaanite alphabet. Baruch ben Neriah, Jeremiah's scribe, used this alphabet to create the later scripts of the Old Testament. The early Hebrew alphabet was prominent in the Mediterranean region until Neo-Babylonian rulers exiled the Jews to Babylon in the 6th century BCE. It was then that the new script (Square Hebrew) emerged, and the older one rapidly died out.\nThe Aramaic alphabet also emerged sometime between 1200 and 1000 BCE. Although early examples are scarce, archeologists have uncovered a wide range of later Aramaic texts, written as early as the seventh century BCE. In the Near East, it was common to record events on clay using the cuneiform script; however, writing Aramaic on leather parchments became common during the Neo-Assyrian empire. With the rise of the Persians in the 5th century BCE, Achaemenid rulers adopted Aramaic as the \"diplomatic language\".\nDarius the Great standardized Aramaic, which became the Imperial Aramaic script. This Imperial Aramaic alphabet rapidly spread: west, to the Kingdom of Nabataea, then to the Sinai and Arabian peninsulas, eventually making its way to Africa; and east, where it later influenced the development of the Brahmi script in India. Over the next few centuries, Imperial Aramaic script in Persia evolved into Pahlavi, \"as well as for a range of alphabets used by early Turkish and Mongol tribes in Siberia, Mongolia and Turkestan\". During this period, literacy spread among the merchant classes, and 15-20% of the total population may have been literate.\nThe Aramaic language declined with the spread of Islam, which was accompanied by the spread of Arabic.\nAntiquity.\nUntil recently, it was thought that the majority of people were illiterate in the classical world, though recent work challenges this perception. Anthony DiRenzo asserts that Roman society was \"a civilization based on the book and the register\" and that \"no one, either free or slave, could afford to be illiterate\". Similarly, Dupont points out, \"The written word was all around them, in both public and private life: laws, calendars, regulations at shrines, and funeral epitaphs were engraved in stone or bronze. The Republic amassed huge archives of reports on every aspect of public life.\" The imperial civilian administration produced masses of documentation used in judicial, fiscal, and administrative matters, as did the municipalities. The army kept extensive records relating to supply and duty rosters and submitted reports. Merchants, shippers, and landowners (and their personal staffs), especially of the larger enterprises, must have been literate.\nIn the late fourth century, the Desert Father Pachomius would expect the literacy of a candidate for admission to his monasteries:\nThey shall give him twenty Psalms or two of the Apostles' epistles or some other part of Scripture. And if he is illiterate he shall go at the first, third and sixth hours to someone who can teach and has been appointed for him. He shall stand before him and learn very studiously and with all gratitude. The fundamentals of a syllable, the verbs and nouns shall all be written for him and even if he does not want to he shall be compelled to read.\nDuring the 4th and 5th centuries, the Church made efforts to ensure a better clergy, especially the bishops, who were expected to have a classical education\u2014the hallmark of a socially acceptable person in higher society. Even after the remnants of the Western Roman Empire fell in the 470s, literacy continued to be a distinguishing mark of the elite, as communication skills were still important in political and church life (bishops were largely drawn from the senatorial class) in a new cultural synthesis that made \"Christianity the Roman religion\". However, these skills were less needed in the absence of a large imperial administrative apparatus whose middle and top echelons were dominated by the elite. Even so, in pre-modern times, it is unlikely that literacy was found in more than about 30\u201340% of the population. During the Dark Ages, the highest percentage of literacy was found among the clergy and monks, as they made up much of the staff needed to administer the states of western Europe.\nAn abundance of graffiti written in the Nabataean script dating back to the beginning of the first millennium CE has been taken to imply a relatively high degree of literacy among the general population in the ancient Arabic-speaking world.\nMedieval and early modern eras.\nThe rates and forms of literacy in the European Medieval period vary and are controversial: historian Elaine Treharne writes of \"a complex era of strategic literacy, generic fluidity, and linguistic competencies beyond our own experiences.\" Historian Malcolm Parkes contrasts the different expertise of the professionally literate class, cultivated readers, and pragmatic readers. Historian Mark Hailwood suggests another two type of near-literacy in Early Modern England, of \"abcederian literates\" who could spell out words to read, and of people who knew the letters though not words, were particularly common in Southern English rural areas: 50% of husbandmen could either sign their name or provide an initial.\nPost-Antiquity illiteracy was made worse by the lack of a suitable writing medium, as when the Western Roman Empire collapsed, the import of papyrus to Europe ceased. Since papyrus perishes easily and does not last well in the wetter European climate, parchment was used, which was expensive and accessible only by the church and the wealthy. Paper was introduced into Europe via Spain in the 11th century and spread north slowly over the next four centuries. Literacy saw a resurgence as a result, and by the 15th century, paper was widespread.\nEstimates of literacy rates vary by time, class, location, sex and reliability: \"Unfortunately, there is no statistical information that allows generalizations to be made in terms of numerical proportions or percentages, either for rates of literacy among the medieval population or for annual book production.\"\nHowever, here are some indicative estimates. Rates are often extrapolated from the number of people who can sign their name on official documents. First, rough estimates by economic historian Robert Allen, based on the urban/rural split of the population:\nHowever:\nInspired by the Enlightenment, Sweden implemented programs in 1723 aimed at making the population fully literate. Other countries implemented similar measures at this time. These included Denmark in 1739, Poland in 1783, and France in 1794/5.\nLiteracy was well established in early 18th century England, when books geared towards children became far more common. Near the end of the century, as many as 50 were printed every year in major cities around England.\nIn Edo-period Japan, literacy in the three major cities has been estimated at 70% for men, 40% for females, but 10-20% lower in the countryside.\nIndustrialization.\nIn the 19th century, reading would become even more common in the United Kingdom. Public notes, broadsides, handbills, catchpennies and printed songs would have been usual street literature before newspapers became common. Other forms of popular reading material included advertising for events, theaters, and goods for sale. In the late 19th century, gas and electric lighting were becoming more common in private homes, replacing candlelight and oil lamps, enabling reading after dark and increasing the appeal of literacy.\nIn his 1836/1837 \"Pickwick Papers\" Charles Dickens's said that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFrom the mid-19th century onward, the Second Industrial Revolution saw technological improvements in paper production. The new distribution networks, enabled by improved roads and rail, resulted in an increased capacity to supply printed material. Social and educational changes increased the demand for reading matter, as rising literacy rates, particularly among the middle and working classes, created a new mass market for printed material. Wider schooling helped increase literacy rates, which in turn helped lower the cost of publication.\nUnskilled labor forces were common in Western Europe, and, as British industry improved, more engineers and skilled workers who could handle technical instructions and complex situations were needed. Literacy was essential to be hired. A senior government official told Parliament in 1870:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe skills of reading and writing are not the same. In Spain, the total rate of literacy between 1841 and 1860 was constant at almost 25%: in 1841 most of the literate could read but not write, but by 1860 most could read and write.\nModern proliferation (1950 \u2013 present).\nData published by UNESCO shows that the worldwide literacy rate among adults has increased, on average, by 5 percentage points every decade since 1950, from 55.7% in 1950 to 86.2% in 2015. Due to rapid population growth, while the percentage of adults who were illiterate decreased, the actual number of illiterate adults increased from 700 million in 1950 to 878 million in 1990, before starting to decrease and falling to 745 million by 2015. The number of illiterate adults remains higher than in 1950, \"despite decades of universal education policies, literacy interventions and the spread of print material and information and communications technology (ICT)\".\nRegional disparities.\nAvailable global data indicates significant variations in literacy rates between world regions. North America, Europe, West Asia, and Central Asia have almost achieved full literacy for men and women aged 15 or older. Most countries in East Asia and the Pacific, as well as Latin America and the Caribbean, have adult literacy rates over 90%. In other regions, illiteracy persists at higher rates; as of 2013, the adult literacy rate in South Asia and North Africa was 67.55% and 59.76% in Sub-Saharan Africa.\nIn much of the world, high youth literacy rates suggest that illiteracy will become less common as more educated younger generations replace less educated older ones. However, in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, where the vast majority of the world's illiterate youth live, lower school enrollment implies that illiteracy will persist to a greater degree. According to 2013 data, the youth literacy rate (ages 15 to 24) is 84% in South Asia and North Africa and 70% in sub-Saharan Africa.\nHowever, the distinction between literacy and illiteracy is not clear-cut. Given that having a literate person in the household confers many of the benefits of literacy, some recent literature in economics, starting with the work of Kaushik Basu and James Foster, distinguishes between a \"proximate illiterate\" and an \"isolated illiterate\". A \"proximate illiterate\" lives in a household with literate members, while an \"isolated illiterate\" lives in a household where everyone is illiterate. Isolated illiteracy is more common among older populations in wealthier nations, where people are less likely to live in multigenerational households with potentially literate relatives. A 2018/2019 UNESCO report noted that \"conversely, in low and lower middle income countries, isolated illiteracy is concentrated among younger people,\" along with increased rates among rural populations and women. This evidence indicates that illiteracy is a complex phenomenon with multiple factors impacting rates of illiteracy and the type of illiteracy one may experience.\nLiteracy has rapidly spread in several regions in the last twenty-five years, and the United Nations's global initiative with Sustainable Development Goal 4 is also gaining momentum.\nSocial impact and demographics.\nThe traditional concept of literacy widened as a consensus emerged among researchers in composition studies, education research, and anthropological linguistics that it makes little sense to speak of reading or writing outside of a specific context, with linguist James Paul Gee describing it as \"simply incoherent.\" For example, even the extremely early stages of acquiring mastery over symbol shapes take place in a particular social context (even if that context is \"school\"), and, after print acquisition, every instance of reading or writing will be for a specific purpose and occasion with particular readers and writers in mind. Reading and writing, therefore, are never separable from social and cultural elements. A corollary point made by David Barton and Rosalind Ivani\u0107, among others, is that the cognitive and societal effects of acquiring literacy are not easily predictable, since, as Brian Street has argued, \"the ways in which people address reading and writing are themselves rooted in conceptions of knowledge, identity, and being.\" Consequently, as Jack Goody has documented, historically, literacy has included the transformation of social systems that rely on literacy and the changing uses of literacy within those evolving systems.\nGender.\nAccording to 2015 data collected by the UNESCO Institute for Statistics, about two-thirds (63%) of the world's illiterate adults are women. This disparity was even starker in previous decades, and from 1970 to 2000, the global gender gap in literacy decreased significantly. Around the year 2013, however, this progress stagnated, with the gender gap holding almost constant over the last two decades. In general, the gender gap in literacy was not as pronounced as the regional gap; that is, differences between countries were often larger than gender differences within countries.\nSub-Saharan Africa has the lowest overall literacy rate and the widest gender gap: 52% of adult women and 68% of adult men are literate. A similar gender disparity exists in North Africa, where 70% of adult women are literate versus 86% of adult men. In South Asia, 58% of adult women and 77% of adult men are literate.\nThe 1990 World Conference on Education for All, held in Jomtien, Thailand, brought attention to the literacy gender gap and prompted many developing countries to prioritize women's literacy.\nIn many contexts, female illiteracy coexists with other aspects of gender inequality. Martha Nussbaum says illiterate women are more vulnerable to becoming trapped in an abusive marriage, given that illiteracy limits their employment opportunities and worsens their position when negotiating within the household. Moreover, Nussbaum links literacy to the ability for women to effectively communicate and collaborate with one another \"to participate in a larger movement for political change.\"\nChallenges of increasing female literacy.\nSocial barriers can limit opportunities to increase literacy skills among women and girls; making literacy classes available can be ineffective when it conflicts with the use of the valuable limited time of women and girls. School-age girls may face more expectations than their male counterparts to perform household work and care for younger siblings. Generational dynamics can also perpetuate these disparities; illiterate parents may not readily appreciate the value of literacy for their daughters, particularly in traditional, rural societies with expectations that girls will remain at home.\nA World Bank and International Center for Research on Women review of academic literature concluded that child marriage, which predominantly impacts girls, tends to reduce literacy levels. A 2008 analysis of the issue in Bangladesh found that for every additional year a girl's marriage is delayed, her likelihood of literacy increases by 5.6%. Similarly, a 2014 study found a correlation that in sub-Saharan Africa, marrying early significantly decreases a girl's probability of literacy, even after accounting for other variables.\nGender gap for boys in developed countries.\nWhile women and girls comprise the majority of the global illiterate population, in many developed countries, a literacy-gender gap exists in the opposite direction. Data from the Programme for International Student Assessment has consistently shown the literacy underachievement of boys within member countries of the OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). In view of such findings, many education specialists have recommended changing classroom practices to better accommodate boys' learning styles and removing any gender stereotypes that may create the perception that reading and writing are feminine activities.\nSocioeconomic impact.\nMany policy analysts consider literacy rates to be a crucial measure of the value of a region's human capital. For example, literate people can be more easily trained than illiterate people and generally have a higher socioeconomic status; thus, they enjoy better health and employment prospects. The international community has come to consider literacy as a key facilitator and goal of development. In regard to the Sustainable Development Goals adopted by the UN in 2015, the UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning has declared the \"central role of literacy in responding to sustainable development challenges such as health, social equality, economic empowerment and environmental sustainability.\"\nA majority of prisoners have been found to be illiterate, and in Edinburgh prison, winner of the 2010 Libraries Change Lives Award, \"the library has become the cornerstone of the prison's literacy strategy\", reducing recidivism and reoffending and allowing incarcerated people to work toward attaining higher socioeconomic status once released.\nEffects on literacy learning.\nAs socioeconomics affects brain development and brain functions are heavily involved in processing both input and output, a learner's environment can affect the cognitive process of learning how to read and write. Before a child enters a school setting, their executive function is influenced by their home environment. Research demonstrates that for children who grow up in poverty, their socioeconomic circumstances severely strain their \"neuro-endocrine and brain function\". This affects a child's ability to regulate environmental stimuli, process and structure information, and plan and effectively execute tasks that involve their working memory\u2014all of these are necessary cognitive facilities to successfully learn how to read and write. Living in poverty is stressful for all involved but is cognitively damaging for young children.\nA study done by NICHD indicates that socioeconomics plays a role for children who are young when the family experiences poverty, but shows no indication of adverse effects on reading achievement or behavior for adolescents entering poverty. \nThe data extensively shows that children from low socioeconomic backgrounds had poorer literacy performance, especially in reading. A study done by the OECD, which included over 25 countries in Europe, found that in all studied countries, students who lived in low-income households scored lower in reading than students who lived in high-income households.\nParenting also affects a child's literacy. Field research was done by collecting data from families that were upper, middle, or lower class, or on welfare. The results found that, in a 100-hour week, children in upper-class households experienced an average of over 200,000 words, those in middle- and lower-class households heard about 125,000 words, and children from households on welfare were exposed to the fewest words\u201462,000 words. This indicates that a child from an upper-class family would be exposed to 8 million more words than a child from a family on welfare. Outside of word exposure, which is essential for word acquisition, the National Center for Educational Statistics found that 41.9% of children from low-income families scored substantially lower on most reading achievements for grades 4, 8, and 12 in 2013.\nAccording to a study performed by ANOVA, multiple socioeconomic variables influence children, such as parental education level, parental occupation, health history, and even usage of technology within the home. With these factors in mind, their study showed that young children are especially susceptible to environmental factors, meaning socioeconomics affects them cognitively and can have adverse effects as their brains continue to develop. However, another study done by the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) around 2012 suggesteda slightly different conclusion. While the study agrees that poverty negatively affects childhood literacy, some nuances are added. In both studies, children who experienced poverty scored lower in reading assessments, but the NLSY's study noted that the duration of poverty altered the literacy outcome. It found that children ages 5\u201311 who experienced \"persistent poverty\" were more adversely affected than their peers who never experienced poverty. The study acknowledged that other factors affected these children's reading scores, particularly maternal influence. The mothers of these households were scaled based on a \"home environment\" score, which measured their emotional and verbal responsiveness, acceptance, and involvement with the child and organization. Households experiencing poverty tended to have lower scores, and lower scores correlated with lower reading levels. The study also showed that the effects of poverty on child literacy differed by ethnicity, culture, and gender.\nHealth impacts.\nPrint illiteracy generally corresponds with less knowledge about modern health, hygiene, and nutritional practices, and a lack of knowledge can exacerbate a range of health issues. Within developing countries in particular, literacy rates also have implications for child mortality; in these contexts, children of literate mothers are 50% more likely to live past age 5 than children of illiterate mothers. Therefore, public health research has increasingly focused on the potential for literacy skills to allow women to more successfully access healthcare and thereby facilitate gains in child health.\nA 2014 descriptive research survey project correlates literacy levels with the socioeconomic status of women in Oyo State, Nigeria. The study shows that developing literacy in the region will bring \"economic empowerment and will encourage rural women to practice hygiene, which will in turn lead to the reduction of birth and death rates.\"\nEconomic impacts.\nLiteracy can increase job opportunities and access to higher education. In 2009, the National Adult Literacy Agency in Ireland commissioned a cost\u2013benefit analysis of adult literacy training, which concluded that there were economic gains for the individuals, the companies they worked for, and the Exchequer, as well as the economy and the country as a whole (e.g., increased GDP).\nKorotayev and coauthors found a rather significant correlation between the level of literacy in the early 19th century and successful modernization and economic breakthroughs in the late 20th century, as \"literate people could be characterized by a greater innovative-activity level, which provides opportunities for modernization, development, and economic growth.\"\nLifespan development and promotion efforts.\nWhile informal learning within the home can play an important role in literacy development, gains in childhood literacy often occur in primary school settings. Continuing the global expansion of public education is thus a frequent focus of literacy advocates. These kinds of broad improvements in education often require centralized efforts by national governments; however, local literacy projects implemented by NGOs can play an important role, particularly in rural contexts.\nFunding for both youth and adult literacy programs often comes from large international development organizations. USAID, for example, steered donors like the Gates Foundation and the Global Partnership for Education toward the issue of childhood literacy by developing the Early Grade Reading Assessment. Advocacy groups like the National Institute of Adult Continuing Education have frequently called upon international organizations such as UNESCO, the International Labour Organization, the World Health Organization, and the World Bank to prioritize support for adult women's literacy. Efforts to increase adult literacy often encompass other development priorities as well; for example, initiatives in Ethiopia, Morocco, and India have combined adult literacy programs with vocational skills trainings in order to encourage program enrollment and address the complex needs of women (and other marginalized groups) who lack economic opportunities.\nIn 2013, the UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning published a set of case studies on programs that successfully improved female literacy rates. The report features countries from a variety of regions and differing income levels, reflecting the general global consensus on \"the need to empower women through the acquisition of literacy skills.\" Part of the impetus for UNESCO's focus on literacy is a broader effort to respond to globalization and \"the shift towards knowledge-based societies\" that it has produced. While globalization presents emerging challenges, it also provides new opportunities. Many education and development specialists are hopeful that new ICTs will expand literacy learning opportunities for children and adults, even in countries that have historically struggled to improve literacy rates through more conventional means.\nAlthough most people acquire literacy during childhood, it continues to develop throughout life; literacy is not a skill that is fixed once a person leaves school but remains malleable across the entire lifespan. Among adults, both gains and losses in literacy occur in roughly equal measure, sometimes over relatively short periods of a few years. Even adults with very low literacy levels can acquire literacy over time. Whether a person experiences gains or losses depends on a range of factors, and one of the key factors are the demands and opportunities to engage in literary practices in the workplace, home, or other contexts.\nLiteracy as a development indicator.\nThe Human Development Index, produced by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), uses education as one of its three indicators. Originally, adult literacy represented two-thirds of this education index weight. In 2010, however, the UNDP replaced the adult literacy measure with mean years of schooling. A 2011 UNDP research paper frames this change as a way to \"ensure current relevance\", arguing that gains in global literacy already achieved between 1970 and 2010 mean that literacy will be \"unlikely to be as informative of the future.\" Other scholars, however, have since warned against overlooking the importance of literacy as an indicator and goal for development, particularly for marginalized groups such as women and rural populations.\nThe World Bank, along with the UNESCO Institute for Statistics, has developed the Learning Poverty concept and an associated measure that measures the proportion of students who are unable to read and understand a simple story by age 10. In low- and middle-income countries, 53% of children are \"learning-poor\", as are up to 80% of children in poor countries. In fact, these new measures indicate that these high rates of illiteracy are an \"early warning sign that SDG 4 for education and all related global goals are in jeopardy.\" Current progress in improving literacy rates is seen as much too slow to meet the SDG goals, as at the current rate, approximately 43% of children will still be learning poorly by 2030.\nThe Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) assesses children on reading and math skills at age 15. PISA-D encourages and facilitates PISA testing in low- and middle-income countries. In 2019, \"PISA-D results reveal exceptionally low scores for participating countries. Only 23 percent of students tested achieved the minimum level of proficiency in reading, compared with 80 percent of OECD.\" Minimum proficiency requires students to \"read 'simple and familiar texts and understand them literally', as well as demonstrating some ability to connect pieces of information and draw inferences.\"\nThe Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC) assesses literacy, numeracy and problem solving for working age population ages 16 to 65.\nMeasuring literacy.\nIn 2020, the UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimated the global literacy rate at 86.68%. It is important to understand how literacy rates have been measured in the past as well as how they are currently being measured. Starting in 1975, the head of a household answered a simple yes-or-no question asking whether household members could read and write; in 1988, some countries started using self-reporting as well.\nSelf-reported data is subjective and has several limitations. First, a simple yes-or-no question does not capture the continuum of literacy. Second, self-reports are dependent on what each individual interprets \"reading\" and \"writing\" to mean. In some cultures, drawing a picture may be understood as writing one's name. Lastly, many of the surveys asked one individual to report literacy on behalf of others, which \"introduces further noise, in particular when it comes to estimating literacy among women and children, since these groups are less often considered 'head of household'\".\nIn 2007, several countries began introducing literacy tests as a more accurate measurement of literacy rates, including Liberia, South Korea, Guyana, Kenya, and Bangladesh. However, in 2016, the majority of counties still reported literacy through either self-reported measures or other indirect estimates.\nThese indirect measurements are potentially problematic, as many countries measure literacy based on years of schooling. In Greece, an individual is considered literate if they have finished six years of primary education, while in Paraguay, individuals are considered literate if they have completed just two years of primary school.\nHowever, emerging research reveals that educational attainment (e.g., years of schooling) does not perfectly correlate with literacy. Literacy tests show that in many low-income countries, a large proportion of students who have attended two years of primary school cannot read a single word. These rates are as high as 90% of second-grade students in Malawi, 85.4% in rural India, 83% in Ghana, and 64% in Uganda. In India, over 50% of Grade 5 students have not mastered Grade 2 literacy. In Nigeria, only about 1 in 10 women who completed Grade 6 can read a single sentence in their native language. This data reveals that literacy rates measured by using years of schooling as a proxy are potentially unreliable and do not reflect the true literacy rates of populations.\nLiteracy as a human right.\nUnlike medieval times, when reading and writing skills were restricted to a few elites and the clergy, literacy skills are now expected from every member of society. Literacy is therefore considered a human right, essential for lifelong learning and social change, as supported by the 1996 Report of the International Commission on Education for the Twenty-First Century and the 1997 Hamburg Declaration: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Literacy, broadly conceived as the basic knowledge and skills needed by all in a rapidly changing world, is a fundamental human right. (...) There are millions, the majority of whom are women, who lack opportunities to learn or who have insufficient skills to be able to assert this right. The challenge is to enable them to do so. This will often imply the creation of preconditions for learning through awareness raising and empowerment. Literacy is also a catalyst for participation in social, cultural, political and economic activities, and for learning throughout life.\nIn 2016, the European Literacy Policy Network (an association of European literacy professionals) published a document entitled the \"European Declaration of the Right to Literacy\". It states that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Everyone in Europe has the right to acquire literacy. EU Member States should ensure that people of all ages, regardless of social class, religion, ethnicity, origin and gender, are provided with the necessary resources and opportunities to develop sufficient and sustainable literacy skills in order to effectively understand and use written communication be in handwritten, in print or digital form.\nTeaching literacy.\nIn school, reading and writing are often taught as separate skills. However, children show curiosity about the written word and begin to experiment with both in a process of emergent literacy and making sense of (and using) the writing system they see used around them. Every new piece of writing draws on previous reading through a process of intertextuality, sometimes explicitly through citation, as in academic writing, and writing about reading is one of the major approaches for teaching writing in higher education. Intertextuality, however, can also be implicit through well-known, recognizable phrases from specific works or genres or through the development of a distinct writing style. Evidence has supported the integration of reading and writing at all levels of schooling, as improvement in one area supports the other. A series of metastudies have examined the effectiveness of various methods of teaching writing, revealing that attention to context, cognitive/motivational factors, and the instruction strategy, among other things, are important.\nCritiques of autonomous models of literacy notwithstanding, the belief that reading development is key to literacy remains dominant, at least in the United States, where it is understood as the progression of skills that begins with the ability to understand spoken words and decode written words and culminates in the deep understanding of the text. Reading development involves a range of complex language underpinnings, including awareness of speech sounds (phonology), spelling patterns (orthography), word meaning (semantics), syntax, and patterns of word formation (morphology), all of which provide a necessary platform for reading fluency and comprehension. Once these skills are acquired, it is believed a reader can attain full language literacy, which includes the abilities to apply to printed material critical analysis, inference, and synthesis; to write with accuracy and coherence; and to use information and insights from text as the basis for informed decisions and creative thought.\nFor this reason, teaching English reading literacy in the United States is dominated by a focus on a set of discrete decoding skills. From this perspective, literacy\u2014or rather, reading\u2014comprises a number of sub-skills that can be taught to students. These sub-skills include phonological awareness, phonics decoding, fluency, comprehension, and vocabulary. Mastering each of these sub-skills is necessary for students to become proficient readers.\nFrom this same perspective, readers of alphabetic languages must understand the alphabetic principle to master basic reading skills. For this purpose, a writing system is \"alphabetic\" if it uses symbols to represent phonemes (individual language sounds), though the degree of correspondence between letters and sounds varies between alphabetic languages. Syllabic writing systems (such as Japanese kana) use a symbol to represent a single syllable, and logographic writing systems (such as Chinese) use a symbol to represent a morpheme.\nThere are a number of approaches to teaching reading. Each is shaped by its assumptions about what literacy is and how it is best learned by students. Phonics instruction, for example, focuses on reading at the level of letters or symbols and their sounds (i.e., sublexical). It teaches readers to decode the letters, or groups of letters, that make up a word. A common method of teaching phonics is synthetic phonics, in which a novice reader pronounces each individual sound and blends them to pronounce the whole word. Another approach is embedded phonics instruction, used more often in whole language reading instruction, in which novice readers learn about the individual letters in words on a just-in-time, just-in-place basis that is tailored to meet each student's reading and writing learning needs. That is, teachers provide phonics instruction opportunistically, within the context of stories or student writing that feature repeat instances of a particular letter or group of letters. Embedded instruction combines letter-sound knowledge with the use of meaningful context to read new and difficult words. Techniques such as directed listening and thinking activities can be used to aid children in learning how to read and in reading comprehension. For students at both primary and secondary levels, writing about what they read as they are learning to write has been found to also be effective in improving their reading skills.\nThe two most commonly used approaches to reading instruction are structured literacy instruction and balanced literacy instruction. The structured literacy approach explicitly and systematically focuses on phonological awareness, word recognition, phonics, decoding, spelling, and syntax at both the sentence and paragraph levels. The balanced literacy approach, as the name suggests, balances emphasis on phonics and decoding; shared, guided, and independent reading; and grapheme representations with context and imagery. Both approaches have their critics\u2014those who oppose structured literacy claim that by restricting students to phonemes, their fluency development is limited; critics of balanced literacy claim that if phonics and decoding instruction are neglected, students will have to rely on compensatory strategies when confronted with unfamiliar text.\nThese strategies are taught to students as part of the balanced literacy approach based on a theory about reading development called the three-cueing system. As the name suggests, the three-cueing system uses three cues to determine the meaning of words: grapho-phonetic cues (letter-sound relationships); syntactic cues (grammatical structure); and semantic cues (a word making sense in context). However, cognitive neuroscientist Mark Seidenberg and professor Timothy Shanahan do not support the theory. They say the three-cueing system's value in reading instruction \"is a magnificent work of the imagination\", and it developed not because teachers lack integrity, commitment, motivation, sincerity, or intelligence, but because they \"were poorly trained and advised\" about the science of reading. In England, the simple view of reading and synthetic phonics are intended to replace \"the searchlights multi-cueing model\".\nIn his 2009 book \"Reading in the Brain\", cognitive neuroscientist Stanislas Dehaene said \"cognitive psychology directly refutes any notion of teaching via a 'global' or 'whole language' method.\" He goes on to talk about \"the myth of whole-word reading\", saying it has been refuted by recent experiments. \"We do not recognize a printed word through a holistic grasping of its contours, because our brain breaks it down into letters and graphemes.\"\nHowever, a 2012 hypothesis proposed that reading might be acquired naturally, in the same manner as spoken language, if print is constantly available at an early age. According to this theory, if an appropriate form of written text is made available before formal schooling begins, reading should be learned inductively, emerge naturally, and have no significant negative consequences. This proposal challenges the commonly held belief that written language requires formal instruction and schooling; thus, its success would change current views of literacy and schooling. Using developments in behavioral science and technology, Technology-Assisted Reading Acquisition (TARA), an interactive system, would enable young pre-literate children to accurately perceive and learn the properties of written language through simple exposure to the written form.\nIn Australia, a number of state governments have introduced Reading Challenges to improve literacy. The Premier's Reading Challenge in South Australia, launched by Premier Mike Rann, has one of the highest participation rates in the world for reading challenges. It has been embraced by more than 95% of public, private, and religious schools.\nPost-conflict settings.\nPrograms have been implemented in regions that have an ongoing conflict or are in a post-conflict stage. The Norwegian Refugee Council Pack program has been used in 13 post-conflict countries since 2003. The program organizers believe that daily routines and otherwise predictable activities help ease the transition from war to peace. Learners can select one area of vocational training for a year-long period; they also complete required courses in agriculture, life skills, literacy, and numeracy. Results have shown that active participation and management of the members of the program are important to the success of the program. These programs share the use of integrated basic education, e.g., literacy, numeracy, scientific knowledge, local history and culture, native and mainstream language skills, and apprenticeships.\nTeaching migrant, immigrant, and non-native users.\nAlthough there is considerable awareness that language deficiencies, including a lack of proficiency, are disadvantageous to immigrants settling into a new country, there is a lack of pedagogical approaches to teaching literacy to migrant English-language learners (ELLs). Harvard scholar Catherine Snow called for the gap to be addressed: \"The TESOL field needs a concerted research effort to inform literacy instruction for such children\u2014to determine when to start literacy instruction and how to adapt it to the LS reader's needs.\" Recent developments to address the gap in teaching literacy to foreign language learners have been ongoing, with promising results seen with a curricular framework from the Harvard Graduate School of Education, which integrates Teaching for Understanding.\nA series of pilot projects have been carried out in the Middle East and Africa, and significant interest from the learners has been seen in the use of visual arts as springboards for literacy-oriented instruction. In one project, migrant women were provided with cameras and took the instructor on a walking tour of their village. There, they photographed places and activities that would later be used for writings about their daily lives\u2014in essence, a narrative of life. Other primers for writing activities include painting, sketching, and other craft projects.\nIn another series of pilot studies, alternatives to instructing literacy to migrant English-language learners were investigated, starting with simple trials aiming to test the effects of teaching photography to participants with no prior photography background and then painting and sketching activities that could later be integrated into a larger pedagogical initiative. In efforts to develop alternative approaches for literacy instruction utilizing visual arts, work was carried out with Afghan laborers, Bangladeshi tailors, Emirati media students, internal Ethiopian migrants (both laborers and university students), and a street child.\nIt should be pointed out that in these challenging contexts, sometimes the teaching of literacy may have unforeseen barriers. The \"EL Gazette\" reported that in the trials carried out in Ethiopia, for example, it was found that all ten of the participants had problems with vision. In order to overcome this or avoid such challenges, preliminary health checks can help inform pre-teaching in order to better assist in the teaching and learning of literacy.\nUsing a visual arts approach to literacy instruction can provide benefits by incorporating a traditional literacy approach (reading and writing) while also addressing 21st-century digital literacy through the use of digital cameras and posting images onto the web. Many scholars, such as Hutchison and Woodward, feel that it is necessary to include digital literacy under the traditional umbrella of literacy instruction, specifically when engaging second language learners.\nA visual arts approach to literary instruction for migrant populations can also be blended with core curricular goals.\nA pressing challenge in education is the instruction of literacy to migrant English-language learners (MELLs), a term coined by Pellerine and not limited to English. \"Due to the growing share of immigrants in many Western societies, there has been increasing concern for the degree to which immigrants acquire language that is spoken in the destination country\".\nWhile learning literacy in one's first language can be challenging, the challenge becomes even more cognitively demanding when learning a second language. The task can become considerably more difficult when confronted by a migrant who has made a sudden change by immigrating and requires the second language immediately upon arrival. In most instances, a migrant will not have the opportunity to start school again in grade one and acquire the language naturally; instead, alternative interventions need to take place. In these cases, a visual arts approach can be helpful\u2014taking a photo, sketching an event, or painting an image have been seen as effective ways to understand the intention of the learner as they can incorporate orality.\nIn the above image, from left to right:\nIn a study based in Ethiopia, participants were asked to rate their preference for activity on a scale of 1\u201310. The survey prompt was: \"On a scale of 1 to 10, how would you rate photography as an activity that helped you get inspiration for your writing activities (think of enjoyment and usefulness)?\" The activities used as primers for writing were rated, in order of preference:\nMore research would need to be conducted to confirm such trends.\nAuthorship programs have been successful in bringing student work together in book format as part of the program's culmination. These books can be used to document learning, and more importantly, to reinforce language and content goals.\nThe collection of such writings into books can trigger both intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. Feedback by students involved in such initiatives indicates that the healthy pressures of collective and collaborative work were beneficial.\nBy continent.\nEurope.\nUnited Kingdom.\nOn average, girls do better than boys at English, yet nearly one in ten young adult women have poor reading and writing skills in the UK in the 21st century, which seriously damages their employment prospects. Many are trapped in poverty but hide their lack of reading skills due to social stigma.\nEngland.\nLiteracy is first documented to have occurred in the area of modern England on 24 September 54 BCE, when Julius Caesar and Quintus Cicero wrote to Marcus Cicero \"from the nearest shores of Britain\". Literacy was widespread under Roman rule but became very rare, limited almost entirely to churchmen, after the fall of the Western Roman Empire. In 12th and 13th century England, the ability to recite a particular passage from the Bible (Psalm 51) in Latin entitled a common law defendant to the benefit of clergy and trial before an ecclesiastical court, where sentences were more lenient, instead of a secular one, where hanging was a likely sentence. Thus, literate defendants often claimed the benefit of clergy, while an illiterate person who had memorized the psalm used in the literacy test could also claim the benefit of clergy.\nDespite lacking a system of free and compulsory primary schooling, England reached near universal literacy in the 19th century as a result of shared, informal learning provided by family members, fellow workers, or benevolent employers. Even with near-universal literacy, the gap between male and female rates persisted until the early 20th century. Many women in the West during the 19th century were able to read but unable to write.\nWales.\nFormal higher education in the arts and sciences in Wales, from the Middle Ages to the 18th century, was limited to the wealthy and the clergy. Following the Roman occupation and the conquest by the English, education in Wales was at a low point during the early modern period; in particular, formal education was only available in English while the majority of the population spoke only Welsh. The first modern grammar schools were established in Welsh towns such as Ruthin, Brecon, and Cowbridge. One of the first modern national education methods to use the native Welsh language was started by Griffith Jones in 1731. Jones became rector of Llanddowror in 1716 and remained there for the rest of his life. He organized and introduced a Welsh language-circulating school system, which was attractive and effective for Welsh speakers, while also teaching them English, which gave them access to broader educational sources. The circulating schools may have taught half the country's population to read. Literacy rates in Wales by the mid-18th century were one of the highest.\nContinental Europe.\nThe ability to read did not necessarily mean the ability to write. The 1686 church law (\"kyrkolagen\") of the Kingdom of Sweden (modern Sweden, Finland, Latvia, and Estonia) made literacy compulsory, and by 1800, the percent of people able to read was close to 100%. This was directly dependent on the need to read religious texts in the Lutheran faith in Sweden and Finland; as a result, literacy in these countries was specifically focused on reading. However, as late as the 19th century, many Swedes, especially women, could not write. Iceland was an exception, as it achieved widespread literacy without formal schooling, libraries, or printed books via informal tuition by religious leaders and peasant teachers.\nHistorian Ernest Gellner argues that Continental European countries were far more successful in implementing educational reform because their governments were more willing to invest in the population as a whole. Government oversight allowed countries to standardize curriculum and secure funding through legislation, thus enabling educational programs to have a broader reach.\nAlthough present-day concepts of literacy have much to do with the 15th-century invention of the movable type printing press, it was not until the Industrial Revolution of the mid-19th century that paper and books became affordable to all classes of industrialized society. Until then, only a small percent of the population was literate, as only wealthy individuals and institutions could afford the materials. Even today[ [update]], the cost of paper and books is a barrier to universal literacy in some developing nations.\nOn the other hand, historian Harvey Graff argues that the introduction of compulsory education was, in part, an effort to control the type of literacy the working class had access to. According to Graff, learning was increasing outside of formal settings (e.g., schools), and this uncontrolled reading could lead to increased radicalization of the populace. In his view, mass schooling was meant to temper and control literacy, not spread it. Graff also says, using the example of Sweden, that mass literacy can be achieved without formal schooling or instruction in writing.\nNorth America.\nMexico.\nIn the last 40 years, the rate of illiteracy in Mexico has been steadily decreasing. In the 1960s, because the majority of the residents of the federal capital were illiterate, the planners of the Mexico City Metro designed a series of unique icons to identify each station in the system in addition to its formal name. The INEGI's census data in 1970 showed a national average illiteracy rate of 25.8%, which had decreased to under 7% by the 2010 census. Mexico still has a gender educational bias\u2014the illiteracy rate for women was 8.1% compared with 5.6% for men.\nRates differ across regions and states. The states with the highest poverty rate had greater than 15% illiteracy in 2010: 17.8% in Chiapas, 16.7% in Guerrero, and 16.3% in Oaxaca. In contrast, the illiteracy rates in the Federal District (now part of Mexico City) and in some northern states like Nuevo Le\u00f3n, Baja California, and Coahuila were below 3% in the 2010 census (2.1%, 2.2%, 2.6%, and 2.6%, respectively).\nSouth America.\nBrazil.\nIn 1964, Paulo Freire was arrested and exiled for teaching peasants to read. However, since democracy returned to Brazil, there has been a steady increase in the percentage of literate people. Educators with the Ax\u00e9 project in the city of Salvador, Bah\u00eda, attempt to improve literacy rates among urban youth, especially youth living on the streets, through the use of cultural music and dances. Then, \"they are encouraged to go on learning and become professional artists.\"\nAfrica.\nThe literacy rates in Africa vary significantly between countries. The registered literacy rate in Libya was 86.1% in 2004, and UNESCO says that the literacy rate in the region of Equatorial Guinea is approximately 95%, while the literacy rate in South Sudan is approximately 27%.\nIn sub-Saharan Africa, youth from wealthier families often have more educational opportunities to become literate than poorer youth, who may need to leave school because they are needed at home to farm or care for siblings. Additionally, the rate of literacy has not improved enough to compensate for the effects of demographic growth. As a result, the number of illiterate adults has risen by 27% over the last 20 years, reaching 169 million in 2010. Thus, out of the 775 million illiterate adults in the world in 2010, more than one fifth (20%) were in sub-Saharan Africa. The countries with the lowest levels of literacy in the world are also concentrated in this region, where adult literacy rates can be well below 50%.\nAlgeria.\nThe literacy rate in Algeria is 81.4%, attributable to the fact that education is compulsory and free up to age 17.\nBurkina Faso.\nBurkina Faso has a very low literacy rate of 28.7%, defined as anyone at least 15 years of age who can read and write. To improve the literacy rate, the government has received at least 80 volunteer teachers. A severe lack of primary school teachers causes problems for any attempt to improve the literacy rate and school enrollment.\nEgypt.\nEgypt has a relatively high literacy rate. The adult literacy rate in 2010 was estimated at 72%.\nEthiopia.\nThe Ethiopians are among the first literate people in sub-saharan Africa, having written, read, and created manuscripts in the ancient Ge'ez language (an Amharic language) since the 2nd century CE. All boys learned to read the Psalms around the age of 7. The national literacy campaign introduced in 1978 increased literacy rates to between 37% (unofficial) and 63% (official) by 1984.\nGuinea.\nGuinea has a literacy rate of 41%, defined as anyone at least 15 years old who can read or write. Guinea was the first to use the Literacy, Conflict Resolution, and Peacebuilding (LCRP) project. This project was developed to increase agriculture production, develop key skills, resolve conflict, and improve literacy and numeracy skills. The LCRP worked within refugee camps near the border of Sierra Leone; however, this project only lasted from 1999 to 2001. There are several other international projects working within the country that have similar goals.\nKenya.\nThe literacy rate in Kenya among people below 20 years of age is over 70%, as the first 8 years of primary school are provided tuition-free by the government. In January 2008, the government began offering a limited program of free secondary education. Literacy is much higher among the young than among the older population, with the total being about 81.54% for the country. Most of this literacy, however, is at an elementary level\u2014not secondary or advanced.\nMali.\nIn Mali in 2015, the adult literacy rate was 33%, one of the lowest in the world, with males having a 43.1% literacy rate and females having a 24.6% rate. The government defines literacy as anyone at least 15 who can read or write. In recent years, the government of Mali and international organizations have taken steps to improve the literacy rate. The government recognized the slow progress and began creating ministries for basic education and literacy in their national languages in 2007; they also increased the education budget by 3%, when it was at 35% in 2007. The lack of literate adults causes the programs to be slowed\u2014they need qualified female instructors, which is problematic as many men refuse to send female family members to be trained by male teachers.\nMauritius.\nThe adult literacy rate in Mauritius was estimated at 89.8% in 2011. Male literacy was 92.3%, and female literacy was 87.3%.\nNiger.\nNiger has an extremely low literacy rate of 28.7%, in part due to the gender gap\u2014men have a literacy rate of 42.9%, while for women it is only 15.1%. The Nigerien government defines literacy as anyone who can read or write over the age of 15. The Niass Tij\u0101niyyah, a Sufi order, has started anti-poverty, empowerment, and literacy campaigns. The women in Kiota had not attempted to improve their education or economic standing until Saida Oumul Khadiri Niass, known as Maman and married to a leader of the Niass Tijaniyya, talked to men and women throughout the community, changing the community's beliefs on appropriate behavior for women. Maman's efforts have allowed women in Kiota to own small businesses, sell in the market, attend literacy classes, and organize small associations that can give microloans. Maman personally teaches children in and around Kiota, with special attention to girls. Maman has her students require instructor permission to allow the girls' parents to marry their daughters early, increasing the amount of education these girls receive as well as delaying marriage, pregnancy, and having children.\nSenegal.\nSenegal has a literacy rate of 49.7%, defined as anyone who is at least 15 and can read and write. However, many students do not attend school long enough to be considered literate. The government did not begin actively attempting to improve the literacy rate until 1971, when it gave the responsibility to the Department for Vocational Training at the Secretariat for Youth and Sports. This department, and those that followed, had no clear policy on literacy until the Department of Literacy and Basic Education was formed in 1986. The government of Senegal relies heavily on funding from the World Bank to fund its school system.\nSomalia.\nThere is no reliable data on the nationwide literacy rate in Somalia. A 2013 FSNAU survey indicates considerable differences per region, with the autonomous northeastern Puntland region having the highest registered literacy rate at 72%.\nSierra Leone.\nThe Sierra Leone government defines literacy as anyone over the age of 15 who can read and write in English, Mende, Temne, or Arabic. Official statistics put the literacy rate at 43.3%. Sierra Leone was the second country to use the Literacy, Conflict Resolution and Peacebuilding project. However, fighting near the city where the project was centered caused a delay until an arms amnesty was in place.\nAsia.\nAfghanistan.\n According to UNESCO, Afghanistan has one of the lowest literacy rates in the world. As of 2020, over 10 million youth and adults are illiterate. However, since 2016, the country has made significant progress. While in 2016\u20132017 the literacy rate was 34.8%, the UNESCO Institute for Statistics recently confirmed that it has increased to 43%. \"That is a remarkable 8 percent increase.\" In addition, the literacy rate for youths aged 15\u201324 has substantially increased and now stands at 65%.\nHowever, there are still a large number of people who lack literacy and opportunities to access continuing education. There is also a substantial gender gap: the literacy rate for men stands at 55%, while for women it is only 29.8%. The UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning has provided technical support to the government of Afghanistan since 2012, with the aim of improving the literacy skills of an estimated 1.2 million people.\nTo improve the literacy rate, the US military taught Afghan Army recruits how to read before teaching them how to fire a weapon. In 2009, US commanders estimated that as many as 65% of recruits may be illiterate.\nChina.\nWhile literacy in Chinese can be assessed by reading comprehension tests, just as in other languages, historically, literacy has often been judged by the number of Chinese characters introduced during the speaker's schooling, with a few thousand considered the minimum for practical literacy.\nThe CIA World Factbook says 96.7% of Chinese people are literate. In classical Chinese civilization, access to literacy for all classes originated with Confucianism, where previously literacy was generally limited to the aristocracy, merchants, and priests.\nIndia.\nLiteracy is defined by the Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India as the ability of \"a person aged 7 years and above to both write and read with understanding in any language.\" According to the 2011 census, the literacy rate stood at 74%.\nIran.\nIn 2023, the Iranian government stopped a literacy campaign that had begun in 1930, despite 9 million people still being reported as illiterate. The government reported that elementary school education cost 5\u201340 million toman (approximately US$12\u201395 or \u20ac11\u201389) per child per year, and 27% of children did not sign up for first grade because of the cost.\nLaos.\nLaos has the lowest level of adult literacy in all of Southeast Asia, other than East Timor.\nObstacles to literacy vary by country and culture, as writing systems, quality of education, availability of written material, competition from other sources (television, video games, cell phones, and family obligations), and culture all influence literacy levels. In Laos, which has a phonetic alphabet, reading is relatively easy to learn\u2014especially compared to English, where spelling and pronunciation rules are filled with exceptions, and Chinese, with thousands of symbols to be memorized. However, a lack of books and other written materials has hindered functional literacy in Laos. Many children and adults read so haltingly that the skill is hardly beneficial.\nA literacy project in Laos addresses this by using what it calls \"books that make literacy fun!\" The project, Big Brother Mouse, publishes colorful, easy-to-read books, then delivers them during book parties at rural schools. Some of the books are modeled on successful western books by authors such as Dr. Seuss; the most popular, however, are traditional Laotian fairy tales. Two popular collections of folktales were written by Siphone Vouthisakdee, who comes from a village where only five children finished primary school.\nBig Brother Mouse has also created village reading rooms and published books for adult readers about subjects such as Buddhism, health, and baby care.\nPakistan.\nIn Pakistan, the National Commission for Human Development aims to bring literacy to adults, especially women. While speaking at a function held in connection with International Literacy Day, Islamabad Director Kozue Kay Nagata said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Illiteracy in Pakistan has fallen over two decades, thanks to the government and people of Pakistan for their efforts working toward meeting the Millennium Development Goals. Today, 70 percent of Pakistani youths can read and write. In 20 years, illiterate population has been reduced significantly.\nShe also emphasized the need to do more to improve literacy in the country, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The proportion of population in Pakistan lacking basic reading and writing is too high. This is a serious obstacle for individual fulfillment, to the development of societies, and to mutual understanding between peoples.\nReferring to the recent national survey carried out by the Ministry of Education, Trainings and Standards in Higher Education with the support of UNESCO, UNICEF, and provincial and area departments of education, Nagata pointed out that in Pakistan, although 70% of children finish primary school, a gender gap still exists as 68% of girls finish compared to 71% of boys.\nReferring specifically to Punjab, she said that while the primary school completion rate is higher at 76%, there is a gender gap of 8 percentage points: 72% of girls compared to 80% for boys. She also noted that the average cost per primary school student (ages five\u2013nine) was higher in Punjab at Rs 6,998 (approximately US$24 or \u20ac22.5).\nIn Balochistan, although almost the same amount (Rs 6,985) is spent per child as in Punjab, the primary school completion rate is only 53%: 54% for girls and 52% for boys.\nThe Literate Pakistan Foundation, a non-profit organization established in 2003, is a case study bringing to light solutions for improving literacy rates in Pakistan. Their data shows that in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, the primary school completion rate is 67%, which is lower than the national average of 70%. Furthermore, a gender gap exists, with only 65% of girls completing primary school compared to 68% of boys. In Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, the education expenditure per student at the primary school level (age five\u2013nine) is Rs 8,638 ($30, \u20ac28).\nIn Sindh, the primary school completion rate is 63%, with a gender gap of 67% of girls completing primary school compared to 60% of boys. In Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, the education expenditure per student at the primary school level (age five\u2013nine) is Rs 5,019 ($17.50, \u20ac16.50).\nNagata, referencing the report, said that the most common reason for children ages 10\u201318 (both boys and girls) leaving school is \"the child [is] not willing to go to school\", which may be related to quality and learning outcome. She added that the second-highest reason for girls living in rural communities dropping out is that their \"parents did not allow\" them to continue school, which might be related to prejudice and cultural norms surrounding girls.\nPhilippines.\nAbout 91.6% of Filipinos ages 10\u201364 were functionally literate in 2019, according to the results of the 2019 Functional Literacy, Education and Mass Media Survey; this translates to around 73.0 million out of the population of 79.7 million.\nStarting in 300 BCE, early Filipinos devised and used their own writing system derived from the Brahmic family of scripts of ancient India. Baybayin became the most widespread of these derived scripts by the 11th century. Early chroniclers, who came during the first Spanish expeditions to the islands, noted the proficiency of some of the natives, especially the chieftain and local kings, in Sanskrit, Old Javanese, Old Malay, and several other languages.\nDuring the Spanish colonization of the islands, reading materials were destroyed far less than during the Spanish colonization of the Americas. Education and literacy were introduced solely to the Peninsulares and remained a privilege until the arrival of Americans, who introduced a public school system to the country, and English became the \"lingua franca\" in the Philippines. During the brief Japanese occupation of the Philippines, the Japanese were able to teach their language and teach the children their written language.\nSri Lanka.\nWith a literacy rate of 92.5%, Sri Lanka has one of the most literate populations among developing nations. Its youth literacy rate stands at 98%, its computer literacy rate at 35%, and its primary school enrollment rate at over 99%. An education system that dictates nine years of compulsory schooling for every child is in place. The free education system, established in 1945, is a result of the initiative of C. W. W. Kannangara and A. Ratnayake. Sri Lanka is one of the few countries in the world that provides universal free education from the primary to the tertiary stage.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nA 2016\u20132017 survey of adult skills conducted by the Australian Bureau of Statistics on behalf of the OECD found that one in five adults of working age has low literacy skills, numeracy skills, or both. The Australian Early Development Census National Report for 2021 reported that 82.6% of five-year-olds are on track to develop good language and cognitive skills. In 2012\u20132013, Australia had 1515 public library service points, lending almost 174 million items to 10 million members at an average per capita cost of just under AU$45. By 2020\u20132021, this had increased to a total of 1690 library outlets with just over 9 million registered or active members.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18457", "revid": "2325890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18457", "title": "Local-loop unbundling", "text": "Telecommunications regulatory process\nLocal loop unbundling (LLU or LLUB) is the regulatory process of allowing multiple telecommunications operators to use connections from a telephone exchange to the customer's location. The physical wire connection between the local exchange and the customer is known as a \"local loop\" and is owned by the incumbent local exchange carrier (also referred to as the \"ILEC\", \"local exchange\", or in the United States, either a \"Baby Bell\" or an independent telephone company). To increase competition, other providers are granted unbundled access.\nPolicy background.\nLLU is generally opposed by ILECs, which are generally either former investor-owned (North America) or state-owned monopoly enterprises. ILECs argue that LLU amounts to regulatory taking, which causes them to be compelled to provide competitors with business inputs, so they believe that LLU stifles infrastructure-based competition and technical innovation because new entrants prefer to use the incumbent's network instead of building their own and that the regulatory interference required to make LLU work (e.g., to set the LLU access price) is detrimental to the market.\nNew entrants, on the other hand, argue that since they cannot economically duplicate the incumbent's local loop, they cannot provide certain services, such as ADSL, thus allowing the incumbent to monopolise the respective potentially competitive market(s) and prevent innovation. They argue that alternative access technologies, such as wireless local loop, have been proven uncompetitive or impractical, and that under current pricing models, the incumbent is in many cases, depending on the regulatory model, guaranteed a fair price for the use of its facilities, including an appropriate return on investment. Finally, they argue that the ILECs generally did not construct their local loop in a competitive market environment, but under legal monopoly protection and using taxpayer's money, meaning that, according to the new entrants, that ILECs should not to be entitled to continue to extract regulated rates of return, which often include monopoly rents from the local loop.\nMost industrially developed nations, including the US, Australia, the European Union member states, and India, have introduced regulatory frameworks that provide for LLU. Regulators are tasked with regulating a changing market without preventing innovation and without improperly disadvantaging competitors.\nThe first action in the EU resulted from a report written for the European Commission in 1993. It took several years for the EU legislation to require unbundling and in individual countries in the EU, the process took further time to mature to become practical and economic rather than being a legal possibility. The 1993 report referred to the requirement to unbundle optical fibre access and recommended deferral to a later date when fibre access would be more common. In 2006, there were signs that, as a result of the municipal fibre networks movement in countries such as Sweden, where unbundled local loop fibre is commercially available from both the incumbent and competitors, there was a potential for policy evolving in a different direction.\nIn 1996, Section 251 of the United States Telecommunication Act defined unbundled access as: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The duty to provide, to any requesting telecommunications carrier for the provision of a telecommunications service, nondiscriminatory access to network elements on an unbundled basis at any technically feasible point on rates, terms, and conditions that are just, reasonable, and nondiscriminatory in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement and the requirements of this section and section 252. An incumbent local exchange carrier shall provide such unbundled network elements in a manner that allows requesting carriers to combine such elements in order to provide such telecommunications service.\nUnbundling developments around the world.\nWorld Trade Organisation.\nSome provisions of World Trade Organization (WTO) telecommunications law can be read to require unbundling:\nThe question has not been settled before a WTO judicial body, and it is thought that these obligations may only apply where the respective WTO member has committed itself to open its basic telecommunications market to competition. About 80 mostly-developed members have done so since 1998.\nIndia.\nLLU has not been implemented in Indian cities yet. However, BSNL recently stated that it would open up its copper loops for private participation. The proliferation of WiMax and cable broadband has increased broadband penetration and market competition. By 2008, a price war had reduced basic broadband prices to INR 250 (US$6), including line rental without any long-term contracts. In rural areas, the state player, BSNL, is still the leading, and often the only supplier. Although BSNL is a monopoly, it is used by the government to create competition.\nEuropean Union.\nThe implementation of local loop unbundling is a requirement of European Union policy on competition in the telecommunications sector and has been introduced, at various stages of development, in all member states as a postreference offer for unbundled access to their local loops and related facilities. The offers are required to be unbundled so that the beneficiary does not have to pay for network elements or facilities that are unnecessary for supplying its services, and are required to contain a description of the components of the offer, associated terms, and conditions, including charges.\nEuropean States that have been approved for membership to the EU have an obligation to introduce LLU as part of the liberalisation of their communications sector.\nUnited Kingdom.\nOn 23 January 2001, Easynet became the first operator in the mainland UK to unbundle a local loop of copper wire from British Telecom's network and provide its own broadband service with it.\nBy 14 January 2006, 210,000 local loop connections had been unbundled from BT operation under local loop unbundling. Ofcom had hoped that 1 million local loop connections would be unbundled by June 2006. However, as reported by \"The Register\" on 15 June 2006, the figure had reached only 500,000, but was growing by 20,000 a week. In November 2006, Ofcom announced that 1,000,000 connections had been unbundled. By April 2007, the figure was 2,000,000.\nBy June 2006, AOL UK had unbundled 100,000 lines through its \u00a3120 million investment.\nOn 10 October 2006, Carphone Warehouse announced its purchase of AOL UK, the leading LLU operator, for \u00a3370m. This made Carphone Warehouse the third largest broadband provider and the largest LLU operator, with more than 150,000 LLU customers.\nOn 8 May 2009, TalkTalk, which was owned by Carphone Warehouse, announced that they would purchase Tiscali UK's assets for \u00a3235 million. On 30 June 2009, Tiscali sold its UK subsidiary to Carphone Warehouse following regulatory approval from the European Union. This purchase made TalkTalk the largest home broadband supplier in the UK, with 4.25 million home broadband subscribers, compared to BT's 3.9 million. The service was rebranded as TalkTalk in January 2010.\nMost LLU operators only unbundle the broadband service, leaving the traditional telephone service using BT's core equipment (with or without the provision of carrier preselect). When the traditional telephone service is also unbundled (full LLU), operators usually prohibit selected calls being made with the networks of other telephone providers (i.e. accessed using a three- to five-digit prefix beginning with '1'). These calls can usually still be made by using an 0800 or other non-geographic (NGN) access code.\nAlthough regulators in the UK admitted that the market could become competitive over time, the purpose of mandatory local loop unbundling in the United Kingdom was to speed up the delivery of advanced services to consumers.\nUnited States.\nPursuant to the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) requires that ILECs lease local loops to competitors (CLECs). Prices are set through a market mechanism.\nNew Zealand.\nThe Commerce Commission recommended against local loop unbundling in late 2003 as Telecom New Zealand (now Spark New Zealand) offered a market-led solution. In May 2004, this was confirmed by the New Zealand government, despite the \"call4change\" campaign made by some of Telecom's competitors. Part of Telecom's commitment to the Commerce Commission to avoid unbundling was a promise to deliver 250,000 new residential broadband connections by the end of 2005, one-third of which were to be wholesaled through other providers. Telecom failed to achieve the number of wholesale connections required, despite the management making a claim that the agreement had been for only one-third of the growth rather than one-third of the total. The claim was rejected by the Commerce Commission, and the publicised figure of 83,333 wholesale connections out of 250,000 was held to be the true target. The achieved number was less than 50,000 wholesale connections, despite total connections exceeding 300,000.\nOn 3 May 2006, the government announced it would require the unbundling of the local loop. This was in response to concerns about the low levels of broadband uptake. Regulatory actions such as information disclosure, the separate accounting of Telecom New Zealand business operations, and enhanced Commerce Commission monitoring were announced.\nOn 9 August 2007, Telecom released the keys to exchanges in Glenfield and Ponsonby in Auckland. In March 2008, Telecom activated ADSL 2+ services from five Auckland exchanges (Glenfield, Browns Bay, Ellerslie, Mt. Albert and Ponsonby), with further plans for the rest of Auckland and other major centres, allowing other ISPs to take advantage.\nWith the number of copper (DSL) connections falling rapidly in New Zealand as of 2023, a large majority of internet connections are now through fibre as opposed to copper, which is wholesaled by the former Telecom company Chorus, rendering local loop unbundling a minor percentage in DSL connections.\nSwitzerland.\nSwitzerland is one of the last OECD nations to provide for unbundling. The Swiss Federal Supreme Court held in 2001 that the 1996 Swiss Telecommunications Act did not require it. The government then enacted an ordinance providing for unbundling in 2003 and the Swiss Parliament amended the act in 2006. While infrastructure-based access is now generally available, unbundled fast bitstream access is limited to a period of four years after the entry into force of the act.\nUnbundling requests tend to be managed by the courts; however, unlike in the EU, Swiss law does not provide for an \"ex ante\" regulation of access conditions by the regulator. Instead, under the Swiss \"ex post\" regulation system, each new entrant must first try to reach an individual agreement with Swisscom, the state-owned ILEC.\nHong Kong.\nMandatory local loop unbundling policy (termed Type II Interconnection (Traditional Chinese:\u7b2c\u4e8c\u985e\u4e92\u9023) in Hong Kong) started on 1 July 1995 (the same day of telephone market liberalisation) to give choices to customers. After 10 years, new operators have built their networks, covering a large region of Hong Kong; the government considered it a good time to withdraw mandatory local loop unbundling policy, to persuade operators to build their own networks, and let businesses run themselves with a minimum of government intervention. At the meeting of the Executive Council on 6 July 2004, the government decided that the regulatory intervention under the Type II Interconnection policy, which was applicable to telephone exchanges for individual buildings covered by such exchanges, should be withdrawn, as outlined by conditions documented in a statement by the Telecommunications Authority. After that, the terms of interconnection would be negotiated between telephone operators. Hong Kong is the only advanced economy that has withdrawn the mandatory local loop unbundling policy.\nSouth Africa.\nOn 25 May 2006, the Minister of Communications of South Africa, Ivy Matsepe-Casaburri, established the Local Loop Unbundling Committee (chaired by Professor Tshilidzi Marwala) to recommend the appropriate local loop unbundling models. The Local Loop Unbundling Committee submitted a report to Minister Matsepe-Casaburri on 25 May 2007. The report recommended that:\nBased on this report, the Minister issued policy directives to ICASA to undergo the unbundling process. At the end of March 2010, nothing had occurred; however, a deadline of 1 November 2011 was set by the Minister of Communications for the monopoly holder, Telkom SA, to finalise the unbundling process.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18459", "revid": "40126538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18459", "title": "Leda", "text": "Leda may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18460", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18460", "title": "Lysithea (moon)", "text": "Outer moon of Jupiter\nLysithea is a prograde irregular satellite of Jupiter. It was discovered by Seth Barnes Nicholson in 1938 at Mount Wilson Observatory and is named after the mythological Lysithea, daughter of Oceanus and one of Zeus' lovers.\nLysithea did not receive its present name until 1975; before then, it was simply known as Jupiter X. It was sometimes called \"Demeter\" from 1955 to 1975.\nIt belongs to the Himalia group, moons orbiting between 11 and 13\u00a0Gm from Jupiter at an inclination of about 28.3\u00b0. Its orbital elements are as of January 2000. They are continuously changing due to solar and planetary perturbations. It is gray in color (B\u2212V=0.72, V\u2212R=0.36, V\u2212I=0.74) and intermediate between C-type and P-type asteroids.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18461", "revid": "4071608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18461", "title": "Leda and the Swan", "text": "Theme from Greek mythology\nLeda and the Swan is a story and subject in art from Greek mythology in which the god Zeus, in the form of a swan, seduces Leda, a Spartan queen. According to later Greek mythology, Leda bore Helen and Polydeuces, children of Zeus, while at the same time bearing Castor and Clytemnestra, children of her husband Tyndareus, the King of Sparta. According to many versions of the story, Zeus took the form of a swan and slept with Leda on the same night she slept with her husband King Tyndareus. In some versions, she laid two eggs from which the children hatched. In other versions, Helen is a daughter of Nemesis, the goddess who personified the disaster that awaited those suffering from the pride of Hubris.\nEspecially in art, the degree of consent by Leda to the relationship seems to vary considerably; there are numerous depictions, for example by Leonardo da Vinci, that show Leda affectionately embracing the swan, as their children play.\nThe subject was rarely seen in the large-scale sculpture of antiquity, although a representation of Leda in sculpture has been attributed in modern times to Timotheus (\"compare illustration, below left\"); small-scale sculptures survive showing both reclining and standing poses, in cameos and engraved gems, rings, and terracotta oil lamps. Thanks to the literary renditions of Ovid and Fulgentius it was a well-known myth through the Middle Ages, but emerged more prominently as a classicizing theme, with erotic overtones, in the Italian Renaissance.\nEroticism.\nThe historian Procopius claims, in his Secret History, that the Roman Empress Theodora acted in a reproduction of this particular myth at some point in her youth in the early sixth century CE prior to her becoming the empress. This account is heavily disputed for the biases Roman aristocrats including Procopius had towards the role of women and the reputation of actresses and sex workers at the time.\nThe subject undoubtedly owed its 16th-century popularity to the paradox that it was considered more acceptable to depict a woman in the act of copulation with a swan than with a man. The earliest depictions show the pair love-making with some explicitness\u2014more so than in any depictions of a human pair made by artists of high quality in the same period.\nThe fate of the erotic album \"I Modi\" some years later shows why this was so. The theme remained a dangerous one in the Renaissance, as the fates of the three best known paintings on the subject demonstrate. The earliest depictions were all in the more private medium of the old master print, and mostly from Venice. They were often based on the extremely brief account in the \"Metamorphoses\" of Ovid (who does not imply a rape), though Lorenzo de' Medici had both a Roman sarcophagus and an antique carved gem of the subject, both with reclining Ledas.\nThe earliest known explicit Renaissance depiction is one of the many woodcut illustrations to \"Hypnerotomachia Poliphili\", a book published in Venice in 1499. This shows Leda and the Swan making love with gusto, despite being on top of a triumphal car, being pulled along and surrounded by a considerable crowd. An engraving dating to 1503 at the latest, by Giovanni Battista Palumba, also shows the couple in coitus, but in deserted countryside. Another engraving, certainly from Venice and attributed by many to Giulio Campagnola, shows a love-making scene, but there Leda's attitude is highly ambiguous. Palumba made another engraving, perhaps in about 1512, presumably influenced by Leonardo's sketches for his earlier composition, showing Leda seated on the ground and playing with her children.\nThere were also significant depictions in the smaller decorative arts, also private media. Benvenuto Cellini made a medallion, now in Vienna, early in his career, and Antonio Abondio one on the obverse of a medal celebrating a Roman courtesan.\nIn painting.\nA fresco depicting the Greek myth of Leda and the Swan was unearthed at the Pompeii archaeological site in 2018. Another fresco commonly attributed to the Leda and the Swan motif was found in the House of the Citarist (, I.4.5/25), and is now housed in the Naples Archaeological Museum (MANN inv. 120034). It dates to the first century CE. \nLeonardo da Vinci began making studies in 1504 for a painting, apparently never executed, of Leda seated on the ground with her children. In 1508, he painted a different composition of the subject, with a nude standing Leda cuddling the Swan, with the two sets of infant twins (also nude), and their huge broken egg-shells. The original of this is lost, possibly deliberately destroyed, and was last recorded in the French royal Ch\u00e2teau de Fontainebleau in 1625 by Cassiano dal Pozzo. However it is known from many copies, of which the earliest are probably the \"Spiridon Leda\", perhaps by a studio assistant and now in the Uffizi, and the one at Wilton House in the United Kingdom (illustrated).\nAlso lost, and probably deliberately destroyed, is Michelangelo's tempera painting of the pair making love, commissioned in 1529 by Alfonso d'Este for his palazzo in Ferrara, and taken to France for the royal collection in 1532; it was at Fontainebleau in 1536. Michelangelo's cartoon for the work\u2014given to his assistant Antonio Mini, who used it for several copies for French patrons before his death in 1533\u2014survived for over a century. This composition is known from many copies, including an by Cornelis Bos, c. 1563; the marble sculpture by Bartolomeo Ammanati in the Bargello, Florence; two copies by the young Rubens on his Italian voyage, and the painting after Michelangelo, ca. 1530, in the National Gallery, London. The Michelangelo composition, of about 1530, shows Mannerist tendencies of elongation and twisted pose (the \"figura serpentinata\") that were popular at the time. In addition, a sculptural group, similar to the Prado Roman group illustrated, was believed until at least the 19th century to be by Michelangelo.\nThe last very famous Renaissance painting of the subject is Correggio's elaborate composition of c. 1530 (Berlin); this too was damaged whilst in the collection of Philippe II, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, the Regent of France in the minority of Louis XV. His son Louis, though a great lover of painting, had periodic crises of conscience about his way of life, in one of which he attacked the figure of Leda with a knife. The damage has been repaired, though full restoration to the original condition was not possible. Both the Leonardo and Michelangelo paintings also disappeared when in the collection of the French Royal Family, and are believed to have been destroyed by more moralistic widows or successors of their owners.\nThere were many other depictions in the Renaissance, including cycles of book illustrations to Ovid, but most were derivative of the compositions mentioned above. The subject remained largely confined to Italy, and sometimes France\u2014Northern versions are rare. After something of a hiatus in the 18th and early 19th centuries (apart from a very sensuous Boucher), Leda and the Swan became again a popular motif in the later 19th and 20th centuries, with many Symbolist and Expressionist treatments. Gustav Klimt painted the subject of Leda with the Swan in 1917, however this work was destroyed in the fire at Schloss Immendorf in 1945.\nAlso from that era were sculptures of the theme by Antonin Merci\u00e9 and Max Klinger.\nIn modern and contemporary art.\nCy Twombly executed an abstract version of \"Leda and the Swan\" in 1962. It was purchased by Larry Gagosian for $52.9\u00a0million at Christie's May 2017 Post-War and Contemporary Art Evening Sale.\nAvant-garde filmmaker Kurt Kren along with other members of the Viennese Actionist movement, including Otto Muehl and Hermann Nitsch, made a film-performance called \"7/64 Leda und der Schwan\" in 1964. The film retains the classical motif, portraying, for most of its duration, a young woman embracing a swan.\nThere is a life-sized marble statue of \"Leda and the Swan\" at the Jai Vilas Palace Museum in Gwalior, Northern Madhya Pradesh, India.\nAmerican artist and photographer Carole Harmel created the \"Bird\" series (1983), a Jean Cocteau-influenced collection of photographs that explored the \"Leda and the Swan\" myth in tightly cropped, voyeuristic images of a nude female and an undefinable birdlike creature hinting at intimacy.\nBristol Museum and Art Gallery currently exhibits Karl Weschke's \"Leda and the Swan\", painted in 1986. The Winnipeg Art Gallery in Canada has, in its permanent collection, a ceramic \"Leda and the Swan\" by Japanese-born American artist Akio Takamori. Genieve Figgis painted her version of Leda and the Swan in 2018 after an earlier work by Fran\u00e7ois Boucher. Figgis\u2019 contemporary version reinvents the idyllic romantic scene of lavish playfulness with a dark humor creating a scene of profanity and horror. There is a sculpture in neon lights depicting Leda and the Swan in Berlin, near Sonnenallee metro station and the Estrel hotel, designed by AES+F. Photographer Charlie White included a portrait of Leda in his \"And Jeopardize the Integrity of the Hull\" series. Zeus, as the swan, only appears metaphorically.\nIn poetry.\nRonsard wrote a poem on \"La D\u00e9floration de L\u00e8de\", perhaps inspired by the Michelangelo, which he may well have known. He imagines the beak going into Leda's mouth.\n\"Leda and the Swan\" is a sonnet by William Butler Yeats composed in 1923 and first published in the \"Dial\" in June, 1924, and later published in the collection 'The Cat the Moon and Certain Poems' in 1924. Combining psychological realism with a mystic vision, it describes the swan's rape of Leda. It also alludes to the Trojan War, which will be provoked by the abduction of Helen, who will be begotten by Zeus on Leda (along with Castor and Pollux, in some versions of the myth). Clytaemnestra, who killed her husband, Agamemnon, leader of the Greeks at Troy, was also supposed to have hatched from one of Leda's eggs. The poem is regularly praised as one of Yeats's masterpieces. Camille Paglia, who called the poem \"the greatest poem of the twentieth century,\" and said \"all human beings, like Leda, are caught up moment by moment in the 'white rush' of experience. For Yeats, the only salvation is the shapeliness and stillness of art.\" See external links for a bas relief arranged in the position as described by Yeats.\nNicaraguan poet Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo's 1892 poem \"Leda\" contains an oblique description of the rape, watched over by the god Pan.\nH.D. (Hilda Doolittle) also wrote a poem called \"Leda\" in 1919, suggested to be from the perspective of Leda. The description of the sexual action going on makes it seem almost beautiful, as if Leda had given her consent.\nIn the song \"Power and Glory\" from Lou Reed's 1992 album \"Magic and Loss\", Reed recalls the experience of seeing his friend dying of cancer and makes reference to the myth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSylvia Plath alludes to the myth in her radio play \"Three Women\" written for the BBC in 1962. The play features the voices of three women. The first is a married woman who keeps her baby. The second is a secretary who suffers a miscarriage. The third voice, a student who is pregnant and gives her baby up for adoption, mentions \"the great swan, with its terrible look,/ Coming at me,/ There is a snake in swans./ He glided by; his eye had a black meaning.\" and repeats a refrain of \"I wasn't ready\" stating \"the face/ Went on shaping itself with love, as if I was ready.\" describing the unwanted pregnancy.\nIn literature.\nSeveral references to the myth are presented in novels by Angela Carter, including \"Nights at the Circus\" and \"The Magic Toyshop\". In the latter novel, the myth is brought to life in the form of a performance in which a frightened young girl is forced to act as Leda in accompaniment with a large mechanical swan.\nThe myth is also mentioned in Richard Yates' 1962 novel \"Revolutionary Road\". The character Frank Wheeler, married to April Wheeler, after having had sex with an office secretary ponders what to say as he is leaving: \"Did the swan apologize to Leda? Did an eagle apologize? Did a lion apologize? Hell no!\"\nThe 2017 novel \"Strange Heart Beating\" by Eli Goldstone was inspired by both the myth and the Yeats sonnet based upon it.\nIn Robert Galbraith's 2020 novel, \"Troubled Blood\", one of the main characters, Robin Ellacott, visits a painting gallery where she sees a painting of Leda and the swan done by one character who is an artist in the novel. Furthermore, the other protagonist of the Strike series, the eponymous detective Cormoran Strike, was born to a mother named Leda and swans appear in several of the novels.\nIn fashion.\nIn 1935, German-born movie star Marlene Dietrich wore a dramatically designed Leda costume to a Hollywood costume party. Designed by the acclaimed costume designer Travis Banton, a longtime Dietrich collaborator, the white tulle and feather dress featured a thigh-slit, a mid-length train and, most characteristically, a fabric and feather \"swan\" neck which coiled around Dietrich's own neck, as well a pair of large feathered wings, one stretching downwards across her chest and the other one upwards across her left shoulder.\nSixty-six years later, at the 2001 Academy Awards, Icelandic singer Bj\u00f6rk wore a dress by Marjan Pejoski in nude mesh and a white tulle skirt. The skirt gradually narrowed upwards over the torso to turn into a swan-neck made out of fabric which coiled around the wearer's neck in exactly the same way as Dietrich's dress from 1935. Although Dietrich's costume remains largely unknown to the general public, Bj\u00f6rk's dress \"attained cult status instantly\" and became an icon of red carpet culture. Yet, the reference to Marlene Dietrich's costume was rarely (if ever) mentioned at the time.\nIn June 2021, Maria Grazia Chiuri as creative director for the French fashion house Dior, designed a collection strongly inspired by Hellenistic culture, the Olympic Games, and Ancient Greek Mythology, and showed it at the Panathenaic Stadium in Athens as an homage to the Olympic tradition (the collection was shown a month before the beginning of the 2020 Summer Olympics). The collection's closing pi\u00e8ce de r\u00e9sistance was a Leda-inspired swan dress. The immediate visual similarity between Chiuri's swan Dress and Bj\u00f6rk's swan dress sparked excitement on social media as most people inevitably thought the Dior dress was directly inspired by Pejoski's iconic 2001 creation. However, only a few days later, Dior openly defended the inspiration of the dress referring to it on its Twitter account as a recreation of a costume worn by Marlene Dietrich, who was, famously, an important and loyal client of the French brand during the 40s and 50s. Notably, Chiuri's 2021 Dior dress featured feathered swan-wings spanning over the chest and shoulder. This dramatic detail, taken directly from Dietrich's costume from 1935, sets Chiuri's dress for Dior entirely apart from Bj\u00f6rk's red-carpet dress, and makes it, irrefutably, a reference to Dietrich's costume, and by extension, to the myth of Leda and the Swan.\nIn modern media.\nA version of the Leda and the Swan story is the foundation myth in the Canadian futuristic thriller television series \"Orphan Black\" which aired over 5 seasons from 2013 to 2017. A corporation uses genetic engineering to create a series of female clones (Leda) and a series of male clones (Castor) who are also brothers and sisters clones as they derive from one mother who is a chimera with male and female genomes.\nMusical artist Hozier released the single Swan Upon Leda in 2022, referencing the myth as a tool to advocate for reproductive rights.\nThe 2021 wordless, 3D feature film Leda transports the myth to dark forests and deep lakes that surround a mid-19th-century mansion. Directed by Samuel Tressler IV and starring Adeline Thery, the story focuses on a pregnant Leda, nightmarishly haunted by the image of a swan and lost between dream and reality in a state of trauma.\nThe Philadelphia cigar maker Bobrow Brothers made a brand of cigars with the name \"Leda\" which was sold at least into the 1940s. The cigar label depicted Leda and the Swan in a river.\nModern censorship.\nIn April 2012 an art gallery in London, England, was instructed by the police to remove a modern exhibit of Leda and the Swan. The law concerned was Section 63 of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008, condemning \"violent pornography\", brought in by the Labour Party government of 2005\u20132010.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18463", "revid": "50835437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18463", "title": "Lions Clubs International", "text": "International service organization based in the United States\nLions Clubs International, is an international service organization, currently headquartered in Oak Brook, Illinois. As of \u00a02020[ [update]], it had over 46,000 local clubs and more than 1.4 million members (including the youth wing Leo) in more than 200 geographic areas around the world.\nIntroduction.\nThe Association of Lions Clubs was established in 1917 in Chicago, Illinois, by Melvin Jones, a Chicago business leader and a Freemason. The Association went international in 1920 when Border Cities Lions Clubs in Windsor, Canada, was established. The name of Lions Clubs International has been used since then. It subsequently evolved as an international service organization under the guidance and supervision of its secretary, Melvin Jones.\nIn 1917, Jones was a 38-year-old Chicago business leader who told members of his local business club they should reach beyond business issues and address the betterment of their communities and the world. Jones' group, the Business Circle of Chicago, agreed. After contacting similar groups around the United States, an organizational meeting was held on June 7, 1917, in Chicago. The Business Circle subsequently joined one of the invited groups, the \"International Association of Lions Clubs\" and at a national convention held in Dallas, Texas, later that year, those who were assembled: (1) adopted a Constitution, By-Laws, Code of Ethics and an Emblem; (2) established as a main tenet \"unselfish service to others\", (3) unanimously elected Woods as its first president, effectively securing his leadership for the first two years of the existence of the International Association of Lions, and (4) selected Jones to serve as the organization's secretary-treasurer.\nThe Lions motto is \"We Serve\". Local Lions Club programs include sight conservation, hearing and speech conservation, diabetes awareness, youth outreach, international relations, environmental issues, and many other programs. The discussion of partisan politics and sectarian religion is forbidden. The LIONS acronym also stands for Liberty, Intelligence, Our Nations' Safety.\nFocus.\nService projects.\nLions Clubs plan and participate in a variety of service projects. Examples include donations to hospices, or community campaigns such as Message in a Bottle, a United Kingdom and Ireland initiative which places a plastic bottle with critical medical information inside the refrigerators of vulnerable people. Money is also raised for international purposes. Some of this is donated in reaction to events such as the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and the 2013 Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda). Other money is used to support international campaigns, coordinated by the Lions Clubs International Foundation (LCIF), such as Sight First and Lions World Sight Day, which was launched in 1998 to draw world media attention to the plight of sight loss in the developing world.\nLions focus on work for the blind and visually impaired began when Helen Keller addressed the international convention at Cedar Point, Ohio, on 30 June 1925 and charged Lions to be \"Knights of the Blind\".\nLions also conduct community hearing- and cancer-screening projects. In Perth, Western Australia, they have conducted hearing screening for over 30 years and provided seed funding for the Lions Ear and Hearing Institute established September 9, 2001, a center of excellence in the diagnosis, management, and research of ear and hearing disorders. In Perth, Lions have also assisted in the establishment of the Lions Eye Institute. In Brisbane, Queensland, the Lions Medical Research Foundation provides funding to a number of researchers. Ian Frazer's initial work, leading to the development of a HPV vaccine for the human papillomavirus which could lead to cervical cancer, was funded by the Lions Medical Research Foundation.\nLions Clubs International has supported the work of the United Nations since that organization's inception in 1945, when it was one of the non-governmental organizations invited to assist in the drafting of the United Nations Charter in San Francisco, California.\nInternational foundation.\nLions Clubs International Foundation is \"Lions helping Lions serve the world\". Donations provide funding in the form of grants to financially assist Lions districts with large-scale humanitarian projects that are too expensive and costly for Lions to finance on their own.\nThe Foundation aids Lions in making a greater impact in their local communities, as well as around the world. Major initiatives of the foundation include the following:\nSightFirst.\nUpon endorsing the biggest ever collaborative disease eradication program called the London Declaration on Neglected Tropical Diseases launched on 30 January 2012 in London, the organization has implemented SightFirst program by which it aims to eradicate blindness due to trachoma, one of the neglected tropical diseases. It has allocated over US$11 million in 10 countries for eye surgeries, medical training, distribution of Zithromax and tetracycline, and sanitary services. It has also announced US$6.9 million funding to support the Government of China for the same cause.\nMembership.\nMembership in the Lions Club is by \"invitation only\" as mandated by its constitution and by-laws. All member applicants need a sponsor who is an active member and of good standing in the club they intend to join. While sponsorship may be obtained by an applicant in order to become a legitimate member, sponsorship is no guarantee of membership. Acceptance of membership is still subject to the approval of the majority of the club's board of directors. A Lions Club chooses its members diligently as it requires time and financial commitments. Prospective applicants must be a person of good moral character in his or her community. Attendance at meetings is encouraged on a monthly or fortnightly basis. Due to the hierarchical nature of Lions Clubs International, members have the opportunity to advance from a local club to an office at the zone, district, multiple district, and international levels.\nIn 1987 the constitution of Lions Clubs International was amended to allow for women to become members. Since then many clubs have admitted women, but some all-male clubs still exist. In 2003, 8 out of 17 members at the Lions Club in Worcester, England, resigned when a woman joined the club.\nAmong the famous and noteworthy members of Lions International are former U.S. President Jimmy Carter, Sophie, Duchess of Edinburgh, a member of the Wokingham Lions Club and Royal Patron of the Lions Clubs of the British Isles, C. P. Radhakrishnan, and Sir Edmund Hillary, a member of the Remuera Lions Club in New Zealand.\nExpansion.\nThe organization expanded internationally on 12 March 1920, when a club opened in Windsor, Ontario, Canada. In 1937 the club expanded to San Juan in Puerto Rico. Currently Lions Clubs operate in more than 200 countries and have over 1.4 million members.\nSaudi Arabia was one of the last countries without a Lions Club. The first Chartered Club in Saudi was founded by a Filipino group from Batangas in the year 2019. The club was named Batangas-Saudi 101 Lions Club.\nConvention.\nAn international convention is held annually in cities across the globe for members to meet other Lions, elect the coming year's officers, and partake in the many activities planned. At the convention, Lions can participate in elections and parades, display and discuss fundraisers and service projects, and trade pins and other souvenirs. The first convention was held in 1917, the first year of the club's existence, in Dallas, Texas. The 2006 convention was due to be held in New Orleans, but damage sustained during Hurricane Katrina meant that the convention had to be relocated to Boston. The latest convention was held in Orlando, FL from 13 to 17 July 2025.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18465", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18465", "title": "Laches (equity)", "text": "Unreasonable delay by a plaintiff in bringing their claim\nIn common-law legal systems, laches ( , ; Law French: , , from ) is a lack of diligence and activity in making a legal claim, or moving forward with legal enforcement of a right, particularly in regard to equity. It is an unreasonable delay that can be viewed as prejudicing the opposing party. When asserted in litigation, it is an equity defense, that is, a defense to a claim for an equitable remedy. It is often understood in comparison to a statute of limitations, a statutory defense, which traditionally is a defense to a claim \"at law\".\nThe person invoking laches is asserting that an opposing party has \"slept on its rights\", and that, as a result of this delay, circumstances have changed (witnesses or evidence may have been lost or no longer available, etc.), such that it is no longer a just resolution to grant the plaintiff's claim. Laches is associated with the maxim of equity: \"Equity aids the vigilant\"\u00a0\u2013 not those who sleep on their rights. Put another way, failure to assert one's rights in a timely manner can result in a claim being barred by laches.\nOrigin, definition, overview.\nLaches is a legal term derived from the Old French \"laschesse,\" meaning \"remissness\" or \"dilatoriness\", and is viewed as the opposite of \"vigilance\". The United States Supreme Court case \"Costello v. United States\" 365 US 265, 282 (1961) is often cited for a definition of laches. \"Costello\" defined Laches as \"Lack of diligence by the party against whom the defense is asserted combined with prejudice to the party asserting the defense\".\nInvoking laches is a reference to a lack of diligence and activity in making a legal claim, or moving forward with legal enforcement of a right, in particular with regard to equity, and so is an \"unreasonable delay pursuing a right or claim, in a way that prejudices the [opposing] party\". When asserted in litigation, it is an equitable defense, that is, a defense to a claim for an equitable remedy. The essential element of \"laches\" is an unreasonable delay by the plaintiff in bringing the claim; because laches is an equitable defense, it is ordinarily applied only to claims for equitable relief (such as injunctions), and not to claims for legal relief (such as damages). The person invoking laches is asserting that an opposing party has \"slept on its rights\", and that, as a result of this delay, witnesses or evidence may have been lost or no longer available, and circumstances have changed such that it is no longer just to grant the plaintiff's original claim; hence, laches is associated with the maxim of equity: (\"Equity aids the vigilant, not the sleeping ones [that is, those who sleep on their rights]\"). Put another way, failure to assert one's rights in a timely manner can result in a claim being barred by laches. Sometimes courts will also require that the party invoking the doctrine has changed its position as a result of the delay, but that requirement is more typical of the related (but more stringent) defense and equally cause of action of estoppel.\nComponents.\nA claim of laches requires the following components:\nDelay.\nThe period of delay begins when the plaintiff knew, or reasonably ought to have known, that the cause of action existed; the period of delay ends only when the legal action is formally filed. Informing or warning the defendant of the cause of action (for example by sending a cease-and-desist letter or merely \"threatening\" a lawsuit) does \"not\", by itself, end the period of delay.\nUnreasonableness.\nIn order to invoke laches, the delay by the opposing party in initiating the lawsuit must be unreasonable. The courts have recognized the following causes of delay as reasonable:\nBy contrast, it is \"not\" reasonable to delay a lawsuit to \"capitalize on the value of the infringer's labor\". In \"Danjaq v. Sony\", the Ninth Circuit decided that a screenwriter who waited for a film studio to publicize and distribute a film based on a script he allegedly owned had delayed his lawsuit unreasonably.\nPrejudice.\nUnreasonable delay must prejudice the defendant. Examples of such prejudice include:\nUnreasonable delay may also prejudice the rights of third-parties who were unknown in the case earlier but whose rights got created in the intervening period of the delay (e.g.: the defendant inducts new persons on a disputed property by sale, or by lease).\nProcedure.\nA defense lawyer raising the defense of \"laches\" against a motion for injunctive relief (a form of equitable relief) might argue that the plaintiff comes \"waltzing in at the eleventh hour\" when it is now too late to grant the relief sought, at least not without causing great harm that the plaintiff could have avoided. In certain types of cases (for example, cases involving time-sensitive matters, such as elections), a delay of even a few days is likely to be met with a defense of \"laches\", even where the applicable statute of limitations might allow the type of action to be commenced within a much longer time period. In courts in the United States, laches has often been applied even where a statute of limitations exists, although there is a division of authority on this point.\nIf a court does accept the laches defense, it can decide either to deny the request for equitable relief or to narrow the equitable relief that it would otherwise give. Even if the court denies equitable relief to a plaintiff because of laches, the plaintiff may still have a claim for legal relief if the statute of limitations has not run out.\nUnder the United States Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, \"laches\" is an affirmative defense, which means that the burden of asserting \"laches\" is on the party responding to the claim to which it applies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When the defense of laches is clear on the face of the complaint, and where it is clear that the plaintiff can prove no set of facts to avoid the insuperable bar, a court may consider the defense on a motion to dismiss.\nThe \"laches\" defense does not apply if the claimant was a minor during the time that the claim was not brought, so a party can bring a claim against an historical injustice when they reach their majority.\nCompared to statute of limitations.\nThe defense of \"laches\" resembles a statute of limitations since both are concerned with ensuring that plaintiffs bring their claims in a timely fashion.\nHowever, a statute of limitations is concerned only with the time that has passed. Laches is concerned with the reasonableness of the delay in a particular situation and so is more case-specific and more focused on the equitable conduct of the plaintiff. Those considerations are not unique to the laches defense because they are characteristic of equitable reasoning and equitable remedies, whereas limitation is a statutory remedy.\nIn the US, the proper disposal of claims in light of those two areas of law has required attention through to the Supreme Court. In \"Petrella v. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer\" (2014), the US Supreme Court rebuffed a defendant's claim that laches barred a copyright infringement suit because Congress had established a detailed statutory scheme, including a statute of limitations.\nExamples.\nIn the Virginia Republican primary for the 2012 US presidential election, several candidates did not appear on the ballot because they failed to obtain sufficient petition signatures. Four of the unsuccessful candidates\u2014Rick Perry, Jon Huntsman, Newt Gingrich, and Rick Santorum\u2014sued, claiming that restrictions on the persons allowed to gather signatures were unconstitutional. Their claim was dismissed by the district court on the grounds of laches, because, in the words of the appellate court: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...plaintiffs could have brought their constitutional challenge to Virginia's residency requirement for petition circulators as soon they were able to circulate petitions in the summer of 2011, but instead chose to wait until after the December 22, 2011 deadline before seeking relief. The district court concluded this delay 'displayed an unreasonable and inexcusable lack of diligence' on plaintiffs' part that 'has significantly harmed the defendants.' Specifically, it determined that the delayed nature of this suit had already transformed the Board's orderly schedule for printing and mailing absentee ballots 'into a chaotic attempt to get absentee ballots out on time.' The district court consequently held that laches barred their request for relief. The appeals court upheld the dismissal on grounds of laches, but it added that the challenge would likely have succeeded if it had been brought in a timely fashion.\nIn Grand Haven, Michigan, the Northwest Ottawa Community Health System sued Grand Haven Township and Health Pointe, which was in the process of building a competing medical facility in the township, arguing that the township ignored its own zoning ordinance in approving the project. On March 24, 2017, as part of a ruling dismissing the lawsuit, Circuit Court Judge Jon A. Van Allsburg noted that the Northwest Ottawa Community Health System waited more than eight months from the date the project was approved before filing the lawsuit and that during that time, defendant Health Pointe had purchased construction materials.\nThe defense of laches is often used as an affirmative defense in patent infringement lawsuits in the USA. In 2021, the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit allowed the USPTO to use laches as a reason for denying patents to an applicant, who filed hundreds of applications, that were \"atypically long and complex\", and who filed amendments, which increased the total number of claims to roughly 115,000. This applicant alone forced the USPTO to create an art unit of twelve experienced examiners solely to examine its patents.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18467", "revid": "45445004", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18467", "title": "Legion", "text": "Legion may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18470", "revid": "1934512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18470", "title": "Lyman Abbott", "text": "Theologian, editor, author\nLyman J. Abbott (December 18, 1835 \u2013 October 22, 1922) was an American Congregationalist theologian, editor, and author.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nAbbott was born at Roxbury, Massachusetts, on December 18, 1835, the son of the prolific author, educator and historian Jacob Abbott, and his mother being Harriet Vaughan. Abbott grew up in Farmington, Maine, and later in New York City. Abbott's ancestors were from England, and came to America roughly twenty years after Plymouth Rock.\nHe graduated from the New York University in 1853, where he was a member of the Eucleian Society, studied law, and was admitted to the bar in 1856. Abbott soon abandoned the legal profession, however, and after studying theology with his uncle, John Stevens Cabot Abbott, was ordained a minister of the Congregational Church in 1860. He was married October 14, 1857, to Abby F. Hamlin, whose father Hannibal Hamlin (1809-1863) was the cousin of the politician Hannibal Hamlin of Boston, Mass.\nCareer.\nHe was pastor of the Congregational Church in Terre Haute, Indiana, from 1860 to 1865 and of the New England Church in New York City in 1865\u20131869. From 1865 to 1868 he was secretary of the American Union Commission (later called the American Freedmen's and Union Commission). In 1869 he resigned his pastorate to devote himself to literature.\nAbbott worked variously in the publishing profession as an associate editor of \"Harper's Magazine\", and was the founder of a publication called the \"Illustrated Christian Weekly,\" which he edited for six years. He was also the co-editor of \"The Christian Union\" with Henry Ward Beecher from 1876 to 1881. Abbott later succeeded Beecher in 1888 as pastor of Plymouth Church, Brooklyn. He also wrote the official biography of Beecher and edited his papers.\nFrom 1881 Abbott was editor-in-chief of \"The Christian Union\", renamed \"The Outlook\" in 1891; this periodical reflected his efforts toward social reform, and, in theology, a liberality, humanitarianism and nearly unitarian. The latter characteristics marked his published works also.\nAbbott's opinions differed from those of Beecher. Abbott was a constant advocate of Industrial Democracy, and was an advocate of Theodore Roosevelt's progressivism for almost 20 years. He later adopted a pronouncedly liberal theology. \nHe was a pronounced Christian Evolutionist. In two of his books, \"The Evolution of Christianity\" and \"The Theology of an Evolutionist\" (1897), Abbott applied the concept of evolution in a Christian theological perspective. Although he objected to being called an advocate of Darwinism, he was an optimistic advocate of evolution, once saying \"what Jesus saw, humanity is becoming.\"\nAbbott was a religious figure of some public note and was called upon on October 30, 1897, to deliver an address in New York at the funeral of economist, Henry George. He ultimately resigned his pastorate in November 1898.\nHis son, Lawrence Fraser Abbott, accompanied President Roosevelt on a tour of Europe and Africa (1909\u201310). In 1913 Lyman Abbott was expelled from the American Peace Society because military preparedness was vigorously advocated in \"The Outlook\", which he edited, and because he was a member of the Army and Navy League. During World War I, he supported the government's war policies.\nHe received the degree D.D. from the University of the City of New York in 1879; from Harvard in 1891, from Yale in 1903, and LL.D. from Western Reserve in 1900.\nDeath and legacy.\nLyman Abbott died on October 22, 1922, and was buried in Woodlawn Cemetery at New Windsor, New York.\nThe editors of \"The Outlook\" kept their normal routine, publishing without \"departure from the normal course of publication\" since that was what their departed colleague would have wanted. The issue asked readers for understanding as the paper \"wait[ed] until [the] next week to give to his friends, known and unknown, a record of his life and of the tributes which marked his passing.\" A brief tribute appeared in that issue, but the November 8th edition contained the official remembrance and tributes. Fifteen pages in that issue dealt with Abbott, and the publishers included \"several long essays in Abbott's honor from close relatives, shorter tributes from friends and past associates, and blurbs from many American press companies.\"\nThe many diverse and prominent author who contributed tributes \"demonstrated the scope and magnitude of Lyman Abbott's influence within American religious and intellectual culture during his long career.\" Prominent examples include a re-published 1915 tribute from former United States president Theodore Roosevelt and articles from prestigious newspapers such as \"The New York Times\" and the \"New York Herald\". Roosevelt praised Abbott for being \"one of those men whose work and life give strength to all who believe in this country,\" and the New York Herald recalled Abbott's ability to \"convey his valuable opinions to the entire intellectual public.\" Dr. Henry Sloane Coffin noted at a later memorial service, \"Measured by the number of people he reached, Dr. Abbott was unquestionably the greatest teacher of religion of this generation.\"\nAbbott's lasting influence and widespread appeal is readily apparent in later evaluations of his life. Abbott's one biographer, Ira V. Brown, confirmed Abbott's importance via \"testimonials by the dozen,\" and added that Abbott \"directly reached several hundred thousands of people\" through his work as a \"minister, lecturer, author, and editor.\" Abbott was \"something of a national patriarch\" by the time of his death, and according to Brown, he was \"no less than a modern oracle\" to thousands of followers. Abbott influenced hundreds every week through his sermons at the prestigious Plymouth Avenue Congregationalist Church. He also gave speeches at many American colleges, published several books that sold between five and ten thousand copies, and edited the Outlook that, at its peak, sold \"about 125,000 copies a week.\" The magazine \"was a prominent news source for Protestant ministers and laypeople all over the United States, demonstrating Abbott's lasting influence.\"\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18472", "revid": "9182658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18472", "title": "Leap second", "text": "Intermittent adjustment to UTC\nA leap second is a one-second adjustment that is occasionally applied to Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), to accommodate the difference between precise time (International Atomic Time (TAI), as measured by atomic clocks) and imprecise observed solar time (UT1), which varies due to irregularities and long-term slowdown in the Earth's rotation. The UTC time standard, widely used for international timekeeping and as the reference for civil time in most countries, uses TAI and consequently would run ahead of observed solar time unless it is reset to UT1 as needed. The leap second facility exists to provide this adjustment. The leap second was introduced in 1972. Since then, 27 leap seconds have been added to UTC, with the most recent occurring on December\u202f31,\u202f2016. All have so far been positive leap seconds, adding a second to a UTC day; while a negative leap second is theoretically possible, it has not yet occurred.\nBecause the Earth's rotational speed varies in response to climatic and geological events, UTC leap seconds are irregularly spaced and not precisely predictable. The decision to insert a leap second is made by the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS), typically about six months in advance, to ensure that the difference between UTC and UT1 does not exceed \u00b10.9 seconds.\nThis practice has proven disruptive, particularly in modern digital systems that require continuous and precise timestamping. Since not all systems implement leap-second adjustments uniformly, some computational, networking, and satellite-based systems may encounter anomalies.\nPhase-out and future of leap seconds.\nAt its 27th meeting in November\u202f2022, the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) passed Resolution\u202f4, directing that the maximum permitted difference between UT1 and UTC be increased \"in, or before, 2035.\" The goal is to reduce the frequency of leap seconds by widening the tolerance, rather than continuing to insert them indefinitely.\nThe resolution instructs the CIPM (International Committee for Weights and Measures) to develop, in consultation with the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and other stakeholders, a plan to implement a new maximum (UT1\u2013UTC) value by 2035 that would ensure UTC continuity for at least a century. The 28th CGPM, scheduled for 2026, is expected to review and potentially approve this new limit.\nImplications and technical debate.\nMany proponents of the change argue that removing frequent leap seconds will improve the stability and reliability of time dissemination systems (e.g., telecommunications, GNSS, data networks), avoiding the disruptions caused by inserting or removing a second unpredictably.\nAccording to the BIPM resolution text and technical studies, proposed alternative strategies include gradual \u201csmear\u201d adjustments (spreading the additional time over hours or days) or very rare \u201cleap minute\u201d insertions, rather than the current unpredictable leap-second model.\nWhile the focus is on removing frequent leap seconds, the link between UTC and Earth's rotation (UT1) would not be permanently broken: the resolution explicitly preserves that connection, just with a more relaxed bound.\nCriticism and counterpoints.\nSome critics warn that increasing the permissible divergence between UTC and UT1 could, over very long timescales, weaken civil time\u2019s alignment with solar time (i.e., what \u201cnoon\u201d feels like vs. real solar noon), though BIPM officials argue that the increase will be gradual and manageable.\nOpponents also caution that the \u201csmear second\u201d solution may not be ideal for all systems: the lack of a sudden, well-defined leap makes it harder for some time\u2011sensitive protocols to maintain compatibility without additional engineering.\nLong-term outlook.\nIf implemented as planned, the change would mean no more leap-second insertions for many decades, reducing disruptions in high-precision digital systems.\nThe new (UT1\u2013UTC) limit is expected to be revisited periodically; the resolution mandates a review mechanism so that the tolerance does not diverge uncontrollably as Earth's rotation evolves.\nHistory.\nIn about AD 140, Ptolemy, the Alexandrian astronomer, sexagesimally subdivided both the mean solar day and the true solar day to at least six places after the sexagesimal point, and he used simple fractions of both the equinoctial hour and the seasonal hour, none of which resemble the modern second. Muslim scholars, including al-Biruni in 1000, subdivided the mean solar day into 24 equinoctial hours, each of which was subdivided sexagesimally, that is into the units of minute, second, third, fourth and fifth, creating the modern second as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204460 of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204460 of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204424 = &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204486,400 of the mean solar day in the process. With this definition, the second was proposed in 1874 as the base unit of time in the CGS system of units. Soon afterwards Simon Newcomb and others discovered that Earth's rotation period varied irregularly, so in 1952, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) defined the second as a fraction of the sidereal year. In 1955, considering the tropical year to be more fundamental than the sidereal year, the IAU redefined the second as the fraction &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204431,556,925.975 of the 1900.0 mean tropical year. In 1956, a slightly more precise value of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204431,556,925.9747 was adopted for the definition of the second by the International Committee for Weights and Measures, and in 1960 by the General Conference on Weights and Measures, becoming a part of the International System of Units (SI).\nEventually, this definition too was found to be inadequate for precise time measurements, so in 1967, the SI second was again redefined as 9,192,631,770 periods of the radiation emitted by a caesium-133 atom in the transition between the two hyperfine levels of its ground state. That value agreed to 1 part in 1010 with the astronomical (ephemeris) second then in use. It was also close to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204486,400 of the mean solar day as averaged between years 1750 and 1892.\nHowever, for the past several centuries, the length of the mean solar day has been increasing by about 1.4\u20131.7\u00a0ms per century, depending on the averaging time. By 1961, the mean solar day was already a millisecond or two longer than SI seconds. Therefore, time standards that change the date after precisely SI seconds, such as the International Atomic Time (TAI), would become increasingly ahead of time standards tied to the mean solar day, such as Universal Time (UT).\nWhen the Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) standard was instituted in 1960, based on atomic clocks, it was felt necessary to maintain agreement with UT, which, until then, had been the reference for broadcast time services. From 1960 to 1971, the rate of UTC atomic clocks was offset from a pure atomic time scale by the BIH to remain synchronized with UT2, a practice known as the \"rubber second\". The rate of UTC was decided at the start of each year, and was offset from the rate of atomic time by \u2212150 parts per 1010 for 1960\u20131962, by \u2212130 parts per 1010 for 1962\u201363, by \u2212150 parts per 1010 again for 1964\u201365, and by \u2212300 parts per 1010 for 1966\u20131971. Alongside the shift in rate, an occasional 0.1\u00a0s step (0.05\u00a0s before 1963) was needed. This predominantly frequency-shifted rate of UTC was broadcast by MSF, WWV, and CHU among other time stations. In 1966, the CCIR approved \"stepped atomic time\" (SAT), which adjusted atomic time with more frequent 0.2\u00a0s adjustments to keep it within 0.1\u00a0s of UT2, because it had no rate adjustments. SAT was broadcast by WWVB among other time stations.\nIn 1972, the leap-second system was introduced so that the UTC seconds could be set exactly equal to the standard SI second, while still maintaining the UTC time of day and changes of UTC date synchronized with those of UT1. By then, the UTC clock was already 10 seconds behind TAI, which had been synchronized with UT1 in 1958, but had been counting true SI seconds since then. After 1972, both clocks have been ticking in SI seconds, so the difference between their displays at any time is 10 seconds plus the total number of leap seconds that have been applied to UTC as of that time; as of 2024[ [update]], 27 leap seconds have been applied to UTC, so the difference is 10 + 27 = 37 seconds. The most recent leap second was on December 31, 2016.\nRationale.\nLeap seconds are irregularly spaced because the Earth's rotation speed changes irregularly. Indeed, the Earth's rotation is quite unpredictable in the long term, which explains why leap seconds are announced only six months in advance.\nA mathematical model of the variations in the length of the solar day was developed by F. R. Stephenson and L. V. Morrison, based on records of eclipses for the period 700 BC to 1623, telescopic observations of occultations for the period 1623 until 1967 and atomic clocks thereafter. The model shows a steady increase of the mean solar day by 1.70\u00a0ms (\u00b10.05\u00a0ms) per century, plus a periodic shift of about 4\u00a0ms amplitude and period of about 1,500\u00a0yr. Over the last few centuries, rate of lengthening of the mean solar day has been about 1.4\u00a0ms per century, being the sum of the periodic component and the overall rate.\nThe main reason for the slowing down of the Earth's rotation is tidal friction, which alone would lengthen the day by 2.3\u00a0ms/century. Other contributing factors are the movement of the Earth's crust relative to its core, changes in mantle convection, and any other events or processes that cause a significant redistribution of mass. These processes change the Earth's moment of inertia, affecting the rate of rotation due to the conservation of angular momentum. Some of these redistributions increase Earth's rotational speed, shorten the solar day and oppose tidal friction. For example, glacial rebound shortens the solar day by 0.6\u00a0ms/century and the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake is thought to have shortened it by 2.68 microseconds.\nIt is a mistake, however, to consider leap seconds as indicators of a slowing of Earth's rotation rate; they are indicators of the accumulated difference between atomic time and time measured by Earth rotation. The plot at the top of this section shows that in 1972 the average length of day was approximately seconds and in 2016 it was approximately seconds, indicating an overall increase in Earth's rotation rate over that time period. Positive leap seconds were inserted during that time because the annual average length of day remained greater than SI seconds, not because of any slowing of Earth's rotation rate.\nIn 2021, it was reported that Earth was spinning faster in 2020 and experienced the 28 shortest days since 1960, each of which lasted less than seconds. This caused engineers worldwide to discuss a negative leap second and other possible timekeeping measures, some of which could eliminate leap seconds. The shortest day ever recorded was 29 June 2022, at 1.59 milliseconds less than 24 hours. In a 2024 paper published in \"Nature\", Duncan Agnew of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography projects that the water from increasing ice cap melting will migrate to the equator and thus cause the rate of rotation to slow down again.\nProcedure.\nThe scheduling of leap seconds was initially delegated to the Bureau International de l'Heure (BIH), but passed to the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS) on 1 January 1988. IERS usually decides to apply a leap second whenever the difference between UTC and UT1 approaches 0.6\u00a0s, in order to keep the difference between UTC and UT1 from exceeding 0.9\u00a0s.\nThe UTC standard allows leap seconds to be applied at the end of any UTC month, with first preference to June and December and second preference to March and September. As of May 2023[ [update]], all of them have been inserted at the end of either 30 June or 31 December. IERS publishes announcements every six months, whether leap seconds are to occur or not, in its \"Bulletin C\". Such announcements are typically published well in advance of each possible leap second date \u2013 usually in early January for 30 June and in early July for 31 December. Some time signal broadcasts give voice announcements of an impending leap second.\nBetween 1972 and 2020, a leap second has been inserted about every 21 months, on average. However, the spacing is quite irregular and apparently increasing: there were no leap seconds in the six-year interval between 1 January 1999, and 31 December 2004, but there were nine leap seconds in the eight years 1972\u20131979. Since the introduction of leap seconds, 1972 has been the longest year on record: 366 days, 364 of which were 86,400 seconds long and two of which were 86,401 seconds long, for a total of 31,622,402 seconds.\nUnlike leap days, which begin after 28 February, 23:59:59 local time, UTC leap seconds occur simultaneously worldwide; for example, the leap second on 31 December 2005, 23:59:60 UTC was 31 December 2005, 18:59:60 (6:59:60 p.m.) in U.S. Eastern Standard Time and 1 January 2006, 08:59:60 (a.m.) in Japan Standard Time.\nWhen it is mandated, a positive leap second is inserted between second 23:59:59 of a chosen UTC calendar date and second 00:00:00 of the following date. The definition of UTC states that the last day of December and June are preferred, with the last day of March or September as second preference, and the last day of any other month as third preference. All leap seconds (as of 2019) have been scheduled for either 30 June or 31 December. The extra second is displayed on UTC clocks as 23:59:60. On clocks that display local time tied to UTC, the leap second may be inserted at the end of some other hour (or half-hour or quarter-hour), depending on the local time zone. A negative leap second would suppress second 23:59:59 of the last day of a chosen month so that second 23:59:58 of that date would be followed immediately by second 00:00:00 of the following date. Since the introduction of leap seconds, the mean solar day has outpaced atomic time only for very brief periods and has not triggered a negative leap second.\nRecent changes to the Earth's rotation rate have made it more likely that a negative leap second will be required before the abolition of leap seconds in 2035.\nFuture.\nThe TAI and UT1 time scales are precisely defined, the former by atomic clocks (and thus independent of Earth's rotation) and the latter by astronomical observations (that measure actual planetary rotation and thus the solar time at the IERS Reference Meridian at Greenwich). UTC (on which civil time is usually based) is a compromise, stepping with atomic seconds but periodically reset by a leap second to match UT1.\nThe irregularity and unpredictability of UTC leap seconds is problematic for several areas, especially computing (see below). With increasing requirements for timestamp accuracy in systems such as process automation and high-frequency trading, this raises a number of issues. Consequently, the long-standing practice of inserting leap seconds is under review by the relevant international standards body.\nElimination proposals.\nOn 5 July 2005, the Head of the Earth Orientation Center of the IERS sent a notice to IERS Bulletins C and D subscribers, soliciting comments on a U.S. proposal before the ITU-R Study Group 7's WP7-A to eliminate leap seconds from the UTC broadcast standard before 2008 (the ITU-R is responsible for the definition of UTC). It was expected to be considered in November 2005, but the discussion has since been postponed. Under the proposal, leap seconds would be technically replaced by leap hours as an attempt to satisfy the legal requirements of several ITU-R member nations that civil time be astronomically tied to the Sun.\nA number of objections to the proposal have been raised. P. Kenneth Seidelmann, editor of the Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Almanac, wrote a letter lamenting the lack of consistent public information about the proposal and adequate justification. In an op-ed for \"Science News\", Steve Allen of the University of California, Santa Cruz said that the process has a large impact on astronomers.\nAt the 2014 General Assembly of the International Union of Radio Scientists (URSI), Demetrios Matsakis, the United States Naval Observatory's Chief Scientist for Time Services, presented the reasoning in favor of the redefinition and rebuttals to the arguments made against it. He stressed the practical inability of software programmers to allow for the fact that leap seconds make time appear to go backwards, particularly when most of them do not even know that leap seconds exist. The possibility of leap seconds being a hazard to navigation was presented, as well as the observed effects on commerce.\nThe United States formulated its position on this matter based upon the advice of the National Telecommunications and Information Administration and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), which solicited comments from the general public. This position is in favor of the redefinition.\nIn 2011, Chunhao Han of the Beijing Global Information Center of Application and Exploration said China had not decided what its vote would be in January 2012, but some Chinese scholars consider it important to maintain a link between civil and astronomical time due to Chinese tradition. The 2012 vote was ultimately deferred. At an ITU/BIPM-sponsored workshop on the leap second, Han expressed his personal view in favor of abolishing the leap second, and similar support for the redefinition was again expressed by Han, along with other Chinese timekeeping scientists, at the URSI General Assembly in 2014.\nAt a special session of the Asia-Pacific Telecommunity meeting on 10 February 2015, Chunhao Han indicated China was now supporting the elimination of future leap seconds, as were all the other presenting national representatives (from Australia, Japan, and the Republic of Korea). At this meeting, Bruce Warrington (NMI, Australia) and Tsukasa Iwama (NICT, Japan) indicated particular concern for the financial markets due to the leap second occurring in the middle of a workday in their part of the world. Subsequent to the CPM15-2 meeting in March/April 2015 the draft gives four methods which the WRC-15 might use to satisfy Resolution 653 from WRC-12.\nArguments against the proposal include the unknown expense of such a major change and the fact that universal time will no longer correspond to mean solar time. It is also answered that two timescales that do not follow leap seconds are already available, International Atomic Time (TAI) and Global Positioning System (GPS) time. Computers, for example, could use these and convert to UTC or local civil time as necessary for output. Inexpensive GPS timing receivers are readily available, and the satellite broadcasts include the necessary information to convert GPS time to UTC. It is also easy to convert GPS time to TAI, as TAI is always exactly 19 seconds ahead of GPS time. Examples of systems based on GPS time include the CDMA digital cellular systems IS-95 and CDMA2000. In general, computer systems use UTC and synchronize their clocks using Network Time Protocol (NTP). Systems that cannot tolerate disruptions caused by leap seconds can base their time on TAI and use Precision Time Protocol. However, the BIPM has pointed out that this proliferation of timescales leads to confusion.\nAt the 47th meeting of the Civil Global Positioning System Service Interface Committee in Fort Worth, Texas, in September 2007, it was announced that a mailed vote would go out on stopping leap seconds. The plan for the vote was:\nIn January 2012, rather than decide yes or no per this plan, the ITU decided to postpone a decision on leap seconds to the World Radiocommunication Conference in November 2015. At this conference, it was again decided to continue using leap seconds, pending further study and consideration at the next conference in 2023.\nIn October 2014, W\u0142odzimierz Lewandowski, chair of the timing subcommittee of the Civil GPS Interface Service Committee and a member of the ESA Navigation Program Board, presented a CGSIC-endorsed resolution to the ITU that supported the redefinition and described leap seconds as a \"hazard to navigation\".\nSome of the objections to the proposed change have been addressed by its supporters. For example, Felicitas Arias, who, as Director of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM)'s Time, Frequency, and Gravimetry Department, was responsible for generating UTC, noted in a press release that the drift of about one minute every 60\u201390 years could be compared to the 16-minute annual variation between true solar time and mean solar time, the one hour offset by use of daylight time, and the several-hours offset in certain geographically extra-large time zones.\nProposed alternatives to the leap second are the leap hour, which requires changes only once every few centuries; and the leap minute, with changes coming every half-century.\nOn 18 November 2022, the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) resolved to eliminate leap seconds by or before 2035. The difference between atomic and astronomical time will be allowed to grow to a larger value yet to be determined. A suggested possible future measure would be to let the discrepancy increase to a full minute, which would take 50 to 100\u00a0years, and then have the last minute of the day taking two minutes in a \"kind of smear\" with no discontinuity. The year 2035 for eliminating leap seconds was chosen considering Russia's request to extend the timeline to 2040, since, unlike the United States's global navigation satellite system, GPS, which does not adjust its time with leap seconds, Russia's system, GLONASS, does adjust its time with leap seconds.\nITU World Radiocommunication Conference 2023 (WRC-23), which was held in Dubai (United Arab Emirates) from 20 November to 15 December 2023 formally recognized the https:// of the 27th CGPM (2022) which decides that the maximum value for the difference (UT1-UTC) will be increased in, or before, 2035.\nProblems.\nTime difference and sequence calculations.\nTo compute the elapsed time in seconds between two given UTC dates requires the consultation of a table of leap seconds, which needs to be updated whenever a new leap second is announced. Since leap seconds are known only 6 months in advance, time intervals for UTC dates further in the future cannot be computed.\nMissing announcements.\nAlthough BIPM announces a leap second 6 months in advance, most time distribution systems (SNTP, IRIG-B, PTP) announce leap seconds at most 12 hours in advance, sometimes only in the last minute and some even not at all (DNP3).\nImplementation differences.\nNot all clocks implement leap seconds in the same manner. Leap seconds in Unix time are commonly implemented by repeating 23:59:59 or adding the time-stamp 23:59:60. Network Time Protocol (NTP) freezes the count of time during the leap second, some time servers declare \"alarm condition\". Other schemes \"smear\" time in the vicinity of a leap second, spreading out the second of change over a longer period. This aims to avoid any negative effects of a substantial (by modern standards) step in time. This approach has led to differences between systems, as leap smear is not standardized and several different schemes are used in practice.\nTextual representation.\nThe textual representation of a leap second is defined by BIPM as \"23:59:60\". There are programs that are not familiar with this format and may report an error when dealing with such input.\nBinary representation.\nMost computer operating systems and most time distribution systems represent time with a binary counter indicating the number of seconds elapsed since an arbitrary epoch; for instance, since 1970-01-01 00:00:00 in POSIX machines or since 1900-01-01 00:00:00 in NTP. This counter does not count positive leap seconds, and has no indicator that a leap second has been inserted, therefore two seconds in sequence will have the same counter value. Some computer operating systems, in particular Linux, assign to the leap second the counter value of the preceding, 23:59:59 second (59\u201359\u20130 sequence), while other computers (and the IRIG-B time distribution) assign to the leap second the counter value of the next, 00:00:00 second (59\u20130\u20130 sequence). Since there is no standard governing this sequence, the timestamp of values sampled at exactly the same time can vary by one second. This may explain flaws in time-critical systems that rely on timestamped values.\nOthers.\nSeveral models of global navigation satellite receivers have software flaws associated with leap seconds:\nSeveral software vendors have distributed software that has not properly functioned with the concept of leap seconds:\nSome businesses and service providers have been impacted by leap-second related software bugs:\nThere were misplaced concerns that farming equipment using GPS navigation during harvests occurring on 31 December 2016, would be affected by the 2016 leap second. GPS navigation makes use of GPS time, which is not impacted by the leap second.\nDue to a software error, the UTC time broadcast by the NavStar GPS system was incorrect by about 13 microseconds on 25\u201326 January 2016.\nWorkarounds.\nThe most obvious workaround is to use the TAI scale for all operational purposes and convert to UTC for human-readable text. UTC can always be derived from TAI with a suitable table of leap seconds. The Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE) video/audio industry standards body selected TAI for deriving timestamps of media. \nIEC/IEEE 60802 (Time sensitive networks) specifies TAI for all operations. Grid automation is planning to switch to TAI for global distribution of events in electrical grids. Bluetooth mesh networking also uses TAI.\nInstead of inserting a leap second at the end of the day, Google servers implement a \"leap smear\", extending seconds slightly over a 24-hour period centered on the leap second. Amazon followed a similar, but slightly different, pattern for the introduction of the 30 June 2015 leap second, leading to another case of the proliferation of timescales. They later released an NTP service for EC2 instances which performs leap smearing. UTC-SLS was proposed as a version of UTC with linear leap smearing, but it never became standard.\nIt has been proposed that media clients using the Real-time Transport Protocol inhibit generation or use of NTP timestamps during the leap second and the second preceding it.\nNIST has established a special NTP time server to deliver UT1 instead of UTC. Such a server would be particularly useful in the event the ITU resolution passes and leap seconds are no longer inserted. Those astronomical observatories and other users that require UT1 could run off UT1 \u2013 although in many cases these users already download UT1-UTC from the IERS, and apply corrections in software.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18473", "revid": "19250086", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18473", "title": "Luca Pacioli", "text": "15th c. Franciscan Friar, mathematician and publisher of accounting treatise\nLuca Bartolomeo de Pacioli, O.F.M. (sometimes \"Paccioli\" or \"Paciolo\"; c. 1447 \u2013 19 June 1517) was an Italian mathematician, Franciscan friar, collaborator with Leonardo da Vinci, and an early contributor to the field now known as accounting. He is referred to as the father of accounting and bookkeeping and he was the first person to publish a work on the double-entry system of book-keeping on the continent. He was also called Luca di Borgo after his birthplace, Borgo Sansepolcro, Tuscany.\nLife.\nLuca Pacioli was born between 1446 and 1448 in the Tuscan town of Sansepolcro where he received an abbaco education. This was education in the vernacular (\"i.e.\", the local tongue) rather than Latin and focused on the knowledge required of merchants. His father was Bartolomeo Pacioli; however, Luca Pacioli was said to have lived with the Befolci family as a child in his birth town Sansepolcro. He moved to Venice around 1464, where he continued his own education while working as a tutor to the three sons of a merchant. It was during this period that he wrote his first book, a treatise on arithmetic for the boys he was tutoring. Between 1472 and 1475, he became a Franciscan friar. Thus, he could be referred to as Fra ('Friar') Luca.\nIn 1475, he started teaching in Perugia as a private teacher before becoming first chair in mathematics in 1477. During this time, he wrote a comprehensive textbook in the vernacular for his students. He continued to work as a private tutor of mathematics and was instructed to stop teaching at this level in Sansepolcro in 1491. In 1494, his first book, , was published in Venice. In 1497, he accepted an invitation from Duke Ludovico Sforza to work in Milan. There he met, taught mathematics to, collaborated, and lived with Leonardo da Vinci. In 1499, Pacioli and Leonardo were forced to flee Milan when Louis XII seized the city and drove out their patron. Their paths appear to have finally separated around 1506. Pacioli died at about the age of 70 on 19 June 1517, most likely in Sansepolcro, where it is thought that he had spent much of his final years.\nMathematics.\nPacioli published several works on mathematics, including:\nTranslation of Piero della Francesca's work.\nThe majority of the second volume of was a slightly rewritten version of one of Piero della Francesca's works. The third volume of Pacioli's \"Divina proportione\" was an Italian translation of Piero della Francesca's Latin book \"De quinque corporibus regularibus\". In neither case did Pacioli include an attribution to Piero. He was severely criticized for this and accused of plagiarism by sixteenth-century art historian and biographer Giorgio Vasari. R. Emmett Taylor (1889\u20131956) said that Pacioli may have had nothing to do with the translated volume \"Divina proportione\", and that it may just have been appended to his work. However, no such defense can be presented concerning the inclusion of Piero della Francesca's material in Pacioli's Summa.\nImpact on accounting and business.\nPacioli dramatically affected the practice of accounting by describing the double-entry accounting method used in parts of Italy. This revolutionized how businesses oversaw their operations, enabling improved efficiency and profitability. The \"Summa\"'s section on accounting was used internationally as an accounting textbook up to the mid-16th century. The essentials of double-entry accounting have for the most part remained unchanged for over 500 years. \"Accounting practitioners in public accounting, industry, and not-for-profit organizations, as well as investors, lending institutions, business firms, and all other users for financial information are indebted to Luca Pacioli for his monumental role in the development of accounting.\"\nThe ICAEW Library's rare book collection at Chartered Accountants' Hall holds the complete published works of Luca Pacioli. Sections of two of Pacioli's books, 'Summa de arithmetica' and 'Divina proportione' can be viewed online using Turning the Pages, an interactive tool developed by the British Library.\nChess.\nAround 1500, Pacioli wrote an unpublished treatise on chess, \"De ludo scachorum\" (\"On the Game of Chess\"). Long thought to have been lost, a surviving manuscript was rediscovered in 2006, in the 22,000-volume library of Count Guglielmo Coronini-Cronberg in Gorizia. A facsimile edition of the book was published in Pacioli's home town of Sansepolcro in 2008. Based on Leonardo da Vinci's long association with the author and his having illustrated \"Divina proportione\", some scholars speculate that Leonardo either drew the chess problems that appear in the manuscript or at least designed the chess pieces used in the problems.\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18474", "revid": "50512162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18474", "title": "Lower Mainland", "text": "Region of British Columbia, Canada\nThe Lower Mainland is a geographic and cultural region of the mainland coast of the Canadian province of British Columbia that generally comprises the regional districts of Metro Vancouver and the Fraser Valley. Home to approximately 3.05million people as of the 2021 Canadian census, the Lower Mainland contains sixteen of the province's 30 most populous municipalities and approximately 60% of the province's total population.\nThe region was historically occupied by the Sto:lo, a Halkomelem-speaking people of the Coast Salish linguistic and cultural grouping.\nBoundaries.\nAlthough the term \"Lower Mainland\" has been used from the earliest period of European colonization in British Columbia, it has never been officially defined in legal terms. The term has historically been in popular usage for over a century to describe a region that extends from Horseshoe Bay south to the Canada\u2013United States border and east to Hope at the eastern end of the Fraser Valley. This definition makes the term \"Lower Mainland\" almost synonymous with the regional districts of Metro Vancouver and Fraser Valley.\nHowever, the British Columbia Geographical Names Information System (BCGNIS) comments that most residents of Vancouver might consider it to be only areas west of Mission and Abbotsford, while residents in the rest of the province consider it to be the Sea-to-Sky Corridor south of Whistler and west of Hope.\nGeography.\nThe region is bounded to the north by the Pacific Ranges and to the southeast by the Cascade Mountains, and is traversed from east to west by the Fraser River. Due to its consistency of climate, flora and fauna, geology and land use, \"Lower Mainland\" is also the name of an ecoregion\u2014a biogeoclimatic region\u2014that comprises the eastern part of the Georgia Depression and extends from Powell River on the Sunshine Coast to Hope at the eastern end of the Fraser Valley.\nClimate.\nOne of the mildest climates in Canada, the region has a mean annual temperature of with a summer mean of and a winter mean of . Annual precipitation ranges from an annual mean of in the west end to in the eastern end of the Fraser Valley and at higher elevations. Maximum precipitation occurs as rain in winter. Less than ten percent falls as snow at sea level but the amount of snowfall increases significantly with elevation.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation.\nAs of the 2021 census, the population of the Lower Mainland core area totals 2,966,830:\nThese figures are slightly inflated due to the inclusion of areas within the regional districts which are not normally considered to be part of the Lower Mainland, notably the lower Fraser Canyon and the heads of Harrison and Pitt Lakes, which are within the FVRD, and Lions Bay and Bowen Island, which are within the Metro Vancouver Regional District.\nEthnicity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Lower Mainland is among the most multicultural and diverse regions in Canada. \nAs of 2021, Europeans form a plurality with 1,337,105 persons or 45.7 percent of the total population, followed by East Asians with 614,860 persons or 21.0 percent and South Asians with 422,880 persons or 14.5 percent.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Lower Mainland includes large irreligious, Christian, and Sikh communities. The Sikh population, numbering over 265,000 persons or 9.1 percent of the total population is statistically significant across Metro Vancouver and the Fraser Valley; proportionally, it is more than four times the national average of 2.1 percent.\nLanguage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRegional districts.\nRegional districts were first created across British Columbia from 1966 to 1967 to form bodies for inter-municipal coordination and to extend municipal-level powers to areas outside existing municipalities. Today, the Lower Mainland includes two regional districts: the Metro Vancouver Regional District (MVRD) and the Fraser Valley Regional District (FVRD). Both regional districts, however, include areas outside the traditional limits of the Lower Mainland. Metro Vancouver includes areas like Surrey and Langley that are geographically in the Fraser Valley.\nThe Metro Vancouver Regional District is made up of 21 municipalities. The MVRD is bordered on the west by the Strait of Georgia, to the north by the Squamish-Lillooet Regional District, on the east by the Fraser Valley Regional District, and to the south by Whatcom County, Washington, in the United States.\nThe Fraser Valley Regional District lies east of the Metro Vancouver Regional District, and comprises the cities of Abbotsford and Chilliwack, the district municipalities of Mission, Kent, and Hope, and the village of Harrison Hot Springs. It also includes many unincorporated areas in the Fraser Valley and along the west side of the Fraser Canyon (the Fraser Canyon is not in the Lower Mainland).\nRegional district powers are very limited and other localized provincial government services are delivered through other regionalization systems.\nIndigenous territories.\nThe region was historically occupied by the Musqueam and Tsleil'waututh, and the southern portion was historically occupied by the Squamish. Its claims overlap those of the Tsleil-waututh, Musqueam, and Kwikwetlem. Other peoples who historically occupied the region are the , Chehalis, Katzie, Kwantlen, Tsawwassen, and Semiahmoo; many of their territories overlap with those of the Musqueam, and with each other. Many other peoples of the Georgia Strait region also frequented the lower Fraser, including those from Vancouver Island and what is now Whatcom County, Washington. Sto:lo \"traditional territory\", known as \"Solh Temexw\" in Halkomelem, roughly coincides with the Lower Mainland, except for the inclusion of Port Douglas at the head of Harrison Lake, which is in In-SHUCK-ch territory, and the lands around Burrard Inlet.\nHealth regions.\nHealth system services and governance in the Lower Mainland are provided by Vancouver Coastal Health, serving Vancouver, Richmond and the North Shore, and the mainland coast as far north as the Central Coast region, and Fraser Health, which serves the area of the Lower Mainland east of Vancouver and Richmond.\nNatural threats.\nFlooding.\nThe Lower Mainland is considered to have a high vulnerability to flood risk. There have been two major region-wide floods in 1894 and 1948, both associated with an extreme spring freshet of the Fraser River. Other major floods in the Lower Mainland\u00a0\u2013 including June 1972, November 1990, and November 2021\u00a0\u2013 have been more localized, primarily impacting areas in the Fraser Valley like the Sumas Prairie, with comparatively minor impacts to Metro Vancouver. Prior to the 2021 flood, according to the Fraser Basin Council, scientists predicted a one-in-three chance of a similar-sized flood occurring in the next 50 years.\nIn the second quarter of 2007, the Lower Mainland was on high alert for flooding. Higher than normal snow packs in the British Columbia Interior prompted municipal governments to start taking emergency measures in the region. Dikes along the Fraser River are regulated to handle approximately at the Mission Gauge (the height above sea level of the dykes at Mission). Warmer than normal weather in the province's Interior region caused large amounts of snow to melt prematurely, resulting in higher-than-normal water levels, which, nevertheless, remained well below flood levels.\nFlooding can cover much of the Lower Mainland. Cloverdale, Barnston Island, low-lying areas of Maple Ridge, areas west of Hope, White Rock, Richmond, parts of Vancouver, and parts of Surrey are potentially at risk. In 2007, the Lower Mainland was largely spared, although northern regions of the province, along the Skeena and Nechako Rivers, experienced floods. Climate scientists predict that increasing temperatures will mean wetter winters and more snow at the high elevations. This will increase the likelihood of snowmelt floods.\nThe provincial government maintains an integrated flood hazard management program and extensive flood protection infrastructure in the Lower Mainland. The infrastructure consists of dikes, pump stations, floodboxes, riprap, and relief wells.\nEarthquakes.\nWhile earthquakes are common in British Columbia and adjacent coastal waters, most are minor in energy release or are sufficiently remote to have little effect on populated areas. Nevertheless, earthquakes with a magnitude of up to 7.3 have occurred within of the Lower Mainland.\nBased on geological evidence, however, stronger earthquakes appear to have occurred at approximately 600-year intervals. Therefore, there is a probability that there will be a major earthquake in the region within the next 200 years.\nIn April 2008, the United States Geological Survey released information concerning a newly found fault south of downtown Abbotsford, called the Boulder Creek Fault. Scientists now believe this fault is active and capable of producing earthquakes in the 6.8 magnitude range.\nVolcanoes.\nMuch of the Lower Mainland is vulnerable to explosive eruptions from the Garibaldi Volcanic Belt. Volcanoes in this zone are capable of producing large quantities of volcanic ash that may cause short and long term water supply problems for Lower Mainland communities. All airports covered by the accompanying eruption column would be closed, heavy ash falls would damage electrical equipment and weak structures could collapse under the weight of the ash.\nCommunities.\nThe Lower Mainland's communities includes large cities in Metro Vancouver, and smaller cities, towns and villages along both banks of the Fraser River. Neighbourhoods within cities are not listed unless historically or otherwise notable and/or separate. Only some of the many Indian Reserves are listed.\nUpper Fraser Valley.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCentral Fraser Valley.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMetro Vancouver.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18475", "revid": "47693289", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18475", "title": "Lucius Afranius (poet)", "text": "1st-century BC Roman comic poet\nLucius Afranius was an ancient Roman comic poet who lived at the beginning of the 1st century BC.\nLife.\nAfranius' comedies described Roman scenes and manners (the genre called \"comoediae togatae\") and the subjects were mostly taken from the life of the lower classes (\"comoediae tabernariae\"). They were considered by some ancients to be frequently polluted with disgraceful amours, which, according to Quintilian, were only a representation of the conduct of Afranius. He depicted, however, Roman life with such accuracy that he is classed with Menander, from whom indeed he borrowed largely. He imitated the style of Gaius Titius, and his language is praised by Cicero. His comedies are spoken of in the highest terms by the ancient writers, and under the Empire they not only continued to be read, but were even acted, of which an example occurs in the time of Nero. They seem to have been well known even at the latter end of the 4th century AD.\nQuintilian's judgement.\nThe Spanish-Roman teacher of rhetoric Quintilian wrote of Afranius's plays:\n\"Tog\u0101t\u012bs excellit Afr\u0101nius: utinam non inquin\u0101sset arg\u016bmenta puer\u014drum foed\u012bs am\u014dribus, m\u014dr\u0113s su\u014ds fassus.\"\n(\"Afranius excelled in Roman-style comedies: if only he hadn't polluted his plots with unseemly sexual affairs with boys, confessing his own habits.\")\nSuch is the generally accepted interpretation of this sentence. An alternative view is proposed by Welsh (2010), who, noting that there is no trace of pederasty or any lewdness in any of the quoted fragments of Afranius, proposed to translate the sentence \"if only he hadn't polluted his plots with disreputable love affairs (conducted) by boys\", something which Quintilian perhaps thought unsuited to the moralising tone of Roman comedies. A problem with this interpretation, as Welsh himself admits, is that in Roman literature the word \"pueri\" is usually used for the boys who are object of love affairs, not the young men who conduct them.\nSurviving titles and fragments.\nAfranius wrote many comedies. The titles of forty-two of his plays are still preserved, along with associated fragments and quotations:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18476", "revid": "50896637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18476", "title": "London Post Office Railway", "text": "Closed railway system in London\nThe Post Office Railway, known since 1987 as Mail Rail, is a narrow-gauge, driverless underground railway in London that was built by the Post Office with assistance from the Underground Electric Railways Company of London, to transport mail between sorting offices. Inspired by the Chicago Tunnel Company, it opened in 1927 and operated for 76 years until it closed in 2003. A museum within the former railway was opened in September 2017.\nGeography.\nThe line ran from Paddington Head District Sorting Office in the west to the Eastern Head District Sorting Office at Whitechapel in the east, a distance of . It had eight stations, the largest of which was underneath Mount Pleasant, but by 2003 only three stations remained in use because the sorting offices above the other stations had been relocated.\nHistory.\nUse as post office railway.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 1911, a plan evolved to build an underground railway long from Paddington to Whitechapel serving the main sorting offices along the route; road traffic congestion was causing unacceptable delays. The plan was approved by the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Post Office (London) Railway Act 1913 (3 &amp; 4 Geo. 5. c. cxvi). The contract to build the tunnels was won by John Mowlem and Co. Construction of the tunnels started in February 1915 from a series of shafts. Most of the line was constructed using the Greathead shield system, with limited amounts of hand-mining for connecting tunnels at stations.\nThe main line has a single diameter tube with two tracks. Just before stations, tunnels diverge into two single-track diameter tunnels leading to two parallel diameter station tunnels. The main tube is at a depth of around . Stations are at a much shallower depth, with a 1-in-20 gradient into the stations. The gradients assist in slowing the trains when approaching stations, and accelerating them away. There is also less distance to lift mail from the stations to the surface. At Oxford Circus the tunnel runs close to the Bakerloo line tunnel of the London Underground. The tunnel also runs under Selfridges as the recent 2018 refurbishment of the building revealed.\nDuring 1917, work was suspended due to the shortage of labour and materials. By June 1924, track laying had started, and additional time was granted by the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Post Office (London) Railway Act 1924 (14 &amp; 15 Geo. 5. c. lxxx). In February 1927, the first section, between Paddington and the West Central District Office, was made available for training. The line became available for the Christmas parcel post in 1927 and letters were carried from February 1928.\nIn 1954, plans were developed for a new Western District Office at Rathbone Place, which required a diversion, opening in 1958. It was not until 3 August 1965 that the new station and office were opened by the Postmaster General, Tony Benn. The disused section was used as a store tunnel; some parts of it still have the track in place.\nIn 1987, the railway changed its name to Mail Rail in celebration of its 60th anniversary, and some trains were rebuilt with more aerodynamic casings.\nClosure.\nA Royal Mail press release in April 2003 said that the railway would be closed and mothballed at the end of May that year. Royal Mail had earlier stated that using the railway was five times more expensive than using road transport for the same task. The Communication Workers Union claimed the actual figure was closer to three times more expensive but argued that this was the result of a deliberate policy of running the railway down and using it at only one-third of its capacity. A local governmental report by the Greater London Authority stated that the \"line carries an average of four million letters and parcels per day\" and was in support of continued use and criticized the increase of lorries on local roads, estimated to be 80 more truck loads per week. The railway was closed on 31 May 2003.\nIn April 2011, an urban exploration group called the \"Consolidation Crew\" published accounts of illicit access to the tunnels. Detailed photography and text revealed that the railway is still largely in good condition, despite some natural decay. More recently, media have been admitted to the tunnels as part of the pre-launch publicity for the Postal Museum. Photographs show much of the infrastructure in place.\nA team from the University of Cambridge has taken over a short, double track section of unused Post Office tunnel near Liverpool Street Station, where a newly built tunnel for Crossrail is situated some two metres beneath. The study is to establish how the original cast-iron lining sections, which are similar to those used for many miles of railway under London, resist possible deformation and soil movement caused by the new works. Digital cameras, fibre optic deformation sensors, laser scanners and other low-cost instruments, reporting in real time, have been installed in the vacated tunnel. As well as providing information about the behaviour of the old construction materials, the scheme can also provide an early warning if the new tunnel bores are creating dangerous soil movement.\nRedevelopment and preservation.\nIn October 2013, the British Postal Museum &amp; Archive announced that it intended opening part of the network to the public. After approval was granted by Islington Council, work on the new museum and the railway began in 2014. Special tourist trains were installed in late 2016. It was planned to open a circular route, running beneath the depot at Mount Pleasant with a journey time of around 15 minutes, by mid-2017. The museum opened on 5 September.\nIn its first year of operation (2017\u20132018), the trains performed 9,000 trips totalling , with the railway and museum hosting over 198,000 visitors.\nRolling stock.\nThe first stock was delivered in 1926 with the opening of the system. All stock used was electrically powered.\nElectric units.\nSome trains have been preserved at the Launceston Steam Railway.\nSimilar railways.\nA pneumatic underground railway was used by the Post Office in London between 1863 and 1874 using individual wheeled capsules, operated by the London Pneumatic Despatch Company.\nIn 1910, a tunnel railway opened in Munich, Germany between M\u00fcnchen Hauptbahnhof and the nearby Post office. The tunnels were damaged in World War II, restored in 1948 and partially rebuilt in 1966 to allow for the first Munich S-Bahn tunnel. Operations ceased in 1988.\nPostal Telegraph and Telephone (Switzerland) opened the Post-U-Bahn (underground railway) in Z\u00fcrich in 1938. It ran between Z\u00fcrich Hauptbahnhof and the Sihlpost, Z\u00fcrich's main post office. The track gauge was 60\u00a0cm, and the small electric railcar, which could carry 250\u00a0kg of mail, collected power from wires between the tracks. Operations ceased on 11 October 1980 when a rubber-tired system replaced the train.\nThe Chicago Tunnel Company, in operation between 1906 and 1959, delivered freight, parcels, and coal, and disposed of ash and excavation debris. It operated an elaborate network of narrow-gauge track in tunnels running under the streets throughout the central business district including and surrounding the \"Loop\".\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLiterature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18477", "revid": "45959324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18477", "title": "Lulach", "text": "King of Alba from 1057 to 1058\nLulach mac Gille Coemg\u00e1in (Modern Gaelic: \"Lughlagh mac Gille Chomghain\", known in English simply as Lulach, and nicknamed Tairbith, \"the Unfortunate\" and Fatuus, \"the Simple-minded\" or \"the Foolish\"; c. 1032 \u2013 17 March 1058) was King of Alba (Scotland) between 15 August 1057 and 17 March 1058.\nLulach was the son of Gruoch of Scotland, from her first marriage to Gille Coemg\u00e1in, Mormaer of Moray, and thus the stepson of Macbeth (Mac Bethad mac Findla\u00edch). Through his mother, he was also the great-grandson of either Kenneth II or Kenneth III. Following the death of Macbeth at the Battle of Lumphanan on 15 August 1057, the king's followers placed Lulach on the throne. He has the distinction of being the first king of Scotland of whom there are inauguration details available: he was inaugurated, probably on 8 September 1057 at Scone. Lulach appears to have been a weak king, as his nicknames suggest, and ruled only for a few months before being assassinated and usurped by Malcolm III. However, it is also plausible his nicknames are the results of negative propaganda, and were established as part of a smear campaign by Malcolm III.\nLulach's son M\u00e1el Snechtai was Mormaer of Moray, while \u00d3engus of Moray was the son of Lulach's daughter.\nHe is believed to be buried on Saint Columba's Holy Island of Iona in or around the monastery. The exact position of his grave is unknown.\nDepictions in fiction.\nLulach is a protagonist in Joel H. Morris's historical novel \"All Our Yesterdays: A Novel of Lady Macbeth\", published by Putnam Books in 2024, where he is referred to as \"the Boy.\" A prequel to the play, the novel interweaves the historical Lady Macbeth and her son with the characters depicted in Shakespeare's tragedy.\nLulach is an important secondary character in Dorothy Dunnett's historical novel \"King Hereafter\", where he is portrayed as a seer. In the novel, Dunnett used Lulach as a mouthpiece for researched information about the real Macbeth.\nLulach is also one of the protagonists in Jackie French's children's novel \"Macbeth and Son\" and in Susan Fraser King's novel \"Lady MacBeth\".\nLulach is also a character in David Greig's play \"Dunsinane\" where he is hunted by the English soldiers as a threat to peace in Malcolm's Scotland.\nLulach McPritchett in \"Modern Family\" is a Scottish warrior and ancestor of Jay Pritchett.\nLulach \u2014 misnamed Luach \u2014 appears in the animated series Gargoyles (TV series) as Macbeth and Gruoch's son, and, briefly, King of Scotland.\nLulach appears in a 2024 adaptation of Shakespeare's play called \"Gruoch and Macbeth: A Screenplay\" by Graham J. Howard.\nLulach appears in Val McDermid's \"Queen Macbeth\".\nHe is apparently referenced by Lady Macbeth (his mother's counterpart in the play Macbeth), in Act I Scene VII, where she says she has \"given suck, and know / How tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me\", in what would be a historical reference to Lulach.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18480", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18480", "title": "Laparoscopic surgery", "text": ""}
{"id": "18481", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18481", "title": "LaissezFaire", "text": ""}
{"id": "18482", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18482", "title": "Luddites", "text": ""}
{"id": "18483", "revid": "50691361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18483", "title": "Lexicography", "text": "Art and science of compiling dictionaries\nLexicography is the study of lexicons and the art of compiling dictionaries. It is divided into two separate academic disciplines:\nThere is some disagreement on the definition of lexicology, as distinct from lexicography. Some use \"lexicology\" as a synonym for theoretical lexicography; others use it to mean a branch of linguistics pertaining to the inventory of words in a particular language.\nA person practicing lexicography is a lexicographer.\nFocus.\nGenerally, lexicography focuses on the design, compilation, use and evaluation of general dictionaries, i.e. dictionaries that provide a description of the language in general use. Specialized lexicography focuses on the design, compilation, use and evaluation of specialized dictionaries, i.e. dictionaries that are devoted to a (relatively restricted) set of linguistic and factual elements of one or more specialist subject fields, e.g. legal lexicography. Such a dictionary is usually called a specialized dictionary or Language for specific purposes dictionary and following Nielsen 1994, specialized dictionaries are either multi-field, single-field or sub-field dictionaries.\nIt is now widely accepted that lexicography is a scholarly discipline in its own right and not a sub-branch of applied linguistics, as the chief object of study in lexicography is the dictionary (see e.g. Bergenholtz/Nielsen/Tarp 2009).\nLexicography is the practice of creating books, computer programs, or databases that reflect lexicographical work and are intended for public use. These include dictionaries and thesauri which are widely accessible resources that present various aspects of lexicology, such as spelling, pronunciation, and meaning.\nLexicographers are tasked with defining simple words as well as figuring out how compound or complex words or words with many meanings can be clearly explained. They also make decisions regarding which words should be kept, added, or removed from a dictionary. They are responsible for arranging lexical material (usually alphabetically) to facilitate understanding and navigation.\nEtymology.\nCoined in English 1680, the word \"lexicography\" derives from the Greek \u03bb\u03b5\u03be\u03b9\u03ba\u03bf\u03b3\u03c1\u03ac\u03c6\u03bf\u03c2 (\"lexikographos\"), \"lexicographer\", from \u03bb\u03b5\u03be\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03bd (\"lexicon\"), neut. of \u03bb\u03b5\u03be\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2 \"lexikos\", \"of or for words\", from \u03bb\u03ad\u03be\u03b9\u03c2 (\"lexis\"), \"speech\", \"word\" (in turn from \u03bb\u03ad\u03b3\u03c9 (\"lego\"), \"to say\", \"to speak\") and \u03b3\u03c1\u03ac\u03c6\u03c9 (\"grapho\"), \"to scratch, to inscribe, to write\".\nAspects.\nPractical lexicographic work involves several activities, and the compilation of well-crafted dictionaries requires careful consideration of all or some of the following aspects:\nOne important goal of lexicography is to keep the lexicographic information costs incurred by dictionary users as low as possible. Nielsen (2008) suggests relevant aspects for lexicographers to consider when making dictionaries as they all affect the users' impression and actual use of specific dictionaries.\nTheoretical lexicography concerns the same aspects as lexicography, but aims to develop principles that can improve the quality of future dictionaries, for instance in terms of access to data and lexicographic information costs. Several perspectives or branches of such academic dictionary research have been distinguished: 'dictionary criticism' (or evaluating the quality of one or more dictionaries, e.g. by means of reviews (see Nielsen 1999), 'dictionary history' (or tracing the traditions of a type of dictionary or of lexicography in a particular country or language), 'dictionary typology' (or classifying the various genres of reference works, such as dictionary versus encyclopedia, monolingual versus bilingual dictionary, general versus technical or pedagogical dictionary), 'dictionary structure' (or formatting the various ways in which the information is presented in a dictionary), 'dictionary use' (or observing the reference acts and skills of dictionary users), and 'dictionary IT' (or applying computer aids to the process of dictionary compilation).\nOne important consideration is the status of 'bilingual lexicography', or the compilation and use of the bilingual dictionary in all its aspects (see e.g. Nielsen 1994). In spite of a relatively long history of this type of dictionary, it is often said to be less developed in a number of respects than its unilingual counterpart, especially in cases where one of the languages involved is not a major language. Not all genres of reference works are available in interlingual versions, e.g. LSP, learners' and encyclopedic types, although sometimes these challenges produce new subtypes, e.g. 'semi-bilingual' or 'bilingualised' dictionaries such as Hornby's \"(Oxford) Advanced Learner's Dictionary English-Chinese\", which have been developed by translating existing monolingual dictionaries (see Marello 1998).\nHistory.\nTraces of lexicography can be identified as early late 4th millennium BCE, with the first known examples being Sumerian cuneiform texts uncovered in the city of Uruk. Ancient lexicography usually consisted of word lists documenting a language's lexicon. Other early word lists have been discovered in Egyptian, Akkadian, Sanskrit, and Eblaite, and take the shape of mono- and bilingual word lists. They were organized in different ways including by subject and part of speech. The first extensive glosses, or word lists with accompanying definitions, began to appear around 300 BCE, and the discipline begins to develop more steadily. Lengthier glosses started to emerge in the literary cultures of antiquity, including Greece, Rome, China, India, Sasanian Persia, and the Middle East. In 636, Isidore of Seville published the first formal etymological compendium. The word was first applied to this type of text by the late 14th century.\nWith the invention and spread of Gutenberg's printing press in the 15th century, lexicography flourished. Dictionaries became increasingly widespread, and their purpose shifted from a way to store lexical knowledge to a mode of disseminating lexical information. Modern lexicographical practices began taking shape during the 18th and 19th centuries, led by notable lexicographers such as Samuel Johnson, Vladimir Dal, the Brothers Grimm, Noah Webster, James Murray, Peter Mark Roget, Joseph Emerson Worcester, and others. \nDuring the 20th century, the invention of computers changed lexicography again. With access to large databases, finding lexical evidence became significantly faster and easier. Corpus research also enables lexicographers to discriminate different senses of a word based on said evidence. Additionally, lexicographers were now able to work nonlinearly, rather than being bound to a traditional lexicographical ordering like alphabetical ordering.\nIn the early 21st century, the increasing ubiquity of artificial intelligence began to impact the field, which had traditionally been a time-consuming, detail-oriented task. The advent of AI has been hailed by some as the \"end of lexicography\". Others are skeptical that human lexicographers will be outmoded in a field studying the particularly human substance of language.\nRegardless of how beneficial human lexicographers may be to lexicography, money to fund such positions has been drying up. The rise of the Internet since the 1990s has seen sharply declining printed paper dictionary sales. Many once formidable brands have stopped publishing new editions and simply began licensing out their last completed edition. During the 2000s and 2010s, ad revenue has helped sustain online versions of dictionaries, including Merriam-Webster and Dictionary.com, and these companies still employed lexicographers to stay up to date. However, changes in Google Search, the main source of incoming traffic, has seen traffic decline since 2016. As such, they too have largely laid off most of their staff working on this, with hobbyists, academics, and contractors continuing the work. Stefan Fatsis has estimated that the number of full-time commercial lexicographers in 2025 has dropped to less than a quarter of the amount in 2000.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nSocieties"}
{"id": "18485", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18485", "title": "LA style Lindy Hop", "text": ""}
{"id": "18486", "revid": "751903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18486", "title": "Law enforcement", "text": "Enforcement of the law by some members of society\nLaw enforcement is the activity of some members of the government or other social institutions who act in an organized manner to enforce the law by investigating, deterring, rehabilitating, or punishing people who violate the rules and norms governing that society. The term encompasses police, courts and corrections. These three components of the criminal justice system may operate independently of each other or collectively through the use of record sharing and cooperation. Throughout the world, law enforcement are also associated with protecting the public, life, property, and keeping the peace in society.\nThe concept of law enforcement dates back to ancient times, and forms of law enforcement and police have existed in various forms across many human societies. Modern state legal codes use the term law enforcement officer or peace officer to include every person vested by the legislating state with police power or authority; traditionally, anyone sworn or badged who can arrest any person for a violation of criminal law is included under the umbrella term of law enforcement.\nAlthough law enforcement may be most concerned with the crime prevention and punishment of crimes, organizations exist to discourage a wide variety of non-criminal violations of rules and norms, effected through the imposition of less severe consequences such as probation.\nHistory.\nLaw enforcement organizations existed in ancient times, such as prefects in ancient China, \"paq\u016bdus\" in Babylonia, \"curaca\" in the Inca Empire, \"vigiles\" in the Roman Empire, and Medjay in ancient Egypt. Who law enforcers were and reported to depended on the civilization and often changed over time, but they were typically slaves, soldiers, officers of a judge, or hired by settlements and households. Aside from their duties to enforce laws, many ancient law enforcers also served as slave catchers, firefighters, watchmen, city guards, and bodyguards.\nBy the post-classical period and the Middle Ages, forces such as the Santa Hermandades, the s\"hurta\", and the \"Mar\u00e9chauss\u00e9e\" provided services ranging from law enforcement and personal protection to customs enforcement and waste collection. In England, a complex law enforcement system emerged, where tithings, groups of ten families, were responsible for ensuring good behavior and apprehending criminals; groups of ten tithings (\"hundreds\") were overseen by a reeve; hundreds were governed by administrative divisions known as shires; and shires were overseen by shire-reeves. In feudal Japan, samurai were responsible for enforcing laws.\nThe concept of police as the primary law enforcement organization originated in Europe in the early modern period; the first statutory police force was the High Constables of Edinburgh in 1611, while the first organized police force was the Paris \"lieutenant g\u00e9n\u00e9ral de police\" in 1667. Until the 18th century, law enforcement in England was mostly the responsibility of private citizens and thief-takers, albeit also including constables and watchmen. This system gradually shifted to government control following the 1749 establishment of the London Bow Street Runners, the first formal police force in Britain. In 1800, Napoleon reorganized French law enforcement to form the Paris Police Prefecture; the British government passed the Glasgow Police Act, establishing the City of Glasgow Police; and the Thames River Police was formed in England to combat theft on the River Thames. In September 1829, Robert Peel merged the Bow Street Runners and the Thames River Police to form the Metropolitan Police. The title of the \"first modern police force\" has still been claimed by the modern successors to these organizations.\nFollowing European colonization of the Americas, the first law enforcement agencies in the Thirteen Colonies were the New York Sheriff's Office and the edit County Sheriff's Department, both formed in the 1660s in the Province of New York. The Province of Carolina established slave-catcher patrols in the 1700s, and by 1785, the Charleston Guard and Watch was reported to have the duties and organization of a modern police force. The first municipal police department in the United States was the Philadelphia Police Department, while the first American state police, federal law enforcement agency was the United States Marshals Service, both formed in 1789. In the American frontier, law enforcement was the responsibility of county sheriffs, rangers, constables, and marshals. The first law enforcement agency in Canada was the Royal Newfoundland Constabulary, established in 1729, while the first Canadian national law enforcement agency was the Dominion Police, established in 1868. By the 19th century, improvements in technology, greater global connections, and changes in the sociopolitical order led to the establishment of police forces worldwide. National, regional, and municipal civilian law enforcement agencies exist in practically all countries; to promote their international cooperation, the International Criminal Police Organization, also known as Interpol, was formed in September 1923. Technology has made an immense impact on law enforcement, leading to the development and regular use of police cars, police radio systems, police aviation, police tactical units, and police body cameras.\nLaw enforcement agencies.\nMost law enforcement is conducted by some law enforcement agency, typically a police force. Civilians generally staff police agencies, which are typically not a military branch. However, some militaries do have branches that enforce laws among the civilian populace, often called gendarmerie, security forces, or internal troops. Social investment in enforcement through such organizations can be massive in terms of the resources invested in the activity and the number of people professionally engaged to perform those functions.\nLaw enforcement agencies are limited to operating within a specified jurisdiction. These are typically organized into three basic levels: national, regional, and municipal. However, depending on certain factors, there may be more or less levels, or they may be merged: in the United States, there are federal, state, and local police and sheriff agencies; in Canada, some territories may only have national-level law enforcement, while some provinces have national, provincial, and municipal; in Japan, there is a national police agency, which supervises the police agencies for each individual prefecture; and in Niger, there is a national police for urban areas and a gendarmerie for rural areas, both technically national-level. In some cases, there may be multiple agencies at the same level but with different focuses: for example, in the United States, the Drug Enforcement Administration and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives are both national-level federal law enforcement agencies, but the DEA focuses on narcotics crimes, while the ATF focuses on weapon regulation violations.\nVarious segments of society may have their own specialist law enforcement agency, such as the military having military police, schools having school police or campus police, or airports having airport police. Private police may exist in some jurisdictions, often to provide dedicated law enforcement for privately owned property or infrastructure, such as railroad police for private railways or hospital police for privately owned hospital campuses.\nDepending on various factors, such as whether an agency is autonomous or dependent on other organizations for its operations, the governing body that funds and oversees the agency may decide to dissolve or consolidate its operations. Dissolution of an agency may occur when the governing body or the agent itself decides to end operations. This can occur due to multiple reasons, including criminal justice reform, a lack of population in the jurisdiction, mass resignations, efforts to deter corruption, or the governing body contracting with a different agency that renders the original agency redundant or obsolete. According to the International Association of Chiefs of Police, agency consolidation can occur to improve efficiency, consolidate resources, or when forming a new type of government.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18488", "revid": "45455330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18488", "title": "Libido", "text": "Psychological or sexual drive or energy\nThe libido ( ; from la) refers to a psychological energy that, in common parlance, encompasses all forms of sexual desire, but is sometimes also regarded as the driving force behind other needs, such as a mother's love for her infant. The term was originally developed by Sigmund Freud, the pioneer of psychoanalysis. Initially it referred only to specific sexual needs, but he later expanded the concept to a universal desire, with the id being its \"great reservoir\". As driving energy behind all life processes, libido became the source of the social engagement (maternal love instinct, for example), sexual behaviour, pursuit for nutrition, skin pleasure, knowledge and victory in all areas of self- and species preservation. \nEquating the libido with the \"Eros\" of Platonic philosophy, Freud further differentiated two inherent operators: the life drive and the death drive. Both aspects are working complementary to each other: While the \"death drive\", also called \"Destrudo\" or \"Thanatos\", embodies the principle of 'analytical' decomposition of complex phenomenon, the effect of \"life drive\" (Greek \"Bios\") is to reassemble or synthesise the parts of the decomposition in a way that serves the organisms regeneration and reproduction. Freud's most abstract description of libido represents an energetic potential that begins like a bow to tense up unpleasantly (noticeable 'hunger') in order to pleasantly relax again (noticeable satisfaction); its nature is both physical and psychological. Starting from the id in the fertilised egg, libido initiates also the emergence of two further instances: the ego (function of conscious perception), and the superego, which specialises in retrievable storage of experiences (long-term memory). Together with libido as their source, these three instances represent the common core of all branches of psychoanalysis.\nFrom a neurobiological point of view, the inner perception and regulation of the various innate needs are mediated through the nucleus accumbens by neurotransmitters and hormones; in relation to sexuality, these are mainly testosterone, oestrogen and dopamine. Each of the needs can be influenced by the others (e.g. baby feeding is inextricably connected with sociality); but above all, their fulfilment requires the libidinal satisfaction of curiosity. Without this 'research instinct' of mind, the control of bodily motoric would be impossible, the arrow from the bow called \"life\" wouldn't do its work (\"death\"). Just as happiness is anchored in the fulfilment of all innate needs, disturbances through social stress resulting from lifestyle, traumatisation in early childhood or during war, mental and bodily illness lead to suffering that is inwardly noticeable and conscious to the ego. Through the capacity of empathy, linguistic and facial expressions of emotion ultimately also affect the human environment.\nDifferent psychological perspectives.\nFreud.\nSigmund Freud defined libido as \"the energy, regarded as a quantitative magnitude... of those instincts which have to do with all that may be comprised under the word 'love'.\" It is the instinctual energy or force, contained in what Freud called the id, the strictly unconscious structure of the psyche. He also explained that it is analogous to hunger, the will to power, and so on insisting that it is a fundamental instinct that is innate in all humans.\nFreud pointed out that these libidinal drives can conflict with the conventions of civilised behavior, represented in the psyche by the superego. It is this need to conform to society and control the libido that leads to tension and anxiety in the individual, prompting the use of ego defenses which channel the psychic energy of the unconscious drives into forms that are acceptable to the ego and superego. Excessive use of ego defenses results in neurosis, so a primary goal of psychoanalysis is to make the drives accessible to consciousness, allowing them to be addressed directly, thus reducing the patient's automatic resort to ego defenses.\nFreud viewed libido as passing through a series of developmental stages in the individual, in which the libido fixates on different erogenous zones: first the oral stage (exemplified by an infant's pleasure in nursing), then the anal stage (exemplified by a toddler's pleasure in controlling his or her bowels), then the phallic stage, through a latency stage in which the libido is dormant, to its reemergence at puberty in the genital stage (Karl Abraham would later add subdivisions in both oral and anal stages.). Failure to adequately adapt to the demands of these different stages could result in libidinal energy becoming 'dammed up' or fixated in these stages, producing certain pathological character traits in adulthood.\nJung.\nSwiss psychiatrist Carl Gustav Jung identified the libido with psychic energy in general. According to Jung, 'energy', in its subjective and psychological sense, is 'desire', of which sexual desire is just one aspect. Libido thus denotes \"a desire or impulse which is unchecked by any kind of authority, moral or otherwise. Libido is appetite in its natural state. From the genetic point of view it is bodily needs like hunger, thirst, sleep, and sex, and emotional states or affects, which constitute the essence of libido.\" It is \"the energy that manifests itself in the life process and is perceived subjectively as striving and desire.\" He describes libido as manifesting through five primary instincts: hunger, sexuality, activity, reflection, and creativity. Duality (opposition) creates the energy (or libido) of the psyche, which Jung asserts expresses itself only through symbols. These symbols may manifest as \"fantasy-images\" in the process of psychoanalysis, giving subjective expression to the contents of the libido, which otherwise lacks any definite form. Desire, conceived generally as a psychic longing, movement, displacement and structuring, manifests itself in definable forms which are apprehended through analysis.\nFurther psychological and social viewpoints.\nA person may have a desire for sex, but not have the opportunity to act on that desire, or may on personal, moral or religious reasons refrain from acting on the urge. Psychologically, a person's urge can be repressed or sublimated. Conversely, a person can engage in sexual activity without an actual desire for it. Multiple factors affect human sex drive, including stress, illness, pregnancy, and others. A large 2022 review, using more than 620,000 people and 211 studies, found that men had higher sex drives than women on average, and that one-third of women (30-35%) had a higher sex drive than the average man. The study found an 80% overlap in the sex drives of men and women, and that the effects of the difference were \"medium\" in size.\nOther studies have found that women report similar sexual habits as men, such as masturbation frequency, under the impression of a lie detector. The study reported that \"sex differences in self-reported sexual behavior (masturbation) were negligible in a bogus pipeline condition in which participants believed lying could be detected.\"\nA 2012 study found that, in couples who has been together at least a year, differences in sex drive were non-significant and more similar than different.\nAnother 2012 study found that testosterone did not account for sexual differences between men and women.\nCertain psychological or social factors can reduce the desire for sex. These factors can include lack of privacy or intimacy, stress or fatigue, distraction, safety social stigma (in women, it can account for a large part of rejecting sex), or depression. Environmental stress, such as prolonged exposure to elevated sound levels or bright light, can also affect libido. Other causes include experience of sexual abuse, assault, trauma, or neglect, body image issues, and anxiety about engaging in sexual activity. Women whose first sexual experience was pleasant report the same sex drive as men. \nIndividuals with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) may find themselves with reduced sexual desire. Struggling to find pleasure, as well as having trust issues, many with PTSD experience feelings of vulnerability, rage and anger, and emotional shutdowns, which have been shown to inhibit sexual desire in those with PTSD. Reduced sex drive may also be present in trauma victims due to issues arising in sexual function. For women, it has been found that treatment can improve sexual function, thus helping restore sexual desire. Depression and libido decline often coincide, with reduced sex drive being one of the symptoms of depression. Those with depression often report the decline in libido to be far reaching and more noticeable than other symptoms. In addition, those with depression often are reluctant to report their reduced sex drive, often normalizing it with cultural/social values, or by the failure of the physician to inquire about it.\nSexual desires are often an important factor in the formation and maintenance of intimate relationships in humans. A lack or loss of sexual desire can adversely affect relationships. Changes in the sexual desires of any partner in a sexual relationship, if sustained and unresolved, may cause problems in the relationship. The infidelity of a partner may be an indication that a partner's changing sexual desires can no longer be satisfied within the current relationship. Problems can arise from disparity of sexual desires between partners, or poor communication between partners of sexual needs and preferences.\nBiological perspectives.\nEndogenous compounds.\nLibido is governed primarily by activity in the mesolimbic dopamine pathway (ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens). Consequently, dopamine and related trace amines (primarily phenethylamine) that modulate dopamine neurotransmission play a critical role in regulating libido.\nOther neurotransmitters, neuropeptides, and sex hormones that affect sex drive by modulating activity in or acting upon this pathway include:\nSex hormone levels and the menstrual cycle.\nA woman's desire for sex is correlated to her menstrual cycle, with many women experiencing a heightened sexual desire in the several days immediately before ovulation, which is her peak fertility period, which normally occurs two days before and until two days after the ovulation. This cycle has been associated with changes in a woman's estradiol and testosterone levels during the menstrual cycle. Women whose ovaries are removed before menopause often experience a dramatic loss of libido.\nAlso, during the week following ovulation, progesterone levels increase, resulting in a woman experiencing difficulty achieving orgasm. As the last days of the menstrual cycle are marked by a higher estrogen level, women's libido may get a boost as a result of the thickening of the uterine lining which stimulates nerve endings and makes a woman feel aroused. Also, during these days, estrogen levels decline, resulting in a decrease of natural lubrication.\nA large study found that testosterone did not reliably predict women's sexual desire at any time point. It provided correlational evidence indicating that circulating estradiol, but not testosterone, was associated with the midcycle peak in women's sexual desire.\nAnother study found that there is little support for the notion that testosterone is the critical libidinal hormone for women. It found that, in all other female mammals, only estradiol has been shown to be critical for female sexual motivation and behavior.\nA report from the University of Michigan supported this claim, reporting that several studies found no difference in testosterone levels in women who have high levels of desire and those diagnosed with a libido disorder \nAlthough some specialists disagree with this theory, menopause is still considered by the majority a factor that can cause decreased sexual desire in women. The levels of estrogen decrease at menopause and this usually causes a lower interest in sex and vaginal dryness which makes sex painful. Estrogen helps a woman's sexual drive, contributing to vaginal lubrication.\nPhysical factors.\nPhysical factors that can affect libido include endocrine issues such as hypothyroidism, the effect of certain prescription medications (for example flutamide), and the attractiveness and biological fitness of one's partner, among various other lifestyle factors.\nAnemia is a cause of lack of libido in women due to the loss of iron during the period.\nSmoking tobacco, alcohol use disorder, and the use of certain drugs can also lead to a decreased libido. Moreover, specialists suggest that several lifestyle changes such as exercising, quitting smoking, lowering consumption of alcohol or using prescription drugs may help increase one's sexual desire.\nMedications.\nSome people purposefully attempt to decrease their libido through the usage of anaphrodisiacs. Aphrodisiacs, such as dopaminergic psychostimulants, are a class of drugs which can increase libido. On the other hand, a reduced libido is also often iatrogenic and can be caused by many medications, such as hormonal contraception, SSRIs and other antidepressants, antipsychotics, opioids, beta blockers and isotretinoin.\nIsotretinoin, finasteride and many SSRIs and SNRIs uncommonly can cause a long-term decrease in libido and overall sexual function, sometimes lasting for months or years after users of these drugs have stopped taking them. These long-lasting effects have been classified as iatrogenic medical disorders, respectively termed post-retinoid sexual dysfunction/post-Accutane syndrome (PRSD/PAS), post-finasteride syndrome (PFS) and post-SSRI sexual dysfunction (PSSD). These three disorders share many overlapping symptoms in addition to reduced libido, and are thought to share a common etiology, but collectively remain poorly-understood and lack effective treatments.\nMultiple studies have shown that with the exception of bupropion (Wellbutrin), trazodone (Desyrel) and nefazodone (Serzone), antidepressants generally will lead to lowered libido. SSRIs and SNRIs that typically lead to decreased libido are fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine (Paxil), fluvoxamine (Luvox), citalopram (Celexa), sertraline (Zoloft), escitalopram (Lexapro), venlafaxine (Effexor), Duloxetine (Cymbalta), and lecomilnacipran (Fetzima). Lowering the dosage of SSRI and SNRI medications has been shown to improve libido in some patients. Other users try enrolling in psychotherapy to solve depression-related issues of libido. However, the effectiveness of this therapy is mixed, with many reporting that it had no or little effect on sexual drive.\nSeveral studies have found that estrogen-only therapies that produce periovulatory levels of circulating estradiol increase sexual desire in postmenopausal women.\nTestosterone is one of the hormones controlling libido in human beings, with the correlations being higher for men and less related in women. Emerging research is showing that hormonal contraception methods like oral contraceptive pills (which rely on estrogen and progesterone together) are causing low libido in females by elevating levels of sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG). SHBG binds to sex hormones, including testosterone, rendering them unavailable. Research is showing that even after ending a hormonal contraceptive method, SHBG levels remain elevated and no reliable data exists to predict when this phenomenon will diminish.\nSeveral studies have found that estrogen-only therapies that produce periovulatory levels of circulating estradiol increase sexual desire in postmenopausal women.\nOral contraceptives lower androgen levels in users, and lowered androgen levels generally lead to a decrease in sexual desire. However, usage of oral contraceptives has shown to typically not have a connection with lowered libido in women.\nEffects of age.\nMales reach the peak of their sex drive in their teenage years, while females reach it in their thirties. The surge in testosterone hits the male at puberty resulting in a sudden and extreme sex drive which reaches its peak at age 15\u201316, then drops slowly over their lifetime. In contrast, a female's libido increases slowly during adolescence and peaks in their mid-thirties.\nActual testosterone and estrogen levels that affect a person's sex drive vary considerably.\nSome boys and girls will start expressing romantic or sexual interest by age 10\u201312. The romantic feelings are not necessarily sexual, but are more associated with attraction and desire for another. For boys and girls in their preteen years (ages 11\u201312), at least 25% report \"thinking a lot about sex\". By the early teenage years (ages 13\u201314), however, boys are much more likely to have sexual fantasies than girls. In addition, boys are much more likely to report an interest in sexual intercourse at this age than girls. Masturbation among youth is common, with prevalence among the population generally increasing until the late 20s and early 30s. Boys generally start masturbating earlier, with less than 10% boys masturbating around age 10, around half participating by age 11\u201312, and over a substantial majority by age 13\u201314. This is in sharp contrast to girls where virtually none are engaging in masturbation before age 13, and only around 20% by age 13\u201314.\nPeople in their 60s and early 70s generally retain a healthy sex drive, but this may start to decline in the early to mid-70s. Older adults generally develop a reduced libido due to declining health and environmental or social factors. In contrast to common belief, postmenopausal women often report an increase in sexual desire and an increased willingness to satisfy their partner. Women often report family responsibilities, health, relationship problems, and well-being as inhibitors to their sexual desires. Aging adults often have more positive attitudes towards sex in older age due to being more relaxed about it, freedom from other responsibilities, and increased self-confidence. Those exhibiting negative attitudes generally cite health as one of the main reasons. Stereotypes about aging adults and sexuality often regard seniors as asexual beings, doing them no favors when they try to talk about sexual interest with caregivers and medical professionals. Non-western cultures often follow a narrative of older women having a much lower libido, thus not encouraging any sort of sexual behavior for women. Residence in retirement homes has effects on residents' libidos. In these homes, sex occurs, but it is not encouraged by the staff or other residents. Lack of privacy and resident gender imbalance are the main factors lowering desire. Generally, for older adults, being excited about sex, good health, sexual self-esteem and having a sexually talented partner can be factors.\nSexual desire disorders.\nSexual desire disorders are more common in women than in men, and women tend to exhibit less frequent and less intense sexual desires than men. Erectile dysfunction may happen to the penis because of lack of sexual desire, but these two should not be confused since the two can commonly occur simultaneously. For example, moderate to large recreational doses of cocaine, amphetamine or methamphetamine can simultaneously cause erectile dysfunction (evidently due to vasoconstriction) while still significantly increasing libido due to heightened levels of dopamine. Although conversely, excessive or very regular/repeated high-dose amphetamine use may damage leydig cells in the male testes, potentially leading to markedly lowered sexual desire subsequently due to hypogonadism. However, in contrast to this, other stimulants such as cocaine and even caffeine appear to lack negative impacts on testosterone levels, and may even increase their concentrations in the body. Studies on cannabis however seem to be exceptionally mixed, with some claiming decreased levels on testosterone, others reporting increased levels, and with some showing no measurable changes at all. This varying data seems to coincide with the almost equally conflicting data on cannabis' effects on sex drive as well, which may be dosage or frequency-dependent, due to different amounts of distinct cannabinoids in the plant, or based on individual enzyme properties responsible for metabolism of the drug. Evidence on alcohol's effects on testosterone however invariably show a clear decrease, however (like amphetamine, albeit to a lesser degree); temporary increases in libido and related sexual behavior have long been observed during alcohol intoxication in both sexes, but likely most noticeable with moderation, particularly in males. Additionally, men often also naturally experience a decrease in their libido as they age due to decreased productions in testosterone.\nThe American Medical Association has estimated that several million US women have a female sexual arousal disorder, though arousal is not at all synonymous with desire, so this finding is of limited relevance to the discussion of libido. Some specialists claim that women may experience low libido due to some hormonal abnormalities such as lack of luteinising hormone or androgenic hormones, although these theories are still controversial.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18490", "revid": "35585582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18490", "title": "Larissa", "text": "City in Thessaly, Greece\nLarissa (; , , ) is the capital and largest city of the Thessaly region in Greece. It is the fifth-most populous city in Greece with a population of 148,562 in the city proper, according to the 2021 census. It is also the capital of the Larissa regional unit. It is a principal agricultural centre and a national transport hub, linked by road and rail with the port of Volos, the cities of Thessaloniki and Athens. The municipality of Larissa has inhabitants, while the regional unit of Larissa reached a population of (in 2021[ [update]]).\nLegend has it that Achilles was born here. Hippocrates, the \"Father of Medicine\", died here. Today, Larissa is an important commercial, transportation, educational, agricultural and industrial centre of Greece. The city straddles the Pineios river and N.-NE. of the city are the Mount Olympus and Mount Kissavos.\nMythology.\nAccording to Greek mythology, it is said that the city was founded by Acrisius, who was killed accidentally by his grandson, Perseus. There lived Peleus, the hero beloved by the gods, and his son Achilles.\nIn mythology, the nymph Larissa was a daughter of the primordial man Pelasgus.\nThe city of Larissa is mentioned in Book\u00a0II of the \"Iliad\" by Homer: \"Hippothous led the tribes of Pelasgian spearsmen, who dwelt in fertile Larissa\u2014Hippothous, and Pylaeus of the race of Mars, two sons of the Pelasgian Lethus, son of Teutamus.\" In this paragraph, Homer shows that the Pelasgians, Trojan allies, used to live in the city of Larissa. This city of Larissa was likely different from the city that was the birthplace of Achilles. The Larissa that features as a Trojan ally in the \"Iliad\" was likely to be located in the Troad, on the other side of the Aegean Sea.\nHistory.\nPre-history.\nTraces of Paleolithic human settlement have been recovered from the area, but it was peripheral to areas of advanced culture. The area around Larissa was extremely fruitful; it was agriculturally important and in antiquity was known for its horses.\nThe name Larissa (\u039b\u03ac\u03c1\u03b9\u03c3\u03b1 \"L\u00e1r\u012bsa\") is in origin a Pelasgian word for \"fortress\". There were many ancient Greek cities with this name.\nThe name of Thessalian Larissa is first recorded in connection with the aristocratic Aleuadai family. It was also a polis (city-state).\nClassical Age.\nLarissa was a polis (city-state) during the Classical Era. Larissa is thought to be where the famous Greek physician Hippocrates and the famous philosopher Gorgias of Leontini died.\nWhen Larissa ceased minting the federal coins it shared with other Thessalian towns and adopted its coinage in the late fifth century BC, it chose local types for its coins. The obverse depicted the nymph of the local spring, Larissa, for whom the town was named; probably the choice was inspired by the famous coins of Kimon depicting the Syracusan nymph Arethusa. The reverse depicted a horse in various poses. The horse was an appropriate symbol of Thessaly, a land of plains, which was well known for its horses. Usually, there is a male figure; he should perhaps be seen as the eponymous hero of the Thessalians, Thessalos, who is probably also to be identified on many of the earlier, federal coins of Thessaly.\nLarissa, sometimes written Larisa on ancient coins and inscriptions, is near the site of the Homeric Argissa. It appears in early times, when Thessaly was mainly governed by a few aristocratic families, as an important city under the rule of the Aleuadae, whose authority extended over the whole district of Pelasgiotis. This powerful family possessed for many generations before 369 BC the privilege of furnishing the \"Tagus\", the local term for the \"strategos\" of the combined Thessalian forces. The principal rivals of the Aleuadae were the Scopadae of Crannon, the remains of which are about 14 miles southwest.\nLarissa was the birthplace of Meno, who thus became, along with Xenophon and a few others, one of the generals leading several thousands of Greeks from various places, in the ill-fated expedition of 401 (retold in Xenophon's \"Anabasis\") meant to help Cyrus the Younger, son of Darius II, king of Persia, overthrow his elder brother Artaxerxes II and take over the throne of Persia (Meno is featured in Plato's dialogue bearing his name, in which Socrates uses the example of \"the way to Larissa\" to help explain to Meno the difference between true opinion and science (Meno, 97a\u2013c); this \"way to Larissa\" might well be on the part of Socrates an attempt to call to Meno's mind a \"way home\", understood as the way toward one's true and \"eternal\" home reached only at death, that each man is supposed to seek in his life).\nThe constitution of the town was democratic, which explains why it sided with Athens in the Peloponnesian War. A festival celebrated near Larissa resembled the Roman Saturnalia, and at which the slaves were waited on by their masters. As the chief city of ancient Thessaly, Larissa was taken by the Thebans and later directly annexed by Philip II of Macedon in 344. It remained under Macedonian control afterwards, except for a brief period when Demetrius Poliorcetes captured it in 302 BC.\nIt was in Larissa that Philip V of Macedon signed in 197 BC a treaty with the Romans after his defeat at the Battle of Cynoscephalae, and it was there also that Antiochus III the Great, won a great victory in 192 BC. In 196 BC Larissa became an ally of Rome and was the headquarters of the Thessalian League.\nLarissa is frequently mentioned in connection with the Roman civil wars which preceded the establishment of the Roman Empire and Pompey sought refuge there after the defeat of Pharsalus.\nMiddle Ages.\nLarissa was sacked by the Ostrogoths in the late 5th century, and rebuilt under the Byzantine emperor Justinian I.\nIn the eighth century, the city became the metropolis of the theme of Hellas. The city was captured in 986 by Tsar Samuel of Bulgaria, who carried off the relics of its patron saint, Saint Achilleios, to Prespa. It was again unsuccessfully besieged by the Italo-Normans under Bohemond I in 1082/3.\nAfter the Fourth Crusade, the King of Thessalonica, Boniface of Montferrat, gave the city to Lombard barons, but they launched a rebellion in 1209 that had to be subdued by the Latin Emperor Henry of Flanders himself. The city was recovered by Epirus soon after.\nOttoman period.\nLarissa was conquered by the Ottoman Empire in 1386/87 and again in the 1390s, but only came under permanent Ottoman control in 1423, by Turahan Bey. Under the Ottoman rule, the city was known as \"Yeni-\u015fehir i-Fenari\", \"new citadel\". As the chief town and military base of Ottoman Thessaly, Larissa was a predominantly Muslim city. In 1521 (Hijri 927) the town had 693 Muslim and 75 Christian households; according to G\u00f6kbilgin (1956), it also included Albanian and Jewish communities. During Ottoman rule the administration of the Metropolis of Larissa was transferred to nearby Trikala where it remained until 1734, when Metropolitan Iakovos II returned the see from Trikala to Larissa and established the present-day metropolis of Larissa and Tyrnavos.\nThe town was noted for its trade fair in the 17th and 18th centuries, while the seat of the pasha of Thessaly was also transferred there in 1770. Larissa was the headquarters of Hursid Pasha during the Greek War of Independence. It was also renowned for its mosques (four of which were still in use in the late 19th century) and its Muslim cemeteries.\nThe city remained a part of the Ottoman Empire until Thessaly became part of the independent Kingdom of Greece in 1881, except for a period when Ottoman forces re-occupied it during the Greco-Turkish War of 1897. In the late 19th century, there was still a small village on the outskirts of the town inhabited by Africans from Sudan, a curious remnant of the forces collected by Ali Pasha.\nIn the 19th century, the town produced leather, cotton, silk and tobacco. Fevers and agues were prevalent owing to bad drainage and the overflowing of the river; and the death rate was higher than the birth rate.\nModern Greek era.\nIn 1881, the city, along with the rest of Thessaly, was incorporated into the Kingdom of Greece during the prime ministry of Alexandros Koumoundouros. On 31 August 1881, a unit of the Greek Army headed by General Skarlatos Soutsos entered the city. A considerable portion of the Turkish population emigrated to the Ottoman Empire at that point. In this new era, the city starts gradually to expand and to be rebuilt by the Greek authorities.\nDuring the Greco-Turkish War of 1897, the city was the headquarters of Greek Crown Prince Constantine. The flight of the Greek army from here to Farsala took place on 23 April 1897. Turkish troops entered the city two days later. After a treaty for peace was signed, they withdrew and Larissa remained permanently in Greece. This was followed by a further exodus of Turks in 1898. The Hassan Bey mosque (which was built in the early 16th century) was demolished in 1908.\nDuring the Axis Occupation of the country, the Jewish community of the city (dated back to the 2nd century BC, see Romaniotes) suffered heavy losses. Today in the city there is a Holocaust memorial and a synagogue.\nAfter WWII.\nAfter WWII the city was expanded rapidly. Today Larissa is the fourth largest Greek city with many squares, taverns and cafes. It has three public hospitals with one being a military hospital. It hosts the Hellenic Air Force Headquarters and NATO Headquarters in Greece. It has a School of Medicine and a School of Biochemistry \u2013 Biotechnology and the third largest in the country Institute of Technology. It occupies the first place among Greek cities in green coverage rate per square-metre urban space and the first place with the highest percentage of bars-taverns-restaurants per capita in Greece. It also has two public libraries and five museums.\nEcclesiastical history.\nChristianity penetrated early to Larissa, though its first bishop was recorded only in 325, at the Council of Nicaea. St. Achillius of the fourth century is celebrated for his miracles. Le Quien cites twenty-nine bishops from the fourth to the 18th centuries; the most famous is Jeremias II, who occupied the see until 733 when Emperor Leo III the Isaurian transferred it from the jurisdiction of the Pope of Rome to the Patriarchate of Constantinople. In the first years of the tenth century it had ten suffragan sees; subsequently the number increased, and in c.\u20091175, under Emperor Manuel I Comnenus, it reached twenty-eight. At the close of the 15th century, under Ottoman domination, there were only ten suffragan sees, which gradually grew less and finally disappeared.\nLarissa is an Orthodox Metropolis of the Church of Greece.\nIt was also briefly a Latin archbishopric in the early 13th century, and remains a Latin Metropolitan (top-ranking) titular see of the Roman Catholic Church, which must not be confused with the Latin episcopal (low-ranking) titular see Larissa in Syria. Today there is a Catholic church in the city (Sacred Heart of Jesus).\nSights.\nIn the area from the Frourio hill to the Central square is located the old part of the city where some of its main landmarks are. Sights of the city are:\nGeography.\nLarissa is around south-west of Thessaloniki and around north-west of Athens.\nThere are a number of highways, including E75, E65, and the main railway from Athens to Thessaloniki (Salonika) crossing through Thessaly. The region is directly linked to the rest of Europe through the International Airport of Central Greece located in Nea Anchialos a short distance from Larissa (about ). Larissa lies on the river Pineios.\nThe municipality of Larissa has an area of , the municipal unit Larissa has an area of , and the community Larissa has an area of .\nThe city is in close proximity of destinations such as Mount Olympus, Mount Kissavos, Meteora, Lake Plastira, Pilio, etc.\nThe Larissa Chasma, a deep gash in the surface of Dione, a natural satellite of Saturn, was named after Larissa.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Larissa is cold semi-arid (K\u00f6ppen: \"BSk\") with some Mediterranean climate (\"Csa\") characteristics such as the drier summers and the somewhat wetter winters. The winter is cold, and some snowfalls may occur, though few of them are heavy. The summer is particularly hot, and temperatures near or above typically occur every year for a few days. Thunderstorms during the summer months are sometimes heavy and may cause agricultural damage. Larissa receives about of rain per year and has an average annual average temperature of .\nAdministration.\nThe municipality Larissa was formed at the 2011 local government reform by the merger of the following 3 former municipalities, that became municipal units:\nDistricts.\nThe municipal unit of Larissa is divided into four city-districts or municipal communities (29 city areas) plus 2 suburban communities (Amphithea and Koulourion). The municipality includes also the Community of Terpsith\u00e8a (with the suburban community of Argyssa).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n1st Municipal District\n2nd Municipal District\n3rd Municipal District\n4th Municipal District\nCommunity of Terpsith\u00e8a\nFrom 1 January 2011, in accordance with the Kallikratis Plan (new administrative division of Greece), the new municipality of Larissa includes also the former municipalities of Giannouli and Koilada.\nProvince.\nThe province of Larissa () was one of the provinces of the Larissa Prefecture. Its territory corresponded with that of the current municipalities Larissa (except the municipal unit Giannouli) and Tempi (except the municipal units Gonnoi and Kato Olympos). It was abolished in 2006.\nMain streets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nList of mayors.\nThe mayors of Larissa from 1881 to 2023 were as follows:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nLarissa is a major agricultural center of Greece, due to the plain of Thessaly.\nIn manufacturing sector, Larissa is among others home to Biokarpet carpet company (whose owners were also major shareholders of AEL FC in the past) and Orient Bikes.\nIt comes also in first place with the highest percentage of bars-taverns-restaurants per capita in Greece. Mikel Coffee Company and Bruno Coffee Stores chains started and have also their base in the city.\nCulture.\nCuisine.\nLocal specialities:\nFestivals.\nAmong the notable festivals that the city hosts, is the \"Pineiou Festival\" (mainly music), \"Mill of Performing Arts\" and \"AgroThessaly\", a major agricultural fair.\nTransport.\nLarissa sits in the middle of the plain of Thessaly, with connections to the A1 motorway and national roads EO3 and EO6.\nSports.\nThe local football club AEL FC currently participates in Super League Greece. The team won the Greek Championship, in 1988, and won the Greek Cup in 1985 and 2007. These titles place AEL among the five most important football clubs in Greece.\nTwo other professional football clubs with long histories also represent the city: Apollon and Iraklis.\nAEL has hosted its home games at the AEL FC Arena, a UEFA 3-star-rated football ground, since November 2010. Other important sport venues are the \"National Sport Center of Larissa\" (EAK Larissas), which includes the Alcazar Stadium and the Neapoli Indoor Hall.\nThe National Sports Center of Larissa can accommodate a number of sports and events (football, basketball, wrestling, swimming, boxing, martial arts, handball, water polo, etc.), while the Sports Hall has hosted important athletic events (the 1995 FIBA Under-19 World Cup, the 1997 Women's EuroLeague Final Four, the 2003 Greek Basketball Cup Final Four, martial arts events, etc.), and it is also used for cultural events, such as dance festivals.\nHistorical population.\nThe population of Larissa at different times was as follows:\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nLarissa is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18491", "revid": "13006032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18491", "title": "Lead and follow", "text": "Roles in dance pairing\nIn some types of partner dance, lead and follow are designations for the two dancers' roles in a dance pairing. The leader is responsible for guiding the couple and initiating transitions to different dance steps and, in improvised dances, for choosing the dance steps to perform. The leader communicates choices to the follower, and directs the follower by means of subtle physical and visual signals, thereby allowing the pair to be smoothly coordinated.\nThe amount of direction given by the leader depends on several factors, including dance style, social context of the dance, and experience and personalities of the dancers. Traditionally, the male dance partner was the leader and the female dance partner was the follower. In the 21st century, it has become increasingly common to see partnerships that buck this dynamic, particularly in more socially progressive dance styles.\nGender roles.\nTraditionally, the male dance partner is the leader and the female dance partner is the follower.\nThis is not always the case, and there have been some changes to the strict gendering of partner dances in some competition or performance contexts (see e.g. \"Jack and Jack\" dance contests). It is possible for an exchange of roles to occur one or more times during some styles of dance, where the leader becomes the follower and vice versa, such as in Schottische danced in the Madrid style. There also exist social dance forms that explicitly have a history of same-sex (e.g. tango) and role-crossing partnerships.\nCommunication.\nPartner dancing requires awareness and clear communication; this is essential both for safety and for the overall success of the dance. If following in the dance, it helps to maintain a centered readiness to the leader. This helps the follower be ready for cues both visually and physically. The leader in the dance will best support the follower by giving clear directions.\nFor the leader and follower to interact with each other, communication needs to occur between the dance couple. Dancers take cues through physical connection, with the follower using it to communicate feedback to the leader just as the leader uses it to suggest moves to the follower. The most accomplished dancers use connection as a line of communication which allows the leader to incorporate the follower's ideas, abilities, and creative suggestions into their own styling and selection of moves.\nIn many partner dances, the leader's steps differ from the follower's. In face-to-face positions, the follower generally \"mirrors\" the leader's footwork. For example, if the leader begins on their left foot, the follower will begin on their right foot. In choreographed pieces and other situations where the follower is in a tandem position or shadow position, the leader and follower will use the same footwork. Usually both partners move together as a unit, but in some dances the partners move in opposite directions - together and apart again.\nIn partner dancing, dancers seek to work together to create synchronized or complementary movements. The leader is largely responsible for \"initiating\" movement, whereas the follower's role is to \"maintain\" this movement (though they may choose not to). This process can be described as involving the initiation of momentum or 'energy' (by the leader) and then the subsequent maintenance, exaggeration, decreasing or dissolving of this momentum by both partners.\nThis momentum or energy may be manifested as movement (in its most obvious form), or in a range of more complex interactions between partners:\nIt is also helpful for dancers to regard their partners in terms of their \"points of balance\" to help the leader initiate movements for their follower. These points of balance include the front-facing side of the shoulders, the front facing side of the hips, and the follower's center (the abdomen). If the leader wants to bring the follower close, the leader is to apply tension and draw the hand in and down toward the leader's own hip; to send the follower away, the leader would guide the hand toward the follower and add compression, signaling the move away.\nObstruction avoidance.\nA general rule is that both leader and follower watch each other's back in a dance hall situation. Collision avoidance is one of the cases when the follower is required to \"backlead\" or at least to communicate about the danger to the leader. In travelling dances, such as waltz, common follower signals of danger are an unusual resistance to the leader, or a slight tap by the shoulder. In open-position dances, such as swing or Latin dances, maintaining eye contact with the partner is an important safety communication link.\nWeight transfer.\nFor partner dancers, using weight transfers is a way for a leader to communicate a 'lead' for a dance step to a follower.\nIn another example, for a leader to have their follower walk forwards while connected, the leader begins by taking his or her center back, indicating a backward walking move. As the partners' arms/points of contact move away from each other, they develop tension, which the follower may either break by dropping their arms or breaking the hold, or 'follow' by moving.\nA more experienced leader may realize (if only on an unconscious level) that the most effective execution of even this \"simple\" step is achieved by preparing for movement before the step begins.\nThe leader-follower connection facilitates this. The principles of leading and following are explored in contact improvisation of modern dance.\nRecovery from miscommunication.\nSometimes a miscommunication will occur between the leader and follower. Techniques of the recovery of connection and synchronization vary from dance to dance, but below are a few common examples.\nLead.\nMethods to lead.\nBody lead vs. arm lead.\nA body lead occurs where the leader initiates a lead by moving their body, which moves their arm(s), and thus transmits a lead to the follower. 'Body lead' means much the same as 'weight transfer'.\nAn arm lead occurs where the leader moves their arm(s) without moving their body, or moves their body in a different direction to their arm.\nWhile an 'arm lead' without the transfer of weight (or movement of the body) on the part of the leader is often a marker of an inexperienced or poorly taught dancer, the process of leading and following, particularly at an advanced level, often involves the contrasting uses of weight transfers and 'arm moves'. As an example, a leader may lead a follower back onto their right foot through the leader's own weight transfer forwards onto their left foot; yet at the same time turn the follower's torso to the left from above the hips.\nTechniques of leading.\nThe leader has to communicate the direction of the movement to the follower. Traditionally, the leader's right hand is on the follower's back, near the lowest part of the shoulder-blade. This is the strongest part of the back and the leader can easily pull the follower's body inwards. To enable the leader to communicate a step forward (backward for the follower) the follower has to constantly put a little weight against the leader's right hand. When the leader goes forward, the follower will naturally go backwards.\nAn important leading mechanism is the leader's left hand, which usually holds the follower's right hand. At no point should it be necessary for any partner to firmly grab the other's hand. It is sufficient to press the hand or even only finger tips slightly against each other, the follower's hand following the leader's hand.\nAnother important leading mechanism is hip contact. Though not possible in traditional Latin dances like Rumba, Cha-cha, Tango Argentino because of partner separation, hip contact is a harmonious and sensual way of communicating movement to the partner, used primarily in Standard or Ballroom dances (English / slow waltz, European tango, quickstep etc.) and Caribbean dances.\nFollow.\nBackleading.\nBackleading is when a follower is executing steps without waiting for, or contrary to the lead's lead. Both are considered bad dancing habits because it makes the follower difficult to lead and dance with.\nBackleading can be a teaching tool that is often used intentionally by an instructor when dancing with a student lead, in order to help them learn the desired technique.\nBackleading sounds similar to \"hijacking\", and indeed it is often used in place of \"hijacking\". However the two terms have significant differences, stemming from intentions. The first difference is superficial; hijacking is usually an occasional \"outburst\" from the follower, who otherwise diligently follows the lead, while a \"backlead\" may refer to a consistent habit. The second difference is more significant; hijacking is an actual reversal of roles, meaning that the hijacker leads the leader and takes control of the dance, while backleading only takes care of the follower.\nHijacking.\nSometimes the follower steals the lead and the couple reverses roles for some time. This is called \"hijacking\" (also known as \"lead stealing\"). Hijacking requires experience and good connection, since without proper timing it may look like sloppy dancing. A signal for hijacking is typically an unusually changed (mostly, increased) stress in the connection from the follower's side. \"Unusually\" meaning more than typically required for the execution of the current step (by these partners). For a follower to hijack, they must be sure that the lead will understand or at least guess the follower's intentions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18492", "revid": "2255048", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18492", "title": "Lexeme", "text": "Unit of lexical meaning\nA lexeme () is a unit of lexical meaning that underlies a set of words that are related through inflection. It is a basic abstract unit of meaning, a unit of morphological analysis in linguistics that roughly corresponds to a set of forms taken by a single root word. For example, in the English language, \"run\", \"runs\", \"ran\" and \"running\" are forms of the same lexeme, which can be represented as RUN.\nOne form, the lemma (or citation form), is chosen by convention as the canonical form of a lexeme. The lemma is the form used in dictionaries as an entry's headword. Other forms of a lexeme are often listed later in the entry if they are uncommon or irregularly inflected.\nDescription.\nThe notion of the lexeme is central to morphology, the basis for defining other concepts in that field. For example, the difference between inflection and derivation can be stated in terms of lexemes:\nA lexeme belongs to a particular syntactic category, has a certain meaning (semantic value), and in inflecting languages, has a corresponding inflectional paradigm. That is, a lexeme in many languages will have many different forms. For example, the lexeme RUN has a present third person singular form \"runs\", a present non-third-person singular form \"run\" (which also functions as the past participle and non-finite form), a past form \"ran\", and a present participle \"running\". (It does not include \"runner, runners, runnable\" etc.) The use of the forms of a lexeme is governed by rules of grammar. In the case of English verbs such as RUN, they include subject\u2013verb agreement and compound tense rules, which determine the form of a verb that can be used in a given sentence.\nIn many formal theories of language, lexemes have subcategorization frames to account for the number and types of complements. They occur within sentences and other syntactic structures.\nDecomposition.\nA language's lexemes are often composed of smaller units with individual meaning called morphemes, according to root morpheme + derivational morphemes + affix (not necessarily in that order), where:\nThe compound root morpheme + derivational morphemes is often called the stem. The decomposition stem + desinence can then be used to study inflection.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18494", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18494", "title": "Lord's Prayer", "text": "Christian prayer attributed to Jesus\nThe Lord's Prayer, also known by its incipit Our Father (, ), is a central Christian prayer attributed to Jesus. It contains petitions to God focused on God's holiness, will, and kingdom, as well as human needs, with variations across manuscripts and Christian traditions. \nTwo versions of this prayer are recorded in the gospels: a longer form within the Sermon on the Mount in the Gospel of Matthew, and a shorter form in the Gospel of Luke when \"one of his disciples said to him, 'Lord, teach us to pray, as John taught his disciples.'\" Scholars generally agree that the differences between the Matthaean and Lucan versions of the Lord's Prayer reflect independent developments from a common source. The first-century text \"Didache\" (at chapter VIII) reports a version closely resembling that of Matthew and the modern prayer. It ends with the Minor Doxology. \nTheologians broadly view the Lord's Prayer as a model that aligns the soul with God's will, emphasizing praise, trust, and ethical living. The prayer is used by most Christian denominations in their worship and, with few exceptions, the liturgical form is the Matthean version. It has been set to music for use in liturgical services.\nSince the 16th century, the Lord's Prayer has been widely translated and collected to compare languages across regions and history. The Lord's Prayer shares thematic and linguistic parallels with prayers and texts from various religious traditions\u2014including the Hebrew Bible, Jewish post-biblical prayers, and ancient writings like the Dhammapada and the Epic of Gilgamesh\u2014though some elements, such as \"Lead us not into temptation,\" have unique theological nuances without direct Old Testament counterparts. Music from 9th century Gregorian chants to modern works by Christopher Tin has used the Lord's Prayer in various religious and interfaith ceremonies.\nTexts.\nThe text of the Lord's Prayer shown here is from the New International Version (NIV).\nInitial words on the topic from the \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" teach that it \"is truly the summary of the whole gospel\".\nThe first three of the seven petitions in Matthew address God; the other four are related to human needs and concerns. Matthew's account alone includes the \"Your will be done\" and the \"Rescue us from the evil one\" (or \"Deliver us from evil\") petitions. Both original Greek texts contain the adjective ; while controversial, 'daily' has been the most common English-language translation of this word. Protestants usually conclude the prayer with a doxology (in some versions, \"For thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever, Amen\"), a later addition appearing in some manuscripts of Matthew. The Eastern Orthodox version is: For Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory: of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.\nRelationship between the Matthaean and Lucan texts.\nIn biblical criticism, the absence of the Lord's Prayer in the Gospel of Mark, together with its occurrence in Matthew and Luke, has caused scholars who accept the two-source hypothesis (against other document hypotheses) to conclude that it is probably a \"logion\" original to the Q source. According to W.D. Davies and Dale Allison, it is also possible than one version was present in Q and another from the M source or the L source, though they do not view the notion that Luke's version used Matthew as plausible. The common source of the two existing versions, whether Q or an oral or another written tradition, was elaborated differently in the Gospels of Matthew and Luke.\nMarianus Pale Hera considers it unlikely that either of the two used the other as its source and that it is possible that they \"preserve two versions of the Lord's Prayer used in two different communities: the Matthean in a Jewish Christian community and the Lucan in the Gentile Christian community\". Davies and Allison find this theory to be possible as well.\nIf either source built on the other, Joachim Jeremias attributes priority to Matthew on the grounds that \"in the early period, before wordings were fixed, liturgical texts were elaborated, expanded and enriched\". On the other hand, Michael Goulder, Thomas J. Mosbo and Ken Olson see the shorter Lucan version as a reworking of the Matthaean text, removing unnecessary verbiage and repetition.\nThe Matthaean version is the one most common in general Christian usage.\nGreek texts.\nThe majority percentage of the verbs are aorist imperatives. In the first part of the prayer there are third person passive imperatives, while in the last one there are second person active imperatives.\nOriginal Greek text and Syriac and Latin translations.\nStandard edition of the Greek text.\nThe text given here is that of the latest edition of \"Greek New Testament\" of the United Bible Societies and in the Nestle-Aland . Most modern translations use a text similar to this one. Most older translations are based on a Byzantine-type text with in line 5 (verse 10) instead of , and in line 8 (verse 12) instead of , and adding at the end (verse 13) the doxology \nStandard edition of the Syriac text of the Peshitta.\nThe Classical Syriac vowels here transcribed as \"\u00ea\", \"\u0101\" and \"o/\u014d\" have been raised to \"i\", \"o\" and \"u\" respectively in Western Syriac.\nVulgata Clementina (1692).\nThere are four editions of the Vulgate: the Sixtine Vulgate, the Sixto-Clementine Vulgate, the , and the Stuttgart Vulgate. The Clementine edition varies from the in this place only in punctuation and in having in place of . The Stuttgart Vulgate has in place of ; in place of ; in place of ; and in place of .\nThe doxology associated with the Lord's Prayer in Byzantine Greek texts is found in four Vetus Latina manuscripts, only two of which give it in its entirety. The other surviving manuscripts of the Vetus Latina Gospels do not have the doxology. The Vulgate translation also does not include it, thus agreeing with critical editions of the Greek text.\nLiturgical texts: Greek, Syriac, Latin.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEnglish versions.\nThere are several different English translations of the Lord's Prayer from Greek or Latin, beginning around AD 650 with the Northumbrian translation. Of those in current liturgical use, the three best-known are:\nAll these versions are based on the text in Matthew, rather than Luke, of the prayer given by Jesus.\n\"Book of Common Prayer\", 1662.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nTraditional ecumenical version.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1988 English Language Liturgical Consultation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nThe concluding doxology (\"For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever\") is representative of the practice of concluding prayers with a short, hymn-like verse that exalts the glory of God. Older English translations of the Bible, based on late Byzantine Greek manuscripts, included it, but it is absent in the oldest manuscripts and is not considered to be part of the original text of \u2013. The translators of the 1611 King James Bible assumed that a Greek manuscript they possessed was ancient and therefore adopted the text into the Lord's Prayer of the Gospel of Matthew. The use of the doxology in English dates from at least 1549 with the First Prayer Book of Edward VI which was influenced by William Tyndale's New Testament translation in 1526.\nIn the Byzantine Rite, whenever a priest is officiating, after the Lord's Prayer he intones this augmented form of the doxology, \"For thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory: of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.\", and in either instance, reciter(s) of the prayer reply \"Amen\".\nThe Catholic Latin liturgical rites have never attached the doxology to the end of the Lord's Prayer. The doxology does appear in the Roman Rite Mass as revised in 1969. After the conclusion of the Lord's Prayer, the priest says a prayer known as the embolism. In the official International Commission on English in the Liturgy (ICEL) English translation, the embolism reads: \"Deliver us, Lord, we pray, from every evil, graciously grant peace in our days, that, by the help of your mercy, we may be always free from sin and safe from all distress, as we await the blessed hope and the coming of our Saviour, Jesus Christ.\" This elaborates on the final petition, \"Deliver us from evil.\" The people then respond to this with the doxology: \"For the kingdom, the power, and the glory are yours, now and forever.\"\nAnalysis.\nAugustine of Hippo gives the following analysis of the Lord's Prayer, which elaborates on Jesus' words just before it in the Gospel of Matthew: \"Your Father knows what you need before you ask him. Pray then in this way\" (Matthew 6:8\u20139):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis excerpt from Augustine is included in the Office of Readings in the Catholic Liturgy of the Hours.\nMany have written biblical commentaries on the Lord's Prayer. Contained below are a variety of selections from some of those commentaries.\nIntroduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Our Father, which art in heaven\n\"Our\" indicates that the prayer is that of a group of people who consider themselves children of God and who call God their \"Father\". \"In heaven\" indicates that the Father who is addressed is distinct from human fathers on earth.\nAugustine interpreted \"heaven\" (\"coelum\", sky) in this context as meaning \"in the hearts of the righteous, as it were in His holy temple\".\nFirst Petition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hallowed be thy Name;\nFormer archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams explains this phrase as a petition that people may look upon God's name as holy, as something that inspires awe and reverence, and that they may not trivialize it by making God a tool for their purposes, to \"put other people down, or as a sort of magic to make themselves feel safe\". He sums up the meaning of the phrase by saying: \"Understand what you're talking about when you're talking about God, this is serious, this is the most wonderful and frightening reality that we could imagine, more wonderful and frightening than we can imagine.\"\nRichard Challoner writes that: \"[t]his petition claims the first place in the Lord's prayer [...]; because the first and principal duty of a Christian is, to love his God with his whole heart and soul, and therefore the first and principal thing he ought to desire and pray for is, the great honor and glory of God.\"\nSecond Petition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thy kingdom come;\n\"This petition has its parallel in the Jewish prayer, 'May he establish his Kingdom during your life and during your days.'\" In the gospels Jesus speaks frequently of God's kingdom, but never defines the concept: \"He assumed this was a concept so familiar that it did not require definition.\" Concerning how Jesus' audience in the gospels would have understood him, George Eldon Ladd turns to the concept's Hebrew biblical background: \"The Hebrew word \"malkuth\" [...] refers first to a reign, dominion, or rule and only secondarily to the realm over which a reign is exercised. [...] When \"malkuth\" is used of God, it almost always refers to his authority or to his rule as the heavenly King.\" This petition looks to the perfect establishment of God's rule in the world in the future, an act of God resulting in the eschatological order of the new age.\nThe Catholic Church believes that, by praying the Lord's prayer, a Christian hastens the Second Coming. Like the church, some denominations see the coming of God's kingdom as a divine gift to be prayed for, not a human achievement. Others believe that the Kingdom will be fostered by the hands of those faithful who work for a better world. These believe that Jesus' commands to feed the hungry and clothe the needy make the seeds of the kingdom already present on earth (Lk 8:5\u201315; Mt 25:31\u201340).\nHilda C. Graef notes that the operative Greek word, \"basileia,\" means both kingdom and kingship (i.e., reign, dominion, governing, etc.), but that the English word kingdom loses this double meaning. Kingship adds a psychological meaning to the petition: one is also praying for the condition of soul where one follows God's will.\nRichard Challoner, commenting on this petition, notes that the kingdom of God can be understood in three ways: 1) of the eternal kingdom of God in heaven. 2) of the spiritual kingdom of Christ, in his Church upon earth. 3) of the mystical kingdom of God, in our souls, according to the words of Christ, \"The kingdom of God is within you\" (Luke 17:21).\nThird Petition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven:\nAccording to William Barclay, this phrase is a couplet with the same meaning as \"Thy kingdom come\". Barclay argues that \"the kingdom is a state of things on earth in which God's will is as perfectly done as it is in heaven. ...To do the will of God and to be in the Kingdom of God are one and the same thing.\"\nJohn Ortberg interprets this phrase as follows: \"Many people think our job is to get my afterlife destination taken care of, then tread water till we all get ejected and God comes back and torches this place. But Jesus never told anybody \u2013 neither his disciples nor us \u2013 to pray, 'Get me out of here so I can go up there.' His prayer was, 'Make up there come down here.' Make things down here run the way they do up there.\" Stephen Cottrell makes the same point in his reflections on \"Thy Kingdom Come\": \"the promise of the gospel isn't really us going up to heaven, but heaven coming down to earth\". The request that \"thy will be done\" is God's invitation to \"join him in making things down here the way they are up there\".\nFourth Petition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Give us this day our daily [\"epiousion\"] bread;\nAs mentioned earlier, the original word (\"epiousion\"), commonly characterized as \"daily\", is unique to the Lord's Prayer in all of ancient Greek literature. The word is almost a \"hapax legomenon\", occurring only in Luke and Matthew's versions of the Lord's Prayer, and nowhere else in any other extant Greek texts. While \"epiousion\" is often substituted by the word \"daily\", all other New Testament translations from the Greek into \"daily\" otherwise reference \"hemeran\" (\u1f21\u03bc\u03ad\u03c1\u03b1\u03bd, \"the day\"), which does not appear in this usage.\nJerome by linguistic parsing translated \"\u1f10\u03c0\u03b9\u03bf\u03cd\u03c3\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd\" (\"epiousion\") as \"\"supersubstantialem\" in the Gospel of Matthew, but as \"cotidianum\"\" (\"daily\") in the Gospel of Luke. This wide-ranging difference with respect to meaning of \"epiousion\" is discussed in detail in the current \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" in an inclusive approach toward tradition as well as a literal one for meaning: \"Taken in a temporal sense, this word is a pedagogical repetition of 'this day', to confirm us in trust 'without reservation'. Taken in the qualitative sense, it signifies what is necessary for life, and more broadly every good thing sufficient for subsistence. Taken literally (\"epi-ousios\": 'super-essential'), it refers directly to the Bread of Life, the Body of Christ, the 'medicine of immortality,' without which we have no life within us.\"\n\"Epiousion\" is translated as \"supersubstantialem\" in the Vulgate Matthew 6:11 and accordingly as \"supersubstantial\" in the Douay\u2013Rheims Bible Matthew 6:11.\nBarclay M. Newman's \"A Concise Greek-English Dictionary of the New Testament\", published in a revised edition in 2010 by the United Bible Societies, has the following entry:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u1f10\u03c0\u03b9|\u03bf\u03cd\u03c3\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2, \u03bf\u03bd (\u03b5\u1f30\u03bc\u03af) of doubtful meaning, \"for today\"; \"for the coming day\"; \"necessary for existence.\"\nIt thus derives the word from the preposition \u1f10\u03c0\u03af (\"epi\") and the verb \u03b5\u1f30\u03bc\u03af (\"eimi\"), from the latter of which are derived words such as \u03bf\u1f50\u03c3\u03af\u03b1 (\"ousia\"), the range of whose meanings is indicated in \"A Greek\u2013English Lexicon\".\nFifth Petition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us;\nAlthough uses the term \"debts\", most older English versions of the Lord's Prayer use the term \"trespasses\", while ecumenical versions often use the term \"sins\". The last choice may be due to Luke 11:4, which uses the word \"sins\", while the former may be due to (immediately after the text of the prayer), where Jesus speaks of \"trespasses\". As early as the third century, Origen of Alexandria used the word \"trespasses\" () in the prayer. \nThe Latin form that was traditionally used in Western Europe has \"debita\" (\"debts\"), but most English-speaking Christians (except Scottish Presbyterians and some others of the Dutch Reformed tradition) use \"trespasses\". For example, the Church of Scotland, the Presbyterian Church (USA), the Reformed Church in America, as well as some Congregational heritage churches in the United Church of Christ follow the version found in Matthew 6 in the King James Version (KJV), which in the prayer uses the words \"debts\" and \"debtors\".\nThe Presbyterian and other Reformed churches tend to use the rendering \"forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors\". Roman Catholics, Lutherans, Anglicans and Methodists are more likely to say \"trespasses... those who trespass against us\". \nThe \"debts\" form appears in the first English translation of the Bible, by John Wycliffe in 1395 (Wycliffe spelling \"dettis\"). The \"trespasses\" version appears in the 1526 translation by William Tyndale (Tyndale spelling \"treaspases\"). In 1549 the first \"Book of Common Prayer\" in English used a version of the prayer with \"trespasses\". This became the \"official\" version used in Anglican congregations. On the other hand, the 1611 King James Version, the version specifically authorized for the Church of England, has \"forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors\".\nAfter the request for bread, Matthew and Luke diverge slightly. Matthew continues with a request for debts to be forgiven in the same manner as people have forgiven those who have debts against them. Luke, on the other hand, makes a similar request about sins being forgiven in the manner of debts being forgiven between people. The word \"debts\" () does not necessarily mean financial obligations, as shown by the use of the verbal form of the same word () in passages such as Romans 13:8. The Aramaic word \"\u1e25\u00f4b\u00e2\" can mean \"debt\" or \"sin\". This difference between Luke's and Matthew's wording could be explained by the original form of the prayer having been in Aramaic. The generally accepted interpretation is thus that the request is for forgiveness of sin, not of supposed loans granted by God. Asking for forgiveness from God was a staple of Jewish prayers (e.g., Penitential Psalms). It was also considered proper for individuals to be forgiving of others, so the sentiment expressed in the prayer would have been a common one of the time.\nAnthony C. Deane, Canon of Worcester Cathedral, suggested that the choice of the word \"\u1f40\u03c6\u03b5\u03b9\u03bb\u03ae\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b1\" (debts), rather than \"\u1f01\u03bc\u03b1\u03c1\u03c4\u03af\u03b1\u03c2\" (sins), indicates a reference to failures to use opportunities of doing good. He linked this with the parable of the sheep and the goats (also in Matthew's Gospel), in which the grounds for condemnation are not wrongdoing in the ordinary sense, but failure to do right, missing opportunities for showing love to others.\n\"As we forgive ...\". Divergence between Matthew's \"debts\" and Luke's \"sins\" is relatively trivial compared to the impact of the second half of this statement. The verses immediately following the Lord's Prayer, Matthew 6:14\u201315 show Jesus teaching that the forgiveness of our sin/debt (by God) is linked with how we forgive others, as in the Parable of the Unforgiving Servant Matthew 18:23\u201335, which Matthew gives later. R. T. France comments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The point is not so much that forgiving is a prior condition of being forgiven, but that forgiving cannot be a one-way process. Like all God's gifts it brings responsibility; it must be passed on. To ask for forgiveness on any other basis is hypocrisy. There can be no question, of course, of our forgiving being in proportion to what we are forgiven, as 18:23\u201335 makes clear.\u2014\u200a\nSixth Petition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And lead us not into temptation,\nInterpretations of the penultimate petition of the prayer \u2013 not to be led by God into \"peirasmos \u2013\" vary considerably. The range of meanings of the Greek word \"\u03c0\u03b5\u03b9\u03c1\u03b1\u03c3\u03bc\u03cc\u03c2\" (\"peirasmos\") is illustrated in New Testament Greek lexicons. In different contexts it can mean temptation, testing, trial, experiment. Although the traditional English translation uses the word \"temptation\" and Carl Jung saw God as actually leading people astray, Christians generally interpret the petition as not contradicting James 1:13\u201314: \"Let no one say when he is tempted, 'I am being tempted by God', for God cannot be tempted with evil, and he himself tempts no one. But each person is tempted when he is lured and enticed by his own desire.\" Some see the petition as an eschatological appeal against unfavourable Last Judgment, a theory supported by the use of the word \"peirasmos\" in this sense in Revelation 3:10. Others see it as a plea against hard \"tests\" described elsewhere in scripture, such as those of Job. It is also read as: \"Do not let us be led (by ourselves, by others, by Satan) into temptations\". Tertullian comments: \"For the completeness of so brief a prayer He added \u2014 in order that we should supplicate not touching the remitting merely, but touching the entire averting, of acts of guilt \u2014 Lead us not into temptation: that is, suffer us not to be led into it, by him (of course) who tempts; but far be the thought that the Lord should seem to tempt, as if He either were ignorant of the faith of any, or else were eager to overthrow it. Infirmity and malice are characteristics of the Devil...The final clause, therefore, is consonant, and interprets the sense of Lead us not into temptation; for this sense is, But convey us away from the Evil One.\" (\"On Prayer\", Ch. VIII) Coherently, Saint Cyprian of Carthago translates Matthew 6:9 as follows: \"And suffer us not to be led into temptation; but deliver us from evil.\" (\"On the Lord's Prayer\", n. 7)\nSince it follows shortly after a plea for daily bread (i.e., material sustenance), it is also seen as referring to not being caught up in the material pleasures given. A similar phrase appears in Matthew 26:41 and Luke 22:40 in connection with the prayer of Jesus in Gethsemane.\nJoseph Smith, the founder of the Latter Day Saint movement, in a version of the Holy Bible which was not published before his death, used: \"And suffer us not to be led into temptation\".\nIn a conversation on the Italian TV channel TV2000 on 6 December 2017, Pope Francis commented that the then Italian wording of this petition (similar to the traditional English) was a poor translation. He said \"the French\" (i.e., the Bishops' Conference of France) had changed the petition to \"Do not let us fall in/into temptation\". He was referring to the 2017 change to a new French version, (\"Do not let us enter into temptation\"), but spoke of it in terms of the Spanish translation, (\"do not let us fall in/into temptation\"), that he was accustomed to recite in Argentina before his election as Pope. He explained: \"I am the one who falls; it's not him [God] pushing me into temptation to then see how I have fallen\". Anglican theologian Ian Paul said that such a proposal was \"stepping into a theological debate about the nature of evil\".\nIn January 2018, after \"in-depth study\", the German Bishops' Conference rejected any rewording of their translation of the Lord's Prayer.\nIn November 2018, the Episcopal Conference of Italy adopted a new edition of the \"Messale Romano\", the Italian translation of the Roman Missal. One of the changes made from the older (1983) edition was to render this petition as (\"do not abandon us to temptation\"). This was approved by Pope Francis; however, there are no current plans to make a similar change for the English translation as of 2019[ [update]]. The Italian-speaking Union of Methodist and Waldensian Churches maintains its translation of the petition: (\"do not expose us to temptation\").\nSeventh Petition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTranslations and scholars are divided over whether the final word here refers to \"evil\" in general or \"the evil one\" (the devil) in particular. In the original Greek, as well as in the Latin translation, the word could be either of neuter (evil in general) or masculine (the evil one) gender. Matthew's version of the prayer appears in the Sermon on the Mount, in earlier parts of which the term is used to refer to general evil. Later parts of Matthew refer to the devil when discussing similar issues. However, the devil is never referred to as \"the evil one\" in any known Aramaic sources. While John Calvin accepted the vagueness of the term's meaning, he considered that there is little real difference between the two interpretations, and that therefore the question is of no real consequence. Similar phrases are found in John 17:15 and Thessalonians 3:3.\nDoxology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory,\nFor ever and ever. Amen.&lt;/poem&gt;\nContent.\nThe doxology sometimes attached to the prayer in English is similar to a passage in \u2013 \"Yours, O LORD, is the greatness and the power and the glory and the victory and the majesty, for all that is in the heavens and in the earth is yours. Yours is the kingdom, O LORD, and you are exalted as head above all.\" It is also similar to the paean to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon in Daniel 2:37 \u2013 \"You, O king, the king of kings, to whom the God of heaven has given the kingdom, the power, and the might, and the glory\".\nThe doxology has been interpreted as connected with the final petition: \"Deliver us from evil\". The kingdom, the power and the glory are the Father's, not of our antagonist's, who is subject to him to whom Christ will hand over the kingdom after he has destroyed all dominion, authority and power (1 Corinthians 15:24). It makes the prayer end as well as begin with the vision of God in heaven, in the majesty of his name and kingdom and the perfection of his will and purpose.\nOrigin.\nThe doxology is not included in Luke's version of the Lord's Prayer, nor is it present in the earliest manuscripts (papyrus or parchment) of Matthew, representative of the Alexandrian text, although it is present in the manuscripts representative of the later Byzantine text. Most scholars do not consider it part of the original text of Matthew. The Codex Washingtonianus, which adds a doxology (in the familiar text), is of the early fifth or late fourth century. New translations generally omit it except as a footnote.\nThe \"Didache\", generally considered a first-century text, has a doxology, \"for yours is the power and the glory forever\", as a conclusion for the Lord's Prayer (\"Didache\", 8:2). C. Clifton Black, although regarding the \"Didache\" as an \"early second century\" text, nevertheless considers the doxology it contains to be the \"earliest additional ending we can trace\". Of a longer version, Black observes: \"Its earliest appearance may have been in Tatian's \"Diatessaron\", a second-century harmony of the four Gospels\". The first three editions of the United Bible Societies text cited the \"Diatessaron\" for inclusion of the familiar doxology in Matthew 6:13, but in the later editions it cites the \"Diatessaron\" for excluding it. The \"Apostolic Constitutions\" added \"the kingdom\" to the beginning of the formula in the \"Didache\", thus establishing the now familiar doxology.\nVaried liturgical use.\nIn the Byzantine Rite, whenever a priest is officiating, after the last line of the prayer he intones the doxology, \"For thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory: of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.\", and in either instance, reciter(s) of the prayer reply \"Amen\".\nAdding a doxology directly following the Our Father is not part of the liturgical tradition of the Roman Rite nor does the Latin Vulgate of St. Jerome contain the doxology that appears in late Greek manuscripts. However, it is recited since 1970 in the Roman Rite Order of Mass, not as part of the Lord's Prayer but separately as a response acclamation after the embolism developing the seventh petition in the perspective of the Final Coming of Christ.\nIn most Anglican editions of the \"Book of Common Prayer\", the Lord's Prayer ends with the doxology unless it is preceded by the Kyrie eleison. This happens at the daily offices of Morning Prayer (Mattins) and Evening Prayer (Evensong) and in a few other offices.\nThe vast majority of Protestant churches conclude the Lord's Prayer with the doxology.\nUse as a language comparison tool.\nIn the course of Christianization, one of the first texts to be translated between many languages has historically been the Lord's Prayer, long before the full Bible would be translated into the respective languages. Since the 16th century, collections of translations of the prayer have often been used for a quick comparison of languages. The first such collection, with 22 versions, was \"Mithridates, de differentiis linguarum\" by Conrad Gessner (1555; the title refers to Mithridates VI of Pontus who according to Pliny the Elder was an exceptional polyglot).\nGessner's idea of collecting translations of the prayer was taken up by authors of the 17th century, including Hieronymus Megiserus (1603) and Georg Pistorius (1621). Andreas M\u00fcller (Orientalist) in 1680 published an enlarged collection of 82 versions of the prayer, under the pseudonym 'Thomas Ludekenius', of which three were in fictional philosophical languages.\nIn 1700, M\u00fcller's collection was re-edited by B. Mottus as \"Oratio dominica plus centum linguis versionibus aut characteribus reddita et expressa\".\nThis edition was comparatively inferior, but a second, revised edition was published in 1715 by John Chamberlayne.\nThis 1715 edition was used by Gottfried Hensel in his \"Synopsis Universae Philologiae\" (1741) to compile \"geographico-polyglot maps\" where the beginning of the prayer was shown in the geographical area where the respective languages were spoken.\nJohann Ulrich Kraus also published a collection with more than 100 entries.\nThese collections continued to be improved and expanded well into the 19th century; Johann Christoph Adelung and Johann Severin Vater in 1806\u20131817 published the prayer in \"well-nigh five hundred languages and dialects\".\nSamples of scripture, including the Lord's Prayer, were published in 52 Asian languages, most of them not previously found in such collections, translated by the brethren of the Serampore Mission and printed at the mission press there in 1818.\nCatholic Indulgences.\nDuring the 2020\u20132021 jubilee of Saint Joseph, Pope Francis signed a decree that granted the plenary indulgence to those who shall contemplate the Lord's Prayer for at least 30 minutes.\nComparisons with other prayer traditions.\nThe book \"The Comprehensive New Testament\", by T. E. Clontz and J. Clontz, points to similarities between elements of the Lord's Prayer and expressions in writings of other religions as diverse as the \"Dhammapada\", the \"Epic of Gilgamesh\", the \"Golden Verses\", and the Egyptian \"Book of the Dead\". It mentions in particular parallels in 1 Chronicles 29:10-18.\nRabbi Aron Mendes Chumaceiro says that nearly all the elements of the prayer have counterparts in the Jewish Bible and Deuterocanonical books: the first part in Isaiah 63:15-16 (\"Look down from heaven and see, from your holy and beautiful habitation... for you are our Father\") and Ezekiel 36:23 (\"I will vindicate the holiness of my great name...\") and 38:23 (\"I will show my greatness and my holiness and make myself known in the eyes of many nations...\"), the second part in Obadiah 1:21 (\"Saviours shall go up to Mount Zion to rule Mount Esau, and the kingdom shall be the L's\") and 1 Samuel 38:18 (\"...It is the L. Let him do what seems good to him.\"), the third part in Proverbs 30:8 (\"...feed me with my apportioned bread...\"), and the fourth part in Book of Sirach 28:2 (\"Forgive your neighbour the wrong he has done, and then your sins will be pardoned when you pray.\"). \"Deliver us from evil\" can be compared with Psalm 119:133 (\"...let no iniquity get dominion over me.\").\nChumaceiro says that, because the idea of God leading a human into temptation contradicts the righteousness and love of God, \"Lead us not into temptation\" has no counterpart in the Jewish Bible/Christian Old Testament. However, the word \"\u03c0\u03b5\u03b9\u03c1\u03b1\u03c3\u03bc\u03cc\u03c2\", which is translated as \"temptation\", can also be translated as \"test\" or \"trial\", making evident the attitude of someone's heart, and in the Old Testament God tested Abraham, and told David, \"Go, number Israel and Judah,\" an action that David later acknowledged as sin; and the testing of Job in the Book of Job.\nReuben Bredenhof says that the various petitions of the Lord's Prayer, as well as the doxology attached to it, have a conceptual and thematic background in the Old Testament Book of Psalms.\nOn the other hand, Andrew Wommack says that the Lord's Prayer \"technically speaking... isn't even a true New Testament prayer\". The only evidence or argument he offers readers, however, is to \"notice that it's not prayed in the name of Jesus.\" \nIn post-biblical Jewish prayer, especially Kiddushin 81a (Babylonian). \"Our Father which art in heaven\" (\u05d0\u05d1\u05d9\u05e0\u05d5 \u05e9\u05d1\u05e9\u05de\u05d9\u05dd, \"Avinu shebashamayim\") is the beginning of many Hebrew prayers. \"Our Father who art in heaven\" and \"hallowed be thy name\" are reflected in the Kaddish (where it says: \"May His great name be hallowed in the world which He created, according to His will, and may He establish His Kingdom...)\". \"Lead us not into sin\" is echoed in the \"morning blessings\" of Jewish prayer. A blessing said by some Jewish communities after the evening \"Shema\" includes a phrase quite similar to the opening of the Lord's Prayer: \"Our God in heaven, hallow thy name, and establish thy kingdom forever, and rule over us for ever and ever. Amen.\" None of these liturgical prayers, however, can be dated to before Jesus Christ.\nMusical settings.\nVarious composers have incorporated the Lord's Prayer into a musical setting for utilization during liturgical services for a variety of religious traditions as well as interfaith ceremonies. Included among them are:\nIn popular culture.\nAs with other prayers, the Lord's Prayer was used by cooks to time their recipes before the spread of clocks. For example, a step could be \"simmer the broth for three Lord's Prayers\".\nAmerican songwriter and arranger Brian Wilson set the text of the Lord's Prayer to an elaborate close-harmony arrangement loosely based on Malotte's melody. Wilson's group, The Beach Boys, would return to the piece several times throughout their recording career, most notably as the B-side to their 1964 single \"Little Saint Nick.\" The band Yazoo used the prayer interspersed with the lyrics of \"In My Room\" on the album \"Upstairs at Eric's\".\nIn the 2002 film \"Spider-Man\", Norman Osborn, as the Green Goblin, attacks and injures Aunt May while she is in the middle of saying the Lord's Prayer, causing her hospitalization.\nBeat Generation poet Lawrence Ferlinghetti wrote and performed a \"Loud Prayer\" parodying the Lord's Prayer, one version of which was featured in the 1978 film \"The Last Waltz\".\nIn July 2023, Filipino drag queen and former \"Drag Den\" contestant Pura Luka Vega drew controversy online for posting a video of themselves dressing up as Jesus Christ and dancing to a punk rock version of \"Ama Namin\", the Filipino version of the Lord's Prayer. The video was also condemned by several Philippine politicians and the Catholic Bishops' Conference of the Philippines.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18495", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18495", "title": "Lightworks", "text": "Video editing software\nLightworks is a freemium non-linear editing system (NLE) for editing and mastering digital video. It was an early developer of computer-based non-linear editing systems, and has been in development since 1998. The development of an open-source version was announced on April 11, 2010. However, no source code of the program has been released. In July 2020, a Lightworks product manager confirmed that they \"still hope to announce something in the future\" about Lightworks' open source development.\nFeatures.\nThe free version comes with a limited number of features:\nThe free version cannot export to DVD or Blu-ray, but can export to a hard drive (since Lightworks 14).\nHistory.\nOLE Limited was founded in 1994 by Paul Bamborough, Nick Pollock and Neil Harris. In 1995 it was sold to Tektronix. In 1999 it was sold on to the newly formed Lightworks Inc., then owned by Fairlight Japan, and then purchased by Gee Broadcast in May 2004.\nGee Broadcast ownership, 2004\u20132009.\nUnder Gee Broadcast ownership, new product releases resumed with the release of the Lightworks \"Touch\" range, and the \"Alacrity\" and \"Softworks\" ranges for SD &amp; HD editing. Softworks offered the Lightworks User Interface and toolset in a software only package for laptops or office workstations. Alacrity supported dual outputs while the same facility was available for Softworks users as an option.\nEditShare ownership, 2009\u20132020.\nIn August 2009, the UK and US based company \"EditShare\" acquired Gee Broadcast and the Lightworks editing platform from, along with their video server system \"GeeVS\".\nAt the annual convention of the National Association of Broadcasters, NAB Show, on 11 April 2010, EditShare announced that they plan to transform Lightworks into Lightworks Open Source. It was presented at IBC in Amsterdam September 2010.\nOn 9 November 2010, EditShare announced that Lightworks would be downloadable on 29 November of the same year, at first exclusively for the users who had registered during the initial announcement, but subsequently publishing the software as \"public beta\".\nEditShare planned the release of the open source version in Q4 of 2011, after they finished code review. They plan to make money from proprietary plugins offered in their associated online shop, including plugins needed to access professional video formats. Shortly before the scheduled release date of 29 November 2011, EditShare announced that an open source release of the software would be temporarily delayed, but did not announce a new release date. The announcement noted that they were not yet satisfied with the stability of the new version.\nWindows version released at NAB 2012.\nAfter an 18-month beta program, EditShare released Lightworks 11, for Windows only, on 28 May 2012. The non beta release of Lightworks includes a host of new features for editors, and runs on wide range of PC hardware. The software was re-designed and re-written for portability (versions for Linux and Mac OS X have also been released) and now supports many more codecs including AVCHD, H.264, AVC-Intra, DNxHD, ProRes, Red R3D, DPX, XDCAM HD 50, XDCAM EX, DVD, Blu-ray, and 4K, but only for the paid Pro version. The free version supports DV, MPEG, Uncompressed and other codecs for both import and export.\nWindows version 11.1 released 29 May 2013.\nOn 29 May 2013, v11.1 stable release was made available for download. A major development in the Pro version is improved performance of the H.264/AVC codec in MP4 and MOV containers. This makes it possible to edit this format natively, even with less powerful CPUs. This should interest HDSLR and GoPro camera users. Native editing of H.264 MTS files has been possible since version 11.0.3.\nThis version of Lightworks has also replaced HASP with the new EditShare Licensing System (ELS), which eliminates some installation problems. The Free version now also comes with a 30-day Pro Trial period.\nLinux version announced at IBC 2012.\nEditShare demonstrated the Linux version at the NAB in Las Vegas in April 2012, and posted a video of it running on Ubuntu on their YouTube channel. At IBC in Amsterdam in September, an updated Linux demo was presented, and EditShare announced that the initial Linux alpha version would become available on 30 October . Lightworks 11 alpha for Linux was released on 30 April 2012, but only to a limited audience. The Linux version of Lightworks was made available as a Public Beta on 30 April 2013.\nLightworks 12 beta released for Windows, Linux and Mac.\nOn 8 August 2014, the first beta of Lightworks version 12 working on Windows, Linux and Mac was released.\nLightworks 12.6 released for Windows, Linux and Mac.\nOn 29 August 2015, Lightworks version 12.5 for Windows, Linux and Mac was released.\nLightworks 12.7 released for Windows, Linux and Mac.\nOn 4 February 2016, Lightworks version 12.6 for Windows, Linux and Mac was released.\nLightworks 14.5 released for Windows, Linux and Mac.\nIn October 2018, Lightworks released version 14.5 for Windows, Linux and Mac platforms. 14.5 added a vast array of new features including variable frame rate support, a huge amount of codec support including Red Cinema R3D, Cineform and Blackmagic Q1 codecs.\nLWKS Software Ltd ownership, 2020-present.\nIn September 2020, a new company, LWKS Software Ltd, founded in August of the same year by two members of the development team, took ownership of Lightworks, as well as QScan AQC software. the agreement also mentions Key member of the development teams of both software joining the new company.\nUsers.\nOver the years, Lightworks has confirmed that over 4-million downloads and registrations had taken place. There are several films that used the editing software and the most example were the series of films directed by Martin Scorsese with the film editor Thelma Schoonmaker being the only known user.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18496", "revid": "47474982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18496", "title": "Love Parade", "text": "Electronic dance music festival and parade\nThe Love Parade () was an electronic dance music festival and technoparade that originated in 1989 in West Berlin, Germany. It was held annually in Berlin from 1989 to 2003 and in 2006, then from 2007 to 2010 in the Ruhr region. Events scheduled for 2004 and 2005 in Berlin and for 2009 in Bochum were canceled.\nOn 24 July 2010, a crowd crush at the Love Parade in Duisburg caused the deaths of 21 people, with at least 500 others injured. As a consequence, the organizer of the festival announced that no further Love Parades would be held and that the festival was permanently canceled.\nHistory.\nThe parade first occurred in July 1989, when 150 people took to the streets in Berlin. It was started by the Berlin underground at the initiative of Matthias Roeingh (also known as \"Dr. Motte\") and Danielle de Picciotto, who were partners at the time. It was conceived as a political demonstration for peace and international understanding through love and music. The idea came from the administrative employee Miriam Scheffler Over the years, the Berlin Love Parade was mainly organized by Dr. Motte, Sandra Molzahn, Ralf Regitz and William R\u00f6ttger (until the takeover by Mc Fit in 2006) It was at the beginning supposed to be a bigger birthday party for Roeingh, and the motto \"Friede, Freude, Eierkuchen\" (in English\u00a0\u2014 \"Peace, Joy, Pancakes\") stood for disarmament (peace), music (joy) and a fair food production/distribution (pancakes). Roeingh dissociated himself from the parade in 2006 because of the commercialization of the event.\nThe parade was held on the Berlin Kurf\u00fcrstendamm until 1996. Because of overcrowding on this street, the festival moved to the Stra\u00dfe des 17. Juni in the Gro\u00dfer Tiergarten park in the center of Berlin. The festival became centered around the \"Siegess\u00e4ule\" in the middle of the park; and the golden angel atop the column became the parade's emblem.\nMany people from Germany and abroad traveled to Berlin to take part in the Parade\u00a0\u2014 over a million attended in the years 1997 through 2000 and 800,000 in 2001. Attendance at the 2001 festival was significantly lower because the date of the parade was changed with little advance notice. 2002 and 2003 also saw lower figures, and in 2004 and 2005 the parade was canceled because of funding difficulties. The parade had inspired opposition because of the damage to the Tiergarten by attendees, who were provided with insufficient toilet facilities. Opponents allegedly complicated matters for organisers by booking their own events in Berlin and so to exclude the parade from being able to register with city police. In 2004, however, a scaled-down version took place which served more as a mini-protest and was promoted with the title \"Love Weekend\". Dozens of clubs promoted the weekend-long event all over the city, with various clubs staying open for three days straight without closing. In 2006, the parade made a comeback with the help of German fitness studio McFit.\nThe Love Parade 2007 was planned for 7 July 2007 in Berlin. However, the Berlin event was canceled in February because the Senate of Berlin did not issue the necessary permits at that time. After negotiations with several German cities, on 21 July, it was announced that the parade would move to the Ruhr Area for the next five years. The first event took place in Essen on 25 August. The parade in Essen saw 1.2 million visitors in comparison to the 500,000 who attended the 2006 parade in Berlin.\nIn 2008, the festival took place in Dortmund on 19 July on the Bundesstra\u00dfe 1 under the motto \"Highway of Love\". The event was planned as a \"Love Weekend\", with parties throughout the region. The official estimate is that 1.6 million visitors attended, making it the largest parade to date.\nThe 2009 event, planned for Bochum, was canceled; a year later, the deaths of 21 attendees at the Duisburg venue prompted the parade's organiser Rainer Schaller to declare an end to the festival. \"The Love Parade has always been a peaceful party, but it will forever be overshadowed by the accident, so out of respect for the victims the Love Parade will never take place again,\" Schaller said. The parade was one of the oldest and largest festivals of electronic music, together with Z\u00fcrich's Street Parade, Mayday and Nature One.\nSuccessors.\nA spiritual successor, the Rave The Planet Parade, was founded by Dr. Motte, the original creator of the Love Parade and is annually held in Berlin. On 9 July 2022, the first Rave The Planet Parade took place in Berlin to call for the city\u2019s electronic music culture to be added to a World Heritage list.\nSetup.\nThe music played at the events was predominantly electronic dance music\u00a0\u2014 in this case mainly house &amp; techno, and schranz music. Attempts to introduce other music styles, such as hip hop, have failed. Hardcore and gabber music were part of the parade in early years, but were later removed. They are now celebrated separately on a counter-demonstration called \"Fuckparade\".\nThe parade was seen to be louder and more crowded than most concerts. With its water-cooled sound systems on every truck, the parade produced an extremely loud sound floor. After the 2001 arrangement, veterinarians at the Berlin Zoo blamed the parade for giving more than half of its animals diarrhea. Chairman Heiner Kloes said veterinarians told him the heavy bass was to blame for disturbing the animals. The parade consisted of the sound trucks that usually featured local, or important, clubs and their DJs. It had become a rule that only trucks that had sponsors from a techno-related field, such as clubs, labels or stores, were allowed, but advertising space was increased after the 2006 event to offset the high costs of equipping a truck. The trucks were usually open on top and featured dancers, with box-systems mounted on the side or rear.\nThe parade was a place where some exhibited and enjoyed other people's exhibitionist tendencies. Some attendees enjoyed carrying around toys or other items such as dummies (pacifiers) or face masks. Often the crowd was imaginative in terms of clothing (or lack thereof) and appearance.\nOne famous picture from the parade is people sitting and dancing on streetlamps, trees, commercial signs, telephone booths, which gave the event's nickname \"the greatest amateur circus on earth\".\nThe demonstration concluded with the so-called \"Abschlusskundgebung\" which were sets of the world's leading top DJs such as Ti\u00ebsto, Paul van Dyk, Carl Cox, Armin van Buuren, DJ Rush, DJ Hell, WestBam, Drum Connection, Miss Djax, Marusha or Chris Liebing. During this time all trucks (usually about 40) were connected to each other and set online to the statue of victory where the turntables are. This was one of the few chances a DJ can ever have to play for a crowd of about one million people.\nDisturbances.\nThe parade was quite peaceful for an event of its size, seeing few arrests. In 2008, for example, charges were pressed for six robberies, three sexually related offences and forty thefts. Twenty-three attendees were caught with drugs and forty-nine were charged with bodily harm. There were 177 parade visitors provisionally arrested by the police. Arrests were usually related to drug crimes and most other incidents featured people passing out due to dehydration or hyperthermia. In 2000, after the parade, a girl under the influence of ecstasy was run over by an S-Bahn after she had been leaning on the door too hard.\n2010 disaster.\nAt the 2010 Love Parade in Duisburg, the number of people attending allegedly reached 1.4 million \u2013 the original expectation was around 800,000 \u2013 whereas police believed around 400,000 people were present. 21 people were killed, and more than 600 injured, in an incident on an overcrowded ramp leading from a tunnel into the festival. All of the victims were crushed to death, according to officials.\nSafety experts and a fire service investigator had previously warned that the site was not suitable for the numbers expected to attend. Rainer Schaller, the festival's organizer and chief executive officer, later said the festival would not continue in future.\nA preliminary investigation of the ministry of the interior placed heavy blame on the organizers around Rainer Schaller. Schaller in turn claimed that errors by the police in controlling streams of visitors led to the accident.\nLove Parade International.\nSimilar festivals have taken place in other cities of Germany and many other countries worldwide. Large spin-off festivals in Europe include Z\u00fcrich's Street Parade, Geneva's Lake Parade, Paris's Techno Parade, Rotterdam's FFWD Dance Parade, Munich's Union Move, Hamburg's Generation Move, Hannover's Reincarnation, Bremen's Vision Parade and the Love Parade and the Freeparade in Vienna. In 1994, 1995 and 1996 an event called Love Parade was held in Melbourne, Australia. Unlike its overseas counterparts, this was a smaller \"rave party\" version of the festival. In 1996 it was held at Festival Hall in West Melbourne and included a parade that made the evening news. It was followed in 1997 by a Love Parade in Sydney, Australia, likewise a smaller rave party, held at the infamous Graffiti Hall of Fame in Redfern. In 1999 and 2000 technoparades named \"Buenos Aires Energy Parade\" took place in Buenos Aires, Argentina under the motto \"Love, Peace and Dance\". On Saturday 8 July 2000 a Love Parade was held in Roundhay Park, Leeds, United Kingdom sponsored by BBC Radio 1. In 2001, the official UK parade had moved to Newcastle upon Tyne which was to have seen a parade through the streets of Newcastle before ending up on Town Moor but was canceled after the police refused a license: BBC Radio 1 still hosted a more contained event, however. Since then no Love Parade has taken place in the United Kingdom. In Summer 2000 one of the first public events that took place in post-war Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, was Futura, Festival of Electronic Music. Some of the world's most famous DJs, including the organizers of the Berlin Love Parade, performed in a bombed and burnt out factory.\nAfter being held in the North-American Continent for the first time in Mexico (2002), in the fall of 2004 the Love Parade was held in San Francisco. They had held their inaugural Parade in September 2004 with 37,000 attending. The parade was held again in San Francisco in September 2005 as a rousing success drawing over 50\u201360,000 people. In 2006, the parade was held on 23 September and was renamed Love Fest because the Loveparade Berlin organization did not renew any of their worldwide licenses not already under contract so they could focus on their own event. 2009 was the biggest success of the parade now renamed LovEvolution with over 100,000 people. The first Love Parade in Santiago was held in 2005 and gathered over 100,000 people; the 2006 version gathered over 200,000 people. The first Love Parade in Caracas was held in June 2007 and gathered over 25,000 people.\nSpin-off festivals of the Love Parade have taken place in:\nLegal issues.\nUnder German law the state has to pay for security during political demonstrations as well as cleaning up the streets after the demonstration. In the case of a commercial event however, the organizer must cover these expenses. For a large event like the Love Parade the costs are quite high: an estimated \u20ac300,000 to \u20ac400,000.\nThe Love Parade was initially held as a political demonstration to save costs; however it was organized by two companies set up just for the Love Parade. Due to this there was a dispute between the organizers and the city of Berlin every year about the status of the Love Parade and who should bear what costs. Finally in 2001, the courts ruled that the Love Parade had to be held as commercial event.\nAnthems.\nEvery German parade has had its own anthem.\nList of Love Parades.\nAccording to media reports, the attendance figures had been misstated by the organizers for years. Accurate counts are not available since entry is free and uncontrolled. The mayor of Dortmund and the police confirmed the number of attendees in Dortmund.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18497", "revid": "50901186", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18497", "title": "Lost Generation", "text": "Cohort born from 1883 to 1900\nThe Lost Generation was the demographic cohort that reached early adulthood during World War I, and preceded the Greatest Generation. The cohort is generally defined as people born from 1883 to 1900, coming of age in either the 1900s or the 1910s, and were the first generation to mature in the 20th century. The term is also particularly used to refer to a group of American expatriate writers living in Paris during the 1920s. Gertrude Stein is credited with coining the term, and it was subsequently popularized by Ernest Hemingway, who used it in the epigraph for his 1926 novel \"The Sun Also Rises\": \"You are all a lost generation.\" \"Lost\" in this context refers to the \"disoriented, wandering, directionless\" spirit of many of the war's survivors in the early interwar period.\nIn the wake of the Industrial Revolution, Western members of the Lost Generation grew up in societies that were more literate, consumerist, and media-saturated than ever before, but which also tended to maintain strictly conservative social values. Young men of the cohort were mobilized on a mass scale for World War I, a conflict that was often seen as the defining moment of their age group's lifespan. Young women also contributed to and were affected by the war, and in its aftermath gained greater freedoms politically and in other areas of life. The Lost Generation was also heavily vulnerable to the Spanish flu pandemic and became the driving force behind many cultural changes, particularly in major cities during what became known as the Roaring Twenties.\nLater in their midlife, they experienced the economic effects of the Great Depression and often saw their own sons leave for the battlefields of World War II. In the developed world, they tended to reach retirement and average life expectancy during the decades after the conflict, but some significantly outlived the norm. The Lost Generation became completely ancestral when the last surviving person who was known to have been born in the Lost Generation or during the 19th century, Nabi Tajima, died in 2018 at age 117.\nTerminology.\nThe first named generation, the term \"Lost Generation\" is used for the young people who came of age around the time of World War I. In Europe, they are mostly known as the \"Generation of 1914\", for the year World War I began. In France, they were sometimes called the \"G\u00e9n\u00e9ration du feu\", the \"(gun)fire generation\". In the United Kingdom, the term was originally used for those who died in the war, and often implicitly referred to upper-class casualties who were perceived to have died disproportionately, robbing the country of a future elite. Many felt that \"the flower of youth and the best manhood of the peoples [had] been mowed down\", for example, such notable casualties as the poets Isaac Rosenberg, Rupert Brooke, Edward Thomas, and Wilfred Owen, composer George Butterworth, and physicist Henry Moseley.\nDate and age range definitions.\nAuthors William Strauss and Neil Howe define the Lost Generation as the cohort born from 1883 to 1900, who came of age during World War I and the Roaring Twenties.\nCharacteristics.\nAs children and adolescents.\nFamily life and upbringing.\nWhen the Lost Generation was growing up, the ideal family arrangement was generally seen as the man of the house being the breadwinner and primary authority figure while his wife dedicated herself to caring for the home and children. Most, even less well-off, married couples attempted to conform to this ideal. It was common for family members of three different generations to share a home. Wealthier households also tended to include domestic servants, though their numbers would have varied from a single maid to a large team depending on how well-off the family was.\nPublic concern for the welfare of children was intensifying by the later 19th century with laws being passed and societies formed to prevent their abuse. The state increasingly gained the legal right to intervene in private homes and family life to protect minors from harm. However, beating children for misbehaviour was not only common but viewed as the duty of a responsible caregiver.\nHealth and living conditions.\nSewer systems designed to remove human waste from urban areas had become widespread in industrial cities by the late 19th century, helping to reduce the spread of diseases such as cholera. Legal standards for the quality of drinking water also began to be introduced. However, the introduction of electricity was slower, and during the formative years of the Lost Generation gas lights and candles were still the most common form of lighting.\nThough statistics on child mortality dating back to the beginning of the Lost Generation's lifespan are limited, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report that in 1900 one in ten American infants died before their first birthday. Figures for the United Kingdom state that during the final years of the 19th century, mortality in the first five years of childhood was plateauing at a little under one in every four births. At around one in three in 1800, the early childhood mortality rate had declined overall throughout the next hundred years but would fall most sharply during the first half of the 20th century, reaching less than one in twenty by 1950. This meant that members of the Lost Generation were somewhat less likely to die at a very early age than their parents and grandparents, but were significantly more likely to do so than children born even a few decades later.\nLiteracy and education.\nLaws restricting child labour in factories had begun to appear from around 1840 onwards and by the end of the 19th century, compulsory education had been introduced throughout much of the Western world for at least a few years of childhood. By 1900, levels of illiteracy had fallen to less than 11% in the United States, around 3% in Great Britain, and only 1% in Germany. However, the problems of illiteracy and lack of school provision or attendance were felt more acutely in parts of Eastern and Southern Europe.\nSchools of this time period tended to emphasise strict discipline, expecting pupils to memorize information by rote. To help deal with teacher shortages, older students were often used to help supervise and educate their younger peers. Dividing children into classes based on age became more common as schools grew.\nHowever, while elementary schooling was becoming increasingly accessible for Western children going into the 20th century, secondary education was still much more of a luxury. Only 11% of American fourteen to seventeen-year-olds were enrolled at High School in 1900, a figure which had only marginally increased by 1910. Though the school leaving age was officially meant to be 14 by 1900, until the First World War, most British children could leave school through rules put in place by local authorities at 12 or 13 years old. It was not uncommon at the end of the 19th century for Canadian children to leave school at nine or ten years old.\nLeisure and play.\nBy the 1890s, children's toys entered into mass production. In 1893, the British toy company William Britain revolutionized the production of toy soldiers by devising the method of hollow casting, making soldiers that were cheaper and lighter than their competitors. This led to metal toy soldiers, which had previously been the preserve of boys from wealthier families, gaining mass appeal during the late Victorian and Edwardian period. Dolls often sold by street vendors at a low price were popular with girls. Teddy bears appeared for the first time in the early 1900s. Tin plated penny toys were also sold by street sellers for a single penny.\nThe turn of the 20th century saw a surge in public park building in parts of the west to provide public space in rapidly growing industrial towns. They provided a means for children from different backgrounds to play and interact together, sometimes in specially designed facilities. They held frequent concerts and performances.\nPopular culture and mass media.\nBeginning around the middle of the 19th century, magazines of various types which had previously mainly targeted the few that could afford them found rising popularity among the general public. The latter part of the century not only saw rising popularity for magazines targeted specifically at young boys but the development of a relatively new genre aimed at girls.\nA significant milestone was reached in the development of cinema when, in 1895, projected moving images were first shown to a paying audience in Paris. Early films were very short (generally taking the form of newsreels, comedic sketches, and short documentaries). They lacked sound but were accompanied by music, lectures, and a lot of audience participation. A notable film industry had developed by the start of the First World War.\nAs young adults.\nMilitary service in the First World War.\nThe Lost Generation is best known as being the cohort that primarily fought in World War I. More than 70 million people were mobilized during the First World War, around 8.5\u00a0million of whom were killed and 21\u00a0million wounded in the conflict. About 2\u00a0million soldiers are believed to have been killed by disease, while individual battles sometimes caused hundreds of thousands of deaths.\nAround 60 million of the enlisted originated from the European continent, which saw its younger men mobilized on a mass scale. Most of Europe's great powers operated peacetime conscription systems where men were expected to do a brief period of military training in their youth before spending the rest of their lives in the army reserve. Nations with this system saw a huge portion of their manpower directly invested in the conflict: 55% of male Italians and Bulgarians aged 18 to 50 were called to military service. Elsewhere the proportions were even higher: 63% of military-aged men in Serbia, 78% in Austro-Hungary, and 81% of military-aged men in France and Germany served. Britain, which traditionally relied primarily on the Royal Navy for its security, was a notable exception to this rule and did not introduce conscription until 1916. Around 5 million British men fought in the First World War out of a total United Kingdom population of 46\u00a0million including women, children, and men too old to bear arms.\nAdditionally, nations recruited heavily from their colonial empires. Three million men from around the British Empire outside the United Kingdom served in the British Army as soldiers and laborers, while France recruited 475,000 soldiers from its colonies. Other nations involved include the United States which enlisted 4 million men during the conflict and the Ottoman Empire which mobilized 2,850,000 soldiers.\nBeyond the extent of the deaths, the war had a profound effect on many of its survivors, giving many young men severe mental health problems and crippling physical disabilities. The war also unsettled many soldiers' sense of reality, who had gone into the conflict with a belief that battle and hardship was a path to redemption and greatness. When years of pain, suffering, and loss seemed to bring about little in the way of a better future, many were left with a profound sense of disillusionment.\nYoung women in the 1910s and 1920s.\nThough soldiers on the frontlines of the First World War were exclusively men, women contributed to the war effort in other ways. Many took the jobs men had left in previously male-dominated sectors such as heavy industry, while some even took on non-combat military roles. Many, particularly wealthier women, took part in voluntary work to contribute to the war effort or to help those suffering due to it, such as the wounded or refugees. Often they were experiencing manual labor for the first time. However, this reshaping of the female role led to fears that the sexes having the same responsibilities would disrupt the fabric of society and that more competition for work would leave men unemployed and erode their pay. Most women had to exit the employment they had taken during the war as soon as it concluded.\nThe war also had a personal impact on the lives of female members of the Lost Generation. Many women lost their husbands in the conflict, which frequently meant losing the main breadwinner of the household. However, war widows often received a pension and financial assistance to support their children. Even with some economic support, raising a family alone was often financially difficult and emotionally draining, and women faced losing their pensions if they remarried or were accused of engaging in frowned-upon behavior. In some cases, grief and other pressures drove widows to alcoholism, depression, or suicide. Additionally, the large number of men killed in the First World War made it harder for many young women who were still single at the start of conflict to get married; this accelerated a trend towards them gaining greater independence and embarking on careers.\nWomen's gaining of political rights sped up in the Western world after the First World War, while employment opportunities for unmarried women widened. This time period saw the development of a new type of young woman in popular culture known as a flapper, who was known for her rebellion against previous social norms. They had a physically distinctive appearance compared to their predecessors only a few years earlier, cutting their hair into bobs, wearing shorter dresses and more makeup, while taking on a new code of behaviour filled with more recklessness, party-going, and overt sexuality.\nAftermath of the First World War.\nThe aftermath of the First World War saw substantive changes in the political situation, including a trend towards republicanism, the founding of many new relatively small nation-states which had previously been part of larger empires, and greater suffrage for groups such as the working class and women. France and the United Kingdom both gained territory from their enemies, while the war and the damage it did to the European empires are generally considered major stepping stones in the United States' path to becoming the world's dominant superpower. The German and Italian populations' resentment against what they generally saw as a peace settlement that took too much away from the former or did not give enough to the latter fed into the fascist movements, which would eventually turn those countries into totalitarian dictatorships. For Russia, the years after its revolution in 1917 were plagued by disease, famine, terror, and civil war eventually concluded in the establishment of the Soviet Union.\nThe immediate post-World War One period was characterized by continued political violence and economic instability. The late 1910s saw the Spanish flu pandemic, which was unusual in the sense that it killed many younger adults of the same Lost Generation age group that had mainly died in the war. Later, especially in major cities, much of the 1920s is considered to have been a more prosperous period when the Lost Generation, in particular, escaped the suffering and turmoil they had lived through by rebelling against the social and cultural norms of their elders.\nIn midlife.\n1930s.\nPolitics and economics.\nThis more optimistic period was short-lived, however, as 1929 saw the beginning of the Great Depression, which would continue throughout the 1930s and become the longest and most severe financial downturn ever experienced in Western industrialized history. Though it had begun in the United States, the crises led to sharp increases in worldwide unemployment, reductions in economic output and deflation. The depression was also a major catalyst for the rise of Nazism in Germany and the beginnings of its quest to establish dominance over the European continent, which would eventually lead to World War II in Europe. Additionally, the 1930s saw the less badly damaged Imperial Japan engage in its own empire-building, contributing to conflict in the Far East, where some scholars have argued the Second World War began as early as 1931.\nPopular media.\nThe 1930s saw rising popularity for radio, with the vast majority of Western households having access to the medium by the end of the decade. Programming included soap operas, music, and sport. Educational broadcasts were frequently available. The airwaves also provided a source of news and, particularly for the era's autocratic regimes, an outlet for political propaganda.\nSecond World War.\nWhen World War II broke out in 1939, the Lost Generation faced a major global conflict for the second time in their lifetime, and now often had to watch their sons go to the battlefield. The place of the older generation who had been young adults during World War I in the new conflict was a theme in popular media of the time period, with examples including \"Waterloo Bridge\" and \"Old Bill and Son.\" Civil defense organizations designed to provide a final line of resistance against invasion and assist in home defense more broadly recruited heavily from the older male population. Like in the First World War, women helped to make up for labour shortages caused by mass military recruitment by entering more traditionally masculine employment and entering the conflict more directly in female military branches and underground resistance movements. However, those in middle age were generally less likely to become involved in this kind of work than the young. This was particularly true of any kind of military involvement.\nIn later life.\nIn the West, the Lost Generation tended to reach the end of their working lives around the 1950s and 1960s. For those members of the cohort who had fought in World War I, their military service frequently was viewed as a defining moment in their lives even many years later. Retirement notices of this era often included information on a man's service in the First World War.\nThough there were slight differences between individual countries and from one year to the next, the average life expectancy in the developed world during the 1950s, 1960s and early 1970s was typically around seventy years old. However, some members of the Lost Generation outlived the norm by several decades. Nabi Tajima, the last surviving person known to have been born in the 19th century, died in 2018. The final remaining veteran to have served in World War I in any capacity was Florence Green, who died in 2012, while Claude Choules, the last veteran to have been involved in combat, had died the previous year. However, these individuals were born in 1902 and 1901 respectively, putting them outside the usual birth years for the Lost Generation.\nIn literature.\nIn his memoir \"A Moveable Feast\" (1964), published after Hemingway's and Stein's deaths, Ernest Hemingway writes that Gertrude Stein heard the phrase from a French garage owner who serviced Stein's car. When a young mechanic failed to repair the car quickly enough, the garage owner shouted at the young man, \"You are all a '\"g\u00e9n\u00e9ration perdue\"'.\"29 While telling Hemingway the story, Stein added: \"That is what you are. That's what you all are\u00a0... all of you young people who served in the war. You are a lost generation.\"29 Hemingway thus credits the phrase to Stein, who was then his mentor and patron.\nThe 1926 publication of Hemingway's \"The Sun Also Rises\" popularized the term; that novel serves to epitomize the post-war expatriate generation.302 However, Hemingway later wrote to his editor Max Perkins that the \"point of the book\" was not so much about a generation being lost, but that \"the earth abideth forever\".82 Hemingway believed the characters in \"The Sun Also Rises\" may have been \"battered\" but were not lost.82\nConsistent with this ambivalence, Hemingway employs \"Lost Generation\" as one of two contrasting epigraphs for his novel. In \"A Moveable Feast\", Hemingway writes, \"I tried to balance Miss Stein's quotation from the garage owner with one from Ecclesiastes.\" A few lines later, recalling the risks and losses of the war, he adds: \"I thought of Miss Stein and Sherwood Anderson and egotism and mental laziness versus discipline and I thought 'who is calling who a lost generation?'\"\nThemes.\nThe writings of the Lost Generation literary figures often pertained to the writers' experiences in World War I and the years following it. It is said that the work of these writers was autobiographical based on their use of mythologized versions of their lives. One of the themes that commonly appear in the authors' works is decadence and the frivolous lifestyle of the wealthy. Both Hemingway and F. Scott Fitzgerald touched on this theme throughout the novels \"The Sun Also Rises\" and \"The Great Gatsby\". Another theme commonly found in the works of these authors was the death of the American Dream, which is exhibited throughout many of their novels. It is particularly prominent in \"The Great Gatsby\", in which the character Nick Carraway comes to realize the corruption that surrounds him.\nNotable figures.\nNotable figures of the Lost Generation include F. Scott Fitzgerald, Thomas Wolfe, Gertrude Stein, Ernest Hemingway, Dorothy Parker, T.\u00a0S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, Jean Rhys, Henry Strater, and Sylvia Beach.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18499", "revid": "33226152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18499", "title": "Left-wing politics", "text": "Political ideologies favouring social equality and egalitarianism\nLeft-wing politics or leftism is the range of political ideologies that support and seek to achieve social equality and egalitarianism, often in opposition to social hierarchy either as a whole, or to certain social hierarchies. Left-wing politics typically involve a concern for those in society whom its adherents perceive as disadvantaged relative to others as well as a belief that there are unjustified inequalities that need to be reduced or abolished, through radical means that change the nature of the society they are implemented in. According to emeritus professor of economics Barry Clark, supporters of left-wing politics \"claim that human development flourishes when individuals engage in cooperative, mutually respectful relations that can thrive only when excessive differences in status, power, and wealth are eliminated.\"\nWithin the left\u2013right political spectrum, \"left\" and \"right\" were coined during the French Revolution, referring to the seating arrangement in the French National Assembly between revolutionaries and monarchists respectively. Usage of the term \"left\" became more prominent after the restoration of the French monarchy in 1815, when it was applied to the \"Independents\". The word \"wing\" was first appended to left and right factions in the late 19th century, usually with disparaging intent, and \"left-wing\" was applied to those who were unorthodox in their religious or political views.\nIdeologies considered to be \"left-wing\" vary greatly depending on the placement along the political spectrum in a given time and place. At the end of the 18th century, upon the founding of the first liberal democracies, the term \"Left\" was used to describe liberalism in the United States and republicanism in France, supporting a lesser degree of hierarchical decision-making than the \"right-wing politics\" of the traditional conservatives and monarchists. In modern politics, the term \"Left\" typically applies to ideologies and movements to the left of classical liberalism, supporting some degree of democracy in the economic sphere.\nToday, ideologies such as social liberalism and social democracy are considered to be centre-left, while \"the Left\" is typically reserved for movements more critical of capitalism, including the labour movement, socialism, anarchism, communism, Marxism, Leninism and syndicalism, each of which rose to prominence in the 19th and 20th centuries. In addition, the term \"left-wing\" has also been applied to a broad range of culturally liberal and progressive social movements, including the civil rights movement, feminist movement, LGBTQ rights movement, abortion-rights movements, multiculturalism, anti-war movement, and environmental movement, as well as a wide range of political parties.\u200c\nPositions.\nEconomics.\nLeft-leaning economic beliefs range from Keynesian economics and the welfare state through industrial democracy and the social market to the nationalisation of the economy and central planning, to the anarcho-syndicalist advocacy of a council-based and self-managed anarchist communism. Left-wing politics are typically associated with popular or state control of major political and economic institutions. During the Industrial Revolution, leftists supported trade unions. At the beginning of the 20th century, many leftists advocated strong government intervention in the economy. \nLeftists continue to criticise the perceived exploitative nature of globalisation, the \"race to the bottom\" and unjust lay-offs and exploitation of workers. In the last quarter of the 20th century, the belief that the government (ruling in accordance with the interests of the people) ought to be directly involved in the day-to-day workings of an economy declined in popularity amongst the centre-left, especially social democrats who adopted the Third Way. \nOther leftists believe in Marxian economics, named after the economic theories of Karl Marx. Some distinguish Marx's economic theories from his political philosophy, arguing that Marx's approach to understanding the economy is independent of his advocacy of revolutionary socialism or his belief in the inevitability of a proletarian revolution. Marxian economics do not exclusively rely on Marx and draw from a range of Marxist and non-Marxist sources. The \"dictatorship of the proletariat\" and \"workers' state\" are terms used by some Marxists, particularly Leninists and Marxist\u2013Leninists, to describe what they see as a temporary state between the capitalist state of affairs and a communist society. Marx defined the proletariat as salaried workers, in contrast to the lumpenproletariat, who he defined as the outcasts of society such as beggars, tricksters, entertainers, buskers, criminals and prostitutes. The political relevance of farmers has divided the left. In , Marx scarcely mentioned the subject. Mikhail Bakunin thought the lumpenproletariat was a revolutionary class, while Mao Zedong believed that it would be rural peasants, not urban workers, who would bring about the proletarian revolution.\nLeft-libertarians, anarchists and libertarian socialists believe in a decentralised economy run by trade unions, workers' councils, cooperatives, municipalities and communes, opposing both state and private control of the economy, preferring social ownership and local control in which a nation of decentralised regions is united in a confederation. The global justice movement, also known as the anti-globalisation movement and the alter-globalisation movement, protests against corporate economic globalisation due to its negative consequences for the poor, workers, the environment, and small businesses.\nLeftists generally believe in innovation in various technological and philosophical fields and disciplines to help causes they support.\nEnvironment.\nOne of the foremost left-wing advocates was Thomas Paine, one of the first individuals since \"left\" and \"right\" became political terms to describe the collective human ownership of the world, which he speaks of in \"Agrarian Justice\". As such, most of left-wing thought and literature regarding environmentalism stems from this duty of ownership and the aforementioned form of cooperative ownership means that humanity must take care of the Earth. This principle is reflected in much of the historical left-wing thought and literature that came afterwards, although there were disagreements about what this entailed. Karl Marx and the early socialist philosopher and scholar William Morris had a concern for environmental matters. According to Marx, \"[e]ven an entire society, a nation, or all simultaneously existing societies taken together, are not the owners of the earth. They are simply its possessors, its beneficiaries, and have to bequeath it in an improved state to succeeding generations\". Following the Russian Revolution, environmental scientists such as revolutionary Alexander Bogdanov and the Proletkult organisation made efforts to incorporate environmentalism into Bolshevism and \"integrate production with natural laws and limits\" in the first decade of Soviet rule, before Joseph Stalin attacked ecologists and the science of ecology, purged environmentalists and promoted the pseudoscience of Trofim Lysenko during his rule up until his death in 1953. Similarly, Mao Zedong rejected environmentalism and believed that based on the laws of historical materialism, all of nature must be put into the service of revolution.\nFrom the 1970s onwards, environmentalism became an increasing concern of the left, with social movements and several unions campaigning on environmental issues and causes. In Australia, the left-wing Builders Labourers Federation, led by the communist Jack Mundy, united with environmentalists to place green bans on environmentally destructive development projects. Several segments of the socialist and Marxist left consciously merged environmentalism and anti-capitalism into an eco-socialist ideology. Barry Commoner articulated a left-wing response to \"The Limits to Growth\" model that predicted catastrophic resource depletion and spurred environmentalism, postulating that capitalist technologies were the key cause responsible for environmental degradation, as opposed to human population pressures. Environmental degradation can be seen as a class or equity issue, as environmental destruction disproportionately affects poorer communities and countries.\nSeveral left-wing or socialist groupings have an overt environmental concern and several green parties contain a strong socialist presence. The Green Party of England and Wales features an eco-socialist group, the Green Left, which was founded in June 2005. Its members held several influential positions within the party, including both the former Principal Speakers Si\u00e2n Berry and Derek Wall, himself an eco-socialist and Marxist academic. In Europe, several green left political parties such as the European United Left\u2013Nordic Green Left combine traditional social-democratic values such as a desire for greater economic equality and workers rights with demands for environmental protection. Democratic socialist Bolivian president Evo Morales has traced environmental degradation to capitalist consumerism, stating that \"[t]he Earth does not have enough for the North to live better and better, but it does have enough for all of us to live well\". James Hansen, Noam Chomsky, Raj Patel, Naomi Klein, The Yes Men and Dennis Kucinich hold similar views.\nIn climate change mitigation, the Left is also divided over how to effectively and equitably reduce carbon emissions as the center-left often advocates a reliance on market measures such as emissions trading and a carbon tax while those further to the left support direct government regulation and intervention in the form of a Green New Deal, either alongside or instead of market mechanisms.\nNationalism, anti-imperialism and anti-nationalism.\nThe question of nationality, imperialism and nationalism has been a central feature of political debates on the Left. During the French Revolution, nationalism was a key policy of the Republican Left. The Republican Left advocated for civic nationalism and argued that the nation is a \"daily plebiscite\" formed by the subjective \"will to live together\". Related to revanchism, the belligerent will to take revenge against Germany and retake control of Alsace-Lorraine, nationalism was sometimes opposed to imperialism. In the 1880s, there was a debate between leftists such as the Radical Georges Clemenceau, the Socialist Jean Jaur\u00e8s and the nationalist Maurice Barr\u00e8s, who argued that colonialism diverted France from liberating the \"blue line of the Vosges\", in reference to Alsace-Lorraine; and the \"colonial lobby\" such as Jules Ferry of the Moderate Republicans, L\u00e9on Gambetta of the Republicans and Eug\u00e8ne Etienne, the president of the Parliamentary Colonial Group. After the antisemitic Dreyfus Affair in which officer Alfred Dreyfus was falsely convicted of sedition and exiled to a penal colony in 1894 before being exonerated in 1906, nationalism in the form of Boulangism increasingly became associated with the far-right.\nThe Marxist social class theory of proletarian internationalism asserts that members of the working class should act in solidarity with working people in other countries in pursuit of a common class interest, rather than only focusing on their own countries. Proletarian internationalism is summed up in the slogan: \"Workers of the world, unite!\", the last line of \"The Communist Manifesto\". Union members had learned that more members meant more bargaining power. Taken to an international level, leftists argued that workers should act in solidarity with the international proletariat in order to further increase the power of the working class. Proletarian internationalism saw itself as a deterrent against war and international conflicts, because people with a common interest are less likely to take up arms against one another, instead focusing on fighting the bourgeoisie as the ruling class. According to Marxist theory, the antonym of proletarian internationalism is bourgeois nationalism. Some Marxists, together with others on the left, view nationalism, racism (including antisemitism) and religion as divide and conquer tactics used by the ruling classes to prevent the working class from uniting against them in solidarity with one another. Left-wing movements have often taken up anti-imperialist positions. Anarchism has developed a critique of nationalism that focuses on nationalism's role in justifying and consolidating state power and domination. Through its unifying goal, nationalism strives for centralisation (both in specific territories and in a ruling elite of individuals) while it prepares a population for capitalist exploitation. Within anarchism, this subject has been extensively discussed by Rudolf Rocker in his book titled \"Nationalism and Culture\" and by the works of Fredy Perlman such as \"Against His-Story, Against Leviathan\" and \"The Continuing Appeal of Nationalism\".\nThe failure of revolutions in Germany and Hungary in the 1918\u20131920 years ended Bolshevik hopes for an imminent world revolution and led to the promotion of the doctrine of socialism in one country by Joseph Stalin. In the first edition of his book titled \"Osnovy Leninizma\" (\"Foundations of Leninism\", 1924), Stalin argued that revolution in one country is insufficient. By the end of that year in the second edition of the book, he argued that the \"proletariat can and must build the socialist society in one country\". In April 1925, Nikolai Bukharin elaborated on the issue in his brochure titled \"Can We Build Socialism in One Country in the Absence of the Victory of the West-European Proletariat?\", whose position was adopted as state policy after Stalin's January 1926 article titled \"On the Issues of Leninism\" (\u041a \u0432\u043e\u043f\u0440\u043e\u0441\u0430\u043c \u043b\u0435\u043d\u0438\u043d\u0438\u0437\u043c\u0430) was published. This idea was opposed by Leon Trotsky and his supporters, who declared the need for an international \"permanent revolution\" and condemned Stalin for betraying the goals and ideals of the socialist revolution. Various Fourth Internationalist groups around the world who describe themselves as Trotskyist see themselves as standing in this tradition while Maoist China formally supported the theory of socialism in one country.\nEuropean social democrats strongly support Europeanism and supranational integration within the European Union, although there is a minority of nationalists and Eurosceptics on the left. Several scholars have linked this form of left-wing nationalism to the pressure generated by economic integration with other countries, often encouraged by neoliberal free trade agreements. This view is sometimes used to justify hostility towards supranational organisations. Left-wing nationalism can also refer to any form of nationalism which emphasises a leftist working-class populist agenda that seeks to overcome exploitation or oppression by other nations. Many Third World anti-colonialist movements have adopted leftist and socialist ideas. Third-Worldism is a tendency within leftist thought that regards the division between First World and Second World developed countries and Third World developing countries as being of high political importance. This tendency supports decolonisation and national liberation movements against imperialism by capitalists. Third-Worldism is closely connected with African socialism, Latin American socialism, Maoism, pan-Africanism and pan-Arabism. Several left-wing groups in the developing world such as the Zapatista Army of National Liberation in Mexico, the Abahlali baseMjondolo in South Africa and the Naxalites in India have argued that the First World and the Second World Left takes a racist and paternalistic attitude towards liberation movements in the Third World.\nReligion.\nThe original French Left was firmly anti-clerical, strongly opposing the influence of the Roman Catholic Church and supporting atheism and the separation of church and state, ushering in a policy known as \"la\u00efcit\u00e9\". Karl Marx asserted that \"religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature, the heart of a heartless world, and the soul of soulless conditions. It is the opium of the people\". In Soviet Russia, the Bolsheviks under Vladimir Lenin originally embraced an ideological principle which professed that all religion would eventually atrophy and resolved to eradicate organised Christianity and other religious institutions. In 1918, 10 Russian Orthodox hierarchs were summarily executed by a firing squad, and children were deprived of any religious education outside of the home.\nToday in the Western world, those on the Left generally support secularisation and the separation of church and state. However, religious beliefs have also been associated with many left-wing movements such as the progressive movement, the Social Gospel movement, the civil rights movement, the anti-war movement, the anti-capital punishment movement and Liberation Theology. Early utopian socialist thinkers such as Robert Owen, Charles Fourier and the Comte de Saint-Simon based their theories of socialism upon Christian principles. Other common leftist concerns such as pacifism, social justice, racial equality, human rights and the rejection of capitalism and excessive wealth can be found in the Bible.\nIn the late 19th century, the Protestant Social Gospel movement arose in the United States which integrated progressive and socialist thought with Christianity through faith-based social activism. Other left-wing religious movements include Buddhist socialism, Jewish socialism and Islamic socialism. There have been alliances between the left and anti-war Muslims, such as the Respect Party and the Stop the War Coalition in Britain. In France, the left has been divided over moves to ban the hijab from schools, with some leftists supporting a ban based on the separation of church and state in accordance with the principle of \"la\u00efcit\u00e9\" and other leftists opposing the prohibition based on personal and religious freedom.\nSocial progressivism and counterculture.\nSocial progressivism is another common feature of modern leftism, particularly in the United States, where social progressives played an important role in the abolition of slavery, the enshrinement of women's suffrage in the United States Constitution, and the protection of civil rights, LGBTQ rights, women's rights and multiculturalism. Progressives have both advocated for alcohol prohibition legislation and worked towards its repeal in the mid to late 1920s and early 1930s. Current positions associated with social progressivism in the Western world include strong opposition to the death penalty, torture, mass surveillance, and the war on drugs, and support for abortion rights, cognitive liberty, LGBTQ rights including legal recognition of same-sex marriage, same-sex adoption of children, the right to change one's legal gender, distribution of contraceptives, and public funding of embryonic stem-cell research. The desire for an expansion of social and civil liberties often overlaps that of the libertarian movement. Public education was a subject of great interest to groundbreaking social progressives such as Lester Frank Ward and John Dewey, who believed that a democratic society and system of government was practically impossible without a universal and comprehensive nationwide system of education.\nVarious counterculture and anti-war movements in the 1960s and 1970s were associated with the New Left. Unlike the earlier leftist focus on labour union activism and a proletarian revolution, the New Left instead adopted a broader definition of political activism commonly called social activism. The New Left in the United States is associated with the hippie movement, mass protest movements on school campuses and a broadening of focus from protesting class-based oppression to include issues such as gender, race and sexual orientation. The British New Left was an intellectually driven movement which attempted to correct the perceived errors of the Old Left. The New Left opposed prevailing authoritarian structures in society which it designated as \"The Establishment\" and became known as the \"Anti-Establishment\". The New Left did not seek to recruit industrial workers en masse, but instead concentrated on a social activist approach to organization, convinced that they could be the source for a better kind of social revolution. This view has been criticised by several Marxists, especially Trotskyists, who characterised this approach as \"substitutionism\" which they described as a misguided and non-Marxist belief that other groups in society could \"substitute\" for and \"replace\" the revolutionary agency of the working class.\nMany early feminists and advocates of women's rights were considered a part of the Left by their contemporaries. Feminist pioneer Mary Wollstonecraft was influenced by Thomas Paine. Many notable leftists have been strong supporters of gender equality such as Marxist philosophers and activists Rosa Luxemburg, Clara Zetkin and Alexandra Kollontai, anarchist philosophers and activists such as Virginia Bolten, Emma Goldman and Luc\u00eda S\u00e1nchez Saornil and democratic socialist philosophers and activists such as Helen Keller and Annie Besant. However, Marxists such as Rosa Luxemburg, Clara Zetkin, and Alexandra Kollontai, who are supporters of radical social equality for women and have rejected and opposed liberal feminism because they considered it to be a capitalist bourgeois ideology. Marxists were responsible for organising the first International Working Women's Day events.\nThe women's liberation movement is closely connected to the New Left and other new social movements which openly challenged the orthodoxies of the Old Left. Socialist feminism as exemplified by the Freedom Socialist Party and Radical Women and Marxist feminism, spearheaded by Selma James, saw themselves as a part of the Left that challenges male-dominated and sexist structures within the Left. The connection between left-wing ideologies and the struggle for LGBTQ rights also has an important history. Prominent socialists who were involved in early struggles for LGBTQ rights include Edward Carpenter, Oscar Wilde, Harry Hay, Bayard Rustin and Daniel Gu\u00e9rin, among others. The New Left is also strongly supportive of LGBTQ rights and liberation, having been instrumental in the founding of the LGBTQ rights movement in the aftermath of the Stonewall Riots of 1969. Contemporary leftist activists and socialist countries such as Cuba are actively supportive of LGBTQ+ people and are involved in the struggle for LGBTQ+ rights and equality.\nHistory.\nIn politics, the term \"Left\" derives from the French Revolution as the political groups opposed to the royal veto privilege (Montagnard and Jacobin deputies from the Third Estate) generally sat to the left of the presiding member's chair in parliament while the ones in favour of the royal veto privilege sat on its right. That habit began in the original French National Assembly. Throughout the 19th century, the main line dividing Left and Right was between supporters of the French republic and those of the monarchy's privileges. The June Days uprising during the Second Republic was an attempt by the Left to re-assert itself after the 1848 Revolution, but only a small portion of the population supported this.\nIn the mid-19th century, nationalism, socialism, democracy and anti-clericalism became key features of the French Left. After Napoleon III's 1851 coup and the subsequent establishment of the Second Empire, Marxism began to rival radical republicanism and utopian socialism as a force within left-wing politics. The influential \"Communist Manifesto\" by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, published amidst the wave of revolutions of 1848 across Europe, asserted that all of human history is defined by class struggle. They predicted that a proletarian revolution would eventually overthrow bourgeois capitalism and create a stateless, moneyless and classless communist society. It was in this period that the word \"wing\" was appended to both Left and Right.\nThe International Workingmen's Association (1864\u20131876), sometimes called the First International, brought together delegates from many different countries, with many different views about how to reach a classless and stateless society. Following a split between supporters of Marx and Mikhail Bakunin, anarchists formed the Saint-Imier International and later the International Workers' Association (IWA\u2013AIT). The Second International (1888\u20131916) became divided over the issue of World War I. Those who opposed the war, among them Vladimir Lenin and Rosa Luxemburg, saw themselves as further to the left.\nIn the United States, leftists such as social liberals, progressives and trade unionists were influenced by the works of Thomas Paine, who introduced the concept of asset-based egalitarianism which theorises that social equality is possible by a redistribution of resources. After the Reconstruction era in the aftermath of the American Civil War, the phrase \"the Left\" was used to describe those who supported trade unions, the civil rights movement and the anti-war movement. More recently, \"left-wing\" and \"right-wing\" have often been used as synonyms for the Democratic and Republican parties, or as synonyms for liberalism and conservatism, respectively.\nDuring the 20th century, war resulted in a dramatic intensification of the pace of social changes, and was a crucial catalyst for the growth of left-wing politics. Since the Right was populist, both in the Western and the Eastern Bloc, anything viewed as avant-garde art was called leftist across Europe, thus the identification of Picasso's \"Guernica\" as \"leftist\" in Europe and the condemnation of the Russian composer Shostakovich's opera (\"The Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk District\") in \"Pravda\" as follows: \"Here we have 'leftist' confusion instead of natural, human music\".\nTypes.\nThe spectrum of left-wing politics ranges from centre-left to far-left or ultra-left. The term \"centre-left\" describes a position within the political mainstream that accepts capitalism and a market economy. The terms \"far-left\" and \"ultra-left\" are used for positions that are more radical, more strongly rejecting capitalism and mainstream representative democracy, instead advocating for a socialist society based on economic democracy and direct democracy, representing economic, political and social democracy. The centre-left includes social democrats, social liberals, progressives and greens. Centre-left supporters accept market allocation of resources in a mixed economy with an empowered public sector and a thriving private sector. Centre-left policies tend to favour limited state intervention in matters pertaining to the public interest.\nIn several countries, the terms \"far-left\" and \"radical left\" have been associated with many varieties of anarchism, autonomism and communism. They have been used to describe groups that advocate anti-capitalism and eco-terrorism. In France, a distinction is made between the centre-left and the left represented by the Socialist Party and the French Communist Party and the far-left as represented by anarcho-communists, Maoists and Trotskyists. The United States Department of Homeland Security defines \"left-wing extremism\" as groups that \"seek to bring about change through violent revolution, rather than through established political processes\". Similar to far-right politics, extremist far-left politics have motivated political violence, radicalisation, genocide, terrorism, sabotage and damage to property, the formation of militant organisations, political repression, conspiracism, xenophobia, and nationalism.\nIn China, the term \"Chinese New Left\" denotes those who oppose the economic reforms enacted by Deng Xiaoping in the 1980s and 1990s, favour instead the restoration of Maoist policies and the immediate transition to a socialist economy. In the Western world, the term \"New Left\" is used for social and cultural politics.\nIn the United Kingdom during the 1980s, the term \"hard left\" was applied to supporters of Tony Benn such as the Campaign Group and those involved in the \"London Labour Briefing\" newspaper as well as Trotskyist groups such as Militant and the Alliance for Workers' Liberty. In the same period, the term \"soft left\" was applied to supporters of the British Labour Party who were perceived to be more moderate and closer to the centre, accepting Keynesianism. Under the leadership of Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, the Labour Party adopted the Third Way and rebranded itself as New Labour in order to promote the notion that it was less left-wing than it had been in the past to accommodate the neoliberal trend arising since the 1970s with the displacement of Keynesianism and post-war social democracy. One of the first actions of Ed Miliband, the Labour Party leader who succeeded Blair and Brown, was the rejection of the New Labour label and a promise to abandon the Third Way and turn back to the left. However, Labour's voting record in the House of Commons from 2010 to 2015 indicated that the Labour Party under Miliband had maintained the same distance from the left as it did under Blair. In contrast, the election of Jeremy Corbyn as the Labour Party leader was viewed by scholars and political commentators as Labour turning back toward its more classical socialist roots, rejecting neoliberalism and the Third Way whilst supporting a democratic socialist society and an end to austerity measures.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18500", "revid": "21640150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18500", "title": "Left wing", "text": ""}
{"id": "18501", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18501", "title": "Left-wing", "text": ""}
{"id": "18502", "revid": "4099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18502", "title": "Leftists", "text": ""}
{"id": "18504", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18504", "title": "Los Angeles-class submarine", "text": "Class of nuclear-powered fast attack submarines of the United States Navy\nThe \"Los Angeles\" class of submarines are nuclear-powered fast attack submarines (SSN) in service with the United States Navy. Also known as the 688 class (pronounced \"six-eighty-eight\") after the hull number of lead vessel , 62 were built from 1972 to 1996, the latter 23 to an improved 688i standard. As of 2025, 23 of the \"Los Angeles\" class remain in commission and they account for almost half of the U.S. Navy's 50 fast attack submarines.\nSubmarines of this class are named after American towns and cities, such as Albany, New York; Los Angeles, California; and Tucson, Arizona, with the exception of , named for the \"father of the nuclear Navy.\" This was a change from traditionally naming attack submarines after marine animals, such as or . Rickover explained the decision to name the submarines after cities (and occasionally politicians influential in defense issues) by observing that \"fish don't vote.\"\nDevelopment.\nIn the late 1960s, the Soviet Union's advances in submarine technology increasingly threatened the survivability of US Navy (USN) carrier battle groups. Soviet fast-attack submarines became capable of keeping pace with carrier groups, while their newer missile submarines could potentially overwhelm the group's defenses with salvos of missiles. Development of the \"Los Angeles\" class commenced in 1967 as a response. The class originally had essentially the same weapons and sensors as the preceding , but was approximately 50% larger with \"major improvements\" in stealth and speed so that they too could keep up with carrier battle groups.\nOn 1 December 1976 General Dynamics Electric Boat (GDEB) submitted a $544\u00a0million claim related to its contract for 18 \"Los-Angeles\"-class submarines; the contractor alleged the USN made an undue amount of design changes while the government argued that Electric Boat mismanaged its operations. The USN and General Dynamics reached an $843\u00a0million settlement agreement in June 1978; the contract price was increased by $125\u00a0million, GDEB absorbed a $359\u00a0million loss, and the USN paid an additional $359\u00a0million under the authority of Public Law 85-804. The USN and General Dynamics had a further dispute in 1979\u20131980 when it was discovered that nonconforming steel had been used in the construction of the submarines and thousands of welds were found to be either defective or missing. This led General Dynamics to file a $100\u00a0million insurance claim to cover the costs of re-inspections of the yard's work, \"thus, Electric Boat was asking the Navy to reimburse it for its own mis-management.\" The parties reached an agreement in 1981 whereby GDEB was awarded a firm contract for an additional 688-class boat and two options; the Navy needed GDEB's shipbuilding capacity to achieve its procurement goals.\n\"Los Angeles\"-class submarines were built in three successive flights:\nDesign.\nFlights.\nIn 1982, after building 31 boats, the class underwent a minor redesign. The following eight that made up the second \"flight\" of subs had 12 new vertical launch tubes that could fire Tomahawk missiles. The last 23 had a significant upgrade with the 688i improvement program. These boats are quieter, with more advanced electronics, sensors, and noise-reduction technology. The diving planes are placed at the bow rather than on the sail, and are retractable. A further four boats were proposed by the Navy, but later cancelled.\nCapabilities.\nAccording to the U.S. Department of Defense, the top speed of the submarines of the \"Los Angeles\" class is over , although the actual maximum is classified. Some published estimates have placed their top speed at . In his book \"Submarine: A Guided Tour Inside a Nuclear Warship\", Tom Clancy estimated the top speed of \"Los Angeles\"-class submarines at about .\nThe U.S. Navy gives the maximum operating depth of the \"Los Angeles\" class as , while Patrick Tyler, in his book \"Running Critical\", suggests a maximum operating depth of . Although Tyler cites the 688-class design committee for this figure, the government has not commented on it. The maximum diving depth is according to \"Jane's Fighting Ships, 2004\u20132005 Edition\", edited by Commodore Stephen Saunders of the Royal Navy.\nWeapons.\n\"Los Angeles\"-class submarines carry 24 torpedo tube-launched weapons, as well as Mark 67 and Mark 60 CAPTOR mines and were designed to launch Tomahawk cruise missiles, and Harpoon missiles horizontally (from the torpedo tubes). The last 31 boats of this class (Flight II and Flight III/688i) also have 12 dedicated vertical launching system tubes for launching Tomahawks. The tube configuration for the first two boats of Flight II differed from the later ones: \"Providence\" and \"Pittsburgh\" have four rows of three tubes vs. the inner two rows of four and outer two rows of two tubes found on other examples. The 688i (\"improved\") model submarines are capable of deploying the Mk 67 Submarine Launched Mobile Mines.\nControl systems.\nOver close to 40 years, the control suite of the class has changed dramatically. The class was originally equipped with the Mk 113 mod 10 fire control system, also known as the Pargo display program. The Mk 113 runs on a UYK-7 computer.\nThe Mk 117 FCS, the first \"all digital\" fire control system, replaced the Mk 113. The Mk 117 transferred the duties of the analog Mk 75 attack director to the UYK-7, and the digital Mk 81 weapon control consoles, removing the two analog conversions, and allowing \"all digital\" control of the digital Mk 48 control. The first 688 sub to be built with the Mk 117 was .\nThe Mark 1 Combat Control System/All Digital Attack Center replaced the Mk 117 FCS, on which it was based. The Mk 1 CCS was built by Lockheed Martin, and gave the class the ability to fire Tomahawk missiles. The CSS internal tracker model provides processing for both towed-array and spherical-array trackers. Trackers are signal followers that generate bearing, arrival angle, and frequency reports based on information received by an acoustic sensor. It incorporated the Gyro Static Navigator into the system in replacement of the AN/WSN-1 DMINS (Dual Mini Ship's Inertial navigation system) of the earlier 688 class.\nThe Mk 1 CCS was replaced by the Mk 2, which was built by Raytheon. Mk 2 provides Tomahawk Block III vertical launch capability as well as fleet-requested improvements to Mk 48 ADCAP torpedo and Towed Array Target Motion Analysis operability. The Mk 2 CCS paired with the AN/BQQ-5E system is referred to as the QE-2\" system. The CCS MK2 Block 1 A/B system architecture extends the CCS MK2 tactical system with a network of tactical advanced computers (TAC-3). These TAC-3s are configured to support the SFMPL, NTCS-A, LINK-11 and ATWCS subsystems.\nSensors.\nSonar.\nAN/BQQ-5.\nAN/BQQ-5 sensor suite consists of the AN/BQS-13 spherical sonar array and AN/UYK-44 computer. The AN/BQQ-5 was developed from the AN/BQQ-2 sonar system. The BQS 11, 12, and 13 spherical arrays have 1,241 transducers. Also equipped are a conformal hull array with 104 to 156 hydrophones and two towed arrays: the TB-12 (later replaced by the TB-16) and TB-23 or TB-29, of which there are multiple variants. There are five versions of the AN/BQQ-5 system, sequentially identified by letters A\u2013E.\nThe 688i (Improved) subclass was initially equipped with the AN/BSY-1 SUBACS submarine advanced combat system that used an AN/BQQ-5E sensor system with updated computers and interface equipment. Development of the AN/BSY-1 and its sister the AN/BSY-2 for the was widely reported as one of the most problematic programs for the Navy, its cost and schedule suffering many setbacks.\nA series of conformal passive hydrophones are hard-mounted to each side of the hull, using the AN/BQR-24 internal processor. The system uses FLIT (frequency line integration tracking) which homes in on precise narrowband frequencies of sound and, using the Doppler principle, can accurately provide firing solutions against very quiet submarines. The AN/BQQ-5's hull array doubled the performance of its predecessors.\nAN/BQQ-10.\nThe AN/BQQ-5 system was replaced by the AN/BQQ-10 system. Acoustic Rapid Commercial Off-The-Shelf Insertion (A-RCI), designated AN/BQQ-10, is a four-phase program for transforming existing submarine sonar systems (AN/BSY-1, AN/BQQ-5, and AN/BQQ-6) from legacy systems to a more capable and flexible COTS/Open System Architecture (OSA) and also provide the submarine force with a common sonar system. A single A-RCI Multi-Purpose Processor (MPP) has as much computing power as the entire \"Los Angeles\" (SSN-688/688I) submarine fleet combined and will allow the development and use of complex algorithms previously beyond the reach of legacy processors. The use of COTS/OSA technologies and systems will enable rapid periodic updates to both software and hardware. COTS-based processors will allow computer power growth at a rate commensurate with the commercial industry.\nEngineering and auxiliary systems.\nTwo watertight compartments are used in the \"Los Angeles\"-class submarines. The forward compartment contains crew living spaces, weapons-handling spaces, and control spaces not critical to recovering propulsion. The aft compartment contains the bulk of the submarine's engineering systems, power generation turbines, and water-making equipment. Some submarines in the class are capable of delivering Navy SEALs through either a SEAL Delivery Vehicle deployed from the Dry Deck Shelter or the Advanced SEAL Delivery System mounted on the dorsal side, although the latter was cancelled in 2006 and removed from service in 2009. A variety of atmospheric control devices are used to allow the vessel to remain submerged for long periods of time without ventilating, including an electrolytic oxygen generator, which produces oxygen for the crew and hydrogen as a byproduct. The hydrogen is pumped overboard but there is always a risk of fire or explosion from this process.\nWhile on the surface or at snorkel depth, the submarine may use the submarine's auxiliary or emergency diesel generator for power or ventilation (e.g., following a fire). The diesel engine in a 688 class can be quickly started by compressed air during emergencies or to evacuate noxious (nonvolatile) gases from the boat, although 'ventilation' requires raising a snorkel mast. During nonemergency situations, design constraints call for operators to allow the engine to reach normal operating temperatures before it is capable of producing full power, a process that may take from 20 to 30 minutes. However, the diesel generator can be immediately loaded to 100% power output, despite design criteria cautions, at the discretion of the submarine commander on the recommendation of the submarine's engineer, if necessity dictates such actions to: (a) restore electrical power to the submarine, (b) prevent a reactor incident from occurring or escalating, or (c) to protect the lives of the crew or others as determined necessary by the commanding officer.\nPropulsion.\nThe \"Los Angeles\" class is powered by the General Electric S6G pressurized water reactor. The hot reactor coolant water heats water in the steam generators, producing steam to power the propulsion turbines and ship service turbine generators (SSTGs), which generate the submarine's electrical power. The high-speed propulsion turbines drive the shaft and propeller through a reduction gear. In the case of a reactor plant casualty, the submarine has a diesel generator and a bank of batteries to provide electrical power. An emergency propulsion motor on the shaft line or a retractable 325-hp secondary propulsion motor power the submarine off the battery or diesel generator.\nThe S6G reactor plant was originally designed to use the D1G-2 core, similar to the D2G reactor used on the guided missile cruiser . The D1G-2 core had a rated thermal power of 150 MW and the turbines were rated at 30,000 shp. All \"Los Angeles\"-class submarines from on were built with a D2W core and older submarines with D1G-2 cores have been refueled with D2W cores. The D2W core is rated at 165 MW and turbine power rose to approximately 33,500 shp.\nBoats in class.\nThe class has a total of 62 boats divided into three flights as follows:\nSubmarines.\nAmong the retired boats, a few were in commission for nearly 40 years or more, including \"Bremerton\" (40), \"Jacksonville\" (40), \"La Jolla\" (38) and \"San Francisco\" (41). With a wide variance in longevity, twelve boats were laid up halfway through their projected lifespans, with \"Baltimore\" being the youngest to be retired at only 15 years, 11 months. Another five boats were also laid up early (within 20\u201325 years), due to their midlife reactor refueling being cancelled, and one was lost during overhaul due to arson. All retired boats have been or will be scrapped per the Navy's Ship-Submarine Recycling Program. In addition, two boats, \"La Jolla\" and \"San Francisco\", have been converted to moored training ships.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18507", "revid": "31541467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18507", "title": "Lucretia", "text": "Late 6th century BC Roman noblewoman\nAccording to Roman tradition, Lucretia ( , ]; died c.\u2009510 BC), anglicized as Lucrece, was a noblewoman in ancient Rome. Sextus Tarquinius (Tarquin), the king's son, raped Lucretia, and her subsequent suicide precipitated a rebellion that overthrew the Roman monarchy and led to the transition of Roman government from a kingdom to a republic. After Tarquin raped Lucretia, flames of dissatisfaction were kindled over the tyrannical methods of Tarquin's father, Lucius Tarquinius Superbus, the last king of Rome. As a result, the prominent families instituted a republic, drove the extensive royal family of Tarquin from Rome, and successfully defended the republic against attempted Etruscan and Latin intervention.\nThere are no contemporary sources of Lucretia and Tarquin\u2019s rape of her. Information regarding Lucretia, how and when Tarquin raped her, her suicide, and the consequence of this being the start of the Roman Republic come from the accounts of Roman historian Livy and Greco-Roman historian Dionysius of Halicarnassus approximately 500 years later. Secondary sources on the establishment of the republic reiterate the basic events of Lucretia's story, though accounts vary slightly between historians. The evidence points to the historical existence of a woman named Lucretia and an event that played a critical part in the downfall of the monarchy. However, specific details are debatable and vary depending on the writer. According to modern sources, Lucretia's narrative is considered a part of Roman mythohistory. Much like the rape of the Sabine women, Lucretia's story provides an explanation for historical change in Rome through a recounting of violence against women by men. \nEarly life and marriage.\nLucretia was the daughter of magistrate Spurius Lucretius and the wife of Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus. The marriage between Lucretia and Collatinus was depicted as the ideal Roman union, as both Lucretia and Collatinus were faithfully devoted to one another. According to Livy, Lucretia was an exemplar of \"beauty and purity,\" as well as Roman standards. While her husband was away at battle, Lucretia would stay at home and pray for his safe return. As with Livy, Dionysius' depiction of Lucretia separates her from the rest of Roman women in a story about the men returning home from a battle. The narrative begins with a bet between the sons of Tarquinius and their kinsmen, Brutus and Collatinus. The men fight over which of their wives best exemplified sophrosyne, an ideal of superb moral and intellectual character. The men return home to find the women socializing with each other, presumably in conversation. By contrast, they find Lucretia home alone, working with her wool in silence. Because of her devotion to her husband, Roman writers Livy and Dionysius outline Lucretia as the role model for Roman girls.\nRape.\nAs the events of the story move rapidly, the date that Tarquin raped Lucretia is most likely the same year as the first of the \"fasti\". Dionysius of Halicarnassus sets this year \"at the beginning of the sixty-eighth Olympiad ... Isagoras being the annual archon at Athens\"; that is, 508/507 BC. According to Dionysius, Lucretia therefore died in 508 BC. This approximate date is met with consensus by other historians; however, the exact year is debatable within a range of about five years.\nWhile engaged in the siege of Ardea, Lucius Tarquinius Superbus, the last king of Rome, sent his son, Tarquin, on a military errand to Collatia. Tarquin was received with great hospitality at the governor's mansion, home of Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus, son of the king's cousin, Arruns Tarquinius, former governor of Collatia and first of the Tarquinii Collatini. Spurius Lucretius, father of Collatinus' wife Lucretia and prefect of Rome, made sure that the king's son was treated as a guest and a figure of his rank.\nIn a variant of the story, Tarquin and Collatinus, at a wine party on furlough, were debating the virtues of wives when Collatinus volunteered to settle the debate. In order to do so, he proposed riding to his home to observe Lucretia. Upon their arrival, she was weaving with her maids. The party awarded her the palm of victory and Collatinus invited them to stay, but for the time being they returned to camp.\nLater in the night, Tarquin entered Lucretia's bedroom, quietly avoiding the slaves who were sleeping at her door. When she awoke, he identified himself and offered her two choices: he would rape her and she would become his wife and future queen, or he would kill her and one of her slaves, place the bodies together, and claim he had caught her having adulterous sex (see sexuality in ancient Rome for Roman attitudes toward sex). In the alternative story, he returned from camp a few days later with one companion to take Collatinus up on his invitation to visit and was lodged in a guest bedroom. He entered Lucretia's room while she lay naked in her bed and started to wash her belly with water, which woke her up. Tarquin tried to convince Lucretia that she should be with him, using \"every argument likely to influence a female heart.\" However, Lucretia stood firm in her devotion to her husband, even when Tarquin threatened her life and honor, while ultimately raping her.\nSuicide.\n\"The account of Dionysius of Halicarnassus\".\nIn Dionysius of Halicarnassus' account, the following day Lucretia dressed in black and went to her father's house in Rome and cast herself down in the supplicant's position (embracing the knees), weeping in front of her father and husband. She asked to explain herself and insisted on summoning witnesses before she told them about her rape. After disclosing that Tarquin had raped her, she asked them for vengeance, a plea that could not be ignored because she was speaking to the chief magistrate of Rome. While the men debated the proper course of action, Lucretia drew a concealed dagger and stabbed herself in the heart. She died in her father's arms, while the women present lamented her death. According to Dionysius, \"This dreadful scene struck the Romans who were present with so much horror and compassion that they all cried out with one voice that they would rather die a thousand deaths in defense of their liberty than suffer such outrages to be committed by the tyrants.\"\n\"The account of Livy\".\nIn Livy's version, Lucretia acts quickly and calmly, deciding not to go to Rome, but instead sends for her father and her husband, asking them to bring one friend each to act as a witness. Those selected were Publius Valerius Publicola from Rome and Lucius Junius Brutus from the camp at Ardea. Once the men found Lucretia in her room, her explanation of Tarquin\u2019s rape of her leads the men to state that \"it is the mind that sins, not the body, and where there has been no consent there is no guilt.\" After exacting an oath of vengeance while the men were discussing the matter\u2014\"Pledge me your solemn word that the adulterer shall not go unpunished\"\u2014 Lucretia drew a poignard and stabbed herself in her heart.\n\"The account of Dio\".\nIn Dio's version, Lucretia's request for revenge is: \"And, whereas I (for I am a woman) shall act in a manner which is fitting for me: you, if you are men, and if you care for your wives and children, exact vengeance on my behalf and free your selves and show the tyrants what sort of woman they outraged, and what sort of men were her menfolk!\" She follows her statement by plunging the dagger into her chest and promptly dying.\nIn this version, Collatinus and Brutus were encountered returning to Rome unaware of Tarquin's rape of Lucretia, were briefed, and were brought to the death scene. Brutus happened to be a politically motivated participant. By kinship he was a Tarquin on his mother's side, the son of Tarquinia, daughter of Lucius Tarquinius Priscus, the third king before last. He was a candidate for the throne if anything should happen to Superbus. By law, however, because he was a Junius on his father's side, he was thus not a Tarquin and therefore could later propose the exile of the Tarquins without fear for himself. Superbus had taken his inheritance and left him a pittance, keeping him at court for entertainment.\nCollatinus, seeing his wife dead, became distraught. He held her, kissed her, called her name and spoke to her. Dio stated that after seeing the hand of Destiny in these events, Brutus called the grieving party to order, explained that his simplicity had been a sham, and proposed that they drive the Tarquins from Rome. Grasping the bloody dagger, he swore by Mars and all the other gods that he would do everything in his power to overthrow the dominion of the Tarquinii. He stated that he would neither be reconciled to the tyrants himself, nor tolerate any who should be reconciled to them, but would look upon every man who thought otherwise as an enemy, and til his death would pursue with unrelenting hatred both the tyranny and its abettors; and if he should violate his oath, he prayed that he and his children might meet with the same end as Lucretia.\nHe passed the dagger around and each mourner swore the same oath by it. The primary sources of both Dio and Livy agree on this point: Livy's version is:\nBy this blood\u2014most pure before the outrage wrought by the king's son\u2014I swear, and you, O gods, I call to witness that I will drive hence Lucius Tarquinius Superbus, together with his cursed wife and his whole blood, with fire and sword and every means in my power, and I will not suffer them or anyone else to reign in Rome.\nRevolution.\nThe newly sworn revolutionary committee paraded the bloody corpse of Lucretia to the Roman Forum where it remained on display as a reminder of the dishonor committed. At the forum, the committee heard grievances against the Tarquins and began to enlist an army to abolish the monarchy. Brutus \"urged them to act as men and Romans and take up arms against their insolent foes\" in response to the death of a dutiful wife. The gates of Rome were blockaded by the new revolutionary soldiers and more were sent to guard Collatia. By now a crowd had gathered in the forum; the presence of the magistrates among the revolutionaries kept them in good order.\nBrutus was the Tribune of the Celeres, a minor office of some religious duties, which as a magistracy gave him the theoretical power to summon the curiae, an organization of patrician families used mainly to ratify the decrees of the king. Summoning them on the spot, he transformed the crowd into an authoritative legislative assembly and began to address them in one of the more noted and effective speeches of ancient Rome.\nHe began by revealing that his pose as a fool was a sham designed to protect him against an evil king. He levelled a number of charges against the king and his family: Tarquin\u2019s rape of Lucretia, whom everyone could see on the dais, the king's tyranny, the forced labor of the plebeians in the ditches and sewers of Rome. In his speech, he pointed out that Superbus had come to rule by the murder of Servius Tullius, his wife's father, next-to-the-last king of Rome. He \"solemnly invoked the gods as the avengers of murdered parents.\" He suggested that the king's wife, Tullia, was in fact in Rome and probably was a witness to the proceedings from her palace near the forum. Seeing herself the target of so much animosity, she fled from the palace in fear of her life and proceeded to the camp at Ardea.\nBrutus opened a debate on the form of government Rome ought to have, a debate at which many patricians spoke. In summation, he proposed the banishment of the Tarquins from all the territories of Rome and the appointment of an interrex to nominate new magistrates and conduct an election of ratification. They decided on a republican form of government with two consuls in place of a king executing the will of a patrician senate. This was a temporary measure until they could consider the details more carefully. Brutus renounced all right to the throne. In subsequent years, the powers of the king were divided among various elected magistracies.A final vote of the curiae carried the interim constitution. Spurius Lucretius was swiftly elected interrex; he was prefect of the city already. He proposed Brutus and Collatinus as the first two consuls and that choice was ratified by the curiae. Needing to acquire the assent of the population as a whole, they paraded Lucretia through the streets, summoning the plebeians to a legal assembly in the forum. Once there, they heard a constitutional speech by Brutus. It began:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In as much as Tarquinius neither obtained the sovereignty in accordance with our ancestral customs and laws, nor, since he obtained it\u2014in whatever manner he got it\u2014has he been exercising it in an honourable or kingly manner, but has surpassed in insolence and lawlessness all the tyrants the world ever saw, we patricians met together and resolved to deprive him of his power, a thing we ought to have done long ago, but are doing now when a favourable opportunity has offered. And we have called you together, plebeians, in order to declare our own decision and then ask for your assistance in achieving liberty for our country ...\nA general election was held and the vote won in favor of the republic. This ended the monarchy, and during these proceedings Lucretia was still displayed in the forum.\nThe constitutional consequences of this event ended the reign of the hereditary king; however, later emperors were absolute rulers in all but name. This constitutional tradition prevented both Julius Caesar and Octavian Augustus from accepting a crown; instead, they had to devise a confluence of several republican offices onto their persons in order to secure absolute power. Their successors both in Rome and in Constantinople adhered to this tradition in essence, and the office of German Holy Roman Emperor remained elective rather than hereditary\u2014up to its abolition in the Napoleonic Wars, over 2300 years later.\nIn literature and music.\nLucretia became an important embodiment of political and literary ideals for different authors throughout the ages, specifically because \"stories of sexual violence against women serve as foundational myths of Western culture.\"\nLivy's account in \"Ab Urbe Condita Libri\" (c. 25\u20138 BC) is the earliest surviving full historical treatment. In his account, her husband has boasted of the virtue of his wife to Tarquin and others. Livy contrasts the virtue of the Roman Lucretia, who remained in her room weaving, with the Etruscan ladies who feasted with friends. Ovid recounts the story of Lucretia in Book II of his \"Fasti\", published in 8 AD, concentrating on the bold over-reaching character of Tarquin. Later, St. Augustine made use of the figure of Lucretia in \"The City of God\" (published 426 AD) to defend the honour of Christian women who had been raped in the sack of Rome and had not committed suicide.\nThe story of Lucretia was a popular moral tale in the later Middle Ages. Lucretia appears to Dante in the section of Limbo, reserved for the nobles of Rome and other \"virtuous pagans\", in Canto IV of the \"Inferno\". Christine de Pizan used Lucretia, just as St. Augustine of Hippo did, in her \"City of Ladies\", defending a woman's sanctity.\nThe myth is recounted in Geoffrey Chaucer's \"The Legend of Good Women\", and it follows a similar storyline to Livy's. Lucretia calls for her father and husband, but Chaucer's tale also has her call for her mother and attendants as well, whereas Livy's has both her father and husband bring a friend as witness. The tale also deviates from Livy's account, as it begins with her husband coming home to surprise her, rather than the men placing a bet on the virtue of their wives.John Gower's \"Confessio Amantis\" (Book VII), and John Lydgate's \"Fall of Princes\" recount the myth of Lucretia. Gower's work is a collection of narrative poems. In Book VII, he tells the \"Tale of the Rape of Lucrece.\" Lydgate's work is a long poem containing stories and myths about various kings and princes who fell from power. It follows their lives from their rise into power and their fall into adversity. Lydgate's poem mentions the fall of Tarquin, the rape and suicide of Lucretia, and her speech prior to death.\nLucretia's rape and suicide is also the subject of William Shakespeare's 1594 long poem \"The Rape of Lucrece\", which draws extensively on Ovid's treatment of the story; he also mentions her in \"Titus Andronicus\", in \"As You Like It\", and in \"Twelfth Night,\" wherein Malvolio authenticates his fateful letter by spotting Olivia's Lucrece seal. Shakespeare also alludes to her in \"Macbeth\", and in \"Cymbeline\" he further refers to the story, though without mentioning Lucretia by name. Shakespeare's poem, based on the rape of Lucretia, draws on the beginning of the Livy's account of the incident. The poem begins with a bet between husbands about the virtuousness of their wives. Shakespeare draws on the idea of Lucretia as a moral agent, as Livy did, when he explores his characters' response to death and her unwillingness to yield to her rapist. A direct excerpt from Livy is used when Shakespeare prefaces his poem with a brief prose called \"Argument\". This is the internal deliberation Lucrece suffered from, following the rape.\nNiccol\u00f2 Machiavelli's comedy \"La Mandragola\" is loosely based on the Lucretia story.\nShe is also mentioned in the poem \"Appius and Virginia\" by John Webster and Thomas Heywood, which includes the following lines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Two fair, but ladies most infortunate,\nHave in their ruins rais'd declining Rome,\nLucretia and Virginia, both renown'd\nFor chastity.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThomas Heywood's play \"The Rape of Lucretia\" dates from 1607. The subject also enjoyed a revival in the mid twentieth century; Andr\u00e9 Obey's 1931 play \"Le Viol de Lucr\u00e8ce\" was adapted by librettist Ronald Duncan for \"The Rape of Lucretia\", a 1946 opera by Benjamin Britten which premiered at Glyndebourne. Ernst Krenek set Emmet Lavery's libretto \"Tarquin\" (1940), a version in a contemporary setting.\nJacques Gallot (died c.\u20091690) composed the allemandes \"Lucr\u00e8ce\" and \"Tarquin\" for baroque lute.\nIn Samuel Richardson's 1740 novel \"Pamela\", Mr. B. cites the story of Lucretia as a reason why Pamela ought not fear for her reputation, should he rape her. Pamela quickly sets him straight with a better reading of the story. Colonial Mexican poet Sor Juana In\u00e9s de la Cruz also mentions Lucretia in her poem \"Redondillas,\" a commentary on prostitution and who is to blame.\nIn 1769, doctor Juan Ramis wrote a tragedy in Menorca entitled \"Lucrecia\". The play is written in the Catalan language using a neoclassical style and is a significant work of the eighteenth century written in this language.\nIn 1932, the play \"Lucrece\" was produced on Broadway, starring legendary actress Katharine Cornell in the title part. It was mostly performed in pantomime.\nIn 1989, a song entitled \"The Rape of Lucretia\" was released by the Scottish musician Momus.\nIn Donna Leon's 2009 Venetian novel, \"About Face\", Franca Marinello refers to the tale of Tarquin and Lucrezia, as recounted in Ovid's \"Fasti\" (Book II, for February 24, \"Regifugium\") to explain her actions to Commissario Brunetti.\nAmerican thrash metal band Megadeth used the name Lucretia as the title for the sixth track on their 1990 release \"Rust In Peace\". The song doesn\u2019t have a direct connection to the story of Lucretia, rather Lucretia acting as a muse for Megadeth frontman Dave Mustaine reaching sobriety after a heavy drug and alcohol addiction during the 1980s.\nSubject in art.\nSince the Renaissance, the suicide of Lucretia has been an enduring subject for visual artists, including Titian, Rembrandt, D\u00fcrer, Raphael, Botticelli, J\u00f6rg Breu the Elder, Johannes Moreelse, Artemisia Gentileschi, Dami\u00e0 Campeny, Eduardo Rosales, Lucas Cranach the Elder, and others. Most commonly, either the moment of the rape is shown, or Lucretia is shown alone at the moment of her suicide. In either situation, her clothing is loosened or absent, while Tarquin is normally clothed.\nThe subject was one of a group showing women from legend or the Bible who were either powerless, such as Susanna and Verginia, or only able to escape their situations by suicide, such as Dido of Carthage and Lucretia. These formed a counterpoint to, or sub-group of, the set of subjects known as the Power of Women, showing female violence against, or domination of, men. These were often depicted by the same artists, and especially popular in Northern Renaissance art. The story of Esther lay somewhere between these two extremes.\nThe subject of Lucretia spinning with her ladies, is sometimes depicted, as in a series of four engravings of her story by Hendrick Goltzius, which also includes a banquet.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18508", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18508", "title": "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol", "text": "Network protocol supporting distributed directory information services\nThe Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP ) is an open, vendor-neutral, industry standard application protocol for accessing and maintaining distributed directory information services over an Internet Protocol (IP) network. Directory services play an important role in developing intranet and Internet applications by allowing the sharing of information about users, systems, networks, services, and applications throughout the network. As examples, directory services may provide any organized set of records, often with a hierarchical structure, such as a corporate email directory. Similarly, a telephone directory is a list of subscribers with an address and a phone number.\nLDAP is specified in a series of Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) publications known as Request for Comments (RFCs), using the description language ASN.1. The latest specification is Version 3, published as and a road map to the technical specifications is provided in .\nA common use of LDAP is to provide a central place to store usernames and passwords. This allows many different applications and services to connect to the LDAP server to validate users.\nLDAP is a simpler (\"lightweight\") subset of the standards in the X.500 series, particularly the X.511 Directory Access Protocol. Because of this relationship, LDAP is sometimes called X.500 Lite.\nHistory.\nTelecommunication companies' understanding of directory requirements were well developed after some 70 years of producing and managing telephone directories. These companies introduced the concept of directory services to information technology and computer networking, their input culminating in the comprehensive X.500 specification, a suite of protocols produced by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) in the 1980s.\nX.500 directory services were traditionally accessed via the X.511 Directory Access Protocol (DAP), which required the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) protocol stack. LDAP was originally intended to be a lightweight alternative protocol for accessing X.500 directory services through the simpler (and now widespread) TCP/IP protocol stack. This model of directory access was borrowed from the DIXIE and Directory Assistance Service protocols.\nThe protocol was originally created by Tim Howes of the University of Michigan, Steve Kille of Isode Limited, Colin Robbins of Nexor and Wengyik Yeong of Performance Systems International, circa 1993, as a successor to DIXIE and DAS. Mark Wahl of Critical Angle Inc., Tim Howes, and Steve Kille started work in 1996 on a new version of LDAP, LDAPv3, under the aegis of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). LDAPv3, first published in 1997, superseded LDAPv2 and added support for extensibility, integrated the Simple Authentication and Security Layer, and better aligned the protocol to the 1993 edition of X.500. Further development of the LDAPv3 specifications themselves and of numerous extensions adding features to LDAPv3 has come through the IETF.\nIn the early engineering stages of LDAP, it was known as \"Lightweight Directory Browsing Protocol\", or \"LDBP\". It was renamed with the expansion of the scope of the protocol beyond directory browsing and searching, to include directory update functions. It was given its \"Lightweight\" name because it was not as network intensive as its DAP predecessor and thus was more easily implemented over the Internet due to its relatively modest bandwidth usage.\nLDAP has influenced subsequent Internet protocols, including later versions of X.500, XML Enabled Directory (XED), Directory Service Markup Language (DSML), Service Provisioning Markup Language (SPML), and the Service Location Protocol (SLP). It is also used as the basis for Microsoft's Active Directory.\nProtocol overview.\nA client starts an LDAP session by connecting to an LDAP server, called a Directory System Agent (DSA), by default on TCP and UDP port 389, or on port 636 for LDAPS (LDAP over TLS/SSL, see below). The client then sends an operation request to the server, and a server sends responses in return. With some exceptions, the client does not need to wait for a response before sending the next request, and the server may send the responses in any order. All information is transmitted using Basic Encoding Rules (BER).\nThe client may request the following operations:\nIn addition the server may send \"Unsolicited Notifications\" that are not responses to any request, e.g. before the connection is timed out.\nA common alternative method of securing LDAP communication is using an SSL tunnel. The default port for LDAP over SSL is 636. The use of LDAP over SSL was common in LDAP Version 2 (LDAPv2) but it was never standardized in any formal specification. This usage has been deprecated along with LDAPv2, which was officially retired in 2003.\nDirectory structure.\nThe protocol provides an interface with directories that follow the 1993 edition of the X.500 model:\nA DN may change over the lifetime of the entry, for instance, when entries are moved within a tree. To reliably and unambiguously identify entries, a UUID might be provided in the set of the entry's \"operational attributes\".\nAn entry can look like this when represented in LDAP Data Interchange Format (LDIF), a plain text format (as opposed to a binary protocol such as LDAP itself):\ndn: cn=John Doe,dc=example,dc=com\ncn: John Doe\ngivenName: John\nsn: Doe\ntelephoneNumber: +1 888 555 6789\ntelephoneNumber: +1 888 555 1232\nmail: john@example.com\nmanager: cn=Barbara Doe,dc=example,dc=com\nobjectClass: inetOrgPerson\nobjectClass: organizationalPerson\nobjectClass: person\nobjectClass: top\n\"codice_3\" is the distinguished name of the entry; it is neither an attribute nor a part of the entry. \"codice_4\" is the entry's RDN (Relative Distinguished Name), and \"codice_5\" is the DN of the parent entry, where \"codice_6\" denotes 'Domain Component'. The other lines show the attributes in the entry. Attribute names are typically mnemonic strings, like \"codice_7\" for common name, \"codice_6\" for domain component, \"codice_9\" for email address, and \"codice_10\" for surname.\nA server holds a subtree starting from a specific entry, e.g. \"codice_5\" and its children. Servers may also hold references to other servers, so an attempt to access \"codice_12\" could return a \"referral\" or \"continuation reference\" to a server that holds that part of the directory tree. The client can then contact the other server. Some servers also support \"chaining\", which means the server contacts the other server and returns the results to the client.\nLDAP rarely defines any ordering: The server may return the values of an attribute, the attributes in an entry, and the entries found by a search operation in any order. This follows from the formal definitions - an entry is defined as a set of attributes, and an attribute is a set of values, and sets need not be ordered.\nOperations.\nAdd.\nThe ADD operation inserts a new entry into the directory-server database. If the distinguished name in the add request already exists in the directory, then the server will not add a duplicate entry but will set the result code in the add result to decimal 68, \"entryAlreadyExists\".\ndn: uid=user,ou=people,dc=example,dc=com\nchangetype: add\nobjectClass:top\nobjectClass:person\nuid: user\nsn: last-name\ncn: common-name\nuserPassword: password\nIn the above example, codice_13 must not exist, and codice_14 must exist.\nBind (authenticate).\nWhen an LDAP session is created, that is, when an LDAP client connects to the server, the authentication state of the session\nis set to anonymous. The BIND operation establishes the authentication state for a session.\nSimple BIND and SASL PLAIN can send the user's DN and password in plaintext, so the connections utilizing either Simple or SASL PLAIN\nshould be encrypted using Transport Layer Security (TLS). The server typically checks the password against the codice_15\nattribute in the named entry. Anonymous BIND (with empty DN and password) resets the connection to anonymous state.\nSASL (Simple Authentication and Security Layer) BIND provides authentication services through a\nwide range of mechanisms, e.g. Kerberos or the client certificate sent with TLS.\nBIND also sets the LDAP protocol version by sending a version number as an integer. If the client requests a version that the server does not support, the server must set the result code in the BIND response to the code for a protocol error. Normally clients should use LDAPv3, which is the\ndefault in the protocol but not always in LDAP libraries.\nBIND had to be the first operation in a session in LDAPv2, but is not required as of LDAPv3. In LDAPv3, each\nsuccessful BIND request changes the authentication state of the session and each unsuccessful BIND request resets the authentication state of the session.\nDelete.\nTo delete an entry, an LDAP client transmits a properly formed delete request to the server.\nSearch and compare.\nThe Search operation is used to both search for and read entries. Its parameters are:\nThe server returns the matching entries and potentially continuation references. These may be returned in any order. The final result will include the result code.\nThe Compare operation takes a DN, an attribute name and an attribute value, and checks if the named entry contains that attribute with that value.\nModify.\nThe MODIFY operation is used by LDAP clients to request that the LDAP server make changes to existing entries. Attempts to modify entries that do not exist will fail. MODIFY requests are subject to access controls as implemented by the server.\nThe MODIFY operation requires that the distinguished name (DN) of the entry be specified, and a sequence of changes. Each change in the sequence must be one of:\nLDIF example of adding a value to an attribute:\ndn: dc=example,dc=com\nchangetype: modify\nadd: cn\ncn: the-new-cn-value-to-be-added\nTo replace the value of an existing attribute, use the codice_27 keyword. If the attribute is multi-valued, the client must specify the value of the attribute to update.\nTo delete an attribute from an entry, use the keyword codice_28 and the changetype designator codice_29. If the attribute is multi-valued, the client must specify the value of the attribute to delete.\nThere is also a Modify-Increment extension which allows an incrementable attribute value to be incremented by a specified amount. The following example using LDIF increments codice_30 by codice_31:\ndn: uid=user.0,ou=people,dc=example,dc=com\nchangetype: modify\nincrement: employeeNumber\nemployeeNumber: 5\nWhen LDAP servers are in a replicated topology, LDAP clients should consider using the post-read control to verify updates instead of a search after an update. The post-read control is designed so that applications need not issue a search request after an update \u2013 it is bad form to retrieve an entry for the sole purpose of checking that an update worked because of the replication eventual consistency model. An LDAP client should not assume that it connects to the same directory server for each request because architects may have placed load-balancers or LDAP proxies or both between LDAP clients and servers.\nModify DN.\nModify DN (move/rename entry) takes the new RDN (Relative Distinguished Name), optionally the new parent's DN, and a flag that indicates whether to delete the value(s) in the entry that match the old RDN. The server may support renaming of entire directory subtrees.\nAn update operation is atomic: Other operations will see either the new entry or the old one. On the other hand, LDAP does not define transactions of multiple operations: If you read an entry and then modify it, another client may have updated the entry in the meantime. Servers may implement extensions that support this, though.\nExtended operations.\nThe Extended Operation is a generic LDAP operation that can define new operations that were not part of the original protocol specification. StartTLS is one of the most significant extensions. Other examples include Cancel and Password Modify.\nStartTLS.\nThe StartTLS operation establishes Transport Layer Security (the descendant of SSL) on the connection. It can provide data confidentiality (to protect data from being observed by third parties) and/or data integrity protection (which protects the data from tampering). During TLS negotiation the server sends its X.509 certificate to prove its identity. The client may also send a certificate to prove its identity. After doing so, the client may then use SASL/EXTERNAL. By using the SASL/EXTERNAL, the client requests the server derive its identity from credentials provided at a lower level (such as TLS). Though technically the server may use any identity information established at any lower level, typically the server will use the identity information established by TLS.\nServers also often support the non-standard \"LDAPS\" (\"Secure LDAP\", commonly known as \"LDAP over SSL\") protocol on a separate port, by default 636. LDAPS differs from LDAP in two ways:\n1) upon connect, the client and server establish TLS before any LDAP messages are transferred (without a StartTLS operation) and\n2) the LDAPS connection must be closed upon TLS closure.\nSome \"LDAPS\" client libraries only encrypt communication; they do not check the host name against the name in the supplied certificate.\nAbandon.\nThe Abandon operation requests that the server abort an operation named by a message ID. The server need not honor the request. Neither Abandon nor a successfully abandoned operation send a response. A similar Cancel extended operation does send responses, but not all implementations support this.\nUnbind.\nThe Unbind operation abandons any outstanding operations and closes the connection. It has no response. The name is of historical origin, and is \"not\" the opposite of the Bind operation.\nClients can abort a session by simply closing the connection, but they should use Unbind. Unbind allows the server to gracefully close the connection and free resources that it would otherwise keep for some time until discovering the client had abandoned the connection. It also instructs the server to cancel operations that can be canceled, and to not send responses for operations that cannot be canceled.\nURI scheme.\nAn LDAP uniform resource identifier (URI) scheme exists, which clients support in varying degrees, and servers return in referrals and continuation references (see RFC 4516):\n ldap://host:port/DN?attributes?scope?filter?extensions\nMost of the components described below are optional.\nFor example, \"codice_33\" refers to all user attributes in John Doe's entry in codice_34, while \"codice_35\" searches for the entry in the default server (note the triple slash, omitting the host, and the double question mark, omitting the attributes). As in other URLs, special characters must be percent-encoded.\nThere is a similar non-standard codice_36 URI scheme for LDAP over SSL. This should not be confused with LDAP with TLS, which is achieved using the StartTLS operation using the standard codice_37 scheme.\nSchema.\nThe contents of the entries in a subtree are governed by a directory schema, a set of definitions and constraints concerning the structure of the directory information tree (DIT).\nThe schema of a Directory Server defines a set of rules that govern the kinds of information that the server can hold. It has a number of elements, including:\nAttributes are the elements responsible for storing information in a directory, and the schema defines the rules for which attributes may be used in an entry, the kinds of values that those attributes may have, and how clients may interact with those values.\nClients may learn about the schema elements that the server supports by retrieving an appropriate subschema subentry.\nThe schema defines \"object classes\". Each entry must have an objectClass attribute, containing named classes defined in the schema. The schema definition of the classes of an entry defines what kind of object the entry may represent - e.g. a person, organization or domain. The object class definitions also define the list of attributes that must contain values and the list of attributes which may contain values.\nFor example, an entry representing a person might belong to the classes \"top\" and \"person\". Membership in the \"person\" class would require the entry to contain the \"sn\" and \"cn\" attributes, and allow the entry also to contain \"userPassword\", \"telephoneNumber\", and other attributes. Since entries may have multiple ObjectClasses values, each entry has a complex of optional and mandatory attribute sets formed from the union of the object classes it represents. ObjectClasses can be inherited, and a single entry can have multiple ObjectClasses values that define the available and required attributes of the entry itself. A parallel to the schema of an objectClass is a class definition and an instance in Object-oriented programming, representing LDAP objectClass and LDAP entry, respectively.\nDirectory servers may publish the directory schema controlling an entry at a base DN given by the entry's subschemaSubentry operational attribute. (An \"operational attribute\" describes operation of the directory rather than user information and is only returned from a search when it is explicitly requested.)\nServer administrators can add additional schema entries in addition to the provided schema elements. A schema for representing individual people within organizations is termed a white pages schema.\nSecurity vulnerabilities.\nLDAP injection.\nLDAP injection is a computer security attack similar to SQL injection that can occur when an application implementing LDAP fails to properly sanitize user input.\nAs an example, consider an LDAP search query that allows the user to search people by their name, the codice_7 attribute. A malicious user might replace a valid name with the codice_39 character, which matches any object with the codice_7 attribute. If the application is vulnerable to this attack, it may display attributes that the searching user is not authorized to see.\nLDAP injection vulnerabilities are mitigated by escaping variables. Escaping is accomplished with two distinct encoding functions \u2014 one for Distinguished Names and one for search strings \u2014 because they each allow different special characters. Some web frameworks come with escaping built in.\nMan-in-the-middle attacks.\nLike other parts of TCP/IP, LDAP was originally created without encryption. This makes it vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks, in which attackers intercept credentials during the bind process. This attack can be mitigated by requiring LDAPS or StartLDAP during every bind involving credentials.\nVariations.\nMuch of the server operation is left to the implementor or administrator to decide. Accordingly, servers may be set up to support a wide variety of scenarios.\nFor example, data storage in the server is not specified - the server may use flat files, databases, or just be a gateway to some other server. Access control is not standardized, though there are commonly used models. Users' passwords may be stored in their entries or elsewhere. The server may refuse to perform operations when it wishes, and impose various limits.\nMost parts of LDAP are extensible. Examples: One can define new operations. \"Controls\" may modify requests and responses, e.g. to request sorted search results. New search scopes and Bind methods can be defined. Attributes can have \"options\" that may modify their semantics.\nOther data models.\nAs LDAP has gained momentum, vendors have provided it as an access protocol to other services. The implementation then recasts the data to mimic the LDAP/X.500 model, but how closely this model is followed varies. For example, there is software to access SQL databases through LDAP, even though LDAP does not readily lend itself to this. X.500 servers may support LDAP as well.\nSimilarly, data previously held in other types of data stores are sometimes moved to LDAP directories. For example, Unix user and group information can be stored in LDAP and accessed via PAM and NSS modules. LDAP is often used by other services for authentication and/or authorization (what actions a given already-authenticated user can do on what service). For example, in Active Directory Kerberos is used in the authentication step, while LDAP is used in the authorization step.\nAn example of such data model is the GLUE Schema, which is used in a distributed information system based on LDAP that enable users, applications and services to discover which services exist in a Grid infrastructure and further information about their structure and state.\nUsage.\nAn LDAP server may return referrals to other servers for requests that it cannot fulfill itself. This requires a naming structure for LDAP entries so one can find a server holding a given distinguished name (DN), a concept defined in the X.500 Directory and also used in LDAP. Another way of locating LDAP servers for an organization is a DNS server record (SRV).\nAn organization with the domain example.org may use the top level LDAP DN codice_41 (where \"dc\" means domain component). If the LDAP server is also named ldap.example.org, the organization's top level LDAP URL becomes codice_42.\nPrimarily two common styles of naming are used in both X.500 [2008] and LDAPv3. These are documented in the ITU specifications and IETF RFCs. The original form takes the top level object as the country object, such as codice_43, codice_44. The domain component model uses the model described above. An example of country based naming could be codice_45, or in the US: codice_46.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18511", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18511", "title": "Linux operating system", "text": ""}
{"id": "18514", "revid": "15915645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18514", "title": "Louis I the Great of Hungary", "text": ""}
{"id": "18521", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18521", "title": "Latina", "text": "Latina or Latinas most often refers to:\nLatina and Latinas may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18522", "revid": "5688440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18522", "title": "Latino (demonym)", "text": "Word used in the United States for people with cultural ties to Latin America\nLatino (masculine) and Latina (feminine) as a noun refer to people living in the United States who have cultural ties to Latin America. As an adjective, the terms refer to things as having ties with Latin America. The term \"Hispanic\" usually includes Spaniards, whereas \"Latino\" as a noun often does not. Sometimes, \"Latino/Latina\" may include Brazilians, Spaniards and even some European romanophones such as Portuguese (a usage sometimes found in bilingual subgroups within the U.S., borrowing from how the word is defined in Spanish), but \"Hispanic\" does not include any of those other than Spaniards.\nUsage of the term is mostly limited to the United States and Canada. Latin American people usually refer to themselves by national origin and rarely as \"Latino\" as the region does not have a cohesive identity. Because of this, many Latin American scholars, journalists, and Indigenous-rights organizations have objected to the mass-media use of the word to refer to all people of Latin American background.\nOrigins.\nThe terms \"Latino\" and \"Latina\" originated in Ancient Rome. In the English language, the term \"Latino\" is a loan word from American Spanish. Its origin is generally given as a shortening of , Spanish for 'Latin American'. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" traces its usage to 1946.\n\"Latino\" has its origins in the French term , coined in the mid-19th century during the Second Mexican Empire to identify areas of the Americas colonized by Romance-speaking people and used to show affinity with French allies during the Mexican Empire, also termed the Mexican intervention.\nBy the late 1850s, with the loss of California to Anglo-Americans or the United States, owing to the Mexican\u2013American War, the term \"latino\" was being used in local California newspapers such as \"El Clamor Publico\" by Californios writing about \"America latina\" and \"Latinoamerica\", and identifying themselves as \"latinos\" as the abbreviated term for their \"hemispheric membership in \".\nUsage.\nCommunity usage.\nBoth \"Hispanic\" and \"Latino\" are generally used to denote people living in the United States. Marcelo M. Su\u00e1rez-Orozco and Mariela P\u00e1ez write that \"Outside the United States, we don't speak of Latinos; we speak of Mexicans, Cubans, Puerto Ricans, and so forth.\" In Latin America, the term is not a common endonym and as a demonym is restricted to the Latin American-descended population of the United States, but this is not always the case. The exception is Spain where is a common demonym for immigrants from Latin America.\nSociologist Salvador Vidal\u2011Ortiz and literary scholar Juliana Mart\u00ednez write that after the U.S. census introduced \"Hispanic\" in the 1970s, \"Latino\" emerged as \"a term of resistance to the explicit colonial relations that 'Hispanic' sets between Spain and countries in Latin America\".387\nGovernmental usage.\nThe U.S. government Office of Management and Budget (OMB) has defined \"Hispanic or Latino\" people as \"a person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race\". The U.S. census uses the ethnonym \"Hispanic or Latino\" to refer to \"a person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin regardless of race\". The Census Bureau also explains that \"[o]rigin can be viewed as the heritage, nationality group, lineage, or country of birth of the person or the person's ancestors before their arrival in the United States. People who identify their origin as Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish may be of any race.\" Hence the U.S. census and the OMB are using the terms differently. The U.S. census and the OMB use the terms interchangeably, where both terms are synonyms. According to a study by the Pew Research Center, the majority (51%) of Hispanic and Latino Americans prefer to identify with their families' country of origin, while only 24% prefer the term \"Hispanic\" or \"Latino\".\nStyle guides.\nThe \"AP Stylebook\" recommends usage of \"Latino\" for persons of Spanish-speaking ancestry, as well as persons \"from \u2013 or whose ancestors were from \u2013 ... Latin America, including Brazilians\". However, in the recent past, the term \"Latinos\" was also applied to people from the Caribbean region, but those from former French, Dutch and British colonies are excluded.\nContrast with \"Hispanic\".\nWhereas \"Latino\" designates someone with roots in Latin America, the term \"Hispanic\" in contrast is a demonym that includes Spaniards and other speakers of the Spanish language.\nThe term \"Latino\" was officially adopted in 1997 by the United States Government in the ethnonym \"Hispanic or Latino\", which replaced the single term \"Hispanic\": \"Because regional usage of the terms differs \u2013 Hispanic is commonly used in the eastern portion of the United States, whereas Latino is commonly used in the western portion.\"\nU.S. official use of the term \"Hispanic\" has its origins in the 1970 census. The Census Bureau attempted to identify all Hispanics by use of the following criteria in sampled sets:\n* Spanish speakers and persons belonging to a household where Spanish was spoken\n* Persons with Spanish heritage by birth location\n* Persons who self-identify with Latin America, excluding Brazil, Haiti and French Guiana\nNeither \"Hispanic\" nor \"Latino\" refers to a race, as a person of Latino or Hispanic ethnicity can be of any race. Like non-Latinos, a Latino can be of any race or combination of races: White, Black or African American, Asian American, Native American or Alaskan Native, Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander American, or two or more ethnicities. While Brazilian Americans are not included with Hispanics and Latinos in the government's census population reports, any Brazilian American can report as being Hispanic or Latino since Hispanic or Latino origin is, like race or ethnicity, a matter of self-identification.\nOther federal and local government agencies and non-profit organizations include Brazilians and Portuguese in their definition of \"Hispanic\". The U.S. Department of Transportation defines \"Hispanic Americans\" as: \"persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Dominican, Central or South American, or other Spanish or Portuguese culture or origin, regardless of race\". This definition has been adopted by the Small Business Administration as well as by many federal, state, and municipal agencies for the purposes of awarding government contracts to minority owned businesses. \nThe Congressional Hispanic Caucus and the Congressional Hispanic Conference include representatives of Spanish and Portuguese descent. The Hispanic Society of America is dedicated to the study of the arts and cultures of Spain, Portugal, and Latin America. Each year since 1997 the International Latino Book Award is conferred to the best achievements in Spanish or Portuguese literature at BookExpo America, the largest publishing trade show in the United States. The Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities, which proclaims itself the champion of Hispanic success in higher education, has member institutions in the U.S., Puerto Rico, Latin America, Spain, and Portugal.\nThe \"American Heritage Dictionary\" maintains a distinction between the terms \"Hispanic\" and \"Latino\":\nThough often used interchangeably in American English, \"Hispanic\" and \"Latino\" are not identical terms, and in certain contexts the choice between them can be significant. \"Hispanic\", from the Latin word for \"Spain,\" has the broader reference, potentially encompassing all Spanish-speaking peoples in both hemispheres and emphasizing the common denominator of language among communities that sometimes have little else in common. \"Latino\"\u2014which in Spanish and Portuguese means \"Latin\" but which as an English word is probably a shortening of the Spanish word \"latinoamericano\"\u2014refers more exclusively to persons or communities of Latin American origin. Of the two, only \"Hispanic\" can be used in referring to Spain and its history and culture; a native of Spain residing in the United States is a \"Hispanic\", not a \"Latino\", and one cannot substitute \"Latino\" in the phrase \"the Hispanic influence on native Mexican cultures\" without garbling the meaning. In practice, however, this distinction is of little significance when referring to residents of the United States, most of whom are of Latin American origin and can theoretically be called by either word.\nThe \"AP Stylebook\" also distinguishes between the terms \"Hispanic\" and \"Latino\". The Stylebook limits the term \"Hispanic\" to people \"from \u2013 or whose ancestors were from \u2013 a Spanish-speaking land or culture\". It provides a more expansive definition, however, of the term \"Latino\". The Stylebook definition of Latino includes not only people of Spanish-speaking ancestry, but also more generally includes persons \"from \u2013 or whose ancestors were from \u2013 . . . Latin America\". The Stylebook specifically lists \"Brazilian\" as an example of a group which can be considered Latino.\nThere were 28 categories tabulated in the 2000 United States census: Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Dominican, Central American: Costa Rican, Guatemalan, Honduran, Nicaraguan, Panamanian, Salvadoran, Other Central American; South American: Argentinian, Bolivian, Chilean, Colombian, Ecuadorian, Paraguayan, Peruvian, Uruguayan, Venezuelan, Other South American; Other Hispanic or Latino: Spaniard, Spanish, Spanish American, All other Hispanic or Latino.\nDebates.\nThe use of the term \"Latino\", despite its increasing popularity, is still highly debated among those who are called by the name. Since the adoption of the term by the U.S. Census Bureau and its subsequent widespread use, there have been several controversies and disagreements, especially in the United States and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and other Spanish-speaking countries. Many Latin American scholars, journalists, and indigenous-rights organizations have objected to the mass-media use of the word \"Latino\", pointing out that such ethnonyms are optional and should be used only to describe people involved in the practices, ideologies, and identity politics of their supporters. Journalist Rodolfo Acu\u00f1a writes:\nWhen and why the Latino identity came about is a more involved story. Essentially, politicians, the media, and marketers find it convenient to deal with the different U.S. Spanish-speaking people under one umbrella. However, many people with Spanish surnames contest the term \"Latino\". They claim it is misleading because no Latino or Hispanic nationality exists since no Latino state exists, so generalizing the term \"Latino\" slights the various national identities included under the umbrella.\nGender-neutral forms.\nAttempts have been made to introduce a gender-neutral term by changing the ending of \"Latino\", as in the terms \"Latin@\", \"Latine\", \"Latino/a\", and \"Latinx\". Both supporters and opponents of \"Latinx\" have cited linguistic imperialism as a reason for supporting or opposing the use of the term.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18523", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18523", "title": "Latin American", "text": ""}
