{"id": "11955", "revid": "12608568", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11955", "title": "George H. W. Bush", "text": "President of the United States from 1989 to 1993\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGeorge Herbert Walker Bush (June 12, 1924 \u2013 November 30, 2018) was the 41st president of the United States, serving from 1989 to 1993. A member of the Republican Party, he also served as the 43rd vice president under President Ronald Reagan from 1981 to 1989 and previously in various other federal positions.\nBorn into a wealthy, established family in Milton, Massachusetts, Bush was raised in Greenwich, Connecticut. He attended Phillips Academy and served as a pilot in the United States Navy Reserve during World War II before graduating from Yale and moving to West Texas, where he established oil company Zapata Corporation. Following an unsuccessful run for the United States Senate in 1964, he was elected to represent Texas's 7th congressional district in 1966. President Richard Nixon appointed Bush as the ambassador to the United Nations in 1971 and as chairman of the Republican National Committee in 1973. President Gerald Ford appointed him as the chief of the Liaison Office to the People's Republic of China in 1974 and as the director of central intelligence in 1976. Bush ran for president in 1980 but was defeated in the Republican presidential primaries by Reagan, who then selected Bush as his vice presidential running mate. In the 1988 presidential election, Bush defeated Democrat Michael Dukakis.\nForeign policy drove Bush's presidency as he navigated the final years of the Cold War and played a key role in the reunification of Germany. He presided over the invasion of Panama and the Gulf War, ending the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait in the latter conflict. Though the agreement was not ratified until after he left office, Bush negotiated and signed the North American Free Trade Agreement, which created a trade bloc consisting of the United States, Canada and Mexico. Domestically, Bush reneged on by enacting legislation to raise taxes that he justified as necessary to reducing the budget deficit. He championed and signed three pieces of bipartisan legislation in 1990, the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Immigration Act and the Clean Air Act Amendments. He also appointed David Souter and Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court. Bush lost the 1992 presidential election to Democrat Bill Clinton following an economic recession, his turnaround on his tax promise, and the decreased emphasis of foreign policy in a post\u2013Cold War political climate.\nAfter leaving office in 1993, Bush was active in humanitarian activities, often working alongside Clinton. With the victory of his eldest son, George W. Bush, in the 2000 and 2004 presidential elections, the two became the second father\u2013son pair to serve as the nation's president, following John Adams and John Quincy Adams. His second son, Jeb Bush, unsuccessfully sought the Republican presidential nomination in the 2016 primaries. Historians generally rank Bush as an above-average president.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and education (1924\u20131948).\nGeorge Herbert Walker Bush was born on June 12, 1924, in Milton, Massachusetts. He was the second son of Prescott Bush and Dorothy (n\u00e9e Walker) Bush, and a younger brother of Prescott Bush Jr. His paternal grandfather, Samuel P. Bush, worked as an executive for a railroad parts company in Columbus, Ohio, while his maternal grandfather and namesake, George Herbert Walker, led Wall Street investment bank W. A. Harriman &amp; Co. Walker was known as \"Pop\", and young Bush was called \"Poppy\" as a tribute to him.\nThe Bush family moved to Greenwich, Connecticut, in 1925, and Prescott took a position with W. A. Harriman &amp; Co., which later merged into Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Co. the following year. Bush spent most of his childhood in Greenwich, at the family vacation home in Kennebunkport, Maine, or at his maternal grandparents' plantation in South Carolina.\nBecause of the family's wealth, Bush was largely unaffected by the Great Depression. He attended Greenwich Country Day School from 1929 to 1937 and Phillips Academy, an elite private academy in Massachusetts, from 1937 to 1942. While at Phillips Academy, he served as president of the senior class, secretary of the student council, president of the community fund-raising group, a member of the editorial board of the school newspaper, and captain of the varsity baseball and soccer teams.\nWorld War II.\nOn his 18th birthday, immediately after graduating from Phillips Academy, he enlisted in the United States Navy as a naval aviator. After a period of training, he was commissioned as an ensign in the Naval Reserve at Naval Air Station Corpus Christi on June 9, 1943, becoming one of the youngest pilots in the Navy. Beginning in 1944, Bush served in the Pacific theater, where he flew a Grumman TBM Avenger, a torpedo bomber capable of taking off from aircraft carriers. His squadron was assigned to the as a member of Air Group 51, where his lanky physique earned him the nickname \"Skin\".\nBush flew his first combat mission in May 1944, bombing Japanese-held Wake Island, and was promoted to lieutenant (junior grade) on August 1, 1944. During an attack on a Japanese installation in Chichijima, Bush's aircraft successfully attacked several targets but was downed by enemy fire. Though both of Bush's fellow crew members died, Bush successfully bailed out from the aircraft and was rescued by the submarine . Several of the aviators shot down during the attack were captured and executed, and their livers were cannibalized by their captors. Bush's survival after such a close brush with death shaped him profoundly, leading him to ask, \"Why had I been spared and what did God have for me?\" He was later awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for his role in the mission.\nBush returned to \"San Jacinto\" in November 1944, participating in operations in the Philippines. In early 1945, he was assigned to a new combat squadron, VT-153, where he trained to participate in an invasion of mainland Japan. Between March and May 1945, he trained in Auburn, Maine, where he and Barbara lived in a small apartment. On September 2, 1945, before any invasion took place, Japan formally surrendered following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Bush was released from active duty that same month but was not formally discharged from the Navy until October 1955, when he had reached the rank of lieutenant. By the end of his period of active service, Bush had flown 58 missions, completed 128 carrier landings, and recorded 1228 hours of flight time.\nMarriage.\nBush met Barbara Pierce at a Christmas dance in Greenwich in December 1941, and, after a period of courtship, they became engaged in December 1943. While Bush was on leave from the Navy, they married in Rye, New York, on January 6, 1945. The Bushes enjoyed a strong marriage, and Barbara would later be a popular First Lady, seen by many as \"a kind of national grandmother\". They had six children: George W. (b. 1946), Robin (1949\u20131953), Jeb (b. 1953), Neil (b. 1955), Marvin (b. 1956), and Dorothy (b. 1959). Their oldest daughter, Robin, died of leukemia in 1953.\nCollege years.\nBush enrolled at Yale College, where he took part in an accelerated program that enabled him to graduate in two and a half years rather than the usual four. He was a member of the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity and was elected its president. He also captained the Yale baseball team and played in the first two College World Series as a left-handed first baseman. Like his father, he was a member of the Yale cheerleading squad and was initiated into the Skull and Bones secret society. He graduated Phi Beta Kappa in 1948 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics.\nBusiness career (1948\u20131963).\nAfter graduating from Yale, Bush moved his young family to West Texas. Biographer Jon Meacham writes that Bush's relocation to Texas allowed him to move out of the \"daily shadow of his Wall Street father and Grandfather Walker, two dominant figures in the financial world,\" but would still allow Bush to \"call on their connections if he needed to raise capital.\" His first position in Texas was an oil field equipment salesman for Dresser Industries, which was led by family friend Neil Mallon. While working for Dresser, Bush lived in various places with his family: Odessa, Texas; Ventura, Bakersfield and Compton, California; and Midland, Texas. In 1952, he volunteered for the successful presidential campaign of Republican candidate Dwight D. Eisenhower. That same year, his father won election to represent Connecticut in the United States Senate as a member of the Republican Party.\nWith support from Mallon and Bush's uncle, George Herbert Walker Jr., Bush and John Overbey launched the Bush-Overbey Oil Development Company in 1951. In 1953, he co-founded the Zapata Petroleum Corporation, an oil company that drilled in the Permian Basin in Texas. In 1954, he was named president of the Zapata Offshore Company, a subsidiary which specialized in offshore drilling. Shortly after the subsidiary became independent in 1959, Bush moved the company and his family from Midland to Houston. There, he befriended James Baker, a prominent attorney who later became an important political ally. Bush remained involved with Zapata until the mid-1960s, when he sold his stock in the company for approximately $1\u00a0million.\nIn 1988, \"The Nation\" published an article alleging that Bush worked as an operative of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) during the 1960s; Bush denied this claim.\nEarly political career (1963\u20131971).\nEntry into politics.\nBy the early 1960s, Bush was widely regarded as an appealing political candidate, and some leading Democrats attempted to convince Bush to become a Democrat. He declined to leave the Republican Party, later citing his belief that the national Democratic Party favored \"big, centralized government\". The Democratic Party had historically dominated Texas, but Republicans scored their first major victory in the state with John G. Tower's victory in a 1961 special election to the United States Senate. Motivated by Tower's victory and hoping to prevent the far-right John Birch Society from coming to power, Bush ran for the chairmanship of the Harris County Republican Party, winning election in February 1963. Like most other Texas Republicans, Bush supported conservative Senator Barry Goldwater over the more centrist Nelson Rockefeller in the 1964 Republican Party presidential primaries.\nIn 1964, Bush sought to unseat liberal Democrat Ralph W. Yarborough in Texas's U.S. Senate election. Bolstered by superior fundraising, Bush won the Republican primary by defeating former gubernatorial nominee Jack Cox in a run-off election. In the general election, Bush attacked Yarborough's vote for the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which banned racial and gender discrimination in public institutions and many privately owned businesses. Bush argued that the act unconstitutionally expanded the federal government's powers, but he was privately uncomfortable with the racial politics of opposing the act. He lost the election 56 percent to 44 percent, though he did run well ahead of Barry Goldwater, the Republican presidential nominee. Despite the loss, \"The New York Times\" reported that Bush was \"rated by political friend and foe alike as the Republicans' best prospect in Texas because of his attractive personal qualities and the strong campaign he put up for the Senate\".\nU.S. House of Representatives.\nIn 1966, Bush ran for the United States House of Representatives in Texas's 7th congressional district, a newly redistricted seat in the Greater Houston area. Initial polling showed him trailing his Democratic opponent, Harris County District Attorney Frank Briscoe, but he ultimately won the race with 57 percent of the vote. To woo potential candidates in the South and Southwest, House Republicans secured Bush an appointment to the powerful United States House Committee on Ways and Means, making Bush the first freshman to serve on the committee since 1904. His voting record in the House was generally conservative. He supported the Nixon administration's Vietnam policies but broke with Republicans on the issue of birth control, which he supported. He also voted for the Civil Rights Act of 1968, although it was generally unpopular in his district. In 1968, Bush joined several other Republicans in issuing the party's Response to the State of the Union address; Bush's part of the address focused on a call for fiscal responsibility.\nThough most other Texas Republicans supported Ronald Reagan in the 1968 Republican Party presidential primaries, Bush endorsed Richard Nixon, who went on to win the party's nomination. Nixon considered selecting Bush as his running mate in the 1968 presidential election, but he ultimately chose Spiro Agnew instead. Bush won re-election to the House unopposed, while Nixon defeated Hubert Humphrey in the presidential election. In 1970, with President Nixon's support, Bush gave up his seat in the House to run for the Senate against Yarborough. Bush easily won the Republican primary, but Yarborough was defeated by the more centrist Lloyd Bentsen in the Democratic primary. Ultimately, Bentsen defeated Bush, taking 53.5 percent of the vote.\nNixon and Ford administrations (1971\u20131977).\nAmbassador to the United Nations.\nAfter the 1970 Senate election, Bush accepted a position as a senior adviser to the president, but he convinced Nixon to instead appoint him as the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations. The position represented Bush's first foray into foreign policy, as well as his first major experiences with the Soviet Union and China, the two major U.S. rivals in the Cold War. During Bush's tenure, the Nixon administration pursued a policy of d\u00e9tente, seeking to ease tensions with both the Soviet Union and China. Bush's ambassadorship was marked by a defeat on the China question, as the United Nations General Assembly voted, in Resolution 2758, to expel the Republic of China and replace it with the People's Republic of China in October 1971. In the 1971 crisis in Pakistan, Bush supported an Indian motion at the UN General Assembly to condemn the Pakistani government of Yahya Khan for waging genocide in East Pakistan (modern Bangladesh), referring to the \"tradition which we have supported that the human rights question transcended domestic jurisdiction and should be freely debated\". Bush's support for India at the UN put him into conflict with Nixon who was supporting Pakistan, partly because Yahya Khan was a useful intermediary in his attempts to reach out to China and partly because the president was fond of Yahya Khan. In 1972, during a controversy over whether the United States was intentionally bombing civilian hydrological infrastructure in Vietnam, Bush was sent by Nixon to convince Kurt Waldheim of the United States' position. Bush, who was himself a fighter pilot in the Second World War, was \"unwilling to press his assigned case that the dikes had been spared,\" and told reporters \"I think that the best thing I can do on the subject is shut up.\"\nChairman of the Republican National Committee.\nAfter Nixon won a landslide victory in the 1972 presidential election, he appointed Bush as chair of the Republican National Committee (RNC). In that position, he was charged with fundraising, candidate recruitment, and making appearances on behalf of the party in the media.\nWhen Agnew was being investigated for corruption, Bush assisted, at the request of Nixon and Agnew, in pressuring John Glenn Beall Jr., the U.S. Senator from Maryland, to force his brother, George Beall the U.S. Attorney in Maryland, to shut down the investigation into Agnew. Attorney Beall ignored the pressure.\nDuring Bush's tenure at the RNC, the Watergate scandal emerged into public view; the scandal originated from the June 1972 break-in of the Democratic National Committee but also involved later efforts to cover up the break-in by Nixon and other members of the White House. Bush initially defended Nixon steadfastly, but as Nixon's complicity became clear he focused more on defending the Republican Party.\nFollowing the resignation of Vice President Agnew in 1973 for a scandal unrelated to Watergate, Bush was considered for the position of vice president, but the appointment instead went to Gerald Ford. After the public release of an audio recording that confirmed that Nixon had plotted to use the CIA to cover up the Watergate break-in, Bush joined other party leaders in urging Nixon to resign. When Nixon resigned on August 9, 1974, Bush noted in his diary that \"There was an aura of sadness, like somebody died... The [resignation] speech was vintage Nixon\u2014a kick or two at the press\u2014enormous strains. One couldn't help but look at the family and the whole thing and think of his accomplishments and then think of the shame... [President Gerald Ford's swearing-in offered] indeed a new spirit, a new lift.\"\nHead of U.S. Liaison Office in China.\nUpon his ascension to the presidency, Ford strongly considered Bush, Donald Rumsfeld, and Nelson Rockefeller for the vacant position of vice president. Ford ultimately chose Nelson Rockefeller, partly because of the publication of a news report claiming that Bush's 1970 campaign had benefited from a secret fund set up by Nixon; Bush was later cleared of any suspicion by a special prosecutor. Bush accepted appointment as Chief of the U.S. Liaison Office in the People's Republic of China, making him the de facto ambassador to China. According to biographer Jon Meacham, Bush's time in China convinced him that American engagement abroad was needed to ensure global stability and that the United States \"needed to be visible but not pushy, muscular but not domineering\".\nDirector of Central Intelligence.\nIn January 1976, Ford brought Bush back to Washington to become the director of central intelligence (DCI), placing him in charge of the CIA. In the aftermath of the Watergate scandal and the Vietnam War, the CIA's reputation had been damaged for its role in various covert operations. Bush was tasked with restoring the agency's morale and public reputation. During Bush's year in charge of the CIA, the U.S. national security apparatus actively supported Operation Condor operations and right-wing military dictatorships in Latin America.\nMeanwhile, Ford decided to drop Rockefeller from the ticket for the 1976 presidential election; he considered Bush as his running mate, but ultimately chose Bob Dole. In his capacity as DCI, Bush gave national security briefings to Jimmy Carter both as a presidential candidate and as president-elect. Bush then stepped down as DCI on the day of Carter's inauguration, January 20, 1977.\n1980 presidential election.\nPresidential campaign.\nBush's tenure at the CIA ended after Carter narrowly defeated Ford in the 1976 presidential election. Out of public office for the first time since the 1960s, Bush became chairman on the executive committee of the First International Bank in Houston. He also spent a year as a part-time professor of Administrative Science at Rice University's Jones School of Business, continued his membership in the Council on Foreign Relations, and joined the Trilateral Commission. Meanwhile, he began to lay the groundwork for his candidacy in the 1980 Republican Party presidential primaries. In the 1980 Republican primary campaign, Bush faced Ronald Reagan, who was widely regarded as the front-runner, as well as other contenders like Senator Bob Dole, Senator Howard Baker, Texas Governor John Connally, Congressman Phil Crane, and Congressman John B. Anderson.\nBush's campaign cast him as a youthful, \"thinking man's candidate\" who would emulate the pragmatic conservatism of President Eisenhower. Amid the Soviet\u2013Afghan War, which brought an end to a period of d\u00e9tente, and the Iran hostage crisis, in which 52 Americans were taken hostage, the campaign highlighted Bush's foreign policy experience. At the outset of the race, Bush focused heavily on winning the January 21 Iowa caucuses, making 31 visits to the state. He won a close victory in Iowa with 31.5% to Reagan's 29.4%. After the win, Bush stated that his campaign was full of momentum, or \"the Big Mo\", and Reagan reorganized his campaign. Partly in response to the Bush campaign's frequent questioning of Reagan's age (Reagan turned 69 in 1980), the Reagan campaign stepped up attacks on Bush, painting him as an elitist who was not truly committed to conservatism. Prior to the New Hampshire primary, Bush and Reagan agreed to a two-person debate, organized by \"The Nashua Telegraph\" but paid for by the Reagan campaign.\nDays before the debate, Reagan announced that he would invite four other candidates to the debate; Bush, who had hoped that the one-on-one debate would allow him to emerge as the main alternative to Reagan in the primaries, refused to debate the other candidates. All six candidates took the stage, but Bush refused to speak in the presence of the other candidates. Ultimately, the other four candidates left the stage, and the debate continued, but Bush's refusal to debate anyone other than Reagan badly damaged his campaign in New Hampshire. He decisively lost New Hampshire's primary to Reagan, winning just 23 percent of the vote. Bush revitalized his campaign with a victory in Massachusetts but lost the next several primaries. As Reagan built up a commanding delegate lead, Bush refused to end his campaign, but the other candidates dropped out of the race. Criticizing his more conservative rival's policy proposals, Bush famously labeled Reagan's supply side\u2013influenced plans for massive tax cuts as \"voodoo economics\". Though he favored lower taxes, Bush feared that dramatic reductions in taxation would lead to deficits and, in turn, cause inflation.\nVice presidential campaign.\nAfter Reagan clinched a majority of delegates in late May, Bush reluctantly dropped out of the race. At the 1980 Republican National Convention, Reagan made the last-minute decision to select Bush as his vice presidential nominee after negotiations with Ford regarding a Reagan\u2013Ford ticket collapsed. Though Reagan had resented many of the Bush campaign's attacks during the primary campaign, and several conservative leaders had actively opposed Bush's nomination, Reagan ultimately decided that Bush's popularity with moderate Republicans made him the best and safest pick. Bush, who had believed his political career might be over following the primaries, eagerly accepted the position and threw himself into campaigning for the Reagan\u2013Bush ticket. The 1980 general election campaign between Reagan and Carter was conducted amid a multitude of domestic concerns and the ongoing Iran hostage crisis, and Reagan sought to focus the race on Carter's handling of the economy. Though the race was widely regarded as a close contest for most of the campaign, Reagan ultimately won over the large majority of undecided voters. Reagan took 50.7 percent of the popular vote and 489 of the 538 electoral votes, while Carter won 41% of the popular vote and John Anderson, running as an independent candidate, won 6.6% of the popular vote.\nVice presidency (1981\u20131989).\nAs vice president, Bush generally maintained a low profile, recognizing the constitutional limits of the office; he avoided decision-making or criticizing Reagan in any way. This approach helped him earn Reagan's trust, easing tensions left over from their earlier rivalry. Bush also generally enjoyed a good relationship with Reagan staffers, including Bush's close friend James Baker, who served as Reagan's initial chief of staff. His understanding of the vice presidency was heavily influenced by Vice President Walter Mondale, who enjoyed a strong relationship with Carter in part because of his ability to avoid confrontations with senior staff and Cabinet members, and by Vice President Nelson Rockefeller's difficult relationship with some members of the White House staff during the Ford administration. The Bushes attended a large number of public and ceremonial events in their positions, including many state funerals, which became a common joke for comedians. As the president of the Senate, Bush also stayed in contact with members of Congress and kept the president informed on occurrences on Capitol Hill.\nFirst term.\nOn March 30, 1981, while Bush was in Texas, Reagan was shot and seriously wounded by John Hinckley Jr. Bush immediately flew back to Washington D.C.; when his plane landed, his aides advised him to proceed directly to the White House by helicopter to show that the government was still functioning. Bush rejected the idea, fearing that such a dramatic scene risked giving the impression that he sought to usurp Reagan's powers and prerogatives. During Reagan's short period of incapacity, Bush presided over Cabinet meetings, met with congressional and foreign leaders, and briefed reporters. Still, he consistently rejected invoking the Twenty-fifth Amendment. Bush's handling of the attempted assassination and its aftermath made a positive impression on Reagan, who recovered and returned to work within two weeks of the shooting. From then on, the two men would have regular Thursday lunches in the Oval Office.\nReagan assigned Bush to chair two special task forces, one on deregulation and one on international drug smuggling. Both were popular issues with conservatives, and Bush, largely a moderate, began courting them through his work. The deregulation task force reviewed hundreds of rules, making specific recommendations on which ones to amend or revise to curb the size of the federal government. The Reagan administration's deregulation push strongly impacted broadcasting, finance, resource extraction, and other economic activities, and the administration eliminated numerous government positions. Bush also oversaw the administration's national security crisis management organization, which had traditionally been the responsibility of the National Security Advisor. In 1983, Bush toured Western Europe as part of the Reagan administration's ultimately successful efforts to convince skeptical NATO allies to support the deployment of Pershing II missiles.\nReagan's approval ratings fell after his first year in office, but they bounced back when the United States began to emerge from recession in 1983. Former vice president Walter Mondale was nominated by the Democratic Party in the 1984 presidential election. Down in the polls, Mondale selected Congresswoman Geraldine Ferraro as his running mate in hopes of galvanizing support for his campaign, thus making Ferraro the first female major party vice presidential nominee in U.S. history. She and Bush squared off in a single televised vice presidential debate. Public opinion polling consistently showed a Reagan lead in the 1984 campaign, and Mondale was unable to shake up the race. In the end, Reagan won re-election, winning 49 of 50 states and receiving 59% of the popular vote to Mondale's 41%.\nSecond term.\nMikhail Gorbachev came to power in the Soviet Union in 1985. Rejecting the ideological rigidity of his three elderly sick predecessors, Gorbachev insisted on urgently needed economic and political reforms called \"glasnost\" (openness) and \"perestroika\" (restructuring). At the 1987 Washington Summit, Gorbachev and Reagan signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, which committed both signatories to the total abolition of their respective short-range and medium-range missile stockpiles. The treaty began a new era of trade, openness, and cooperation between the two powers. President Reagan and Secretary of State George Shultz took the lead in these negotiations, but Bush sat in on many meetings. Bush did not agree with many of the Reagan policies, but he did tell Gorbachev that he would seek to continue improving relations if he succeeded Reagan. On July 13, 1985, Bush became the first vice president to serve as acting president when Reagan underwent surgery to remove polyps from his colon; Bush served as the acting president for approximately eight hours.\nIn 1986, the Reagan administration was shaken by a scandal when it was revealed that administration officials had secretly arranged weapon sales to Iran during the Iran\u2013Iraq War. The officials had used the proceeds to fund the Contra rebels in their fight against the leftist Sandinista government in Nicaragua. Democrats had passed a law that appropriated funds could not be used to help the Contras. Instead, the administration used non-appropriated funds from the sales. When news of the affair broke to the media, Bush stated that he had been \"out of the loop\" and unaware of the diversion of funds. Biographer Jon Meacham writes that \"no evidence was ever produced proving Bush was aware of the diversion to the contras,\" but he criticizes Bush's \"out of the loop\" characterization, writing that the \"record is clear that Bush was aware that the United States, in contravention of its own stated policy, was trading arms for hostages\". The Iran\u2013Contra scandal, as it became known, did serious damage to the Reagan presidency, raising questions about Reagan's competency. Congress established the Tower Commission to investigate the scandal, and, at Reagan's request, a panel of federal judges appointed Lawrence Walsh as a special prosecutor charged with investigating the Iran\u2013Contra scandal. The investigations continued after Reagan left office, and, though Bush was never charged with a crime, the Iran\u2013Contra scandal would remain a political liability for him.\nOn July 3, 1988, the guided missile cruiser accidentally shot down Iran Air Flight 655, killing 290 passengers. Bush, then-vice president, defended his country at the United Nations by arguing that the U.S. attack had been a wartime incident and the crew of \"Vincennes\" had acted appropriately to the situation.\n1988 presidential election.\nBush began planning for a presidential run after the 1984 election, and he officially entered the 1988 Republican Party presidential primaries in October 1987. He put together a campaign led by Reagan staffer Lee Atwater, which also included his son, George W. Bush, and media consultant Roger Ailes. Though he had moved to the right during his time as vice president, endorsing a Human Life Amendment and repudiating his earlier comments on \"voodoo economics\", Bush still faced opposition from many conservatives in the Republican Party. His major rivals for the Republican nomination were Senate minority leader Bob Dole of Kansas, Representative Jack Kemp of New York, and Christian televangelist Pat Robertson. Reagan did not publicly endorse any candidate but privately expressed support for Bush.\nThough considered the early front-runner for the nomination, Bush came in third in the Iowa caucus, behind Dole and Robertson. Much as Reagan had done in 1980, Bush reorganized his staff and concentrated on the New Hampshire primary. With help from Governor John H. Sununu and an effective campaign attacking Dole for raising taxes, Bush overcame an initial polling deficit and won New Hampshire with 39 percent of the vote. After Bush won South Carolina and 16 of the 17 states holding a primary on Super Tuesday, his competitors dropped out of the race.\nBush, occasionally criticized for his lack of eloquence compared to Reagan, delivered a well-received speech at the Republican convention. Known as the \"thousand points of light\" speech, it described Bush's vision of America: he endorsed the Pledge of Allegiance, prayer in schools, capital punishment, and gun rights. Bush also , stating: \"Congress will push me to raise taxes, and I'll say no, and they'll push, and I'll say no, and they'll push again. And all I can say to them is: read my lips. No new taxes.\" Bush selected little-known Senator Dan Quayle of Indiana as his running mate. Though Quayle had compiled an unremarkable record in Congress, he was popular among many conservatives, and the campaign hoped that Quayle's youth would appeal to younger voters.\nMeanwhile, the Democratic Party nominated Governor Michael Dukakis, known for presiding over an economic turnaround in Massachusetts. Leading in the general election polls against Bush, Dukakis ran an ineffective, low-risk campaign. The Bush campaign attacked Dukakis as an unpatriotic liberal extremist and seized on the Willie Horton case, in which a convicted felon from Massachusetts raped a woman while on a prison furlough, a program Dukakis supported as governor. The Bush campaign charged that Dukakis presided over a \"revolving door\" that allowed dangerous convicted felons to leave prison. Dukakis damaged his own campaign with a widely mocked ride in an M1 Abrams tank and poor performance at the second presidential debate. Bush also attacked Dukakis for opposing a law that would require all students to recite the Pledge of Allegiance. The election is widely considered to have had a high level of negative campaigning, though political scientist John Geer has argued that the share of negative ads was in line with previous presidential elections.\nBush defeated Dukakis by a margin of 426 to 111 in the Electoral College, and he took 53.4% of the national popular vote. Bush ran well in all the major regions of the country, but especially in the South. He became the fourth sitting vice president to be elected president and the first to do so since Martin Van Buren in 1836 and the first person to succeed a president from his own party via election since Herbert Hoover in 1929. In the concurrent congressional elections, Democrats retained control of both houses of Congress.\nPresidency (1989\u20131993).\nBush was inaugurated on January 20, 1989, succeeding Reagan. In his inaugural address, Bush said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I come before you and assume the Presidency at a moment rich with promise. We live in a peaceful, prosperous time, but we can make it better. For a new breeze is blowing, and a world refreshed by freedom seems reborn; for in man's heart, if not in fact, the day of the dictator is over. The totalitarian era is passing, its old ideas blown away like leaves from an ancient, lifeless tree. A new breeze is blowing, and a nation refreshed by freedom stands ready to push on. There is new ground to be broken, and new action to be taken.\nBush's first major appointment was that of James Baker as Secretary of State. Leadership of the Department of Defense went to Dick Cheney, who had previously served as Gerald Ford's chief of staff and would later serve as vice president under his son George W. Bush. Jack Kemp joined the administration as Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, while Elizabeth Dole, the wife of Bob Dole and a former Secretary of Transportation, became the Secretary of Labor under Bush. Bush retained several Reagan officials, including Secretary of the Treasury Nicholas F. Brady, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, and Secretary of Education Lauro Cavazos. New Hampshire Governor John Sununu, a strong supporter of Bush during the 1988 campaign, became chief of staff. Brent Scowcroft was appointed as the National Security Advisor, a role he had also held under Ford.\nForeign affairs.\nEnd of the Cold War.\nDuring the first year of his tenure, Bush paused Reagan's d\u00e9tente policy toward the Soviet Union. Bush and his advisers were initially divided on Gorbachev; some administration officials saw him as a democratic reformer, but others suspected him of trying to make the minimum changes necessary to restore the Soviet Union to a competitive position with the United States. In 1989, all the Communist governments collapsed in Eastern Europe. Gorbachev declined to send in the Soviet military, effectively abandoning the Brezhnev Doctrine. The U.S. was not directly involved in these upheavals, but the Bush administration avoided gloating over the demise of the Eastern Bloc to avoid undermining further democratic reforms.\nBush and Gorbachev met at the Malta Summit in December 1989. Though many on the right remained wary of Gorbachev, Bush came away believing that Gorbachev would negotiate in good faith. For the remainder of his term, Bush sought cooperative relations with Gorbachev, believing he was the key to peace. The primary issue at the Malta Summit was the potential reunification of Germany. While Britain and France were wary of a reunified Germany, Bush joined German chancellor Helmut Kohl in pushing for German reunification. Bush believed that a reunified Germany would serve American interests. After extensive negotiations, Gorbachev agreed to allow a reunified Germany to be a part of NATO, and Germany officially reunified in October 1990 after paying billions of marks to Moscow.\nGorbachev used force to suppress nationalist movements within the Soviet Union itself. A crisis in Lithuania left Bush in a difficult position, as he needed Gorbachev's cooperation in the reunification of Germany and feared that the collapse of the Soviet Union could leave nuclear arms in dangerous hands. The Bush administration mildly protested Gorbachev's suppression of Lithuania's independence movement but took no action to intervene directly. Bush warned independence movements of the disorder that could come with secession from the Soviet Union; in a 1991 address that critics labeled the \"Chicken Kiev speech\", he cautioned against \"suicidal nationalism\". In July 1991, Bush and Gorbachev signed the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START I) treaty, in which both countries agreed to cut their strategic nuclear weapons by 30 percent.\nIn August 1991, hard-line Communists launched a coup against Gorbachev; while the coup quickly fell apart, it broke the remaining power of Gorbachev and the central Soviet government. Later that month, Gorbachev resigned as general secretary of the Communist party, and Russian president Boris Yeltsin ordered the seizure of Soviet property. Gorbachev clung to power as the President of the Soviet Union until December 1991, when the Soviet Union dissolved. Fifteen states emerged from the Soviet Union, and of those states, Russia was the largest and most populous. Bush and Yeltsin met in February 1992, declaring a new era of \"friendship and partnership\". In January 1993, Bush and Yeltsin agreed to START II, which provided for further nuclear arms reductions on top of the original START treaty.\nInvasion of Panama.\nThrough the late 1980s, the U.S. provided aid to Manuel Noriega, the anti-Communist leader of Panama. Noriega had long-standing ties to United States intelligence agencies, including during Bush's tenure as Director of Central Intelligence, and was also deeply involved in drug trafficking. In May 1989, Noriega annulled the results of a democratic presidential election in which Guillermo Endara had been elected. Bush objected to the annulment of the election and worried about the status of the Panama Canal with Noriega still in office. Bush dispatched 2,000 soldiers to the country, where they began conducting regular military exercises violating prior treaties. After Panamanian forces shot a U.S. serviceman in December 1989, Bush ordered the United States invasion of Panama, known as \"Operation Just Cause\". The invasion was the first large-scale American military operation unrelated to the Cold War in more than 40 years. American forces quickly took control of the Panama Canal Zone and Panama City. Noriega surrendered on January 3, 1990, and was quickly transported to a prison in the United States. Twenty-three Americans died in the operation, while another 394 were wounded. Noriega was convicted and imprisoned on racketeering and drug trafficking charges in April 1992. Historian Stewart Brewer argues that the invasion \"represented a new era in American foreign policy\" because Bush did not justify the invasion under the Monroe Doctrine or the threat of Communism, but rather because it was in the best interests of the United States.\nGulf War.\nFaced with massive debts and low oil prices in the aftermath of the Iran\u2013Iraq War, Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein decided to conquer the country of Kuwait, a small, oil-rich country situated on Iraq's southern border. After Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, Bush imposed economic sanctions on Iraq and assembled a multi-national coalition opposed to the invasion. Some in the administration feared that a failure to respond to the invasion would embolden Hussein to attack Saudi Arabia or Israel. Robert Gates attempted to convince Brent Scowcroft that Bush should tone down the rhetoric but Bush insisted it was his primary concern to discourage other countries from \"unanswered aggression\". Bush also wanted to ensure continued access to oil, as Iraq and Kuwait collectively accounted for 20% of the world's oil production, and Saudi Arabia produced another 26% of the world's oil supply.\nAt Bush's insistence, in November 1990, the United Nations Security Council approved a resolution authorizing the use of force if Iraq did not withdraw from Kuwait by January 15, 1991. Gorbachev's support and China's abstention helped ensure passage of the United Nations resolution. Bush convinced Britain, France, and other nations to commit soldiers to an operation against Iraq. He won important financial backing from Germany, Japan, South Korea, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates. In January 1991, Bush asked Congress to approve a joint resolution authorizing a war against Iraq. Bush believed that the United Nations resolution had already provided him with the necessary authorization to launch a military operation against Iraq. Still, he wanted to show that the nation was united behind military action. Despite the opposition of a majority of Democrats in both the House and the Senate, Congress approved the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 1991.\nAfter the January 15 deadline passed without an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, U.S. and coalition forces conducted a bombing campaign that devastated Iraq's power grid and communications network and resulted in the desertion of about 100,000 Iraqi soldiers. In retaliation, Iraq launched Scud missiles at Israel and Saudi Arabia, but most missiles did little damage. On February 23, coalition forces began a ground invasion into Kuwait, evicting Iraqi forces by the end of February 27. About 300 Americans and approximately 65 soldiers from other coalition nations died during the military action. A ceasefire was arranged on March 3, and the United Nations passed a resolution establishing a peacekeeping force in a demilitarized zone between Kuwait and Iraq. A March 1991 Gallup poll showed that Bush had an approval rating of 89%, the highest presidential approval rating in the history of Gallup polling. After 1991, the United Nations maintained economic sanctions against Iraq, and the United Nations Special Commission was assigned to ensure that Iraq did not revive its weapons of mass destruction program.\nNAFTA.\nIn 1987, the U.S. and Canada reached a free trade agreement that eliminated many tariffs between the two countries. President Reagan had intended it as the first step towards a larger trade agreement to eliminate most tariffs among the United States, Canada, and Mexico. The Bush administration, along with the Progressive Conservative Canadian prime minister Brian Mulroney, spearheaded the negotiations of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) with Mexico. In addition to lowering tariffs, the proposed treaty would affect patents, copyrights, and trademarks. In 1991, Bush sought fast track authority, which grants the president the power to submit an international trade agreement to Congress without the possibility of amendment. Despite congressional opposition led by House Majority Leader Dick Gephardt, both houses of Congress voted to grant Bush fast track authority. NAFTA was signed in December 1992, after Bush lost reelection, but President Clinton won ratification of NAFTA in 1993. NAFTA was controversial for its impact on wages, jobs, and overall economic growth. In 2020, it was replaced entirely by the United States\u2013Mexico\u2013Canada Agreement (USMCA).\nDomestic affairs.\nEconomy and fiscal issues.\nThe U.S. economy had generally performed well since emerging from recession in late 1982, but it slipped into a mild recession in 1990. The unemployment rate rose from 5.9% in 1989 to a high of 7.8% in mid-1991. Large federal deficits, spawned during the Reagan years, rose from $152.1\u00a0billion in 1989 to $220\u00a0billion for 1990; the $220\u00a0billion deficit represented a threefold increase since 1980. As the public became increasingly concerned about the economy and other domestic affairs, Bush's well-received handling of foreign affairs became less of an issue for most voters. Bush's top domestic priority was to end federal budget deficits, which he saw as a liability for the country's long-term economic health and standing in the world. As he was opposed to major defense spending cuts and had pledged not to raise taxes, the president had major difficulties in balancing the budget.\nBush and congressional leaders agreed to avoid major changes to the budget for fiscal year 1990, which began in October 1989. However, both sides knew spending cuts or new taxes would be necessary for the following year's budget to avoid the draconian automatic domestic spending cuts required by the Gramm\u2013Rudman\u2013Hollings Balanced Budget Act of 1987. Bush and other leaders also wanted to cut deficits because Federal Reserve Chair Alan Greenspan refused to lower interest rates and thus stimulate economic growth unless the federal budget deficit was reduced. In a statement released in late June 1990, Bush said that he would be open to a deficit reduction program which included spending cuts, incentives for economic growth, budget process reform, as well as tax increases. To fiscal conservatives in the Republican Party, Bush's statement represented a betrayal, and they heavily criticized him for compromising so early in the negotiations.\nIn September 1990, Bush and congressional Democrats announced a compromise to cut mandatory and discretionary programs funding while raising revenue, partly through a higher gas tax. The compromise additionally included a \"pay as you go\" provision that required that new programs be paid for at the time of implementation. House minority whip Newt Gingrich led the conservative opposition to the bill, strongly opposing any form of tax increase. Some liberals also criticized the budget cuts in the compromise, and in October, the House rejected the deal, resulting in a brief government shutdown. Without the strong backing of the Republican Party, Bush agreed to another compromise bill, this one more favorable to Democrats. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 (OBRA-90), enacted on October 27, 1990, dropped much of the gasoline tax increase in favor of higher income taxes on top earners. It included cuts to domestic spending, but the cuts were not as deep as those proposed in the original compromise. Bush's decision to sign the bill damaged his standing with conservatives and the general public, but it also laid the groundwork for the budget surpluses of the late 1990s.\nDiscrimination.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"Even the strongest person couldn't scale the Berlin Wall to gain the elusive promise of independence that lay just beyond. And so, together we rejoiced when that barrier fell. And now I sign legislation which takes a sledgehammer to another wall, one which has for too many generations separated Americans with disabilities from the freedom they could glimpse, but not grasp.\"\n\u2014Bush's remarks at the signing ceremony for the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990\nThe disabled had not received legal protections under the landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964, and many faced discrimination and segregation by the time Bush took office. In 1988, Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and Tony Coelho introduced the Americans with Disabilities Act, which barred employment discrimination against qualified individuals with disabilities. The bill had passed the Senate but not the House and was reintroduced in 1989. Though some conservatives opposed the bill due to its costs and potential burdens on businesses, Bush strongly supported it, partly because his son, Neil, had struggled with dyslexia. After the bill passed both houses of Congress, Bush signed the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 into law in July 1990. The act required employers and public accommodations to make \"reasonable accommodations\" for disabled people while providing an exception when such accommodations imposed an \"undue hardship\".\nSenator Ted Kennedy later led the congressional passage of a separate civil rights bill designed to facilitate launching employment discrimination lawsuits. In vetoing the bill, Bush argued that it would lead to racial quotas in hiring. In November 1991, Bush signed the Civil Rights Act of 1991, which was largely similar to the bill he had vetoed in the previous year.\nIn August 1990, Bush signed the Ryan White CARE Act, the largest federally funded program dedicated to assisting persons living with HIV/AIDS. Throughout his presidency, the AIDS epidemic grew dramatically in the U.S. and around the world, and Bush often found himself at odds with AIDS activist groups who criticized him for not placing a high priority on HIV/AIDS research and funding. Frustrated by the administration's lack of urgency on the issue, ACT UP dumped the ashes of deceased HIV/AIDS patients on the White House lawn during a viewing of the AIDS Quilt in 1992. By that time, HIV had become the leading cause of death in the U.S. for men aged 25\u201344.\nEnvironment.\nIn June 1989, the Bush administration proposed a bill to amend the Clean Air Act. Working with Senate majority leader George J. Mitchell, the administration won passage of the amendments over the opposition of business-aligned members of Congress who feared the impact of tougher regulations. The legislation sought to curb acid rain and smog by requiring decreased emissions of chemicals such as sulfur dioxide, and was the first major update to the Clean Air Act since 1977. Bush also signed the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 in response to the \"Exxon Valdez\" oil spill. However, the League of Conservation Voters criticized some of Bush's other environmental actions, including his opposition to stricter auto-mileage standards.\nPoints of Light.\nBush devoted attention to voluntary service to solve some of America's most serious social problems. He often used the \"thousand points of light\" theme to describe the power of citizens to solve community problems. In his 1989 inaugural address, Bush said, \"I have spoken of a thousand points of light, of all the community organizations that are spread like stars throughout the Nation, doing good.\" During his presidency, Bush honored numerous volunteers with the Daily Point of Light Award, a tradition that his presidential successors continued. In 1990, the Points of Light Foundation was created as a nonprofit organization in Washington to promote this spirit of volunteerism. In 2007, the Points of Light Foundation merged with the Hands On Network to create a new organization, Points of Light.\nJudicial appointments.\nBush appointed two justices to the Supreme Court of the United States. In 1990, Bush appointed a largely unknown state appellate judge, David Souter, to replace liberal icon William J. Brennan Jr. Souter was easily confirmed and served until 2009, but joined the liberal bloc of the court, disappointing Bush. In 1991, Bush nominated conservative federal judge Clarence Thomas to succeed Thurgood Marshall, a long-time liberal stalwart. Thomas, the former head of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), faced heavy opposition in the Senate, as well as from pro-choice groups and the NAACP. His nomination faced another difficulty when Anita Hill accused Thomas of having sexually harassed her during his time as the chair of EEOC. Thomas won confirmation in a narrow 52\u201348 vote; 43 Republicans and 9 Democrats voted to confirm Thomas's nomination, while 46 Democrats and 2 Republicans voted against confirmation. Thomas became one of the most conservative justices of his era.\nOther issues.\nBush's education platform consisted mainly of offering federal support for a variety of innovations, such as open enrollment, incentive pay for outstanding teachers, and rewards for schools that improve performance with underprivileged children. Though Bush did not pass a major educational reform package during his presidency, his ideas influenced later reform efforts, including Goals 2000 and the No Child Left Behind Act. Bush signed the Immigration Act of 1990, which led to a 40% increase in legal immigration to the United States. The act more than doubled the number of visas given to immigrants on the basis of job skills. In the wake of the savings and loan crisis, Bush proposed a $50\u00a0billion package to rescue the savings and loans industry, and also proposed the creation of the Office of Thrift Supervision to regulate the industry. Congress passed the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989, which incorporated most of Bush's proposals.\nPublic image.\nBush was widely seen as a \"pragmatic caretaker\" president who lacked a unified and compelling long-term theme in his efforts. A Bush sound bite, referring to the issue of overarching purpose as \"the vision thing\", has become a metonym applied to other political figures accused of similar difficulties. His ability to gain broad international support for the Gulf War and the war's result were seen as both a diplomatic and military triumph, rousing bipartisan approval, though his decision to withdraw without removing Saddam Hussein left mixed feelings, and attention returned to the domestic front and a souring economy. A \"New York Times\" article mistakenly depicted Bush as being surprised to see a supermarket barcode reader; the report of his reaction exacerbated the notion that he was \"out of touch\".\nBush was popular throughout most of his presidency. After the Gulf war concluded in February 1991, his approval rating saw a high of 89%, before gradually declining for the rest of the year, and eventually falling below 50% according to a January 1992 Gallup poll. His sudden drop in his favorability was likely due to the early 1990s recession, which shifted his image from \"conquering hero\" to \"politician befuddled by economic matters\". At the elite level, several commentators and political experts lamented the state of American politics in 1991\u20131992 and reported the voters were angry. Many analysts blamed the poor quality of national election campaigns.\n1992 presidential campaign.\nBush announced his reelection bid in early 1992; with a coalition victory in the Persian Gulf War and high approval ratings, Bush's reelection initially looked likely. As a result, many leading Democrats, including Mario Cuomo, Dick Gephardt, and Al Gore, declined to seek their party's presidential nomination. However, Bush's tax increase angered many conservatives, who believed that Bush had strayed from the conservative principles of Ronald Reagan. He faced a challenge from conservative political columnist Pat Buchanan in the 1992 Republican primaries. Bush fended off Buchanan's challenge and won his party's nomination at the 1992 Republican National Convention. Still, the convention adopted a socially conservative platform strongly influenced by the Christian right.\nMeanwhile, the Democrats nominated Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas. A moderate who was affiliated with the Democratic Leadership Council (DLC), Clinton favored welfare reform, deficit reduction, and a tax cut for the middle class. In early 1992, the race took an unexpected twist when Texas billionaire H. Ross Perot launched a third-party bid, claiming that neither Republicans nor Democrats could eliminate the deficit and make government more efficient. His message appealed to voters across the political spectrum disappointed with both parties' perceived fiscal irresponsibility. Perot also attacked NAFTA, which he claimed would lead to major job losses. National polling taken in mid-1992 showed Perot in the lead, but Clinton experienced a surge through effective campaigning and the selection of Senator Al Gore, a popular and relatively young Southerner, as his running mate.\nClinton won the election, taking 43% of the popular vote and 370 electoral votes, while Bush won 37.5% of the popular vote and 168 electoral votes. Perot won 19% of the popular vote, one of the highest totals for a third-party candidate in U.S. history, drawing equally from both major candidates, according to exit polls. Clinton performed well in the Northeast, the Midwest, and the West Coast, while also waging the strongest Democratic campaign in the South since the 1976 election. Several factors were important in Bush's defeat. The ailing economy which arose from recession may have been the main factor in Bush's loss, as 7 in 10 voters said on election day that the economy was either \"not so good\" or \"poor\". On the eve of the 1992 election, the unemployment rate stood at 7.8%, which was the highest it had been since 1984. The president was also damaged by his alienation of many conservatives in his party. Bush partially blamed Perot for his defeat, though exit polls showed that Perot drew his voters about equally from Clinton and Bush.\nDespite his defeat, Bush left office with a 56% job approval rating in January 1993. Like many of his predecessors, Bush issued a series of pardons during his last days in office. In December 1992, he granted executive clemency to six former senior government officials implicated in the Iran-Contra scandal, most prominently former Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger. The charges against the six were that they lied to or withheld information from Congress. The pardons effectively brought an end to the Iran-Contra scandal.\nAccording to Seymour Martin Lipset, the 1992 election had several unique characteristics. Voters felt that economic conditions were worse than they were, which harmed Bush. A rare event was the presence of a strong third-party candidate. Liberals launched a backlash against 12 years of a conservative White House. The chief factor was Clinton uniting his party and winning over several heterogeneous groups.\nPost-presidency (1993\u20132018).\nAppearances.\nAfter leaving office, Bush and his wife built a retirement house in the community of West Oaks, Houston. He established a presidential office within the Park Laureate Building on Memorial Drive in Houston. He also frequently spent time at his vacation home in Kennebunkport, took annual cruises in Greece, went on fishing trips in Florida, and visited the Bohemian Club in Northern California. He declined to serve on corporate boards but delivered numerous paid speeches and was an adviser to The Carlyle Group, a private equity firm. He never published his memoirs, but he and Brent Scowcroft co-wrote \"A World Transformed\", a 1998 work on foreign policy. Portions of his letters and his diary were later published as \"The China Diary of George H.\u00a0W. Bush\" and \"All the Best, George Bush\".\nDuring a 1993 visit to Kuwait, Bush was targeted in an assassination plot directed by the Iraqi Intelligence Service. President Clinton retaliated when he ordered the firing of 23 cruise missiles at Iraqi Intelligence Service headquarters in Baghdad. Bush did not publicly comment on the assassination attempt or the missile strike, but privately spoke with Clinton shortly before the strike took place.\nIn the 1994 gubernatorial elections, his sons George W. and Jeb concurrently ran for Governor of Texas and Governor of Florida. Concerning their political careers, he advised them both that \"[a]t some point both of you may want to say 'Well, I don't agree with my Dad on that point' or 'Frankly I think Dad was wrong on that.' Do it. Chart your own course, not just on the issues but on defining yourselves\". George W. won his race against Ann Richards while Jeb lost to Lawton Chiles. After the results came in, the elder Bush told ABC, \"I have very mixed emotions. Proud father, is the way I would sum it all up.\" Jeb would again run for governor of Florida in 1998 and win at the same time that his brother George W. won re-election in Texas. It marked the second time in United States history that a pair of brothers served simultaneously as governors (the first of which spanned from 1967 to 1971, when Nelson Rockefeller and brother Winthrop Rockefeller were governors of New York and Arkansas respectively).\nBush supported his son's candidacy in the 2000 presidential election but did not actively campaign in the election and did not deliver a speech at the 2000 Republican National Convention. George W. Bush defeated Al Gore in the 2000 election and was re-elected in 2004. Bush and his son thus became the second father\u2013son pair to each serve as President of the United States, following John Adams and John Quincy Adams. Through previous administrations, the elder Bush had ubiquitously been known as \"George Bush\" or \"President Bush\", but following his son's election, the need to distinguish between them has made retronymic forms such as \"George H.\u00a0W. Bush\" and \"George Bush Sr.\" and colloquialisms such as \"Bush 41\" and \"Bush the Elder\" more common. Bush advised his son on some personnel choices, approving of the selection of Dick Cheney as running mate and the retention of George Tenet as CIA Director. However, he was not consulted on all appointments, including that of his old rival, Donald Rumsfeld, as Secretary of Defense. Though he avoided giving unsolicited advice to his son, Bush and his son also discussed some policy matters, especially regarding national security issues.\nIn his retirement, Bush used the public spotlight to support various charities. Despite earlier political differences with Bill Clinton, the two former presidents eventually became friends. They appeared together in television ads, encouraging aid for victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami and Hurricane Katrina. However, when interviewed by Jon Meacham, Bush criticized Donald Rumsfeld, Dick Cheney, and even his son George W. Bush for their handling of foreign policy after the September 11 attacks.\nFinal years.\nBush supported Republican John McCain in the 2008 presidential election, and Republican Mitt Romney in the 2012 presidential election, but both were defeated by Democrat Barack Obama. In 2011, Obama awarded Bush with the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian honor in the United States.\nBush supported his son Jeb's bid in the 2016 Republican primaries. Jeb Bush's campaign struggled, however, and he withdrew from the race during the primaries. Neither George H.\u00a0W. nor George W. Bush endorsed the eventual Republican nominee, Donald Trump; all three Bushes emerged as frequent critics of Trump's policies and speaking style, while Trump frequently criticized George W. Bush's presidency. George H.\u00a0W. later said he voted for the Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton, in the general election. After the election, Bush wrote a letter to President-elect Donald Trump in January 2017 to inform him that because of his poor health, he would not be able to attend Trump's inauguration on January 20; he gave him his best wishes.\nIn August 2017, after the violence at Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, both presidents Bush released a joint statement saying, \"America must always reject racial bigotry, anti-Semitism, and hatred in all forms[. ...] As we pray for Charlottesville, we are all reminded of the fundamental truths recorded by that city's most prominent citizen in the Declaration of Independence: we are all created equal and endowed by our Creator with unalienable rights.\"\nOn April 17, 2018, Barbara Bush died at the age of 92 at her home in Houston, Texas. Her funeral was held at St. Martin's Episcopal Church in Houston four days later. Bush, along with former presidents Barack Obama, George W. Bush (son), Bill Clinton and First Ladies Melania Trump, Michelle Obama, Laura Bush (daughter-in-law) and Hillary Clinton attended the funeral and posed together for a photo as a sign of unity.\nOn November 1, 2018, Bush went to the polls to vote early in the midterm elections. This would be his final public appearance.\nDeath and funeral.\nAfter a long battle with vascular Parkinson's disease, Bush died at his home in Houston on November 30, 2018, at the age of 94. At the time of his death he was the longest-lived U.S. president until March 22, 2019, when Jimmy Carter surpassed his lifespan. He was also the third-oldest vice president. Bush lay in state in the Rotunda of the U.S. Capitol from December 3 through December 5; he was the 12th U.S. president to be accorded this honor. Then, on December 5, Bush's casket was transferred from the Capitol rotunda to Washington National Cathedral where a state funeral was held. After the funeral, Bush's body was transported to George H.W. Bush Presidential Library in College Station, Texas, where he was buried next to his wife Barbara and daughter Robin. At the funeral, former president George W. Bush eulogized his father saying,\n\"He looked for the good in each person, and he usually found it.\"\nPersonal life.\nIn May 1991, \"The New York Times\" revealed that Bush had developed Graves' disease, a non-contagious thyroid condition that his wife Barbara also had. Bush had two separate hip replacement surgeries in 2000 and 2007. Thereafter, Bush started to experience weakness in his legs, which was attributed to vascular parkinsonism, a form of Parkinson's disease. He progressively developed problems walking, initially needing a walking stick for mobility aid before he eventually came to rely on a wheelchair from 2011 onwards.\nBush was a lifelong Episcopalian and a member of St. Martin's Episcopal Church in Houston. As President, Bush regularly attended services at St. John's Episcopal Church in Washington D.C. He cited various moments in his life on the deepening of his faith, including his escape from Japanese forces in 1944, and the death of his three-year-old daughter Robin in 1953. His faith was reflected in his \"thousand points of light\" speech, his support for prayer in schools, and his support for the pro-life movement (following his election as vice president). Shortly after his death, it was revealed that Bush secretly financed the education and food expenses of a schoolboy from the Philippines under the assumed name \"George Walker\" through the charity Compassion International.\nLegacy.\nHistorical reputation.\nPolls of historians and political scientists have ranked Bush in the top half of presidents. A 2018 poll of the American Political Science Association's Presidents and Executive Politics section ranked Bush as the 17th best president out of 44. A 2017 C-SPAN poll of historians also ranked Bush as the 20th best president out of 43. Richard Rose described Bush as a \"guardian\" president, and many other historians and political scientists have similarly described Bush as a passive, hands-off president who was \"largely content with things as they were\". Professor Steven Knott writes that \"[g]enerally the Bush presidency is viewed as successful in foreign affairs but a disappointment in domestic affairs.\"\nBiographer Jon Meacham writes that, after he left office, many Americans viewed Bush as \"a gracious and underappreciated man who had many virtues but who had failed to project enough of a distinctive identity and vision to overcome the economic challenges of 1991\u201392 and to win a second term.\" Bush himself noted that his legacy was \"lost between the glory of Reagan ... and the trials and tribulations of my sons.\" In the 2010s, Bush was fondly remembered for his willingness to compromise, which contrasted with the intensely partisan era that followed his presidency.\nIn 2018, \"Vox\" highlighted Bush for his \"pragmatism\" as a moderate Republican president by working across the aisle. They specifically noted Bush's accomplishments within the domestic policy by making bipartisan deals, including raising the tax budget among the wealthy with the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990. Bush also helped pass the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 which \"The New York Times\" described as \"the most sweeping anti-discrimination law since the Civil Rights Act of 1964. In response to the \"Exxon Valdez\" oil spill, Bush built another bipartisan coalition to strengthen the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. Bush also championed and signed into a law the Immigration Act of 1990, a sweeping bipartisan immigration reform act that made it easier for immigrants to legally enter the county, while also granting immigrants fleeing violence the temporary protected status visa, as well as lifted the pre-naturalization English testing process, and finally \"eliminated the exclusion of homosexuals under what Congress now deemed the medically unsound classification of 'sexual deviant' that was included in the 1965 act.\" Bush stated, \"Immigration is not just a link to our past but it's also a bridge to America's future\".\nAccording to \"USA Today\", the legacy of Bush's presidency was defined by his victory over Iraq after the invasion of Kuwait and by his presiding over the dissolution of the Soviet Union and German reunification. Michael Beschloss and Strobe Talbott praise Bush's handling of the Soviet Union, especially how he prodded Gorbachev in terms of releasing control over the satellite states and permitting German unification\u2014and especially a united Germany in NATO. Andrew Bacevich judges the Bush administration as \"morally obtuse\" in the light of its \"business-as-usual\" attitude towards China after the massacre in Tiananmen Square and its uncritical support of Gorbachev as the Soviet Union disintegrated. David Rothkopf argues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the recent history of U.S. foreign policy, there has been no president, nor any president's team, who, when confronted with profound international change and challenges, responded with such a thoughtful and well-managed foreign policy...[the Bush administration was] a bridge over one of the great fault lines of history [that] ushered in a \"new world order\" it described with great skill and professionalism.However, \"TIME\" has criticized Bush's domestic policies involving \"drugs, homelessness, racial hostility, education gaps, [and] issues with the environment\", and it argues that these issues in the United States became worse in the 21st century primarily due to Bush setting a poor example and his handling of these concepts during his presidency.\nMemorials, awards, and honors.\nIn 1990, \"Time\" magazine named him the Man of the Year. In 1997, the Houston Intercontinental Airport was renamed as the George Bush Intercontinental Airport. In 1999, the CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, was named the \"George Bush Center for Intelligence\" in his honor. In 2011, Bush, an avid golfer, was inducted in the World Golf Hall of Fame. The (CVN-77), the tenth and last supercarrier of the United States Navy, was named for Bush. Bush is commemorated on a postage stamp that was issued by the United States Postal Service in 2019. In December 2020, the United States Mint honored Bush with a presidential dollar coin.\nThe George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum, the tenth U.S. presidential library, was completed in 1997. It contains the presidential and vice presidential papers of Bush and the vice presidential papers of Dan Quayle. The library is located on a site on the west campus of Texas A&amp;M University in College Station, Texas. Texas A&amp;M University also hosts the Bush School of Government and Public Service, a graduate public policy school. In 2012, Phillips Academy also awarded Bush its Alumni Award of Distinction.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "11956", "revid": "3461395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11956", "title": "GPS (disambiguation)", "text": "GPS is the Global Positioning System, a satellite-based navigation system.\nGPS may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\n* Athletic Association of the Great Public Schools of New South Wales\n* Great Public Schools Association of Queensland Inc.\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "11958", "revid": "44383382", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11958", "title": "George Berkeley", "text": "Anglo-Irish philosopher and bishop (1685\u20131753)\nGeorge Berkeley ( ; 12 March 1685\u00a0\u2013 14 January 1753), known as Bishop Berkeley (Bishop of Cloyne of the Anglican Church of Ireland), was an Anglo-Irish philosopher, writer, and clergyman who is regarded as the founder of \"immaterialism\", a philosophical theory he developed which later came to be known as subjective idealism. He has also been called \"the father of idealism\" by German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer. Berkeley played a leading role in the empiricism movement and was one of its pioneers. He was among the most cited philosophers of 18th-century Europe, and his works deeply influenced later thinkers such as Immanuel Kant and David Hume.\nIn 1709, Berkeley published his first major work \"\", in which he discussed the limitations of human vision and advanced the theory that the proper objects of sight are not material objects, but light and colour. This foreshadowed his most well-known philosophical work \"A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge\", published in 1710, which, after its poor reception, he rewrote in dialogue form and published under the title \"Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous\" in 1713. In this book, Berkeley's views were represented by Philonous (Greek: \"lover of mind\"), while Hylas (\"hyle\", Greek: \"matter\") embodies Berkeley's opponents, in particular John Locke.\nBerkeley argued against Isaac Newton's doctrine of absolute space, time and motion in \"De Motu\" (\"On Motion\"), first published in 1721. His arguments were a notable precursor to those of Ernst Mach and Albert Einstein. In 1732, he published \"Alciphron\", a Christian apologetic against the free-thinkers, and in 1734, he published \"The Analyst\", a critique of the foundations of calculus, which was influential in the development of mathematics. In his work on immaterialism, Berkeley's theory denies the existence of material substance and instead contends that familiar objects like tables and chairs are ideas perceived by the mind and, as a result, cannot exist without being perceived. Berkeley is also known for his critique of abstraction, an important premise in his argument for immaterialism.\nHe died in 1753 in Oxford, and was buried in Christ Church Cathedral. Berkeley remains arguably the most influential of Irish philosophers, and interest in his ideas and works increased greatly after World War II because they tackled many of the issues of paramount interest to philosophy in the 20th century, such as the problems of perception, the difference between primary and secondary qualities, and the importance of language. Public interest in his views and philosophical ideas increased significantly in the United States during the early 19th century, and as a result, the University of California, Berkeley, the city of Berkeley, California, and Berkeley College, Yale, were all named after him.\nBiography.\nIreland.\nBerkeley was born at his family home, Dysart Castle, near Thomastown, County Kilkenny, Ireland, the eldest son of William Berkeley, a cadet of the noble family of Berkeley whose ancestry can be traced back to the Anglo-Saxon period and who had served as feudal lords and landowners in Gloucestershire, England. Little is known of his mother. He was educated at Kilkenny College and attended Trinity College Dublin, where he was elected a Scholar in 1702, being awarded BA in 1704 and MA and a Fellowship in 1707. He remained at Trinity College after the completion of his degree as a tutor and Greek lecturer.\nHis earliest publication was on mathematics, but the first that brought him notice was his \"\", first published in 1709. In the essay, Berkeley examines visual distance, magnitude, position and problems of sight and touch. While this work raised much controversy at the time, its conclusions are now accepted as an established part of the theory of optics.\nThe next publication to appear was the \"Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge\" in 1710, which had great success and gave him a lasting reputation, though few accepted his theory that nothing exists outside the mind. This was followed in 1713 by \"Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous\", in which he propounded his system of philosophy, the leading principle of which is that the world, as represented by our senses, depends for its existence on being perceived.\nFor this theory, the \"Principles\" gives the exposition and the \"Dialogues\" the defence. One of his main objectives was to combat the prevailing materialism of his time. The theory was largely received with ridicule, while even those such as Samuel Clarke and William Whiston, who did acknowledge his \"extraordinary genius,\" were nevertheless convinced that his first principles were false.\nEngland and Europe.\nShortly afterwards, Berkeley visited England and was received into the circle of Addison, Pope and Steele. In the period between 1714 and 1720, he interspersed his academic endeavours with periods of extensive travel in Europe, including one of the most extensive Grand Tours of the length and breadth of Italy ever undertaken. In 1721, he took Holy orders in the Church of Ireland, earning his doctorate in divinity, and once again chose to remain at Trinity College Dublin, lecturing this time in Divinity and in Hebrew. In 1721/2 he was made Dean of Dromore and, in 1724, Dean of Derry.\nIn 1723, Berkeley was named co-heir of Esther Vanhomrigh, along with the barrister Robert Marshall. This naming followed Vanhomrigh's violent quarrel with Jonathan Swift, who had been her intimate friend for many years. Vanhomrigh's choice of legatees caused a good deal of surprise since she did not know either of them well, although Berkeley as a very young man had known her father. Swift said that he did not grudge Berkeley his inheritance, much of which vanished in a lawsuit in any event. A story that Berkeley and Marshall disregarded a condition of the inheritance that they must publish the correspondence between Swift and Vanessa is probably untrue.\nIn 1725, Berkeley began the project of founding a college in Bermuda for training ministers and missionaries in the colony, in pursuit of which he gave up his deanery with its income of \u00a31,100.\nMarriage and America.\nOn 1 August 1728 at St Mary le Strand, London, Berkeley married Anne Forster, daughter of John Forster, Chief Justice of the Irish Common Pleas, and Forster's first wife Rebecca Monck. He then went to America on a salary of \u00a3100 per annum. He landed near Newport, Rhode Island, where he bought a plantation at Middletown\u00a0\u2013 the famous \"Whitehall\". Berkeley purchased several enslaved Africans to work on the plantation. In 2023, Trinity College Dublin removed Berkeley's name from one of its libraries because of his slave ownership and his active defence of slavery.\nIt has been claimed that \"he introduced Palladianism into America by borrowing a design from [William] Kent's \"Designs of Inigo Jones\" for the door-case of his house in Rhode Island, Whitehall\". He also brought to New England John Smibert, the Scottish artist he \"discovered\" in Italy, who is generally regarded as the founding father of American portrait painting. Meanwhile, he drew up plans for the ideal city he planned to build on Bermuda. He lived at the plantation while he waited for funds for his college to arrive. The funds, however, were not forthcoming. \"With the withdrawal from London of his own persuasive energies, opposition gathered force; and the Prime Minister, Walpole grew steadily more sceptical and lukewarm. At last it became clear that the essential Parliamentary grant would be not forthcoming\", and in 1732 he left America and returned to London.\nHe and Anne had four children who survived infancy\u00a0\u2013 Henry, George, William and Julia\u00a0\u2013 and at least two others who did not. William's death in 1751 was a great cause of grief for his father.\nEpiscopate in Ireland.\nBerkeley was nominated to be the Bishop of Cloyne in the Church of Ireland on 18 January 1734. He was consecrated as such on 19 May 1734. He was the Bishop of Cloyne until his death on 14 January 1753, although he died at Oxford (see below).\nHumanitarian work.\nWhile living in London's Saville Street, he took part in efforts to create a home for the city's abandoned children. The Foundling Hospital was founded by royal charter in 1739, and Berkeley is listed as one of its original governors.\nLast works.\nHis last two publications were \"Siris: A Chain of Philosophical Reflexions and Inquiries Concerning the Virtues of Tarwater, And divers other Subjects connected together and arising one from another\" (1744) and \"Further Thoughts on Tar-water\" (1752). Pine tar is an effective antiseptic and disinfectant when applied to cuts on the skin, but Berkeley argued for the use of pine tar as a broad panacea for diseases. His 1744 work on tar-water sold more copies than any of his other books during Berkeley's lifetime.\nHe remained at Cloyne until 1752, when he retired. With his wife and daughter Julia, he went to Oxford to live with his son George and supervise his education. He died soon afterwards and was buried in Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford. His affectionate disposition and genial manners made him much loved and held in warm regard by many of his contemporaries. Anne outlived her husband by many years, and died in 1786.\nContributions to philosophy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;According to Berkeley there are only two kinds of things: spirits and ideas. Spirits are simple, active beings which produce and perceive ideas; ideas are passive beings which are produced and perceived. \nThe use of the concepts of \"spirit\" and \"idea\" is central in Berkeley's philosophy. As used by him, these concepts are difficult to translate into modern terminology. His concept of \"spirit\" is close to the concept of \"conscious subject\" or of \"mind\", and the concept of \"idea\" is close to the concept of \"sensation\" or \"state of mind\" or \"conscious experience\".\nThus Berkeley denied the existence of matter as a metaphysical substance, but did not deny the existence of physical objects such as apples or mountains (\"I do not argue against the existence of any one thing that we can apprehend, either by sense or reflection. That the things I see with mine eyes and touch with my hands do exist, really exist, I make not the least question. The only thing whose existence we deny, is that which philosophers call matter or corporeal substance. And in doing of this, there is no damage done to the rest of mankind, who, I dare say, will never miss it.\", \"Principles\" #35). This basic claim of Berkeley's thought, his \"idealism\", is sometimes and somewhat derisively called \"immaterialism\" or, occasionally, subjective idealism. In \"Principles\" #3, he wrote, using a combination of Latin and English, \"esse is percipi\" (to be is to be perceived), most often if slightly inaccurately attributed to Berkeley as the pure Latin phrase esse est percipi. The phrase appears associated with him in authoritative philosophical sources, e.g., \"Berkeley holds that there are no such mind-independent things, that, in the famous phrase, \"esse est percipi (aut percipere)\"\u2014to be is to be perceived (or to perceive).\"\nHence, human knowledge is reduced to two elements: that of spirits and of ideas (\"Principles\" #86). In contrast to ideas, a spirit cannot be perceived. A person's spirit, which perceives ideas, is to be comprehended intuitively by inward feeling or reflection (\"Principles\" #89). For Berkeley, we have no direct 'idea' of spirits, albeit we have good reason to believe in the existence of other spirits, for their existence explains the purposeful regularities we find in experience (\"It is plain that we cannot know the existence of other spirits otherwise than by their operations, or the ideas by them excited in us\", \"Dialogues\" #145). This is the solution that Berkeley offers to the problem of other minds. Finally, the order and purposefulness of the whole of our experience of the world and especially of nature overwhelms us into believing in the existence of an extremely powerful and intelligent spirit that causes that order. According to Berkeley, reflection on the attributes of that external spirit leads us to identify it with God. Thus a material thing such as an apple consists of a collection of ideas (shape, colour, taste, physical properties, etc.) which are caused in the spirits of humans by the spirit of God.\nTheology.\nA convinced adherent of Christianity, Berkeley believed God to be present as an immediate cause of all our experiences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He did not evade the question of the external source of the diversity of the sense data at the disposal of the human individual. He strove simply to show that the causes of sensations could not be things, because what we called things, and considered without grounds to be something different from our sensations, were built up wholly from sensations. There must consequently be some other external source of the inexhaustible diversity of sensations. The source of our sensations, Berkeley concluded, could only be God; He gave them to man, who had to see in them signs and symbols that carried God's word.\nHere is Berkeley's proof of the existence of God:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whatever power I may have over my own thoughts, I find the ideas actually perceived by Sense have not a like dependence on my will. When in broad daylight I open my eyes, it is not in my power to choose whether I shall see or no, or to determine what particular objects shall present themselves to my view; and so likewise as to the hearing and other senses; the ideas imprinted on them are not creatures of my will. There is therefore some other Will or Spirit that produces them. (Berkeley. \"Principles\" #29)\nAs T. I. Oizerman explained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Berkeley's mystic idealism (as Kant aptly christened it) claimed that nothing separated man and God (except materialist misconceptions, of course), since nature or matter did not exist as a reality independent of consciousness. The revelation of God was directly accessible to man, according to this doctrine; it was the sense-perceived world, the world of man's sensations, which came to him from on high for him to decipher and so grasp the divine purpose.\nBerkeley believed that God is not the distant engineer of Newtonian machinery that in the fullness of time led to the growth of a tree in the university quadrangle. Rather, the perception of the tree is an idea that God's mind has produced in the mind, and the tree continues to exist in the quadrangle when \"nobody\" is there, simply because God is an infinite mind that perceives all.\nThe philosophy of David Hume concerning causality and objectivity is an elaboration of another aspect of Berkeley's philosophy. A.A. Luce, the most eminent Berkeley scholar of the 20th century, constantly stressed the continuity of Berkeley's philosophy. The fact that Berkeley returned to his major works throughout his life, issuing revised editions with only minor changes, also counts against any theory that attributes to him a significant volte-face.\nYet as Colin Murray Turbayne observed, late entries found amidst Berkeley's unpublished private notes in the \"Philosophical Commentaries\" point toward his inclination to withdraw from a dogmatic form of ontological idealism in order to adopt a more skeptical attitude toward the existence of an active, universal substantial mind such as God. Here, Berkeley's \"official doctrine\" that \"Mind is a substance.\" in a literal sense is accompanied by additional puzzling references to a universal \"thinking substance, something unknown\" (687) and \"the substance of Spirit we do not know, it not being knowable\" (701). In his exegesis of the term \"substance\", and his description of the soul as a substance in which ideas \"inhere\" while it \"supports\" ideas, Berkeley also asserts that he must \"use utmost caution not to give give the least handle of offense to the Church or Church-men (715)\". Keeping in mind Berkeley's development of a philosophy of science and his theory of vision, this suggests that his final references to God as a universal and \"substantial mind\" are essentially metaphorical in nature and indicate a willingness to diplomatically uphold a \"purely substantivalist conception of the mind, confirmed by his private utterances\".\nRelativity arguments.\nJohn Locke (Berkeley's intellectual predecessor) states that we define an object by its primary and secondary qualities. He takes heat as an example of a secondary quality. If you put one hand in a bucket of cold water, and the other hand in a bucket of warm water, then put both hands in a bucket of lukewarm water, one of your hands is going to tell you that the water is cold and the other that the water is hot. Locke says that since two different objects (both your hands) perceive the water to be hot \"and\" cold, then the heat is not a quality of the water.\nWhile Locke used this argument to distinguish primary from secondary qualities, Berkeley extends it to cover primary qualities in the same way. For example, he says that size is not a quality of an object because the size of the object depends on the distance between the observer and the object, or the size of the observer. Since an object is a different size to different observers, then size is not a quality of the object. Berkeley rejects shape with a similar argument and then asks: if neither primary qualities nor secondary qualities are of the object, then how can we say that there is anything more than the qualities we observe?\nRelativity is the idea that there is no objective, universal truth; it is a state of dependence in which the existence of one independent object is solely dependent on that of another. According to Locke, characteristics of primary qualities are mind-independent, such as shape, size, etc., whereas secondary qualities are mind-dependent, for example, taste and colour. George Berkeley refuted John Locke's belief on primary and secondary qualities because Berkeley believed that \"we cannot abstract the primary qualities (e.g shape) from secondary ones (e.g colour)\". Berkeley argued that perception is dependent on the distance between the observer and the object, and \"thus, we cannot conceive of mechanist material bodies which are extended but not (in themselves) colored\". What perceived can be the same type of quality, but completely opposite from each other because of different positions and perceptions, what we perceive can be different even when the same types of things consist of contrary qualities. Secondary qualities aid in people's conception of primary qualities in an object, like how the colour of an object leads people to recognize the object itself. More specifically, the colour red can be perceived in apples, strawberries, and tomatoes, yet we would not know what these might look like without its colour. We would also be unaware of what the colour red looked like if red paint, or any object that has a perceived red colour, failed to exist. From this, we can see that colours cannot exist on their own and can solely represent a group of perceived objects. Therefore, both primary and secondary qualities are mind-dependent: they cannot exist without our minds.\nGeorge Berkeley was a philosopher who opposed rationalism and \"classical\" empiricism. He was a \"subjective idealist\" or \"empirical idealist\", who believed that reality is constructed entirely of immaterial, conscious minds and their ideas; everything that exists is somehow dependent on the subject perceiving it, except the subject themselves. He refuted the existence of abstract objects that many other philosophers believed to exist, notably Plato. According to Berkeley, \"an abstract object does not exist in space or time and which is therefore entirely non-physical and non-mental\"; however, this argument contradicts his relativity argument. If \"esse est percipi\", (Latin meaning that to exist is to be perceived) is true, then the objects in the relativity argument made by Berkeley can either exist or not. Berkeley believed that only the minds' perceptions and the Spirit that perceives are what exists in reality; what people perceive every day is only the idea of an object's existence, but the objects themselves are not perceived. Berkeley also discussed how, at times, materials cannot be perceived by oneself, and the mind of oneself cannot understand the objects. However, there also exists an \"omnipresent, eternal mind\" that Berkeley believed to consist of God and the Spirit, both omniscient and all-perceiving. According to Berkeley, God is the entity who controls everything, yet Berkeley also argued that \"abstract object[s] do not exist in space or time\". In other words, as Warnock argues, Berkeley \"had recognized that he could not square with his own talk of \"spirits\", of our minds and of God; for these are perceivers and not among objects of perception. Thus he says, rather weakly and without elucidation, that in addition to our ideas, we also have \"notions\"\u2014we know what it means to speak of \"spirits\" and their operations.\"\nHowever, the relativity argument violates the idea of immaterialism. Berkeley's immaterialism argues that \"esse est percipi (aut percipere)\", which in English is: to be is to be perceived (or to perceive). That is saying only what is perceived or perceived is real, and without our perception or God's nothing can be real. Yet, if the relativity argument, also by Berkeley, argues that the perception of an object depends on the different positions, then this means that what is perceived can either be real or not because the perception does not show that whole picture and the whole picture cannot be perceived. Berkeley also believes that \"when one perceives mediately, one perceives one idea by means of perceiving another\". By this, it can be elaborated that if the standards of what perceived at first are different, what perceived after that can be different, as well. In the heat perception described above, one hand perceived the water to be hot and the other hand perceived the water to be cold due to relativity. If applying the idea \"to be is to be perceived\", the water should be both cold and hot because both perceptions are perceived by different hands. However, the water cannot be cold and hot at the same time for it self-contradicts, so this shows that what perceived is not always true because it sometimes can break the law of noncontradiction. In this case, \"it would be arbitrary anthropocentrism to claim that humans have special access to the true qualities of objects\". The truth for different people can be different, and humans are limited to accessing the absolute truth due to relativity. Summing up, nothing can be absolutely true due to relativity or the two arguments, to be is to be perceived and the relativity argument, do not always work together.\nNew theory of vision.\nIn his \"Essay Towards a New Theory of Vision\", Berkeley frequently criticised the views of the Optic Writers, a title that seems to include Molyneux, Wallis, Malebranche and Descartes. In sections 1\u201351, Berkeley argued against the classical scholars of optics by holding that: \"spatial depth, as the distance that separates the perceiver from the perceived object is itself invisible\". That is, we do not see space directly or deduce its form logically using the laws of optics. Space for Berkeley is no more than a contingent expectation that visual and tactile sensations will follow one another in regular sequences that we come to expect through habit.\nBerkeley goes on to argue that visual cues, such as the perceived extension or 'confusion' of an object, can only be used to indirectly judge distance, because the viewer learns to associate visual cues with tactile sensations. Berkeley gives the following analogy regarding indirect distance perception: one perceives distance indirectly just as one perceives a person's embarrassment indirectly. When looking at an embarrassed person, we infer indirectly that the person is embarrassed by observing the red colour on the person's face. We know through experience that a red face tends to signal embarrassment, as we've learned to associate the two.\nThe question concerning the visibility of space was central to the Renaissance perspective tradition and its reliance on classical optics in the development of pictorial representations of spatial depth. This matter has been debated by scholars since the 11th-century Arab polymath and mathematician Alhazen (Ab\u016b \u02bfAl\u012b al-\u1e24asan ibn al-\u1e24asan ibn al-Haytham) affirmed in experimental contexts the visibility of space. This issue, which was raised in Berkeley's theory of vision, was treated at length in the \"Phenomenology of Perception\" of Maurice Merleau-Ponty, in the context of confirming the visual perception of spatial depth (\"la profondeur\"), and by way of refuting Berkeley's thesis.\nBerkeley wrote about the perception of size in addition to that of distance. He is frequently misquoted as believing in size\u2013distance invariance\u2014a view held by the Optic Writers. This idea is that we scale the image size according to distance in a geometrical manner. The error may have become commonplace because the eminent historian and psychologist E. G. Boring perpetuated it. In fact, Berkeley argued that the same cues that evoke distance also evoke size, and that we do not first see size and then calculate distance. It is worth quoting Berkeley's words on this issue (Section 53):\nWhat inclines men to this mistake (beside the humour of making one see by geometry) is, that the same perceptions or ideas which suggest distance, do also suggest magnitude ... I say they do not first suggest distance, and then leave it to the judgement to use that as a medium, whereby to collect the magnitude; but they have as close and immediate a connexion with the magnitude as with the distance; and suggest magnitude as independently of distance, as they do distance independently of magnitude.\nBerkeley claimed that his visual theories were \"vindicated\" by a 1728 report regarding the recovery of vision in a 13-year-old boy operated for congenital cataracts by surgeon William Cheselden. In 2021, the name of Cheselden's patient was published for the first time: Daniel Dolins. Berkeley knew the Dolins family, had numerous social links to Cheselden, including the poet Alexander Pope, and Princess Caroline, to whom Cheselden's patient was presented. The report misspelt Cheselden's name, used language typical of Berkeley, and may even have been ghost-written by Berkeley. Unfortunately, Dolins was never able to see well enough to read, and there is no evidence that the surgery improved Dolins' vision at any point prior to his death at age 30.\nPhilosophy of physics.\n\"Berkeley's works display his keen interest in natural philosophy [...] from his earliest writings (\"Arithmetica\", 1707) to his latest (\"Siris\", 1744). Moreover, much of his philosophy is shaped fundamentally by his engagement with the science of his time.\" The profundity of this interest can be judged from numerous entries in Berkeley's \"Philosophical Commentaries\" (1707\u20131708), e.g. \"Mem. to Examine &amp; accurately discuss the scholium of the 8th Definition of Mr Newton's Principia.\" (#316)\nBerkeley argued that forces and gravity, as defined by Newton, constituted \"occult qualities\" that \"expressed nothing distinctly\". He held that those who posited \"something unknown in a body of which they have no idea and which they call the principle of motion, are in fact simply stating that the principle of motion is unknown\". Therefore, those who \"affirm that active force, action, and the principle of motion are really in bodies are adopting an opinion not based on experience\". Forces and gravity existed nowhere in the phenomenal world. On the other hand, if they resided in the category of \"soul\" or \"incorporeal thing\", they \"do not properly belong to physics\" as a matter. Berkeley thus concluded that forces lay beyond any kind of empirical observation and could not be a part of proper science. He proposed his theory of signs as a means to explain motion and matter without reference to the \"occult qualities\" of force and gravity.\nBerkeley's razor.\nBerkeley's razor is a rule of reasoning proposed by the philosopher Karl Popper in his study of Berkeley's key scientific work \"De Motu\". Berkeley's razor is considered by Popper to be similar to Ockham's razor but \"more powerful\". It represents an extreme, empiricist view of scientific observation that states that the scientific method provides us with no true insight into the nature of the world. Rather, the scientific method gives us a variety of partial explanations about regularities that hold in the world and that are gained through experiments. The nature of the world, according to Berkeley, is only approached through proper metaphysical speculation and reasoning. Popper summarises Berkeley's razor as such:\nA general practical result\u2014which I propose to call \"Berkeley's razor\"\u2014of [Berkeley's] analysis of physics allows us \"a priori\" to eliminate from physical science all essentialist explanations. If they have a mathematical and predictive content they may be admitted \"qua\" mathematical hypotheses (while their essentialist interpretation is eliminated). If not they may be ruled out altogether. This razor is sharper than Ockham's: \"all\" entities are ruled out except those which are perceived.\nIn another essay of the same book titled \"Three Views Concerning Human Knowledge\", Popper argues that Berkeley is to be considered as an instrumentalist philosopher, along with Robert Bellarmine, Pierre Duhem and Ernst Mach. According to this approach, scientific theories have the status of serviceable fictions, useful inventions aimed at explaining facts, and without any pretension to being true. Popper contrasts instrumentalism with the above-mentioned essentialism and his own \"critical rationalism\".\nPhilosophy of mathematics.\nIn addition to his contributions to philosophy, Berkeley was also very influential in the development of mathematics, although in a rather indirect sense. \"Berkeley was concerned with mathematics and its philosophical interpretation from the earliest stages of his intellectual life.\" Berkeley's \"Philosophical Commentaries\" (1707\u20131708) witness to his interest in mathematics:\nAxiom. No reasoning about things whereof we have no idea. Therefore no reasoning about Infinitesimals. (#354)\nTake away the signs from Arithmetic &amp; Algebra, &amp; pray what remains? (#767)\nThese are sciences purely Verbal, &amp; entirely useless but for Practise in Societys of Men. No speculative knowledge, no comparison of Ideas in them. (#768)\nIn 1707, Berkeley published two treatises on mathematics. In 1734, he published \"The Analyst\", subtitled \"A DISCOURSE Addressed to an Infidel Mathematician\", a critique of calculus. Florian Cajori called this treatise \"the most spectacular event of the century in the history of British mathematics.\" However, a recent study suggests that Berkeley misunderstood Leibnizian calculus. The mathematician in question is believed to have been either Edmond Halley, or Isaac Newton himself\u2014though if to the latter, then the discourse was posthumously addressed, as Newton died in 1727. \"The Analyst\" represented a direct attack on the foundations and principles of calculus and, in particular, the notion of fluxion or infinitesimal change, which Newton and Leibniz used to develop the calculus. In his critique, Berkeley coined the phrase \"ghosts of departed quantities\", familiar to students of calculus. Ian Stewart's book \"From Here to Infinity\" captures the gist of his criticism.\nBerkeley regarded his criticism of calculus as part of his broader campaign against the religious implications of Newtonian mechanics\u00a0\u2013 as a defence of traditional Christianity against deism, which tends to distance God from His worshipers. Specifically, he observed that both Newtonian and Leibnizian calculus employed infinitesimals sometimes as positive, nonzero quantities and other times as a number explicitly equal to zero. Berkeley's key point in \"The Analyst\" was that Newton's calculus (and the laws of motion based on calculus) lacked rigorous theoretical foundations. He claimed that:\nIn every other Science Men prove their Conclusions by their Principles, and not their Principles by the Conclusions. But if in yours you should allow your selves this unnatural way of proceeding, the Consequence would be that you must take up with Induction, and bid adieu to Demonstration. And if you submit to this, your Authority will no longer lead the way in Points of Reason and Science.\nBerkeley did not doubt that calculus produced real-world truth; simple physics experiments could verify that Newton's method did what it claimed to do. \"The cause of Fluxions cannot be defended by reason\", but the results could be defended by empirical observation, Berkeley's preferred method of acquiring knowledge at any rate. Berkeley, however, found it paradoxical that \"Mathematicians should deduce true Propositions from false Principles, be right in Conclusion, and yet err in the Premises.\" In \"The Analyst\" he endeavoured to show \"how Error may bring forth Truth, though it cannot bring forth Science\". Newton's science, therefore, could not on purely scientific grounds justify its conclusions, and the mechanical, deistic model of the universe could not be rationally justified.\nThe difficulties raised by Berkeley were still present in the work of Cauchy whose approach to calculus was a combination of infinitesimals and a notion of limit, and were eventually sidestepped by Weierstrass by means of his (\u03b5, \u03b4) approach, which eliminated infinitesimals altogether. More recently, Abraham Robinson restored infinitesimal methods in his 1966 book \"Non-standard analysis\" by showing that they can be used rigorously.\nMoral philosophy.\nThe tract \"A Discourse on Passive Obedience\" (1712) is considered Berkeley's major contribution to moral and political philosophy.\nIn \"A Discourse on Passive Obedience\", Berkeley defends the thesis that people have \"a moral duty to observe the negative precepts (prohibitions) of the law, including the duty not to resist the execution of punishment.\" However, Berkeley does make exceptions to this sweeping moral statement, stating that we need not observe precepts of \"usurpers or even madmen\" and that people can obey different supreme authorities if there are more than one claims to the highest authority.\nBerkeley defends this thesis with deductive proof stemming from the laws of nature. First, he establishes that because God is perfectly good, the end to which he commands humans must also be good, and that end must not benefit just one person, but the entire human race. Because these commands\u2014or laws\u2014if practised, would lead to the general fitness of humankind, it follows that they can be discovered by the right reason\u2014for example, the law to never resist supreme power can be derived from reason because this law is \"the only thing that stands between us and total disorder\". Thus, these laws can be called the laws of nature, because they are derived from God\u2014the creator of nature himself. \"These laws of nature include duties never to resist the supreme power, lie under oath ... or do evil so that good may come of it.\"\nOne may view Berkeley's doctrine on Passive Obedience as a kind of 'Theological Utilitarianism', insofar as it states that we have a duty to uphold a moral code which presumably is working towards the ends of promoting the good of humankind. However, the concept of 'ordinary' utilitarianism is fundamentally different in that it \"makes utility the one and only \"ground\" of obligation\"\u2014that is, Utilitarianism is concerned with whether particular actions are morally permissible in specific situations, while Berkeley's doctrine is concerned with whether or not we should follow moral rules in any and all circumstances. Whereas act utilitarianism might, for example, justify a morally impermissible act in light of the specific situation, Berkeley's doctrine of Passive Obedience holds that it is never morally permissible to not follow a moral rule, even when it seems like breaking that moral rule might achieve the happiest ends. Berkeley holds that even though sometimes, the consequences of an action in a specific situation might be bad, the general tendencies of that action benefit humanity.\nOther important sources for Berkeley's views on morality are \"Alciphron\" (1732), especially dialogues I\u2013III, and the \"Discourse to Magistrates\" (1738).\" \"Passive Obedience\" is notable partly for containing one of the earliest statements of rule utilitarianism.\nImmaterialism.\nGeorge Berkeley\u2019s theory that matter does not exist comes from the belief that \"sensible things are those only which are immediately perceived by sense.\" Berkeley says in his book called \"Principles of Human Knowledge\" that \"the ideas of sense are stronger, livelier, and clearer than those of the imagination; and they are also steady, orderly and coherent.\" From this we can tell that the things that we are perceiving are truly real rather than it just being a dream.\nAll knowledge comes from perception; what we perceive are ideas, not things in themselves; a thing in itself must be outside experience; so the world only consists of ideas and minds that perceive those ideas; a thing only exists so far as it perceives or is perceived. Through this we can see that consciousness is considered something that exists to Berkeley due to its ability to perceive. \"'To be,' said of the object, means to be perceived, 'esse est percipi'; 'to be', said of the subject, means to perceive or 'percipere'.\" Having established this, Berkeley then attacks the \"opinion strangely prevailing amongst men, that houses, mountains, rivers, and in a word all sensible objects have an existence natural or real, distinct from being perceived\". He believes this idea to be inconsistent because such an object with an existence independent of perception must have both sensible qualities, and thus be known (making it an idea), and also an insensible reality, which Berkeley believes is inconsistent. Berkeley believes that the error arises because people think that perceptions can imply or infer something about the material object. Berkeley calls this concept \"abstract ideas\". He rebuts this concept by arguing that people cannot conceive of an object without also imagining the sensual input of the object. He argues in \"Principles of Human Knowledge\" that, similar to how people can only sense matter with their senses through the actual sensation, they can only conceive of matter (or, rather, ideas of matter) through the idea of sensation of matter. This implies that everything that people can conceive in regards to matter is only ideas about matter. Thus, matter, should it exist, must exist as collections of ideas, which can be perceived by the senses and interpreted by the mind. But if matter is just a collection of ideas, then Berkeley concludes that matter, in the sense of a material substance, does not exist as most philosophers of Berkeley's time believed. Indeed, if a person visualizes something, then it must have some colour, however dark or light; it cannot just be a shape of no colour at all if a person is to visualize it.\nBerkeley's ideas raised controversy because his argument refuted Descartes' philosophy, which was expanded upon by Locke, and resulted in the rejection of Berkeley's form of empiricism by several philosophers of the eighteenth century. In Locke's philosophy, \"the world causes the perceptual ideas we have of it by the way it interacts with our senses.\" This contradicts with Berkeley's philosophy because not only does it suggest the existence of physical causes in the world, but in fact, there is no physical world beyond our ideas. The only causes that exist in Berkeley's philosophy are those that are a result of the use of the will.\nBerkeley's theory relies heavily on his form of empiricism, which in turn relies heavily on the senses. His empiricism can be defined by five propositions: all significant words stand for ideas; all knowledge of things is about ideas; all ideas come from without or from within; if from without it must be by the senses, and they are called sensations (the real things), if from within they are the operations of the mind, and are called thoughts. Berkeley clarifies his distinction between ideas by saying they \"are imprinted on the senses,\" \"perceived by attending to the passions and operations of the mind,\" or \"are formed by help of memory and imagination.\" One refutation of his idea was: if someone leaves a room and stops perceiving that room does that room no longer exist? Berkeley answers this by claiming that it is still being perceived and the consciousness that is doing the perceiving is God. (This makes Berkeley's argument hinge upon an omniscient, omnipresent deity.) This claim is the only thing holding up his argument which is \"depending for our knowledge of the world, and of the existence of other minds, upon a God that would never deceive us.\" Berkeley anticipates a second objection, which he refutes in \"Principles of Human Knowledge\". He anticipates that the materialist may take a representational materialist standpoint: although the senses can only perceive ideas, these ideas resemble (and thus can be compared to) the actual, existing object. Thus, through the sensing of these ideas, the mind can make inferences as to matter itself, even though pure matter is non-perceivable. Berkeley's objection to that notion is that \"an idea can be like nothing but an idea; a colour or figure can be like nothing but another colour or figure\". Berkeley distinguishes between an idea, which is mind-dependent, and a material substance, which is not an idea and is mind-independent. As they are not alike, they cannot be compared, just as one cannot compare the colour red to something that is invisible, or the sound of music to silence, other than that one exists and the other does not. This is called the likeness principle: the notion that an idea can only be like (and thus compared to) another idea.\nBerkeley attempted to show how ideas manifest themselves into different objects of knowledge:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is evident to anyone who takes a survey of the objects of human knowledge, that they are either \"ideas\" actually imprinted on the senses; or else such as are perceived by attending to the passions and operations of the mind; or lastly \"ideas\" formed by help of memory and imagination\u2014either compounding, dividing, or barely representing those originally perceived in the aforesaid ways\". (Berkeley's emphasis.)\nBerkeley also attempted to prove the existence of God throughout his beliefs in immaterialism.\nInfluence.\nBerkeley's \"Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge\" was published three years before the publication of Arthur Collier's \"Clavis Universalis\", which made assertions similar to those of Berkeley's. However, there seemed to have been no influence or communication between the two writers.\nGerman philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer once wrote of him: \"Berkeley was, therefore, the first to treat the subjective starting-point really seriously and to demonstrate irrefutably its absolute necessity. He is the father of idealism...\".\nBerkeley is considered one of the originators of British empiricism. A linear development is often traced from three great \"British Empiricists\", leading from Locke through Berkeley to Hume.\nBerkeley influenced many modern philosophers, especially David Hume. Thomas Reid admitted that he put forward a drastic criticism of Berkeleianism after he had been an admirer of Berkeley's philosophical system for a long time. Berkeley's \"thought made possible the work of Hume and thus Kant, notes Alfred North Whitehead\". Some authors draw a parallel between Berkeley and Edmund Husserl.\nWhen Berkeley visited America, the American educator Samuel Johnson visited him, and the two later corresponded. Johnson convinced Berkeley to establish a scholarship program at Yale and to donate a large number of books, as well as his plantation, to the college when the philosopher returned to England. It was one of Yale's largest and most important donations; it doubled its library holdings, improved the college's financial position and brought Anglican religious ideas and English culture into New England. Johnson also took Berkeley's philosophy and used parts of it as a framework for his own American Practical Idealism school of philosophy. As Johnson's philosophy was taught to about half the graduates of American colleges between 1743 and 1776, and over half of the contributors to the \"Declaration of Independence\" were connected to it, Berkeley's ideas were indirectly a foundation of the American Mind.\nOutside of America, during Berkeley's lifetime, his philosophical ideas were comparatively uninfluential. But interest in his doctrine grew from the 1870s when Alexander Campbell Fraser, \"the leading Berkeley scholar of the nineteenth century\", published \"The Works of George Berkeley\". A powerful impulse to serious studies in Berkeley's philosophy was given by A.\u00a0A.\u00a0Luce and Thomas Edmund Jessop, \"two of the twentieth century's foremost Berkeley scholars\", thanks to whom Berkeley scholarship was raised to the rank of a special area of historico-philosophical science. In addition, the philosopher Colin Murray Turbayne wrote extensively on Berkeley's use of language as a model for visual, physiological, natural and metaphysical relationships.\nThe proportion of Berkeley scholarship, in literature on the history of philosophy, is increasing. This can be judged from the most comprehensive bibliographies on George Berkeley. During the period of 1709\u20131932, about 300 writings on Berkeley were published. That amounted to 1.5 publications per year. During the course of 1932\u20131979, over one thousand works were brought out, i.e., 20 works per year. Since then, the number of publications has reached 30 per annum. In 1977 publication began in Ireland of a special journal on Berkeley's life and thought (\"Berkeley Studies\"). In 1988, the Australian philosopher Colin Murray Turbayne established the International Berkeley Essay Prize Competition at the University of Rochester in an effort to advance scholarship and research on the works of Berkeley.\nOther than philosophy, Berkeley also influenced modern psychology with his work on John Locke's theory of association and how it could be used to explain how humans gain knowledge in the physical world. He also used the theory to explain perception, stating that all qualities were, as Locke would call them, \"secondary qualities\", therefore perception laid entirely in the perceiver and not in the object. These are both topics today studied in modern psychology.\nAppearances in literature.\nLord Byron's \"Don Juan\" references immaterialism in the Eleventh Canto:\n When Bishop Berkeley said 'there was no matter,'&lt;br&gt;\n And proved it\u2014't was no matter what he said:&lt;br&gt;\n They say his system 't is in vain to batter,&lt;br&gt;\n Too subtle for the airiest human head;&lt;br&gt;\n And yet who can believe it? I would shatter&lt;br&gt;\n Gladly all matters down to stone or lead,&lt;br&gt;\n Or adamant, to find the world a spirit,&lt;br&gt;\n And wear my head, denying that I wear it.\nHerman Melville humorously references Berkeley in Chapter 20 of Mardi (1849), when outlining a character's belief of being on board a ghostship:\nAnd here be it said, that for all his superstitious misgivings about the brigantine; his imputing to her something equivalent to a purely phantom-like nature, honest Jarl was nevertheless exceedingly downright and practical in all hints and proceedings concerning her. Wherein, he resembled my Right Reverend friend, Bishop Berkeley\u2013truly, one of your lords spiritual\u2014who, metaphysically speaking, holding all objects to be mere optical delusions, was, notwithstanding, extremely matter-of-fact in all matters touching matter itself. Besides being pervious to the points of pins, and possessing a palate capable of appreciating plum-puddings:\u2014which sentence reads off like a pattering of hailstones.\nJames Joyce references Berkeley's philosophy in the third episode of \"Ulysses\" (1922):\nWho watches me here? Who ever anywhere will read these written words? Signs on a white field. Somewhere to someone in your flutiest voice. The good bishop of Cloyne took the veil of the temple out of his shovel hat: veil of space with coloured emblems hatched on its field. Hold hard. Coloured on a flat: yes, that's right. Flat I see, then think distance, near, far, flat I see, east, back. Ah, see now!\nIn commenting on a review of \"\", author Vladimir Nabokov alludes to Berkeley's philosophy as informing his novel:\nAnd finally I owe no debt whatsoever (as Mr. Leonard seems to think) to the famous Argentine essayist and his rather confused compilation \"A New Refutation of Time.\" Mr. Leonard would have lost less of it had he gone straight to Berkeley and Bergson. (\"Strong Opinions\", pp. 2892\u201390)\nJames Boswell, in the part of his \"Life of Samuel Johnson\" covering the year 1763, recorded Johnson's opinion of one aspect of Berkeley's philosophy:\nAfter we came out of the church, we stood talking for some time together of Bishop Berkeley's ingenious sophistry to prove the non-existence of matter, and that every thing in the universe is merely ideal. I observed, that though we are satisfied his doctrine is untrue, it is impossible to refute it. I shall never forget the alacrity with which Johnson answered, striking his foot with mighty force against a large stone, till he rebounded from it,\u2013 \"I refute it \"thus\".\"\nCommemoration.\nBoth the University of California, Berkeley, and the city of Berkeley, California, were named after him, although the pronunciation has evolved to suit American English: ( ). The naming was suggested in 1866 by Frederick H.\u00a0Billings, a trustee of what was then called the College of California. Billings was inspired by Berkeley's \"Verses on the Prospect of Planting Arts and Learning in America\", particularly the final stanza: \"Westward the course of empire takes its way; the first four Acts already past, a fifth shall close the Drama with the day; time's noblest offspring is the last\".\nThe Town of Berkley, currently the least populated town in Bristol County, Massachusetts, was founded on 18\u00a0April 1735 and named for George Berkeley.\nA residential college and an Episcopal seminary at Yale University also bear Berkeley's name.\n\"Bishop Berkeley's Gold Medals\" were two awards given annually at Trinity College Dublin, \"provided outstanding merit is shown\", to candidates answering a special examination in Greek. The awards were founded in 1752 by Berkeley. However, they have not been awarded since 2011. Other elements of Berkeley's legacy at Trinity are currently under review (As of 2023[ [update]]) due to his support of slavery. For example, the library at Trinity that was named after him in 1978 was \"de-named\" in April 2023 and renamed in October 2024 after Irish poet Eavan Boland. Another memorialization of him in the form of a stained glass window will remain, but used as part of \"a retain-and-explain approach\" where his legacy will be given further context.\nAn Ulster History Circle blue plaque commemorating him is located in Bishop Street Within, the city of Derry.\nBerkeley's farmhouse in Middletown, Rhode Island, is preserved as Whitehall Museum House, also known as Berkeley House, and was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1970. St.\u00a0Columba's Chapel, located in the same town, was formerly named \"The Berkeley Memorial Chapel\", and the appellation still survives at the end of the formal name of the parish, \"St.\u00a0Columba's, the Berkeley Memorial Chapel\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11959", "revid": "50567234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11959", "title": "G. E. Moore", "text": "English philosopher (1873\u20131958)\nGeorge Edward Moore (4 November 1873 \u2013 24 October 1958) was an English philosopher, who with Bertrand Russell, Ludwig Wittgenstein and earlier Gottlob Frege was among the initiators of analytic philosophy. He and Russell began de-emphasising the idealism which was then prevalent among British philosophers and became known for advocating common-sense concepts and contributing to ethics, epistemology and metaphysics. He was said to have had an \"exceptional personality and moral character\". Ray Monk dubbed him \"the most revered philosopher of his era\".\nAs Professor of Philosophy at the University of Cambridge, he influenced but abstained from the Bloomsbury Group, an informal set of intellectuals. He edited the journal \"Mind\". He was a member of the Cambridge Apostles from 1894 to 1901, a fellow of the British Academy from 1918, and was chairman of the Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club in 1912\u20131944. A humanist, he presided over the British Ethical Union (now Humanists UK) in 1935\u20131936.\nLife.\nGeorge Edward Moore was born in Upper Norwood, in south-east London, on 4 November 1873, the middle child of seven of Daniel Moore, a medical doctor, and Henrietta Sturge. His grandfather was the author George Moore. His eldest brother was Thomas Sturge Moore, a poet, writer and engraver.\nHe was educated at Dulwich College and, in 1892, began attending Trinity College, Cambridge, to learn classics and moral sciences. His tripos results were a double first. He became a Fellow of Trinity in 1898 and was later University of Cambridge Professor of Mental Philosophy and Logic from 1925 to 1939.\nMoore is known best now for defending ethical non-naturalism, his emphasis on common sense for philosophical method, and the paradox that bears his name. He was admired by and influenced by other philosophers and some of the Bloomsbury Group. But unlike his colleague and admirer Bertrand Russell, who for some years thought Moore fulfilled his \"ideal of genius\", he is mostly unknown presently except among academic philosophers. Moore's essays are known for their clarity and circumspection of writing style and methodical and patient treatment of philosophical problems. He was critical of modern philosophy for lack of progress, which he saw as a stark contrast to the dramatic advances in the natural sciences since the Renaissance. Among Moore's most famous works are his \"Principia Ethica\", and his essays, \"The Refutation of Idealism\", \"A Defence of Common Sense\", and \"A Proof of the External World\".\nMoore was an important and admired member of the secretive Cambridge Apostles, a discussion group drawn from the British intellectual elite. At the time another member, 22-year-old Bertrand Russell, wrote \"I almost worship him as if he were a god. I have never felt such an extravagant admiration for anybody\", and would later write that \"for some years he fulfilled my ideal of genius. He was in those days beautiful and slim, with a look almost of inspiration as deeply passionate as Spinoza's.\"\nIn 1914 Moore traveled to Norway to visit Wittgenstein, here he took a series of notes later published as \"Notes dictated to G.E. Moore in Norway\". From 1918 to 1919, Moore was chairman of the Aristotelian Society, a group committed to the systematic study of philosophy, its historical development and its methods and problems. He was appointed to the Order of Merit in 1951. This was awarded to him at Buckingham Palace by King George VI. After a conversation with the King, he returned to his wife who was awaiting Moore back in the car and told her \"Do you know that the King had never heard of Wittgenstein!\". The title of Ludwig Wittgenstein's \"Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus\" was adopted at the suggestion of Moore, taking the title from Baruch Spinoza's \"Tractatus Theologico-Politicus\" (1670).\nMoore died in England in the Evelyn Nursing Home on 24 October 1958. He was cremated at Cambridge Crematorium on 28 October 1958 and his ashes interred at the Parish of the Ascension Burial Ground in the city. His wife, Dorothy Ely (1892\u20131977), was buried there. Together, they had two sons, the poet Nicholas Moore and the composer Timothy Moore.\nPhilosophy.\nEthics.\nHis influential work \"Principia Ethica\" is one of the main inspirations of the reaction against ethical naturalism (see ethical non-naturalism) and is partly responsible for the twentieth-century concern with meta-ethics.\nNaturalistic fallacy.\nMoore asserted that philosophical arguments can suffer from a confusion between the use of a term in a particular argument and the definition of that term (in all arguments). He named this confusion the naturalistic fallacy. For example, an ethical argument may claim that if an item has certain properties, then that item is 'good.' A hedonist may argue that 'pleasant' items are 'good' items. Other theorists may argue that 'complex' things are 'good' things. Moore contends that, even if such arguments are correct, they do not provide definitions for the term 'good'. The property of 'goodness' cannot be defined. It can only be shown and grasped. Any attempt to define it (X is good if it has property Y) will simply shift the problem (Why is Y-ness good in the first place?).\nOpen-question argument.\nMoore's argument for the indefinability of 'good' (and thus for the fallaciousness in the \"naturalistic fallacy\") is often termed the open-question argument; it is presented in http://. The argument concerns the nature of statements such as \"Anything that is pleasant is also good\" and the possibility of asking questions such as \"Is it \"good\" that x is pleasant?\". According to Moore, these questions are \"open\" and these statements are \"significant\"; and they will remain so no matter what is substituted for \"pleasure\". Moore concludes from this that any analysis of value is bound to fail. In other words, if value could be analysed, then such questions and statements would be trivial and obvious. Since they are anything but trivial and obvious, value must be indefinable.\nCritics of Moore's arguments sometimes claim that he is appealing to general puzzles concerning analysis (cf. the paradox of analysis), rather than revealing anything special about value. The argument clearly depends on the assumption that if 'good' were definable, it would be an analytic truth about 'good', an assumption that many contemporary moral realists like Richard Boyd and Peter Railton reject. Other responses appeal to the Fregean distinction between sense and reference, allowing that value concepts are special and \"sui generis\", but insisting that value properties are nothing but natural properties (this strategy is similar to that taken by non-reductive materialists in philosophy of mind).\nGood as indefinable.\nMoore contended that goodness cannot be analysed in terms of any other property. In \"Principia Ethica\", he writes:\n It may be true that all things which are good are also something else, just as it is true that all things which are yellow produce a certain kind of vibration in the light. And it is a fact, that Ethics aims at discovering what are those other properties belonging to all things which are good. But far too many philosophers have thought that when they named those other properties they were actually defining good; that these properties, in fact, were simply not \"other,\" but absolutely and entirely the same with goodness. (\"Principia\", http://)\nTherefore, we cannot define 'good' by explaining it in other words. We can only indicate a \"thing\" or an \"action\" and say \"That is good.\" Similarly, we cannot describe to a person born totally blind exactly what yellow is. We can only show a sighted person a piece of yellow paper or a yellow scrap of cloth and say \"That is yellow.\"\nGood as a non-natural property.\nIn addition to categorising 'good' as indefinable, Moore also emphasised that it is a non-natural property. This means that it cannot be empirically or scientifically tested or verified\u2014it is not analysable by \"natural science\".\nMoral knowledge.\nMoore argued that, once arguments based on the naturalistic fallacy had been discarded, questions of intrinsic goodness could be settled only by appeal to what he (following Sidgwick) termed \"moral intuitions\": self-evident propositions which recommend themselves to moral thought, but which are not susceptible to either direct proof or disproof (\"Principia\", http://). As a result of his opinion, he has often been described by later writers as an advocate of ethical intuitionism. Moore, however, wished to distinguish his opinions from the opinions usually described as \"Intuitionist\" when \"Principia Ethica\" was written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In order to express the fact that ethical propositions of my \"first\" class [propositions about what is good as an end in itself] are incapable of proof or disproof, I have sometimes followed Sidgwick's usage in calling them 'Intuitions.' But I beg that it may be noticed that I am not an 'Intuitionist,' in the ordinary sense of the term. Sidgwick himself seems never to have been clearly aware of the immense importance of the difference which distinguishes his Intuitionism from the common doctrine, which has generally been called by that name. The Intuitionist proper is distinguished by maintaining that propositions of my \"second\" class\u2014propositions which assert that a certain action is \"right\" or a \"duty\"\u2014are incapable of proof or disproof by any enquiry into the results of such actions. I, on the contrary, am no less anxious to maintain that propositions of \"this\" kind are \"not\" 'Intuitions,' than to maintain that propositions of my \"first\" class \"are\" Intuitions.\u2014\u200a\nMoore distinguished his view from the opinion of deontological intuitionists, who claimed that \"intuitions\" could determine questions about what \"actions\" are right or required by duty. Moore, as a consequentialist, argued that \"duties\" and moral rules could be determined by investigating the \"effects\" of particular actions or kinds of actions (\"Principia\", http://), and so were matters for empirical investigation rather than direct objects of intuition (\"Principia\", http://). According to Moore, \"intuitions\" revealed not the rightness or wrongness of specific actions, but only what items were good in themselves, as \"ends to be pursued\".\nRight action, duty and virtue.\nMoore holds that right actions are those producing the most good. The difficulty with this is that the consequences of most actions are too complex for us to properly take into account, especially the long-term consequences. Because of this, Moore suggests that the definition of duty is limited to what generally produces better results than probable alternatives in a comparatively near future. Whether a given rule of action is also a \"duty\" depends to some extent on the conditions of the corresponding society but \"duties\" agree mostly with what common-sense recommends. Virtues, like honesty, can in turn be defined as \"permanent dispositions\" to perform duties.\nProof of an external world.\nOne of the most important parts of Moore's philosophical development was his differing with the idealism that dominated British philosophy (as represented by the works of his former teachers F. H. Bradley and John McTaggart), and his defence of what he regarded as a \"common sense\" type of realism. In his 1925 essay \"A Defence of Common Sense\", he argued against idealism and scepticism toward the external world, on the grounds that they could not give reasons to accept that their metaphysical premises were more plausible than the reasons we have for accepting the common sense claims about our knowledge of the world, which sceptics and idealists must deny. He famously put the point into dramatic relief with his 1939 essay \"Proof of an External World\", in which he gave a common sense argument against scepticism by raising his right hand and saying \"Here is one hand\" and then raising his left and saying \"And here is another\", then concluding that there are at least two external objects in the world, and therefore that he knows (by this argument) that an external world exists. Not surprisingly, not everyone preferring sceptical doubts found Moore's method of argument entirely convincing; Moore, however, defends his argument on the grounds that sceptical arguments seem invariably to require an appeal to \"philosophical intuitions\" that we have considerably less reason to accept than we have for the common sense claims that they supposedly refute. The \"Here is one hand\" argument also influenced Ludwig Wittgenstein, who spent his last years working out a new method for Moore's argument in the remarks that were published posthumously as \"On Certainty\".)\nMoore's paradox.\nMoore is also remembered for drawing attention to the peculiar inconsistency involved in uttering a sentence such as \"It is raining, but I do not believe it is raining\", a puzzle now commonly termed \"Moore's paradox\". The puzzle is that it seems inconsistent for anyone to \"assert\" such a sentence; but there doesn't seem to be any \"logical contradiction\" between \"It is raining\" and \"I don't believe that it is raining\", because the former is a statement about the weather and the latter a statement about a person's belief about the weather, and it is perfectly logically possible that it may rain whilst a person does not believe that it is raining.\nIn addition to Moore's own work on the paradox, the puzzle also inspired a great deal of work by Ludwig Wittgenstein, who described the paradox as the most impressive philosophical insight that Moore had ever introduced. It is said that when Wittgenstein first heard this paradox one evening (which Moore had earlier stated in a lecture), he rushed round to Moore's lodgings, got him out of bed and insisted that Moore repeat the entire lecture to him.\nOrganic wholes.\nMoore's description of the principle of the organic whole is extremely straightforward, nonetheless, and a variant on a pattern that began with Aristotle:\n The value of a whole must not be assumed to be the same as the sum of the values of its parts (\"Principia\", http://).\nAccording to Moore, a moral actor cannot survey the 'goodness' inherent in the various parts of a situation, assign a value to each of them, and then generate a sum in order to get an idea of its total value. A moral scenario is a complex assembly of parts, and its total value is often created by the relations between those parts, and not by their individual value. The organic metaphor is thus very appropriate: biological organisms seem to have emergent properties which cannot be found anywhere in their individual parts. For example, a human brain seems to exhibit a capacity for thought when none of its neurons exhibit any such capacity. In the same way, a moral scenario can have a value different than the sum of its component parts.\nTo understand the application of the organic principle to questions of value, it is perhaps best to consider Moore's primary example, that of a consciousness experiencing a beautiful object. To see how the principle works, a thinker engages in \"reflective isolation\", the act of isolating a given concept in a kind of null context and determining its intrinsic value. In our example, we can easily see that, of themselves, beautiful objects and consciousnesses are not particularly valuable things. They might have some value, but when we consider the total value of a consciousness experiencing a beautiful object, it seems to exceed the simple sum of these values. Hence the value of a whole must not be assumed to be the same as the sum of the values of its parts.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11963", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11963", "title": "Gottleib Fichte", "text": ""}
{"id": "11964", "revid": "7770027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11964", "title": "Genus\u2013differentia definition", "text": "Type of intensional definition\nA genus\u2013differentia definition is a type of intensional definition, and it is composed of two parts:\nFor example, consider these two definitions:\nThose definitions can be expressed as one genus and two \"differentiae\":\nThe use of a genus (Greek: \"genos\") and a differentia (Greek: \"diaphora\") in constructing a definition goes back at least as far as Aristotle (384\u2013322 BCE). Furthermore, a genus may fulfill certain characteristics (described below) that qualify it to be referred to as \"a species\", a term derived from the Greek word \"eidos\", which means \"form\" in Plato's dialogues but should be taken to mean \"species\" in Aristotle's corpus.\nDifferentiation and abstraction.\nThe process of producing new definitions by \"extending\" existing definitions is commonly known as differentiation (and also as derivation). The reverse process, by which just part of an existing definition is used itself as a new definition, is called abstraction; the new definition is called \"an\u00a0abstraction\" and it is said to have been \"abstracted away from\" the existing definition.\nFor instance, consider the following:\nA part of that definition may be singled out (using parentheses here):\nand with that part, an abstraction may be formed:\nThen, the definition of \"a\u00a0square\" may be recast with that abstraction as its genus:\nSimilarly, the definition of \"a\u00a0square\" may be rearranged and another portion singled out:\nleading to the following abstraction:\nThen, the definition of \"a\u00a0square\" may be recast with that abstraction as its genus:\nIn fact, the definition of \"a\u00a0square\" may be recast in terms of both of the abstractions, where one acts as the genus and the other acts as the differentia:\nHence, abstraction is a means of simplifying definitions.\nMultiplicity.\nWhen multiple definitions could serve equally well, then all such definitions apply simultaneously. Thus, \"a\u00a0square\" is a member of both the genus \"[a] rectangle\" and the genus \"[a] rhombus\". In such a case, it is notationally convenient to consolidate the definitions into one definition that is expressed with multiple genera (and possibly no differentia, as in the following):\nor completely equivalently:\nMore generally, a collection of formula_1 equivalent definitions (each of which is expressed with one unique genus) can be recast as one definition that is expressed with formula_2 genera. Thus, the following:\ncould be recast as:\nStructure.\nA genus of a definition provides a means by which to specify an \"is-a relationship\":\nThe non-genus portion of the differentia of a definition provides a means by which to specify a \"has-a relationship\":\nWhen a system of definitions is constructed with genera and differentiae, the definitions can be thought of as nodes forming a hierarchy or\u2014more generally\u2014a directed acyclic graph; a node that has no predecessor is \"a\u00a0most general definition\"; each node along a directed path is \"more differentiated (or \"more derived) than any one of its predecessors, and a node with no successor is \"a\u00a0most differentiated\" (or \"a\u00a0most derived\") definition.\nWhen a definition, \"S\", is the tail of each of its successors (that is, \"S\" has at least one successor and each direct successor of \"S\" is a most differentiated definition), then \"S\" is often called \"the species of each of its successors, and each direct successor of \"S\" is often called \"an individual (or \"an entity\") of the species \"S\"; that is, the genus of an individual is synonymously called \"the\u00a0species\" of that individual. Furthermore, the differentia of an individual is synonymously called \"the identity\" of that individual. For instance, consider the following definition:\nIn this case:\nAs in that example, the identity itself (or some part of it) is often used to refer to the entire individual, a phenomenon that is known in linguistics as a \"pars\u00a0pro\u00a0toto synecdoche\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11966", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11966", "title": "Firearm", "text": "Gun for an individual\nA firearm is any type of gun that shoots projectiles using high explosive pressure generated from combustion (deflagration) of chemical propellant, most often black powder in antique firearms and smokeless powder in modern firearms. Small arms is a subset of light firearms that is designed to be readily carried and operated by an individual. The term \"firearm\" is however variably defined in both technically and legally in different countries (see legal definitions), and can be used colloquially (sometimes incorrectly) to refer to any type of guns.\nThe first firearms originated in 10th-century Song dynasty China (see gunpowder weapons in the Song dynasty), when bamboo tubes containing gunpowder and pellet projectiles were mounted on spears to make the portable fire lance, which was operable by a single person and was later used effectively as a shock weapon in the siege of De'an in 1132. In the 13th century, fire lance barrels were replaced with metal tubes and transformed into the metal-barreled hand cannon, and the technology gradually spread throughout Eurasia during the 14th century. Older firearms typically used black powder as a propellant, but modern firearms use smokeless powder or other explosive propellants. Most modern firearms (with the notable exception of smoothbore shotguns) have rifled barrels to impart a stabilizing spin to the bullet for improved external ballistics.\nModern firearms can be described by their caliber (i.e. bore diameter). For handguns and rifles this is given in millimeters or inches (e.g. 7.62mm or .308 in.); in the case of shotguns, gauge or bore (e.g. 12 ga. or .410 bore.). They are also described by the type of action employed (single-shot vs. repeating, e.g. muzzleloader, breechloader, lever, bolt, pump, revolver, semi-automatic, fully automatic, etc.), together with the usual means of deportment (i.e. handheld or mounted). Further classification may make reference to the type of barrel bore used (i.e. rifled vs smoothbore) and to the barrel length (e.g. 24 inches), to the firing mechanism (e.g. matchlock, flintlock, wheellock, caplock or primer-ignited such as needlefire, pinfire, teat-fire, rimfire and centerfire, as well as the atypical electronic firing), to the design's primary intended use (e.g. hunting rifle,\nservice rifle), or to the commonly accepted name for a particular variation (e.g. Gatling gun).\nShooters aim firearms at their targets with hand-eye coordination, using either iron sights or optical sights such as scope, red dot or holographic sights. The effective range of handguns and shotguns generally does not exceed , while most rifles are accurate to using iron sights, or to longer ranges whilst using optical sights. Purpose-built sniper rifles and anti-materiel rifles are accurate to ranges of more than . (Firearm rounds may be dangerous or lethal well beyond their accurate range; the minimum distance for safety is much greater than the specified range for accuracy.)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTypes.\nA firearm is a barreled weapon that inflicts damage on targets by launching one or more projectiles driven by rapidly expanding high-pressure gas produced by exothermic combustion (deflagration) of a chemical propellant, historically black powder, now smokeless powder.\nIn the military, firearms are categorized into \"heavy\" and \"light\" weapons by their portability. Light firearms are those that can be readily carried by individual foot soldier, though they might require more than one individual (i.e. crew-served) to achieve optimal operational capacity. Heavy firearms are those that are too large and heavy to be transported on foot, or too unstable against recoil, and thus require the support of a weapons platform (e.g. a fixed mount, wheeled carriage, vehicle, aircraft or water vessel) to be tactically mobile or useful.\nThe subset of light firearms that only use kinetic projectiles and are compact enough to be operated to full capacity by a single infantryman (individual-served) are also referred to as small arms. Such firearms include handguns such as pistols, revolvers, and derringers; and long guns such as rifles (and their subtypes), shotguns, submachine guns, and light machine guns.\nAmong the world's arms manufacturers, the top firearms manufacturers are Browning, Remington, Colt, Ruger, Smith &amp; Wesson, Savage, Mossberg (United States), Heckler &amp; Koch, SIG Sauer, Walther (Germany), \u010cZUB (Czech Republic), Glock, Steyr Arms (Austria), FN Herstal (Belgium), Beretta (Italy), Norinco (China), Rostec, and Kalashnikov (Russia). Former top producers included the Springfield Armory (United States), the Royal Small Arms Factory (United Kingdom), Mauser (Germany), Steyr-Daimler-Puch (Austria), and Rock Island Armory under Armscor (Philippines).\nAs of 2018[ [update]] the Small Arms Survey reported that there were over one billion firearms distributed globally, of which 857\u00a0million (about 85 percent) were in civilian hands. U.S. civilians alone account for 393\u00a0million (about 46 percent) of the worldwide total of civilian-held firearms. This amounts to \"120.5 firearms for every 100 residents\". The world's armed forces control about 133\u00a0million (about 13 percent) of the global total of small arms, of which over 43 percent belong to two countries: the Russian Federation (30.3\u00a0million) and China (27.5\u00a0million). Law enforcement agencies control about 23\u00a0million (about 2 percent) of the global total of small arms.\nHandguns.\nA handgun is, as defined generally and in many gun laws, a firearm that can be used with a single hand. They are the smallest of all firearms, and are common as sidearms, concealed carry weapons, or as backup weapons for self-defense.\nHandguns can be categorized into two broad types: pistols, which have a single fixed firing chamber machined into the rear of the barrel, and are often loaded using magazines of varying capacities; revolvers, which have a number of firing chambers or \"charge holes\" in a revolving cylinder, each one loaded with a single cartridge or charge; and derringers, broadly defined as any handgun that is not a traditional pistol nor a revolver.\nThere are various types of the aforementioned handguns designed for different mechanisms or purposes, such as single-shot, manual repeating, semi-automatic, or automatic pistols; single-action, double-action, or double-action/single-action revolvers; and small, compact handguns for concealed carry such as pocket pistols and \"Saturday night specials\".\nExamples of pistols include Glocks, Browning Hi-Power, M1911 pistol, Makarov pistol, Walther PP, Luger pistol, Mauser C96, and Beretta 92. Examples of revolvers include the Colt Single Action Army, Smith &amp; Wesson Model 10, Colt Official Police, Colt Python, New Nambu M60, and Mateba Autorevolver. Examples of derringers include the Remington Model 95, FP-45 Liberator, and COP .357 Derringer.\nLong guns.\nA long gun is any firearm with a notably long barrel, typically a length of (there are restrictions on minimum barrel length in many jurisdictions; maximum barrel length is usually a matter of practicality). Unlike a handgun, long guns are designed to be held and fired with both hands, while braced against either the hip or the shoulder for better stability. The receiver and trigger group is mounted into a stock made of wood, plastic, metal, or composite material, which has sections that form a foregrip, rear grip, and optionally (but typically) a shoulder mount called the \"butt\". Early long arms, from the Renaissance up to the mid-19th century, were generally smoothbore firearms that fired one or more ball shot, called muskets or arquebuses depending on caliber and firing mechanism. Since the 19th and 20th centuries, various types of long guns have been created for different purposes.\nRifles.\nA rifle is a long gun that has riflings (spiral grooves) machined into the bore (inner) surface of its barrel, imparting a gyroscopically stabilizing spin to the bullets that it fires. A descendant of the musket, rifles produce a single point of impact with each firing with a long range and high accuracy. For this reason, as well as for their ubiquity, rifles are very popular among militaries as service rifles, police as accurate long-range alternatives to their traditional shotgun long guns, and civilians for hunting, shooting sports, and self-defense.\nMany types of rifles exist owing to their wide adoption and versatility, ranging from mere barrel length differences as in short-barreled rifles and carbines, to classifications per the rifle's function and purpose as in semi-automatic rifles, automatic rifles and sniper rifles, to differences in the rifle's action as in single-shot, break-action, bolt-action, and lever-action rifles.\nExamples of rifles of various types include the Henry rifle, Winchester rifle, Lee\u2013Enfield, Gewehr 98, M1 Garand, MAS-36 rifle, AKM, Ruger 10/22, Heckler &amp; Koch G3, Remington Model 700, and Heckler &amp; Koch HK417.\nShotguns.\nA shotgun is a long gun that has a predominantly smoothbore barrel\u2014meaning it lacks rifling\u2014designed to fire a number of shot pellets in each discharge. These shot pellet sizes commonly range between 2\u00a0mm #9 birdshot and 8.4\u00a0mm #00 (double-aught) buckshot, and produce a cluster of impact points with considerably less range and accuracy, since shot spreads during flight. Shotguns are also capable of firing single solid projectiles called slugs, or specialty (often \"less lethal\") munitions such as bean bags or tear gas to function as a riot gun or breaching rounds to function as a door breaching shotgun. Shotgun munitions, regardless of type, are packed into shotgun shells (cartridges designed specifically for shotguns) that are loaded into the shotgun for use; these shells are commonly loose and manually loaded one-by-one, though some shotguns accept magazines.\nShotguns share many qualities with rifles, such as both being descendants of early long guns such as the musket; both having single-shot, break-action, bolt-action, lever-action, pump-action, semi-automatic, and automatic variants; and both being popular with militaries, police, and civilians for largely the same reasons. However, unlike rifles, shotguns are less favored in combat roles due to their low accuracy and limited effectiveness in modern warfare, with combat shotguns often only used for breaching or close-quarters combat and sometimes limited to underbarrel attachments such as the M26 Modular Accessory Shotgun System. Shotguns are still popular with civilians for the suitability of their shot spread in hunting, clay pigeon shooting, and home defense.\nDouble-barreled shotguns are break-action shotguns with two parallel barrels (horizontal side-by-side or vertical over-and-under), allowing two single shots that can be loaded and fired in quick succession.\nExamples of shotguns include the Winchester Model 1897, Browning Auto-5, Ithaca 37, Remington Model 870, Mossberg 500, Benelli M4, Franchi SPAS-12, Atchisson AA-12, and Knight's Armament Company Masterkey.\nCarbines.\nA carbine is a long gun, usually a rifle, that has had its barrel shortened from its original length or is of a certain size smaller than standard rifles, but is still large enough to be considered a long gun. How considerable the difference is between a rifle and a carbine varies; for example, the standard Heckler &amp; Koch G36's barrel has a length of 480\u00a0mm (18.9\u00a0in), the G36K carbine variant's barrel is 318\u00a0mm (12.5\u00a0in), and the G36C compact variant's barrel is 228\u00a0mm (9.0\u00a0in). Some carbines are also redesigned compared to their rifle counterparts, such as the aforementioned G36/G36K and G36C, or the AK-74 and AKS-74U. However, some carbines, such as the M1 carbine, are not a variant of any existing design and are their own firearm model. Carbines are regardless very similar to rifles and often have the same actions (single-shot, lever-action, bolt-action, semi-automatic, automatic, etc.). This similarity has given carbines the alternate name of \"short barreled rifle\" (SBR), though this more accurately describes a full-size rifle with a shortened carbine-style barrel for close-quarters use.\nThe small size of a carbine provides lighter weight and better maneuverability, making them ideal for close-quarters combat and storage in compact areas. This makes them popular firearms among special forces and police tactical units alongside submachine guns, considerably so since the late 1990s due to the familiarity and better stopping power of carbines compared to submachine guns. They are also popular with (and were originally mostly intended for) military personnel in roles that are expected to engage in combat, but where a full-size rifle would be an impediment to the primary duties of that soldier (logistical personnel, airborne forces, military engineers, officers, etc.), though since the turn of the millennium these have been superseded to a degree in some roles by personal defense weapons. Carbines are also common among civilian firearm owners who have size, space, and power concerns similar to military and police users.\nExamples of carbines include the Winchester Model 1892, Rifle No. 5 Mk I, SKS, M1 carbine, Ruger Mini-14, M4 carbine, and Kel-Tec SUB-2000.\nAssault rifles.\nAn assault rifle is commonly defined as a selective-fire rifle chambered in an intermediate cartridge (such as 5.56\u00d745mm NATO, 7.62\u00d739mm, 5.45\u00d739mm, and .300 AAC Blackout) and fed with a detachable magazine. Assault rifles are also usually smaller than full-sized rifles such as battle rifles.\nOriginating with the StG 44 produced by Nazi Germany during World War II, assault rifles have since become extremely popular among militaries and other armed groups due to their universal versatility, and they have made up the vast majority of standard-issue military service rifles since the mid-20th century. Various configurations of assault rifle exist, such as the bullpup, in which the firing grip is located in front of the breech instead of behind it.\nExamples of assault rifles include the Kalashnikov rifles of Soviet and Russian origin (such as the AK-47, AKM, and AK-74), as well as the American M4 carbine and M16 rifle.\nBattle rifles.\nA battle rifle is commonly defined as a semi-automatic or selective-fire rifle that is larger or longer than an assault rifle and is chambered in a \"full-power\" cartridge (e.g. 7.62\u00d751mm NATO, 7.92\u00d757mm Mauser, 7.62\u00d754mmR). The term originated as a retronym to differentiate older full-powered rifles of these configurations like the M1 Garand, from newer assault rifles using intermediate cartridges like the Heckler &amp; Koch HK33, but it is sometimes used to describe similar modern rifles such as the FN SCAR.\nBattle rifles serve similar purposes as assault rifles, as they both are usually employed by ground infantry for essentially the same purposes. However, some prefer battle rifles for their more powerful cartridge, despite the added recoil. Some designated marksman rifles are configured from battle rifles, such as the Mk 14 Enhanced Battle Rifle and United States Marine Corps Designated Marksman Rifle, both essentially heavily modified and modernized variants of the M14 rifle.\nExamples of rifles considered to be battle rifles include the FG 42, Gewehr 43, FN FAL, Howa Type 64, and Desert Tech MDR.\nSniper rifles.\nA sniper rifle is, per widespread definition, a high-powered precision rifle, often bolt-action or semi-automatic, with an effective range farther than that of a standard rifle. Though any rifle in a sniper configuration (usually with a telescopic sight and bipod) can be considered a sniper rifle, most sniper rifles are purpose-built for their applications, or are variants of existing rifles that have been modified to function as sniper rifles, such as the Type 97 sniper rifle, which was essentially a standard Type 38 rifle that was modified to be lighter and come with a telescopic sight.\nRelated developments are anti-materiel rifles, large-caliber rifles designed to destroy enemy materiel such as vehicles, supplies, or hardware; anti-tank rifles, anti-materiel rifles that were designed specifically to combat early armoured fighting vehicles, but are now largely obsolete due to advances in vehicle armour; scout rifles, a broad class of rifles generally summed up as short, lightweight, portable sniper rifles; and designated marksman rifles, semi-automatic high-precision rifles, usually chambered in intermediate or full-power cartridges, that fill the range gap between sniper rifles and regular rifles and are designed for designated marksmen in squads.\nExamples of sniper and scout rifles include the M40 rifle, Heckler &amp; Koch PSG1, Walther WA 2000, Accuracy International AWM, M24 Sniper Weapon System, Steyr Scout, Sako TRG, and CheyTac Intervention. Examples of anti-materiel and anti-tank rifles include the Mauser Tankgewehr M1918, Boys anti-tank rifle, PTRS-41, Barrett M82, Gep\u00e1rd anti-materiel rifle, and McMillan TAC-50. Examples of designated marksman rifles include the SVD, SR-25, Dragunov SVU, Marine Scout Sniper Rifle, Mk 14 Enhanced Battle Rifle, and M110 Semi-Automatic Sniper System.\nAutomatic rifles.\nAn automatic rifle is a magazine-fed rifle that is capable of automatic fire. They include most assault rifles and battle rifles, but originated as their own category of rifles capable of automatic fire, as opposed to the bolt-action and semi-automatic rifles commonly issued to infantry at the time of their invention. They usually have smaller magazine capacities than machine guns; the French Chauchat had a 20-round box magazine, while the Hotchkiss Mle 1914 machine gun, the French Army's standard machine gun at the time, was fed by a 250-round ammunition belt.\nThough automatic rifles are sometimes considered to be their own category, they are also occasionally considered to be other types of firearms that postdated their invention, usually as light machine guns. Automatic rifles are sometimes confused with machine guns or vice versa, or are defined as such by law; the National Firearms Act and Firearm Owners Protection Act define a \"machine gun\" in United States Code \"Title 26, Subtitle E, Chapter 53, Subchapter B, Part 1, \u00a7 5845\" as \"... any firearm which shoots ... automatically more than one shot, without manual reloading, by a single function of the trigger\". \"Machine gun\" is therefore largely synonymous with \"automatic weapon\" in American civilian parlance, covering all automatic firearms. In most jurisdictions, automatic rifles, as well as automatic firearms in general, are prohibited from civilian purchase or are at least heavily restricted; in the U.S. for instance, most automatic rifles are Title II weapons that require certain licenses and are greatly regulated.\nExamples of automatic rifles include the Cei-Rigotti, Lewis gun, Fedorov Avtomat, and M1918 Browning automatic rifle.\nMachine guns.\nA machine gun is a fully-automatic firearm, chambered in intermediate or full-power rifle cartridges, designed to provide sustained automatic direct fire as opposed to the semi-automatic or burst fire of standard rifles. They are commonly associated with being belt-fed, though many machine guns are also fed by box, drum, pan, or hopper magazines. They generally have a high rate of fire and a large ammunition capacity, and are often used for suppressive fire to support infantry advances or defend positions from enemy assaults. Owing to their versatility and firepower, they are also commonly installed on military vehicles and military aircraft, either as main or ancillary weapons. Many machine guns are individual-served and can be operated by a single soldier, though some are crew-served weapons that require a dedicated crew of soldiers to operate, usually between two and six soldiers depending on the machine gun's operation and the crew members' roles (ammunition bearers, spotters, etc.).\nMachine guns can be divided into three categories: light machine guns, individual-served machine guns of an intermediate cartridge that are usually magazine-fed; medium machine guns, belt-fed machine guns of a full-power caliber and a certain weight that can be operated by an individual but tend to work best with a crew; and heavy machine guns, machine guns that are too large and heavy to be carried and are thus mounted to something (like a tripod or military vehicle), and require a crew to operate. A general-purpose machine gun combines these categories under a single flexible machine gun platform, often one that is most suitable as a light or medium machine gun but fares well as a heavy machine gun. A closely related concept is the squad automatic weapon, a portable light machine gun or even a modified rifle that is designed and fielded to provide a squad with rapid direct fire.\nExamples of machine guns include the Maxim gun, M2 Browning, Bren light machine gun, MG 42, PK machine gun, FN MAG, M249 light machine gun, RPK, IWI Negev, and M134 Minigun.\nSubmachine guns.\nA submachine gun is a magazine-fed carbine chambered in a small-caliber handgun cartridge (such as 9\u00d719mm Parabellum, .45 ACP, .22 Long Rifle, and .40 S&amp;W). They cannot be considered machine guns due to their small-caliber, hence the prefix \"sub-\" to differentiate them from proper machine guns. Submachine guns are commonly associated with high rates of fire, automatic fire capabilities, and low recoil, though many submachine guns differentiate from this in various ways, such as having fairly low rates of fire or including burst and semi-automatic modes available through selective fire. Most submachine guns are the size of carbines and short-barreled rifles, and use similar configurations. Many are designed to take as little space as possible for use in close-quarters or for easy storage in vehicles and cases. Some submachine guns are designed and configured similar to pistols even down to size, and are thus occasionally classed as machine pistols, even if they are not actually a handgun (i.e. designed to require two hands to use).\nSubmachine guns are considered ideal for close-quarters combat and are cheap to mass-produce. They were very common in military service through much of the 20th century, but have since been superseded in most combat roles by rifles, carbines, and personal defense weapons due to their low effective range and poor penetration against most body armor developed since the late 20th century. However, they remain popular among special forces and police for their effectiveness in close-quarters and low likelihood to overpenetrate targets.\nExamples of submachine guns include the MP 18, MP 40, Thompson submachine gun, M3 submachine gun, Uzi, Heckler &amp; Koch MP5, Spectre M4, Steyr TMP, Heckler &amp; Koch UMP, PP-2000, KRISS Vector, and SIG MPX.\nPersonal defense weapons.\nA personal defense weapon is, in simplest terms, a submachine gun that is designed to fire ammunition with ballistic performance that is similar to (but not actually a type of) rifle cartridges, often called \"sub-intermediate\" cartridges. In this way, it combines the high automatic rate of fire, reliable low recoil, and lightweight compact maneuverability of submachine guns with the versatility, penetration, and effective range of rifles, effectively making them an \"in-between\" of submachine guns and carbines.\nPersonal defense weapons were developed to provide rear and \"second-line\" personnel not otherwise armed with high-caliber firearms (vehicle and weapon crews, engineers, logistical personnel, etc.) with a method of effective self-defense against skirmishers and infiltrators who cannot effectively be defeated by low-powered submachine guns and handguns, often the only firearms suitable for those personnel (while they could be issued rifles or carbines, those would become unnecessary burdens in their normal duties, during which the likelihood of hostility is fairly rare regardless, making their issuance questionable). Thus, per their name, personal defense weapons allow these personnel to effectively defend themselves from enemies and repel attacks themselves or at least until support can arrive. They are not intended for civilian self-defense due to their nature as automatic firearms (which are usually prohibited from civilian purchase), though some semi-automatic PDWs exist for the civilian market, albeit often with longer barrels.\nExamples of personal defense weapons include the FN P90, Heckler &amp; Koch MP7, AAC Honey Badger, and ST Kinetics CPW.\nAction.\nTypes aside, firearms are also categorized by their \"action\", which describes their loading, firing, and unloading cycle.\nManual.\n\"Manual action\" or \"manual operation\" is essentially any type of firearm action that is loaded, and usually also fired, one cartridge at a time by the user, rather than automatically. Manual action firearms can be divided into two basic categories: single-shot firearms that can only be fired once per barrel before it must be reloaded or charged via an external mechanism or series of steps; and repeating firearms that can be fired multiple times per barrel, but can only be fired once with each subsequent pull of the trigger or ignite, and the firearm's action must be reloaded or charged via an internal mechanism between trigger pulls.\nTypes of manual actions include lever action, bolt action, and pump action.\nLever action.\n\"Lever action\" is a repeating action that is operated by using a cocking handle (the \"lever\") located around the trigger guard area (often incorporating it) that is pulled down then back up to move the bolt via internal linkages and cock the firing pin mechanism, expelling the old cartridge and loading a new one.\nBolt action.\n\"Bolt action\" is a repeating (and rarely single-shot) action that is operated by directly manipulating the bolt via a bolt handle. The bolt is unlocked from the receiver, then pulled back to open the breech, ejecting a cartridge, and cocking the striker and engaging it against the sear; when the bolt is returned to the forward position, a new cartridge, if loaded, is pushed out of the magazine and into the barrel chamber, and the breech is re-locked.\nTwo designs of bolt action exist: \"rotating bolt\", where the bolt must be axially rotated to unlock and lock the receiver; and \"straight pull\", which does not require the bolt to be rotated, simplifying the bolt action mechanism and allowing for a greater rate of fire.\nPump action.\n\"Pump action\" or \"slide action\" is a repeating action that is operated by moving a sliding handguard (the \"pump\") on the gun's forestock rearward (frontward on some models), ejecting any spent cartridges and cocking the hammer or striker, then moving the handguard forward to load a new cartridge into the chamber. It is most common on shotguns, though pump action rifles and grenade launchers also exist.\nSemi-automatic.\n\"Semi-automatic\", \"self-loading\", or \"autoloading\" is a firearm action that, after a single discharge, automatically performs the feeding and ignition procedures necessary to prepare the firearm for a subsequent discharge. Semi-automatic firearms only discharge once with each trigger actuation, and the trigger must be actuated again to fire another cartridge.\nTypes of semi-automatic actions and modes include automatic, burst, and selective.\nAutomatic.\n\"Automatic\" is a firearm action that uses the same automated action cycling as semi-automatic, but continues to do so for as long as the trigger is actuated, until the trigger is let go of or the firearm is depleted of available ammunition. The excess energy released from a discharged cartridge is used to load a new cartridge into the chamber, then igniting the propellant and discharging said new cartridge by delivering a hammer or striker impact on the primer. Automatic firearms are further defined by the type of cycling principles used, such as recoil operation (uses energy from the recoil to cycle the action), blowback (uses energy from the cartridge case as it is pushed by expanding gas), blow forward (use propellant gas pressure to open the breech), or gas operation (uses high-pressure gas from a fired cartridge to dispose of the spent case and load a new cartridge).\nBurst.\n\"Burst\" is a fire mode of some semi-automatic and automatic firearms that fires a predetermined amount of rounds\u2014usually two or three\u2014in the same manner as automatic fire. Depending on the firearm, a single trigger actuation may fire the full burst of rounds, or it must be depressed for the entire discharge, with a single pull of the trigger firing a single round or an incomplete burst. Most firearms with burst capabilities have it as a fire mode secondary to semi-automatic and automatic.\nSelective fire.\n\"Selective fire\" or \"select fire\" is the capability of a firearm to have its fire mode adjusted between semi-automatic, burst, or automatic. The modes are chosen by means of a fire mode selector, which varies depending on the weapon's design. The presence of selective-fire modes on firearms allows more efficient use of ammunition for specific tactical needs, either precision-aimed or suppressive fire. Selective fire is most commonly found on assault rifles and submachine guns.\nUse as a blunt weapon.\nFirearms can be used as blunt weapons, for instance to conserve limited ammunition or when ammunition has run out entirely.\nNew recruits of the Israel Defense Forces undergo training on the safe practice of using the M16 rifle as a blunt weapon, mainly so that in close-quarter fighting, the weapon cannot be pulled away from them. Other training includes the recruit learning how to jab parts of the body with the muzzle and using the butt stock as a weapon.\nForensic medicine recognizes evidence for various types of blunt-force injuries produced by firearms. For example, \"pistol-whipping\" typically leaves semicircular or triangular lacerations of skin produced by the butt of a pistol.\nIn armed robberies, beating the victims with firearms is a more common way to complete the robbery, rather than shooting or stabbing them.\nExamples include:\nHistory.\nThe first firearms were invented in 10th century China when the man-portable fire lance (a bamboo or metal tube that could shoot ignited gunpowder) was combined with projectiles such as scrap metal, broken porcelain, or darts/arrows.\nAn early depiction of a firearm is a sculpture from a cave in Sichuan, China. The sculpture dates to the 12th century and represents a figure carrying a vase-shaped bombard, with flames and a cannonball coming out of it. The oldest surviving gun, the Heilongjiang hand cannon, was a hand cannon made of bronze, dating to 1288 because it was discovered at a site in modern-day Acheng District, Heilongjiang, China, where the \"Yuan Shi\" records that battles were fought at that time. The firearm had a barrel of a diameter, a chamber for the gunpowder and a socket for the firearm's handle. It is long and without the handle, which would have been made of wood.\nThe Arabs and Mamluks had firearms in the late-13th century. Europeans obtained firearms in the 14th century. The Koreans adopted firearms from the Chinese in the 14th century. The Iranians (first Aq Qoyunlu and Safavids) and Indians (first Mughals) all got them no later than the 15th century, from the Ottoman Turks. The people of the Nusantara archipelago of Southeast Asia used the long arquebus at least by the last quarter of the 15th century.\nEven though the knowledge of making gunpowder-based weapons in the Nusantara archipelago had been known after the failed Mongol invasion of Java (1293), and the predecessor of firearms, the pole gun (bedil tombak), was recorded as being used by Java in 1413, the knowledge of making \"true\" firearms came much later, after the middle of 15th century. It was brought by the Islamic nations of West Asia, most probably the Arabs. The precise year of introduction is unknown, but it may be safely concluded to be no earlier than 1460. Before the arrival of the Portuguese in Southeast Asia, the natives already possessed firearms, the Java arquebus.\nThe technology of firearms in Southeast Asia further improved after the Portuguese capture of Malacca (1511). Starting in the 1513, the traditions of German-Bohemian gun-making merged with Turkish gun-making traditions. This resulted in the Indo-Portuguese tradition of matchlocks. Indian craftsmen modified the design by introducing a very short, almost pistol-like buttstock held against the cheek, not the shoulder, when aiming. They also reduced the caliber and made the gun lighter and more balanced. This was a hit with the Portuguese who did a lot of fighting aboard ship and on river craft, and valued a more compact gun. The Malaccan gunfounders, compared as being in the same level with those of Germany, quickly adapted these new firearms, and thus a new type of arquebus, the istinggar, appeared. The Japanese did not acquire firearms until the 16th century, and then from the Portuguese rather than from the Chinese.\nDevelopments in firearms accelerated during the 19th and 20th centuries. Breech-loading became more or less a universal standard for the reloading of most hand-held firearms and continues to be so with some notable exceptions (such as mortars). Instead of loading individual rounds into weapons, magazines holding multiple munitions were adopted\u2014these aided rapid reloading. Automatic and semi-automatic firing mechanisms meant that a single soldier could fire many more rounds in a minute than a vintage weapon could fire over the course of a battle. Polymers and alloys in firearm construction made weaponry progressively lighter and thus easier to deploy. Ammunition changed over the centuries from simple metallic ball-shaped projectiles that rattled down the barrel to bullets and cartridges manufactured to high precision. Especially in the past century particular attention has focused on accuracy and sighting to make firearms altogether far more accurate than ever before. More than any single factor though, firearms have proliferated due to the advent of mass production\u2014enabling arms-manufacturers to produce large quantities of weaponry to a consistent standard.\nVelocities of bullets increased with the use of a \"jacket\" of metals such as copper or copper alloys that covered a lead core and allowed the bullet to glide down the barrel more easily than exposed lead. Such bullets are known as \"full metal jacket\" (FMJ). Such FMJ bullets are less likely to fragment on impact and are more likely to traverse through a target while imparting less energy. Hence, FMJ bullets impart less tissue damage than non-jacketed bullets that expand. This led to their adoption for military use by countries adhering to the Hague Convention of 1899.\nThat said, the basic principle behind firearm operation remains unchanged to this day. A musket of several centuries ago is still similar in principle to a modern-day rifle\u2014using the expansion of gases to propel projectiles over long distances\u2014albeit less accurately and rapidly.\nEarly firearm models.\nFire lances.\nThe Chinese fire lance from the 10th century was the direct predecessor to the modern concept of the firearm. It was not a gun itself, but an addition to soldiers' spears. Originally it consisted of paper or bamboo barrels that would contain incendiary gunpowder that could be lit one time and which would project flames at the enemy. Sometimes Chinese troops would place small projectiles within the barrel that would also be projected when the gunpowder was lit, but most of the explosive force would create flames. Later, the barrel was changed to be made of metal, so that more explosive gunpowder could be used and put more force into the propulsion of projectiles.\nHand cannons.\nThe original predecessor of all firearms, the Chinese hand cannon from the 13th century, was loaded with gunpowder and the projectile (initially lead shot, later replaced by cast iron) through the muzzle, while a fuse was placed at the rear. This fuse was lit, causing the gunpowder to ignite and propel the projectiles. In military use, the Chinese hand cannon was tremendously powerful, while also being somewhat erratic due to the relative inability of the gunner to aim the weapon, or to control the ballistic properties of the projectile. Recoil could be absorbed by bracing the barrel against the ground using a wooden support, the forerunner of the stock. Neither the quality nor amount of gunpowder, nor the consistency in projectile dimensions was controlled, with resulting inaccuracy in firing due to windage, variance in gunpowder composition, and the difference in diameter between the bore and the shot. Hand cannons were replaced around the 15th century by lighter carriage-mounted artillery pieces, and ultimately by the arquebus.\nIn the 1420s, gunpowder was used to propel missiles from hand-held tubes during the Hussite revolt in Bohemia.\nArquebuses.\nThe arquebus is a long gun that appeared in Europe and the Ottoman Empire during the 15th Century. The term \"arquebus\" is derived from the Dutch word \"haaqbus\" (literally meaning \"hook gun\"). The term arquebus was applied to many different types of guns. In their earliest form they were defensive weapon mounts on German city walls in the 15th Century. The addition of a shoulder stock, priming pan and matchlock mechanism in the late 15th century turned the arquebus into a handheld firearm, and also first firearm equipped with a trigger. Heavy arquebuses mounted on war wagons were called \"arquebus a croc\". These heavy arquebuses fired a lead ball of about 3.5 ounces (100g).\nMuskets.\nMuzzle-loading muskets (smooth-bored long guns) were among the first firearms developed. The firearm was loaded through the muzzle with gunpowder, optionally with some wadding, and then with a bullet (usually a solid lead ball, but musketeers could shoot stones when they ran out of bullets). Greatly improved muzzleloaders (usually rifled instead of smooth-bored) are manufactured today and have many enthusiasts, many of whom hunt large and small game with their guns. Muzzleloaders have to be manually reloaded after each shot; a skilled archer could fire multiple arrows faster than most early muskets could be reloaded and fired, although by the mid-18th century when muzzleloaders became the standard small-armament of the military, a well-drilled soldier could fire six rounds in a minute using prepared cartridges in his musket. Before then, the effectiveness of muzzleloaders was hindered both by the low reloading speed and, before the firing mechanism was perfected, by the very high risk posed by the firearm to the person attempting to fire it.\nOne interesting solution to the reloading problem was the \"Roman Candle Gun\" with superposed loads. This was a muzzleloader in which multiple charges and balls were loaded one on top of the other, with a small hole in each ball to allow the subsequent charge to be ignited after the one ahead of it was ignited. It was neither a very reliable nor popular firearm, but it enabled a form of \"automatic\" fire long before the advent of the machine gun.\nFiring mechanisms.\nMatchlock.\nMatchlocks were the first and simplest firearms-firing mechanisms developed. In the matchlock mechanism, the powder in the gun barrel was ignited by a piece of burning cord called a \"match\". The match was wedged into one end of an S-shaped piece of steel. When the trigger (often actually a lever) was pulled, the match was brought into the open end of a \"touch hole\" at the base of the gun barrel, which contained a very small quantity of gunpowder, igniting the main charge of gunpowder in the gun barrel. The match usually had to be relit after each firing. The main parts of the matchlock firing mechanism are the pan, match, arm, and trigger. A benefit of the pan and arm swivel being moved to the side of the gun was it gave a clear line of fire. An advantage to the matchlock firing mechanism is that it did not misfire. However, it also came with some disadvantages. One disadvantage involved weather: in rain, the match could not be kept lit to fire the weapon. Another issue with the match was it could give away the position of soldiers because of the glow, sound, and smell. While European pistols were equipped with wheellock and flintlock mechanisms, Asian pistols used matchlock mechanisms.\nWheellock.\nThe wheellock action, a successor to the matchlock, predated the flintlock. Despite its many faults, the wheellock was a significant improvement over the matchlock in terms of both convenience and safety, since it eliminated the need to keep a smoldering match in proximity to loose gunpowder. It operated using a small wheel (much like that on a cigarette lighter) which was wound up with a key before use and which, when the trigger was pulled, spun against a flint, creating the shower of sparks that ignited the powder in the touch hole. Supposedly invented by Leonardo da Vinci (1452\u20131519), the Italian Renaissance man, the wheellock action was an innovation that was not widely adopted due to the high cost of the clockwork mechanism.\nFlintlock.\nThe flintlock action represented a major innovation in firearm design. The spark used to ignite the gunpowder in the touch hole came from a sharpened piece of flint clamped in the jaws of a \"cock\" which, when released by the trigger, struck a piece of steel called the \"frizzen\" to generate the necessary sparks. (The spring-loaded arm that holds a piece of flint or pyrite is referred to as a cock because of its resemblance to a rooster.) The cock had to be manually reset after each firing, and the flint had to be replaced periodically due to wear from striking the frizzen. (See also flintlock mechanism, snaphance, Miquelet lock.) The flintlock was widely used during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries in both muskets and rifles.\nPercussion cap.\nPercussion caps (caplock mechanisms), coming into wide service in the early 19th century, offered a dramatic improvement over flintlocks. With the percussion-cap mechanism, the small primer charge of gunpowder used in all preceding firearms was replaced by a completely self-contained explosive charge contained in a small brass \"cap\". The cap was fastened to the touch hole of the gun (extended to form a \"nipple\") and ignited by the impact of the gun's \"hammer\". (The hammer is roughly the same as the cock found on flintlocks except that it does not clamp onto anything.) In the case of percussion caps the hammer was hollow on the end to fit around the cap in order to keep the cap from fragmenting and injuring the shooter.\nOnce struck, the flame from the cap, in turn, ignited the main charge of gunpowder, as with the flintlock, but there was no longer any need to charge the touch hole with gunpowder, and even better, the touch hole was no longer exposed to the elements. As a result, the percussion-cap mechanism was considerably safer, far more weatherproof, and vastly more reliable (cloth-bound cartridges containing a pre-measured charge of gunpowder and a ball had been in regular military service for many years, but the exposed gunpowder in the entry to the touch hole had long been a source of misfires). All muzzleloaders manufactured since the second half of the 19th-century use percussion caps except those built as replicas of the flintlock or earlier firearms.\nLoading techniques.\nMost early firearms were muzzle-loading. This form of loading has several disadvantages, such as a slow rate of fire and having to expose oneself to enemy fire to reload\u2014as the weapon had to be pointed upright so the powder could be poured through the muzzle into the breech, followed by the ramming the projectile into the breech. As effective methods of sealing the breech developed along with sturdy, weatherproof, self-contained metallic cartridges, muzzle-loaders were replaced by single-shot breech loaders. Eventually, single-shot weapons were replaced by the following repeater-type weapons.\nInternal magazines.\nMany firearms made from the late-19th century through the 1950s used internal magazines to load the cartridge into the chamber of the weapon. The most notable and revolutionary weapons of this period appeared during the U.S. Civil War of 1861\u20131865: the Spencer and Henry repeating rifles. Both used fixed tubular magazines, the former having the magazine in the buttstock and the latter under the barrel, which allowed a larger capacity. Later weapons used fixed box magazines that could not be removed from the weapon without disassembling the weapon itself. Fixed magazines permitted the use of larger cartridges and eliminated the hazard of having the bullet of one cartridge butting next to the primer or rim of another cartridge. These magazines are loaded while they are in the weapon, often using a stripper clip. A clip is used to transfer cartridges into the magazine. Some notable weapons that use internal magazines include the Mosin\u2013Nagant, the Mauser Kar 98k, the Springfield M1903, the M1 Garand, and the SKS. Firearms that have internal magazines are usually, but not always, rifles. Some exceptions to this include the Mauser C96 pistol, which uses an internal magazine, and the Breda 30, an Italian light machine gun.\nDetachable magazines.\nMany modern firearms use what are called detachable or box magazines as their method of chambering a cartridge. Detachable magazines can be removed from the weapon without disassembling the firearms, usually by pushing a magazine release.\nBelt-fed weapons.\nA belt or ammunition belt, a device used to retain and feed cartridges into a firearm, is commonly used with machine guns. Belts were originally composed of canvas or cloth with pockets spaced evenly to allow the belt to be mechanically fed into the gun. These designs were prone to malfunctions due to the effects of oil and other contaminants altering the belt. Later belt-designs used permanently-connected metal links to retain the cartridges during feeding. These belts were more tolerant to exposure to solvents and oil. Notable weapons that use belts include the M240, the M249, the M134 Minigun, and the PK Machine Gun.\nCartridges.\nFrenchman Louis-Nicolas Flobert invented the first rimfire metallic cartridge in 1845. His cartridge consisted of a percussion cap with a bullet attached to the top. Flobert then made what he called \"parlor guns\" for this cartridge, as these rifles and pistols were designed to be shot in indoor shooting-parlors in large homes. These 6mm Flobert cartridges do not contain any powder, the only propellant substance contained in the cartridge is the percussion cap. In English-speaking countries, the 6mm Flobert cartridge corresponds to .22 BB Cap and .22 CB Cap ammunition. These cartridges have a relatively low muzzle-velocity of around 700\u00a0ft/s (210\u00a0m/s).\nCartridges represented a major innovation: firearms ammunition, previously delivered as separate bullets and powder, was combined in a single metallic (usually brass) cartridge containing a percussion cap, powder, and a bullet in one weatherproof package. The main technical advantage of the brass cartridge case was the effective and reliable sealing of high-pressure gasses at the breech, as the gas pressure forces the cartridge case to expand outward, pressing it firmly against the inside of the gun-barrel chamber. This prevents the leakage of hot gas which could injure the shooter. The brass cartridge also opened the way for modern repeating arms, by uniting the bullet, gunpowder, and primer into one assembly that could be fed reliably into the breech by mechanical action in the firearm.\nBefore this, a \"cartridge\" was simply a pre-measured quantity of gunpowder together with a ball in a small cloth bag (or rolled paper cylinder), which also acted as wadding for the charge and ball. This early form of cartridge had to be rammed into the muzzleloader's barrel, and either a small charge of gunpowder in the touch hole or an external percussion cap mounted on the touch hole ignited the gunpowder in the cartridge. Cartridges with built-in percussion caps (called \"primers\") continue to this day to be the standard in firearms. In cartridge-firing firearms, a hammer (or a firing pin struck by the hammer) strikes the cartridge primer, which then ignites the gunpowder within. The primer charge is at the base of the cartridge, either within the rim (a \"rimfire\" cartridge) or in a small percussion cap embedded in the center of the base (a \"centerfire\" cartridge). As a rule, centerfire cartridges are more powerful than rimfire cartridges, operating at considerably higher pressures than rimfire cartridges. Centerfire cartridges are also safer, as a dropped rimfire cartridge has the potential to discharge if its rim strikes the ground with sufficient force to ignite the primer. This is practically impossible with most centerfire cartridges.\nNearly all contemporary firearms load cartridges directly into their breech. Some additionally or exclusively load from a magazine that holds multiple cartridges. A magazine is a part of the firearm which exists to store ammunition and to assist in its feeding by the action into the breech (such as through the rotation of a revolver's cylinder or by spring-loaded platforms in most pistol and rifle designs). Some magazines, such as that of most centerfire hunting rifles and all revolvers, are internal to and inseparable from the firearm, and are loaded by using a \"clip\". A clip (the term often mistakenly refers to a detachable \"magazine\") is a device that holds the ammunition by the rim of the case and is designed to assist the shooter in reloading the firearm's magazine. Examples include revolver speedloaders, the stripper clip used to aid loading rifles such as the Lee\u2013Enfield or Mauser 98, and the en-bloc clip used in loading the M1 Garand. In this sense, \"magazines\" and \"clips\", though often used synonymously, refer to different types of devices.\nRepeating firearms.\nMany firearms are \"single shot\": i.e., each time a cartridge is fired, the operator must manually re-cock the firearm and load another cartridge. The classic single-barreled shotgun offers a good example. A firearm that can load multiple cartridges as the firearm is re-cocked is considered a \"repeating firearm\" or simply a \"repeater\". A lever-action rifle, a pump-action shotgun, and most bolt-action rifles are good examples of repeating firearms. A firearm that automatically re-cocks and reloads the next round with each trigger-pull is considered a semi-automatic or autoloading firearm.\nThe first \"rapid firing\" firearms were usually similar to the 19th-century Gatling gun, which would fire cartridges from a magazine as fast as and as long as the operator turned a crank. Eventually, the \"rapid\" firing mechanism was perfected and miniaturized to the extent that either the recoil of the firearm or the gas pressure from firing could be used to operate it, thus the operator needed only to pull a trigger\u2014this made the firing mechanisms truly \"automatic\". An automatic (or \"fully automatic\") firearm automatically re-cocks, reloads, and fires as long as the trigger is depressed. An automatic firearm is capable of firing multiple rounds with one pull of the trigger. The Gatling gun may have been the first automatic weapon, though the modern trigger-actuated machine gun was not widely introduced until the First World War (1914\u20131918) with the German \"Spandau\" (adopted in 1908) and the British Lewis gun (in service from 1914). Automatic rifles such as the Browning automatic rifle were in common use by the military during the early part of the 20th century, and automatic rifles that fired handgun rounds, known as submachine guns, also appeared at this time. Many modern military firearms have a selective fire option, which is a mechanical switch that allows the firearm to be fired either in the semi-automatic or fully automatic mode. In the current M16A2 and M16A4 variants of the U.S.-made M16, continuous fully-automatic fire is not possible, having been replaced by an automatic burst of three cartridges (this conserves ammunition and increases controllability).\nHealth hazards.\nFirearm hazard is quite notable, with a significant impact on the health system. In 2001, for quantification purposes, it was estimated that the cost of fatalities and injuries was US$4700\u00a0million per year in Canada (US$170 per Canadian) and US$100,000\u00a0million per year in the U.S. (US$300 per American).\nDeath.\nFrom 1990 to 2015, global deaths from assault by firearm rose from 128,000 to 173,000, however this represents a drop in rate from 2.41/100,000 to 2.35/100,000, as world population has increased by more than two billion.\nIn 2017, there were 39,773 gun-related deaths in the United States; over 60% were suicides from firearms. In 2001, firearms were involved in cases constituting the second leading cause of \"mechanism of injury deaths\" (which are deaths which occur as a direct, identifiable, and immediate consequence of an event, such as a shooting or poisoning, and do not include deaths due to \"natural causes\" or \"indirect causes\" such as chronic alcohol abuse or tobacco use) after motor vehicle accidents, which comprised the majority of deaths in this category. The most recent, complete data, from 2017, shows gunshot related homicides as having been the 31st most common cause of death in the US, while gunshot related suicides was the 21st most common cause of death. Accidental discharge of a firearm accounted for the 59th most common cause of death, with 486 deaths in 2017, while 616 individuals were killed by law enforcement, comprising the 58th most common cause of death. The total number of deaths related to firearms in 2017 was 38,882 (not including incidents of deaths resulting from lethal force when used by law enforcement), while the most common cause of death, heart disease, claimed 647,457 lives, over sixteen times that of firearms, including suicides. The most recent data from the CDC, from 2020, shows that deaths involving firearms accounted for about 0.2% of all deaths nationwide in 2020, of which about two-thirds were suicides.\nIn the 52 high- and middle-income countries, with a combined population of 1,400\u00a0million and not engaged in civil conflict, fatalities due to firearm injuries were estimated at 115,000 people per annum, in the 1990s.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n Fatalities in 52 countries, mid-1990s\nIn those 52 countries, a firearm is the first method used for homicide (two-thirds) but only the second method for suicide (20%.\nTo prevent unintentional injury, gun safety training includes education on proper firearm storage and firearm-handling etiquette.\nInjury.\nBased on US data, it is estimated that three people are injured for one killed.\nA 2017 study found that attacks account for more than half (50.2%) of all nonfatal gun injuries, while unintentional injuries make up more than one-third (36.7%).\nNoise.\nA common hazard of repeated firearm use is noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL). NIHL can result from long-term exposure to noise or from high intensity impact noises such as gunshots. Individuals who shoot guns often have a characteristic pattern of hearing loss referred to as \"shooter's ear\". They often have a high-frequency loss with better hearing in the low frequencies and one ear is typically worse than the other. The ear on the side the shooter is holding the gun will receive protection from the sound wave from the shoulder while the other ear remains unprotected and more susceptible to the full impact of the sound wave.\nThe intensity of a gunshot does vary; lower caliber guns are typically on the softer side while higher caliber guns are often louder. The intensity of a gunshot though typically ranges from 140\u00a0dB to 175\u00a0dB. Indoor shooting also causes loud reverberations which can also be as damaging as the actual gunshot itself. According to the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, noise above 85\u00a0dB can begin to cause hearing loss. While many sounds cause damage over time, at the intensity level of a gunshot (140\u00a0dB or louder), damage to the ear can occur instantly.\nShooters use custom hearing protection such as electronic type hearing protection for hunters which can amplify soft sounds like leaves crunching while reducing the intensity of the gunshot and custom hearing protection for skeet shooting.\nEven with hearing protection, due to the high intensity of the noise guns produce shooters still develop hearing loss over time.\nLegal definitions.\nFirearms include a variety of ranged weapons and there is no agreed-upon definition. For instance, English language laws of big legal entities such as the United States, India, the European Union and Canada use different definitions. Other English language definitions are provided by international treaties.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, under 26 USC \u00a7 5845 (a), the term \"firearm\" means\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis is the ATF definition of a title II \"NFA firearm\", as defined by the National Firearms Act, and not the definition of a title I firearm, which includes firearms not restricted by the NFA. ATF forms dealing with Title II weapons all state the above-mentioned information, however, the above information is only applicable for the purposes of those forms. For practical purposes, a firearm, in the U.S., is defined as the part of a weapon- designed to use expanded gas caused by the combustion of explosive material, to propel a projectile- which houses the fire control group (trigger &amp; sear).\nAccording to the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, if gas pressurization is achieved through \"mechanical\" gas compression rather than through chemical propellant combustion, then the device is technically an air gun, not a firearm.\nIndia.\nIn India, the arms act, 1959, provides a definition of firearms where \"firearms\" means arms of any description designed or adapted to discharge a projectile or projectiles of any kind by the action of any explosive or other forms of energy, and includes:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEuropean Union.\nIn the European Union, a European Directive amended by EU directive 2017/853 set minimum standards regarding civilian firearms acquisition and possession that EU member states must implement into their national legal systems. In this context, since 2017, firearms are considered as \"any portable barrelled weapon that expels, is designed to expel or may be converted to expel a shot, bullet or projectile by the action of a combustible propellant\". For legal reasons, objects can be considered a firearm if they have the appearance of a firearm or are made in a way that makes it possible to convert them to a firearm. Member states may be allowed to exclude from their gun control law items such as antique weapons, or specific purposes items that can only be used for that sole purpose.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the UK, a firearm does not have to use a combustible propellant, as explained by https:// The Firearms Act 1968 Section 57(1B), uses the definition of a firearm as a \"lethal barrelled weapon\" as a \"barrelled weapon of any description from which a shot, bullet or other missile, with kinetic energy of more than one joule as measured at the muzzle of the weapon, can be discharged\". As such, low-energy air rifles and pistols also fall under UK firearm legislation, although the licensing requirements of low-energy weapons are more relaxed.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, firearms are defined by the Criminal Code:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;firearm\u2002means a barrelled weapon from which any shot, bullet, or other projectile can be discharged and that is capable of causing serious bodily injury or death to a person, and includes any frame or receiver of such a barrelled weapon and anything that can be adapted for use as a firearm;\u2002(arme \u00e0 feu)\nAustralia.\nAustralia has a definition of firearms in its 1996 legal act:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSouth Africa.\nIn South Africa, Firearms Control Act [No. 60 of 2000] defines firearms since June 2001, with a 2006 amendment of the definition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'firearm' means any-\nInternational treaties.\nAn inter-American convention defines firearms as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;* any barreled weapon which will or is designed to or may be readily converted to expel a bullet or projectile by the action of an explosive, except antique firearms manufactured before the 20th Century or their replicas; or\nAn international UN protocol on firearms considers that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Firearm\" shall mean any portable barrelled weapon that expels, is designed to expel or may be readily converted to expel a shot, bullet or projectile by the action of an explosive, excluding antique firearms or their replicas. Antique firearms and their replicas shall be defined in accordance with domestic law. In no case, however, shall antique firearms include firearms manufactured after 1899\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11968", "revid": "50079837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11968", "title": "George Washington", "text": "Founding Father, U.S. president from 1789 to 1797\nGeorge Washington (February 22, 1732 [O.S. February 11, 1731]\u00a0\u2013 December 14, 1799) was a Founding Father and the first president of the United States, serving from 1789 to 1797. As commander of the Continental Army, Washington led Patriot forces to victory in the American Revolutionary War against the British Empire. He is commonly known as the Father of the Nation for his role in bringing about American independence.\nBorn in the Colony of Virginia, Washington became the commander of the Virginia Regiment during the French and Indian War (1754\u20131763). He was later elected to the Virginia House of Burgesses, and opposed the perceived oppression of the American colonists by the British Crown. When the American Revolutionary War against the British began in 1775, Washington was appointed commander-in-chief of the Continental Army. He directed a poorly organized and equipped force against disciplined British troops. Washington and his army achieved an early victory at the Siege of Boston in March 1776 but were forced to retreat from New York City in November. Washington crossed the Delaware River and won the battles of Trenton in late 1776 and of Princeton in early 1777, then lost the battles of Brandywine and of Germantown later that year. He faced criticism of his command, low troop morale, and a lack of provisions for his forces as the war continued. Ultimately Washington led a combined French and American force to a decisive victory over the British at Yorktown in 1781. In the resulting Treaty of Paris in 1783, the British acknowledged the sovereign independence of the United States. Washington then served as president of the Constitutional Convention in 1787, which drafted the current Constitution of the United States.\nWashington was unanimously elected the first U.S. president by the Electoral College in 1788 and 1792. He implemented a strong, well-financed national government while remaining impartial in the fierce rivalry that emerged within his cabinet between Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton. During the French Revolution, he proclaimed a policy of neutrality while supporting the Jay Treaty with Britain. Washington set enduring precedents for the office of president, including republicanism, a peaceful transfer of power, the use of the title \"Mr. President\", and the two-term tradition. His 1796 farewell address became a preeminent statement on republicanism: Washington wrote about the importance of national unity and the dangers that regionalism, partisanship, and foreign influence pose to it. As a planter of tobacco and wheat at Mount Vernon, Washington owned many slaves. He began opposing slavery near the end of his life, and provided in his will for the eventual manumission of his slaves.\nWashington's image is an icon of American culture and he has been extensively memorialized. His namesakes include the national capital and the State of Washington. In both popular and scholarly polls, he is consistently considered one of the greatest presidents in American history.\nEarly life (1732\u20131752).\nGeorge Washington was born on February 22, 1732, at Popes Creek in Westmoreland County, Virginia. He was the first of six children of Augustine and Mary Ball Washington. His father was a justice of the peace and a prominent public figure who had four additional children from his first marriage to Jane Butler. Washington was not close to his father and rarely mentioned him in later years; he had a fractious relationship with his mother. Among his siblings, he was particularly close to his older half-brother Lawrence.\nThe family moved to a plantation on Little Hunting Creek in 1735 before settling at Ferry Farm near Fredericksburg, Virginia, in 1738. When Augustine died in 1743, Washington inherited Ferry Farm and ten slaves; Lawrence inherited Little Hunting Creek and renamed it Mount Vernon. Because of his father's death, Washington did not have the formal education his elder half-brothers had received at Appleby Grammar School in England; he instead attended the Lower Church School in Hartfield. He learned mathematics and land surveying, and became a talented draftsman and mapmaker. By early adulthood, he was writing with what his biographer Ron Chernow described as \"considerable force\" and \"precision\". As a teenager, Washington compiled over a hundred rules for social interaction styled \"The Rules of Civility\", copied from an English translation of a French guidebook.\nWashington often visited Belvoir, the plantation of William Fairfax, Lawrence's father-in-law, and Mount Vernon. Fairfax became Washington's patron and surrogate father. In 1748, Washington spent a month with a team surveying Fairfax's Shenandoah Valley property. The following year, he received a surveyor's license from the College of William &amp; Mary. Even though Washington had not served the customary apprenticeship, Thomas Fairfax (William's cousin) appointed him surveyor of Culpeper County, Virginia. Washington took his oath of office on July 20, 1749, and resigned in 1750. By 1752, he had bought almost in the Shenandoah Valley and owned .\nIn 1751, Washington left mainland North America for the first and only time, when he accompanied Lawrence to Barbados, hoping the climate would cure his brother's tuberculosis. Washington contracted smallpox during the trip, which left his face slightly scarred. Lawrence died in 1752, and Washington leased Mount Vernon from his widow, Ann; he inherited it outright after her death in 1761.\nColonial military career (1752\u20131758).\nLawrence Washington's service as adjutant general of the Virginia militia inspired George to seek a militia commission. Virginia's lieutenant governor, Robert Dinwiddie, appointed Washington as a major and commander of one of the four militia districts. The British and French were competing for control of the Ohio River Valley: the British were constructing forts along the river, and the French between the river and Lake Erie.\nIn October 1753, Dinwiddie appointed Washington as a special envoy to demand the French forces vacate land that was claimed by the British. Washington was also directed to make peace with the Iroquois Confederacy and to gather intelligence about the French forces. Washington met with Iroquois leader Tanacharison at Logstown. Washington said that at this meeting Tanacharison named him Conotocaurius. This name, meaning \"devourer of villages\", had previously been given to his great-grandfather John Washington in the late 17th century by the Susquehannock.\nWashington's party reached the Ohio River in November 1753 and was intercepted by a French patrol. The party was escorted to Fort Le Boeuf, where Washington was received in a friendly manner. He delivered the British demand to vacate to the French commander Jacques Legardeur de Saint-Pierre, but the French refused to leave. Saint-Pierre gave Washington his official answer after a few days' delay, as well as food and winter clothing for his party's journey back to Virginia. Washington completed the precarious mission in difficult winter conditions, achieving a measure of distinction when his report was published in Virginia and London.\nFrench and Indian War.\nIn February 1754, Dinwiddie promoted Washington to lieutenant colonel and second-in-command of the 300-strong Virginia Regiment, with orders to confront the French at the Forks of the Ohio. Washington set out with half the regiment in April and was soon aware that a French force of 1,000 had begun construction of Fort Duquesne there. In May, having established a defensive position at Great Meadows, Washington learned that the French had made camp away; he decided to take the offensive. The French detachment proved to be only about 50 men, so on May 28 Washington commanded an ambush. His small force of Virginians and Indian allies killed the French, including their commander Joseph Coulon de Jumonville, who had been carrying a diplomatic message for the British. The French later found their countrymen dead and scalped, blaming Washington, who had retreated to Fort Necessity.\nThe rest of the Virginia Regiment joined Washington the following month with news that he had been promoted to the rank of colonel and given command of the full regiment. They were reinforced by an independent company of a hundred South Carolinians led by Captain James Mackay; his royal commission outranked Washington's and a conflict of command ensued. On July 3, 900 French soldiers attacked Fort Necessity, and the ensuing battle ended in Washington's surrender. Washington did not speak French, but signed a surrender document in which he unwittingly took responsibility for \"assassinating\" Jumonville, later blaming the translator for not properly translating it. The Virginia Regiment was divided and Washington was offered a captaincy in one of the newly formed regiments. He refused, as it would have been a demotion\u2014the British had ordered that \"colonials\" could not be ranked any higher than captain\u2014and instead resigned his commission. The Jumonville affair became the incident which ignited the French and Indian War.\nIn 1755, Washington volunteered as an aide to General Edward Braddock, who led a British expedition to expel the French from Fort Duquesne and the Ohio Country. On Washington's recommendation, Braddock split the army into one main column and a smaller \"flying column\". Washington was suffering from severe dysentery so did not initially travel with the expedition forces. When he rejoined Braddock at Monongahela, still very ill, the French and their Indian allies ambushed the divided army. Two-thirds of the British force became casualties in the ensuing Battle of the Monongahela, and Braddock was killed. Under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Gage, Washington rallied the survivors and formed a rear guard, allowing the remnants of the force to retreat. During the engagement, Washington had two horses shot out from under him, and his hat and coat were pierced by bullets. His conduct redeemed his reputation among critics of his command in the Battle of Fort Necessity, but he was not included by the succeeding commander (Colonel Thomas Dunbar) in planning subsequent operations.\nThe Virginia Regiment was reconstituted in August 1755, and Dinwiddie appointed Washington its commander, again with the rank of colonel. Washington clashed over seniority almost immediately, this time with Captain John Dagworthy, who commanded a detachment of Marylanders at the regiment's headquarters in Fort Cumberland. Washington, impatient for an offensive against Fort Duquesne, was convinced Braddock would have granted him a royal commission and pressed his case in February 1756 with Braddock's successor as Commander-in-Chief, William Shirley, and again in January 1757 with Shirley's successor, Lord Loudoun. Loudoun humiliated Washington, refused him a royal commission, and agreed only to relieve him of the responsibility of manning Fort Cumberland.\nIn 1758, the Virginia Regiment was assigned to the British Forbes Expedition to capture Fort Duquesne. General John Forbes took Washington's advice on some aspects of the expedition but rejected his opinion on the best route to the fort. Forbes nevertheless made Washington a brevet brigadier general and gave him command of one of the three brigades that was assigned to assault the fort. The French had abandoned the fort and the valley before the assault, however, and Washington only saw a friendly fire incident, which left 14 dead and 26 injured. Frustrated, he resigned his commission soon afterwards and returned to Mount Vernon.\nUnder Washington, the Virginia Regiment had defended of frontier against 20 Indian attacks in 10 months. He increased the professionalism of the regiment as it grew from 300 to 1,000 men. Though he failed to realize a royal commission, which made him hostile towards the British, he gained self-confidence, leadership skills, and knowledge of British military tactics. The destructive competition Washington witnessed among colonial politicians fostered his later support of a strong central government.\nMarriage, civilian and political life (1759\u20131775).\nOn January 6, 1759, Washington, at age 26, married Martha Dandridge Custis, the 27-year-old widow of wealthy plantation owner Daniel Parke Custis. Martha was intelligent, gracious, and experienced in managing a planter's estate, and the couple had a happy marriage. They lived at Mount Vernon, where Washington cultivated tobacco and wheat. The marriage gave Washington control over Martha's one-third dower interest in the Custis estate, and he managed the remaining two-thirds for Martha's children. As a result, he became one of the wealthiest men in Virginia, which increased his social standing.\nAt Washington's urging, Governor Lord Botetourt fulfilled Dinwiddie's 1754 promise to grant land bounties to those who served with volunteer militias during the French and Indian War. In late 1770, Washington inspected the lands in the Ohio and Great Kanawha regions, and he engaged surveyor William Crawford to subdivide it. Crawford allotted to Washington, who told the veterans that their land was unsuitable for farming and agreed to purchase , leaving some feeling that they had been duped. He also doubled the size of Mount Vernon to and, by 1775, had more than doubled its slave population to over one hundred.\nAs a respected military hero and large landowner, Washington held local offices and was elected to the Virginia provincial legislature, representing Frederick County in the Virginia House of Burgesses for seven years beginning in 1758. Early in his legislative career, Washington rarely spoke at or even attended legislative sessions, but was more politically active starting in the 1760s, becoming a prominent critic of Britain's taxation and mercantilist policies towards the American colonies. Washington imported luxury goods from England, paying for them by exporting tobacco. His profligate spending combined with low tobacco prices left him \u00a31,800 in debt by 1764. Washington's complete reliance on London tobacco buyer and merchant Robert Cary also threatened his economic security. Between 1764 and 1766, he sought to diversify his holdings: he changed Mount Vernon's primary cash crop from tobacco to wheat and expanded operations to include flour milling and hemp farming. Washington's stepdaughter Patsy suffered from epileptic attacks, and she died at Mount Vernon in 1773, allowing Washington to use part of the inheritance from her estate to settle his debts.\nOpposition to the British Parliament and Crown.\nWashington was opposed to the taxes which the British Parliament imposed on the Colonies without proper representation. He believed the Stamp Act 1765 was oppressive and celebrated its repeal the following year. In response to the Townshend Acts, he introduced a proposal in May 1769 which urged Virginians to boycott British goods; the Townshend Acts were mostly repealed in 1770. Washington and other colonists were also angered by the Royal Proclamation of 1763 (which banned American settlement west of the Allegheny Mountains) and British interference in American western land speculation (in which Washington was a participant).\nParliament sought to punish Massachusetts colonists for their role in the Boston Tea Party in 1774 by passing the Coercive Acts, which Washington saw as \"an invasion of our rights and privileges\". That July, he and George Mason drafted a list of resolutions for the Fairfax County committee, including a call to end the Atlantic slave trade; the resolutions were adopted. In August, Washington attended the First Virginia Convention and was selected as a delegate to the First Continental Congress. As tensions rose in 1774, he helped train militias in Virginia and organized enforcement of the Continental Association boycott of British goods instituted by the Congress.\nCommander in chief of the army (1775\u20131783).\nThe American Revolutionary War broke out on April 19, 1775, with the Battles of Lexington and Concord. Washington hastily departed Mount Vernon on May 4 to join the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia. On June 14, Congress created the Continental Army and John Adams nominated Washington as its commander-in-chief, mainly because of his military experience and the belief that a Virginian would better unite the colonies. He was unanimously elected by Congress the next day. Washington gave an acceptance speech on June 16, declining a salary, though he was later reimbursed expenses.\nCongress chose Washington's primary staff officers, including Artemas Ward, Horatio Gates, Charles Lee, Philip Schuyler, and Nathanael Greene. Henry Knox impressed Adams and Washington with his knowledge of ordnance and was promoted to colonel and chief of artillery. Similarly, Washington was impressed by Alexander Hamilton's intelligence and bravery; he would later promote Hamilton to colonel and appoint him his aide-de-camp.\nWashington initially banned the enlistment of Black soldiers, both free and enslaved. The British saw an opportunity to divide the colonies: the colonial governor of Virginia issued a proclamation promising freedom to slaves if they joined the British forces. In response to this proclamation and the need for troops, Washington soon overturned his ban. By the end of the war, around one-tenth of the soldiers in the Continental Army were Black, with some obtaining freedom.\nSiege of Boston.\nIn April 1775, in response to the growing rebellious movement, British troops occupied Boston, led by General Thomas Gage, commander of British forces in America. Local militias surrounded the city and trapped the British troops, resulting in a standoff. As Washington headed for Boston, he was greeted by cheering crowds and political ceremony; he became a symbol of the Patriot cause. Upon Washington's arrival on July 2, he went to inspect the army, but found undisciplined militia. After consultation, he initiated Benjamin Franklin's suggested reforms, instituting military drills and imposing strict disciplinary measures. Washington promoted some of the soldiers who had performed well at Bunker Hill to officer rank, and removed officers who he saw as incompetent. In October, King George III declared that the colonies were in open rebellion and relieved Gage of command, replacing him with General William Howe.\nWhen the Charles River froze over, Washington was eager to cross and storm Boston, but Gates and others were opposed to having untrained militia attempt to assault well-garrisoned fortifications. Instead, Washington agreed to secure the Dorchester Heights above Boston to try to force the British out. On March 17, 8,906 British troops, 1,100 Loyalists, and 1,220 women and children began a chaotic naval evacuation. Washington entered the city with 500 men, giving them explicit orders not to plunder. He refrained from exerting military authority in Boston, leaving civilian matters in the hands of local authorities.\nNew York and New Jersey.\nBattle of Long Island.\nAfter the victory at Boston, Washington correctly guessed that the British would return to New York City and retaliate. He arrived there on April 13, 1776, and ordered the construction of fortifications. He also ordered his forces to treat civilians and their property with respect, to avoid the abuses Bostonians suffered at the hands of British troops. The British forces, including more than a hundred ships and thousands of troops, began arriving on Staten Island in July to lay siege to the city.\nHowe's troop strength totaled 32,000 regulars and Hessian auxiliaries; Washington had 23,000 men, mostly untrained recruits and militia. In August, Howe landed 20,000 troops at Gravesend, Brooklyn, and approached Washington's fortifications. Overruling his generals, Washington chose to fight, based on inaccurate information that Howe's army had only around 8,000 soldiers. In the Battle of Long Island, Howe assaulted Washington's flank and inflicted 1,500 Patriot casualties. Washington retreated to Manhattan.\nHowe sent a message to Washington to negotiate peace, addressing him as \"George Washington, Esq.\" Washington declined to accept the message, demanding to be addressed with diplomatic protocol\u2014not as a rebel. Despite misgivings, Washington heeded the advice of General Greene to defend Fort Washington, but was ultimately forced to abandon it. Howe pursued and Washington retreated across the Hudson River to Fort Lee. In November, Howe captured Fort Washington. Loyalists in New York City considered Howe a liberator and spread a rumor that Washington had set fire to the city. Now reduced to 5,400 troops, Washington's army retreated through New Jersey.\nCrossing the Delaware, Trenton, and Princeton.\nWashington crossed the Delaware River into Pennsylvania, where General John Sullivan joined him with 2,000 more troops. The future of the Continental Army was in doubt due to a lack of supplies, a harsh winter, expiring enlistments, and desertions. Howe posted a Hessian garrison at Trenton to hold western New Jersey and the east shore of the Delaware. At sunrise on December 26, 1776, Washington, aided by Colonel Knox and artillery, led his men in a successful surprise attack on the Hessians.\nWashington returned to New Jersey on January 3, 1777, launching an attack on the British regulars at Princeton, with 40 Americans killed or wounded and 273 British killed or captured. Howe retreated to New York City for the winter. Washington took up winter headquarters in Morristown, New Jersey. Strategically, Washington's victories at Trenton and Princeton were pivotal: they revived Patriot morale and quashed the British strategy of showing overwhelming force followed by offering generous terms, changing the course of the war.\nPhiladelphia.\nBrandywine, Germantown, and Saratoga.\nIn July 1777, the British general John Burgoyne led his British troops south from Quebec in the Saratoga campaign; he recaptured Fort Ticonderoga, intending to divide New England. However, General Howe took his army from New York City south to Philadelphia rather than joining Burgoyne near Albany. Washington and Gilbert, Marquis de Lafayette rushed to Philadelphia to engage Howe. In the Battle of Brandywine on September 11, 1777, Howe outmaneuvered Washington and marched unopposed into the American capital at Philadelphia. A Patriot attack against the British at Germantown in October failed.\nIn Upstate New York, the Patriots were led by General Horatio Gates. Concerned about Burgoyne's movements southward, Washington sent reinforcements north with Generals Benedict Arnold and Benjamin Lincoln. On October 7, 1777, Burgoyne tried to take Bemis Heights but was isolated from support and forced to surrender. Gates' victory emboldened Washington's critics, who favored Gates as a military leader. According to the biographer John Alden, \"It was inevitable that the defeats of Washington's forces and the concurrent victory of the forces in upper New York should be compared.\" Admiration for Washington was waning.\nValley Forge and Monmouth.\nWashington and his army of 11,000 men went into winter quarters at Valley Forge north of Philadelphia in December 1777. There they lost between 2,000 and 3,000 men as a result of disease and lack of food, clothing, and shelter, reducing the army to below 9,000 men. By February, Washington was facing low troop morale and increased desertions. An internal revolt by his officers prompted some members of Congress to consider removing Washington from command. Washington's supporters resisted, and the matter was ultimately dropped.\nWashington made repeated petitions to Congress for provisions and expressed the urgency of the situation to a congressional delegation. Congress agreed to strengthen the army's supply lines and reorganize the quartermaster and commissary departments, while Washington launched the Grand Forage of 1778 to collect food from the surrounding region. Meanwhile, Baron Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben's incessant drilling transformed Washington's recruits into a disciplined fighting force. Washington appointed him Inspector General.\nIn early 1778, the French entered into a Treaty of Alliance with the Americans. In May, Howe resigned and was replaced by Sir Henry Clinton. The British evacuated Philadelphia for New York that June and Washington summoned a war council of American and French generals. He chose to order a limited strike on the retreating British. Generals Lee and Lafayette moved with 4,000 men, without Washington's knowledge, and bungled their first strike on June 28. Washington relieved Lee and achieved a draw after an expansive battle. The British continued their retreat to New York.\nThis battle \"marked the end of the war's campaigning in the northern and middle states. Washington would not fight the British in a major engagement again for more than three years\". British attention shifted to the Southern theatre; in late 1778, General Clinton captured Savannah, Georgia, a key port in the American South. Washington, meanwhile, ordered an expedition against the Iroquois, the Indigenous allies of the British, destroying their villages.\nEspionage and West Point.\nWashington became America's first spymaster by designing an espionage system against the British. In 1778, Major Benjamin Tallmadge formed the Culper Ring at Washington's direction to covertly collect information about the British in New York. Intelligence from the Culper Ring saved French forces from a surprise British attack, which was itself based on intelligence from Washington's general turned British spy Benedict Arnold.\nWashington had disregarded incidents of disloyalty by Arnold, who had distinguished himself in many campaigns, including the invasion of Quebec. In 1779, Arnold began supplying the British spymaster John Andr\u00e9 with sensitive information intended to allow the British to capture West Point, a key American defensive position on the Hudson River. On September 21, Arnold gave Andr\u00e9 plans to take over the garrison. Andr\u00e9 was captured by militia who discovered the plans, after which Arnold escaped to New York. On being told about Arnold's treason, Washington recalled the commanders positioned under Arnold at key points around the fort to prevent any complicity. He assumed personal command at West Point and reorganized its defenses.\nSouthern theater and Yorktown.\nBy June 1780, the British had occupied the South Carolina Piedmont and had firm control of the South. Washington was reinvigorated, however, when Lafayette returned from France with more ships, men, and supplies, and 5,000 veteran French troops led by Marshal Rochambeau arrived at Newport, Rhode Island in July.\nGeneral Clinton sent Arnold, now a British brigadier general, to Virginia in December with 1,700 troops to capture Portsmouth and conduct raids on Patriot forces. Washington sent Lafayette south to counter Arnold's efforts. Washington initially hoped to bring the fight to New York, drawing the British forces away from Virginia and ending the war there, but Rochambeau advised him that Cornwallis in Virginia was the better target. On August 19, 1781, Washington and Rochambeau began a march to Yorktown, Virginia, known now as the \"celebrated march\". Washington was in command of an army of 7,800 Frenchmen, 3,100 militia, and 8,000 Continental troops. Inexperienced in siege warfare, he often deferred to the judgment of Rochambeau. Despite this, Rochambeau never challenged Washington's authority as the battle's commanding officer.\nBy late September, Patriot-French forces surrounded Yorktown, trapping the British Army, while the French navy emerged victorious at the Battle of the Chesapeake. The final American offensive began with a shot fired by Washington. The siege ended with a British surrender on October 19, 1781; over 7,000 British soldiers became prisoners of war. Washington negotiated the terms of surrender for two days, and the official signing ceremony took place on October 19. Although the peace treaty was not negotiated for two more years, Yorktown proved to be the last significant battle of the Revolutionary War, with the British Parliament agreeing to cease hostilities in March 1782.\nDemobilization and resignation.\nWhen peace negotiations began in April 1782, both the British and French began gradually evacuating their forces. In March 1783, Washington successfully calmed the Newburgh Conspiracy, a planned mutiny by American officers dissatisfied with a lack of pay. Washington submitted an account of $450,000 in expenses which he had advanced to the army. The account was settled, though it was vague about large sums and included expenses his wife had incurred through visits to his headquarters.\nWhen the Treaty of Paris was signed on September 3, 1783, Britain officially recognized American independence. Washington disbanded his army, giving a farewell address to his soldiers on November 2. He oversaw the evacuation of British forces in New York and was greeted by parades and celebrations.\nIn early December 1783, Washington bade farewell to his officers at Fraunces Tavern and resigned as commander-in-chief soon after. In a final appearance in uniform, he gave a statement to the Congress: \"I consider it an indispensable duty to close this last solemn act of my official life, by commending the interests of our dearest country to the protection of Almighty God, and those who have the superintendence of them, to His holy keeping.\" Washington's resignation was acclaimed at home and abroad, \"extolled by later historians as a signal event that set the country's political course\" according to the historian Edward J. Larson. The same month, Washington was appointed president-general of the Society of the Cincinnati, a newly established hereditary fraternity of Revolutionary War officers.\nEarly republic (1783\u20131789).\nReturn to Mount Vernon.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I am not only retired from all public employments but I am retiring within myself, and shall be able to view the solitary walk and tread the paths of private life with heartfelt satisfaction\u00a0... I will move gently down the stream of life, until I sleep with my fathers.\"\n\u2014 George Washington in a letter to Lafayette.&lt;br&gt; February 1, 1784.\nAfter spending just ten days at Mount Vernon out of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;8+1\u20442 years of war, Washington was eager to return home. He arrived on Christmas Eve; Professor John E. Ferling wrote that he was delighted to be \"free of the bustle of a camp and the busy scenes of public life\". He received a constant stream of visitors paying their respects at Mount Vernon.\nWashington reactivated his interests in the Great Dismal Swamp and Potomac Canal projects, begun before the war, though neither paid him any dividends. He undertook a 34-day, trip in 1784 to check on his land holdings in the Ohio Country. He oversaw the completion of remodeling work at Mount Vernon, which transformed his residence into the mansion that survives to this day\u2014although his financial situation was not strong. Creditors paid him in depreciated wartime currency, and he owed significant amounts in taxes and wages. Mount Vernon had made no profit during his absence, and he saw persistently poor crop yields due to pestilence and bad weather. His estate recorded its eleventh year running at a deficit in 1787.\nTo make his estate profitable again, Washington undertook a new landscaping plan and succeeded in cultivating a range of fast-growing trees and native shrubs. He also began breeding mules after being gifted a stud by King Charles III of Spain in 1785; he believed that they would revolutionize agriculture.\nConstitutional Convention of 1787.\nBefore returning to private life in June 1783, Washington called for a strong union. Though he was concerned that he might be criticized for meddling in civil matters, he sent a circular letter to the states, maintaining that the Articles of Confederation were no more than \"a rope of sand\". He believed the nation was on the verge of \"anarchy and confusion\", was vulnerable to foreign intervention, and that a national constitution would unify the states under a strong central government.\nWhen Shays's Rebellion erupted in Massachusetts in August 1786, Washington was further convinced that a national constitution was needed. Some nationalists feared that the new republic had descended into lawlessness, and they met on September 11, 1786, at Annapolis to ask the Congress to revise the Articles of Confederation. Congress agreed to a Constitutional Convention to be held in Philadelphia in 1787, with each state to send delegates. Washington was chosen to lead the Virginia delegation, but he declined. He had concerns about the legality of the convention and consulted James Madison, Henry Knox, and others. They persuaded him to attend as they felt his presence might induce reluctant states to send delegates and smooth the way for the ratification process while also giving legitimacy to the convention.\nWashington arrived in Philadelphia on May 9, 1787, and the convention began on May 25. Benjamin Franklin nominated Washington to preside over the meeting, and he was unanimously elected. The delegate Edmund Randolph introduced Madison's Virginia Plan; it called for an entirely new constitution and a sovereign national government, which Washington highly recommended. However, details around representation were particularly contentious, resulting in a competing New Jersey Plan being brought forward. On July 10, Washington wrote to Alexander Hamilton: \"I almost despair of seeing a favorable issue to the proceedings of our convention and do therefore repent having had any agency in the business.\" Nevertheless, he lent his prestige to the work of the other delegates, lobbying many to support the ratification of the Constitution. The final version adopted the Connecticut Compromise between the two plans, and was signed by 39 of 55 delegates on September 17, 1787.\nFirst presidential election.\nJust prior to the first presidential election of 1789, in 1788 Washington was appointed chancellor of the College of William &amp; Mary. He continued to serve through his presidency until his death. The delegates to the convention for the first presidential election anticipated a Washington presidency and left it to him to define the office once elected. When the state electors voted on February 4, 1789, Washington was unanimously elected, unique among U.S. presidents. John Adams was elected vice president. Despite writing that he felt \"anxious and painful sensations\" about leaving Mount Vernon, Washington departed for New York City on April 16.\nPresidency (1789\u20131797).\nFirst term.\nWashington was inaugurated on April 30, 1789, taking the oath of office at Federal Hall in New York City. His coach was led by militia and a marching band and followed by statesmen and foreign dignitaries in an inaugural parade, with a crowd of 10,000. Robert R. Livingston administered the oath, using a Bible provided by the Masons. Washington read a speech in the Senate Chamber, asking \"that Almighty Being ... consecrate the liberties and happiness of the people of the United States\". Though he wished to serve without a salary, Congress insisted that he receive one, providing Washington $25,000 annually (compared to $5,000 annually for the vice president).\nWashington wrote to James Madison: \"As the first of everything in our situation will serve to establish a precedent, it is devoutly wished on my part that these precedents be fixed on true principles.\" To that end, he argued against the majestic titles proposed by the Senate, including \"His Majesty\" and \"His Highness the President\", in favor of \"Mr. President\". His executive precedents included the inaugural address, messages to Congress, and the cabinet form of the executive branch. He also selected the first justices for the Supreme Court.\nWashington was an able administrator and judge of talent and character. The old Confederation lacked the powers to handle its workload and had weak leadership, no executive, a small bureaucracy of clerks, large debt, worthless paper money, and no power to establish taxes. Congress created executive departments in 1789, including the State Department, the War Department, and the Treasury Department. Washington appointed Edmund Randolph as Attorney General, Samuel Osgood as Postmaster General, Thomas Jefferson as Secretary of State, Henry Knox as Secretary of War, and Alexander Hamilton as Secretary of the Treasury. Washington's cabinet became a consulting and advisory body, not mandated by the Constitution. Washington restricted cabinet discussions to topics of his choosing and expected department heads to agreeably carry out his decisions. He exercised restraint in using his veto power, writing that \"I give my Signature to many Bills with which my Judgment is at variance.\"\nWashington opposed political factionalism and remained non-partisan throughout his presidency (the only United States president to do so). He was sympathetic to a Federalist form of government. Washington's closest advisors formed two factions, portending the First Party System. Hamilton formed the Federalist Party to promote national credit and a financially powerful nation. Jefferson opposed Hamilton's agenda and founded the Jeffersonian Republicans. Washington favored Hamilton's agenda, however, and it ultimately went into effect\u2014resulting in bitter controversy.\nOther domestic issues during Washington's first term included the planning of a permanent capital, the passage of several constitutional amendments including the Bill of Rights, and continuing debates concerning slavery and expansion into Native American territory. Washington proclaimed November 26, 1789, as a day of Thanksgiving to encourage national unity.\nSecond term.\nWashington initially planned to retire after his first term, weary of office and in poor health. After dealing with the infighting in his cabinet and with partisan critics, he showed little enthusiasm for a second term, and Martha wanted him not to run. Washington's nephew George Augustine Washington, managing Mount Vernon in his absence, was critically ill, further increasing Washington's desire to retire. Many, however, urged him to run for a second term. Madison told him that his absence would allow the dangerous political rift in his cabinet and the House to worsen. Jefferson also pleaded with him not to retire, pledging to drop his attacks on Hamilton. Hamilton maintained that Washington's absence would be \"deplored as the greatest evil\" to the country. With the election of 1792 nearing, Washington agreed to run. On February 13, 1793, the Electoral College unanimously re-elected Washington president, while John Adams was re-elected as vice president by a vote of 77 to 50. Washington was sworn into office by Associate Justice William Cushing on March 4, 1793, in Congress Hall in Philadelphia.\nOn April 22, 1793, after the French Revolutionary Wars broke out, Washington issued a proclamation declaring American neutrality. He was resolved to pursue \"a conduct friendly and impartial toward the belligerent Powers\" while warning Americans not to intervene in the conflict. Although Washington recognized France's revolutionary government, he eventually asked that the French minister to the United States, Edmond-Charles Gen\u00eat, be recalled. Gen\u00eat was a diplomatic troublemaker who was openly hostile toward Washington's neutrality policy. He procured four American ships as privateers to strike at Spanish forces (British allies) in Florida while organizing militias to strike at other British possessions. However, his efforts failed to draw the United States into the conflict.\nDuring his second term Washington faced two major domestic conflicts. The first was the Whiskey Rebellion (1791\u20131794), a Pennsylvania revolt against liquor taxation. Washington mobilized a militia and personally commanded an expedition against the rebels which suppressed the insurgency. The second was the Northwest Indian War between White settlers and Native Americans who were supported by the British; the latter were stationed in forts that they had refused to abandon after the Revolutionary War. In 1794 American troops defeated the Native American forces at the Battle of Fallen Timbers, ending the conflict between the two.\nHamilton formulated the Jay Treaty to normalize trade relations with Britain while removing them from western forts, and also to resolve financial debts remaining from the Revolution. Chief Justice John Jay represented Washington's position and signed the treaty on November 19, 1794. Washington supported the treaty because it avoided war, although he was disappointed that its provisions favored Britain. He mobilized public opinion and secured ratification but faced frequent public criticism and political controversy. Following the British abandonment of their forts around the Great Lakes, the proposed position of the Canada\u2013United States border was sent to arbitration. Numerous pre-Revolution debts were settled and the British opened the British West Indies to American merchants. The agreement secured peace with Britain and a decade of prosperous trade; however, Jefferson claimed that it angered France and \"invited rather than avoided\" war. Jefferson's claim was verified when relations with France deteriorated after the signing of the treaty, with the French Directory authorizing the seizure of American ships two days before Washington's term ended. Succeeding president John Adams was left with the prospect of war. Relations with the Spanish were more successful: Thomas Pinckney negotiated the Treaty of San Lorenzo in 1795, settling the border between the United States and Spanish territory, and guaranteeing American navigational access to the Mississippi River.\nOn July 31, 1793, Jefferson submitted his resignation from cabinet. Hamilton resigned from office in January 1795 and was replaced by Oliver Wolcott Jr. Washington's relationship with Secretary of War Henry Knox deteriorated over rumors that Knox had profited from contracts for the construction of U.S. frigates ostensibly commissioned to combat Barbary pirates under the Naval Act of 1794. Knox was forced to resign. In the final months of his presidency, Washington was assailed by his political foes and a partisan press who accused him of being ambitious and greedy. He came to regard the press as a disuniting force. Washington also opposed demands by Congress to see papers related to the Jay Treaty, arguing that they were not \"relative to any purpose under the cognizance of the House of Representatives, except that of an impeachment, which the resolution has not expressed.\"\nFarewell Address.\nAt the end of his second term, Washington retired. He was dismayed with the personal attacks against him and wanted to ensure that a truly contested presidential election could be held. He did not feel bound to a two-term limit, but his retirement set a significant precedent. In May 1792, in anticipation of his retirement, Washington instructed James Madison to prepare a \"valedictory address\", an initial draft of which was entitled the \"Farewell Address\". In May 1796, Washington sent the manuscript to Hamilton, who did an extensive rewrite, while Washington provided final edits. On September 19, 1796, David Claypoole's \"American Daily Advertiser\" published the address.\nWashington stressed that national identity was paramount, and said that the \"name of AMERICAN... must always exalt the just pride of patriotism\". Washington warned against the dangers of political parties and entangling foreign alliances with domestic affairs. He counseled friendship and commerce with all nations, but advised against involvement in European wars. He stressed the importance of religion, asserting that \"religion and morality are indispensable supports\" in a republic.\nHe closed the address by reflecting on his legacy: \"I fervently beseech the Almighty to avert or mitigate the evils to which [my unintentioned errors] may tend. I shall also carry with me the hope that my country will never cease to view them with indulgence, and that, after forty-five years of my life dedicated to its service with an upright zeal, the faults of incompetent abilities will be consigned to oblivion, as myself must soon be to the mansions of rest.\" After initial publication, many Republicans, including Madison, criticized the address and described it as an anti-French campaign document, with Madison believing that Washington was strongly pro-British. In 1972, the Washington scholar James Flexner referred to the Farewell Address as receiving as much acclaim as Thomas Jefferson's Declaration of Independence and Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg Address. In 2010, Chernow called the \"Farewell Address\" one of the most influential statements on republicanism.\nPost-presidency (1797\u20131799).\nRetirement.\nWhen Washington retired to Mount Vernon in March 1797, he devoted time to his business interests His plantation operations were only minimally profitable. Nearly all of his wealth was in the form of land and slaves rather than ready cash. To supplement his income, Washington erected a distillery for whiskey production using his enslaved workers. \nHe was a land speculator, buying parcels of land to spur development around the nearby new capital of Washington, D.C., (named in his honor in 1791), just up the Potomac River from Mount Vernon. He sold individual lots in the capital to middle-income investors rather than multiple lots to large investors, believing the former would be more likely to commit to making improvements. He held lands in the west (on the Piedmont), which yielded little income, and he unsuccessfully attempted to sell them. At the time of his death in 1799, he held title to more than of land across Virginia, Ohio, Maryland, Pennsylvania, New York, Kentucky, and the Northwest Territory.\nIn retirement, Washington became an even more committed Federalist. He vocally supported the Alien and Sedition Acts and convinced Federalist John Marshall to run for Congress to weaken the Jeffersonian hold on Virginia. When French privateers began seizing American ships in 1798, and deteriorating relations led to the \"Quasi-War\". Washington wrote to Secretary of War James McHenry offering to organize President Adams' army. Adams nominated him for a lieutenant general commission and the position of commander-in-chief of the armies on July 4, 1798. Washington served as the commanding general from July 13, 1798, until his death 17 months later. He participated in planning but delegated the active leadership of the army to Hamilton. No army invaded the United States during this period, and Washington did not assume a field command.\nDeath.\nOn December 12, 1799, Washington inspected his farms on horseback in inclement weather for five hours. He then dined with guests without putting on dry clothes. He had a sore throat the next day but was well enough to mark trees for cutting. Early the following morning, he awoke to an inflamed throat and difficulty breathing. He ordered his estate overseer, George Rawlins, to remove nearly a pint of his blood (bloodletting was a common practice of the time). His family summoned doctors James Craik, Gustavus Richard Brown, and Elisha C. Dick. Brown initially believed Washington had quinsy; Dick thought the condition was a more serious \"violent inflammation of the membranes of the throat\". They continued bloodletting to approximately five pints, but Washington's condition deteriorated further. Dick proposed a tracheotomy; the other physicians were not familiar with that procedure and disapproved. Washington instructed Brown and Dick to leave the room, while he assured Craik, \"Doctor, I die hard, but I am not afraid to go.\"\nOn his deathbed, afraid of being entombed alive, Washington instructed his private secretary Tobias Lear to wait three days before his burial. According to Lear, Washington died between 10 p.m. and 11 p.m. on December 14, 1799, with Martha seated at the foot of his bed. His last words were \"'Tis well.\" The diagnosis of Washington's illness and the immediate cause of his death have been subjects of debate. The published account of Craik and Brown stated that his symptoms were consistent with \"cynanche trachealis\", a term then used to describe severe inflammation of the upper windpipe, including quinsy. Accusations of medical malpractice have persisted since Washington's death. Modern medical authors have largely concluded that he likely died from severe epiglottitis complicated by the treatments he was given, which included multiple doses of calomel (a purgative) and extensive bloodletting, likely resulting in hypovolemic shock.\nFuneral and burial.\nWashington's funeral was held on December 18, 1799, four days after his death, at Mount Vernon. Cavalry and foot soldiers led the procession, and six colonels served as the pallbearers. The Mount Vernon funeral service was restricted mostly to family and friends. Reverend Thomas Davis read a brief funeral service, followed by a ceremony performed by members of Washington's Masonic lodge; Washington had been a Freemason since 1752. Word of his death traveled slowly, but as it reached other regions, church bells rang and many businesses closed. Memorial processions were held in major cities of the United States. Martha burned her correspondence with Washington to protect its privacy, though five letters between the couple are known to have survived.\nWashington was buried in the Washington family vault at Mount Vernon on December 18, 1799. In his will, Washington left instructions for the construction of a new vault; this was completed in 1831, after a disgruntled ex-employee of the estate attempted to steal what he thought was Washington's skull. In 1832, a joint Congressional committee debated moving his body from Mount Vernon to a crypt in the United States Capitol. Southern opposition was intense, antagonized by an ever-growing rift between North and South; many were concerned that Washington's remains could end up, in the words of Representative Wiley Thompson, on \"a shore foreign to his native soil\" if the country became divided, and Washington's remains stayed in Mount Vernon. On October 7, 1837, Washington's remains, still in the original lead coffin, were placed within a marble sarcophagus designed by William Strickland and constructed by John Struthers.\nPhilosophy and views.\nSlavery.\nDuring Washington's lifetime at least 577 slaves lived and worked at Mount Vernon. He inherited some, gained control of 84 dower slaves upon his marriage to Martha, and purchased at least 71 slaves between 1752 and 1773. From 1786, he rented slaves as part of an agreement regarding a neighboring estate; they totaled 40 in 1799.\nSlavery was deeply ingrained in the economic and social fabric of the Colony of Virginia. Prior to the Revolutionary War, Washington's views on slavery matched those of most Virginia planters of the time: \"his principal interest was still their contribution to the economic life of the plantation.\" Beginning in the 1760s, however, Washington gradually grew to oppose it. His first doubts were prompted by his choice to transition from tobacco to grain crops, which left him with a costly surplus of slaves, causing him to question the system's economic efficiency. In a 1778 letter to Lund Washington, he made clear his desire \"to get quit of Negroes\".\nHis growing disillusionment with the institution was spurred by the principles of the Revolution and revolutionary friends such as Lafayette and Hamilton. Most historians agree the Revolution was central to the evolution of Washington's attitudes; Kenneth Morgan writes that after 1783, \"[Washington] began to express inner tensions about the problem of slavery more frequently, though always in private\". As president, he remained publicly silent on the topic, believing it was a nationally divisive issue that could undermine the union. He gave moral support to a plan proposed by Lafayette to purchase land and free slaves to work on it, but chose not to participate in the experiment. Washington privately expressed support for emancipation to prominent Methodists Thomas Coke and Francis Asbury in 1785 but declined to sign their petition. In personal correspondence the next year, he made clear his desire to see the institution of slavery ended by a gradual legislative process, a view that correlated with the mainstream antislavery literature published in the 1780s. Washington emancipated 123 or 124 slaves, which was highly unusual among the large slave-holding Virginians during the Revolutionary era. However, he remained dependent on slave labor to work his farms.\nBased on his private papers and on accounts from his contemporaries, Washington slowly developed a cautious sympathy toward abolitionism that ended with his will freeing his long-time valet Billy Lee, and freeing the rest of his personally owned slaves outright upon Martha's death. On January 1, 1801, one year after George Washington's death, Martha Washington signed an order to free his slaves. Many of them were reluctant to leave; others refused to abandon spouses or children still held as dower slaves by the Custis estate. Following Washington's instructions in his will, funds were used to feed and clothe the young, aged, and infirm slaves until the early 1830s.\nReligious and spiritual views.\nWashington was baptized as an infant in April 1732 and was a devoted Anglican. He served for more than 20 years as a vestryman and churchwarden at the Fairfax and Truro parishes in Virginia. He privately prayed and read the Bible daily, and publicly encouraged prayer. He may have taken communion regularly prior to the Revolution, but he did not do so afterwards.\nWashington referred to God in American Enlightenment terms, including \"Providence\", the \"Almighty\", and the \"Divine Author\". He believed in a divine power who watched over battlefields, influenced the outcome of war, protected his life, and was involved in American politics and specifically in the creation of the United States. Chernow has argued that Washington avoided evangelistic Christianity, hellfire-and-brimstone speech, and anything inclined to \"flaunt his religiosity\", saying that he \"never used his religion as a device for partisan purposes or in official undertakings\". At the same time, Washington frequently quoted from or paraphrased the Bible, and often referred to the Anglican \"Book of Common Prayer\".\nWhile president, Washington acknowledged major religious sects, gave speeches on religious toleration, and opposed state religion. He adopted the ideas, values, and modes of thinking of the Enlightenment, but he harbored no contempt for organized Christianity and its clergy. In 1793, speaking to members of the New Church in Baltimore, Washington said, \"We have abundant reason to rejoice that in this Land the light of truth and reason has triumphed over the power of bigotry and superstition.\"\nFreemasonry was a widely accepted institution in the late 18th century, known for advocating moral teachings. American Masonic lodges did not share the anti-clerical views of the controversial European lodges. A Masonic lodge was established in Fredericksburg, Virginia, in September 1752, and Washington was initiated two months later at the age of 20 as one of its first Entered Apprentices. Within a year, he progressed through its ranks to become a Master Mason. In 1777, he was recommended for the office of Grand Master of the newly established Grand Lodge of Virginia; sources differ as to whether he declined or was never asked, but he did not assume the role. He served as the charter Master of Alexandria Masonic lodge No. 22 in 1788\u20131789.\nPersonal life.\nWashington's 1751 bout with smallpox may have rendered him sterile, though Chernow notes that it is possible Martha \"sustained injury during the birth of Patsy, her final child, making additional births impossible\". The couple lamented not having any children together. The two raised Martha's children John Parke Custis (Jacky) and Martha Parke Custis (Patsy), and later Jacky's two youngest children Eleanor Parke Custis (Nelly) and George Washington Parke Custis (Washy), and supported numerous nieces and nephews. Some descendants of West Ford, a slave of Washington's younger brother John Augustine Washington, maintain (based on family oral history) that Ford was fathered by George Washington, though this paternity has been disputed.\nWashington was somewhat reserved in personality, although he was known for having a strong presence. He made speeches and announcements when required, but he was not a noted orator nor debater. He drank alcohol in moderation but was morally opposed to excessive drinking, smoking tobacco, gambling, and profanity. He was taller than most of his contemporaries; accounts of his height vary from to . He was known for his strength. He had grey-blue eyes and long reddish-brown hair. He did not wear a powdered wig; instead he wore his hair curled, powdered, and tied in a queue in the fashion of the day.\nWashington suffered from severe tooth decay and ultimately lost all of his teeth except one. He had several sets of false teeth during his presidency. Contrary to common lore, these were not made of wood, but of metal, ivory, bone, animal teeth, and human teeth possibly obtained from slaves. His dental problems left him in constant pain, which he treated with laudanum. He also experienced a painful growth in his thigh early in his first presidential term, followed by a life-threatening bout of pneumonia in 1790 from which he never fully recovered.\nWashington was a talented equestrian. Jefferson described him as \"the best horseman of his age\". He collected thoroughbreds at Mount Vernon; his two favorite horses were Blueskin and Nelson.\nLegacy.\nWashington is one of the most influential figures in American history. Virginia's Governor Henry Lee III as \"first in war, first in peace, and first in the hearts of his countrymen\". Polls have consistently placed Washington among the highest-ranked of presidents.\nWashington became an international symbol for liberation and nationalism as the leader of the first successful revolution against a colonial empire. In 1879, Congress proclaimed Washington's Birthday to be a federal holiday. In 1976, he was posthumously appointed General of the Armies of the United States during the American Bicentennial. President Gerald Ford stated that Washington would \"rank first among all officers of the Army, past and present\". On March 13, 1978, Washington was officially promoted by the Army.\nIn 1809, Mason Locke Weems wrote a hagiographic biography to honor Washington. Chernow maintains that Weems attempted to humanize Washington, inspire \"patriotism and morality\", and foster \"enduring myths\", such as that of Washington's refusal to lie about damaging his father's cherry tree. Weems' accounts have never been proven or disproven.\nIn the 21st century, Washington's reputation has been critically scrutinized. The historian John Ferling maintains that Washington remains the only founder and president ever to be referred to as \"godlike\", and points out that his character has been the most scrutinized by historians. The author David Hackett Fischer defined Washington's character as \"integrity, self-discipline, courage, absolute honesty, resolve, and decision, but also forbearance, decency, and respect for others\".\nWashington's legacy with Native Americans is mixed. Chernow describes Washington as always trying to be even-handed in dealing with Indigenous peoples, hoping they would abandon their itinerant hunting life and adapt to fixed agricultural communities in the manner of White settlers. He also maintains that Washington never advocated outright confiscation of tribal land or the forcible removal of tribes. By contrast, Colin G. Calloway wrote that \"Washington had a lifelong obsession with getting Indian land, either for himself or for his nation, and initiated policies and campaigns that had devastating effects in Indian country.\" He stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The growth of the nation demanded the dispossession of Indian people... But if Indians refused and resisted, as they often did, he felt he had no choice but to \"extirpate\" them and that the expeditions he sent to destroy Indian towns were therefore entirely justified.\nAlong with other Founding Fathers, Washington has been criticized for holding enslaved people. Though he expressed the desire to see the abolition of slavery through legislation, he did not initiate or support any initiatives for bringing about its end. This has led to calls to remove his name from public buildings and his statue from public spaces.\nWashington's presidential library is housed at Mount Vernon, which is now a National Historic Landmark. His papers are held by the Library of Congress.\nNamesakes and monuments.\nMany places and monuments have been named in honor of Washington, including the capital city of Washington, D.C., and the state of Washington. On February 21, 1885, the Washington Monument was dedicated, a marble obelisk on the National Mall in Washington, D.C.\nWashington appears as one of four presidents on the \"Shrine of Democracy\", a colossal sculpture by Gutzon Borglum on Mount Rushmore in South Dakota. The George Washington Bridge, opened in 1931, connects New York City to New Jersey. A number of secondary schools and universities are named in honor of Washington, including George Washington University and Washington University in St. Louis.\nHe appears on contemporary United States currency, including the one-dollar bill, a presidential one-dollar coin and the quarter-dollar coin (the Washington quarter). Washington was pictured on the nation's first postage stamp in 1847, and has since appeared on more United States postage stamps than anyone else.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11969", "revid": "29539620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11969", "title": "Gulf Coast of the United States", "text": "Region of the US bordering the Gulf of Mexico\nThe Gulf Coast of the United States, also known as the Gulf South or the South Coast, is the coastline along the Southern United States where they meet the Gulf of Mexico. The coastal states that have a shoreline on the Gulf of Mexico are Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida, and these are known as the \"Gulf States\".\nThe economy of the Gulf Coast area is dominated by industries related to energy, petrochemicals, fishing, aerospace, agriculture, and tourism. The large cities of the region are (from west to east) Brownsville, Corpus Christi, Houston, Galveston, Beaumont, Lake Charles, Lafayette, Baton Rouge, New Orleans, Gulfport, Biloxi, Mobile, Pensacola, Panama City, St. Petersburg, and Tampa. All are the centers or major cities of their respective metropolitan areas and many contain large ports.\nGeography.\nThe Gulf Coast is made of many inlets, bays, and lagoons. The coast is intersected by numerous rivers, the largest of which is the Mississippi River. Much of the land along the Gulf Coast is, or was, marshland. Ringing the Gulf Coast is the Gulf Coastal Plain, which reaches from Southern Texas to the western Florida panhandle, while the western portions of the Gulf Coast are made up of many barrier islands and peninsulas, including the Padre Island along the Texas coast. These landforms protect numerous bays and inlets providing as a barrier to oncoming waves. The central part of the Gulf Coast, from eastern Texas through Louisiana, consists primarily of marshland. The eastern part of the Gulf Coast, predominantly Florida, is dotted with many bays and inlets.\nClimate.\nThe Gulf Coast climate is humid subtropical, although Southwest Florida features a tropical climate. Much of the year is warm to hot along the Gulf Coast, while the three winter months bring periods of cool (or rarely, cold) weather mixed with mild temperatures. The area is highly vulnerable to hurricanes as well as floods and severe thunderstorms. Much of the Gulf Coast has a summer precipitation maximum, with July or August commonly the wettest month due to the combination of frequent summer thunderstorms produced by relentless heat and humidity, and tropical weather systems, including tropical depressions, tropical storms, and hurricanes, while winter and early spring rainfall also can be heavy.\nThis pattern is evident in southern cities such as Houston; New Orleans; Mobile, Alabama; and Pensacola, Florida. However, the central and southern Florida peninsula and South Texas has a pronounced winter dry season, as at Tampa and Fort Myers. On the central and southern Texas coast, winter, early spring and mid-summer are markedly drier, and September is the wettest month on average at Corpus Christi and Brownsville, Texas. Tornadoes are infrequent at the coast but do occur; however, they occur more frequently in inland portions of Gulf Coast states. Over most of the Gulf Coast from Houston, Texas, eastward, extreme rainfall events are a significant threat, commonly from tropical weather systems, which can bring 4 to 10 or more inches of rain in a single day. In August 2017, Hurricane Harvey made landfall along the central Texas coast, then migrated to and stalled over the greater Houston area for several days, producing extreme, unprecedented rainfall totals of over 40\u00a0inches (1,000\u00a0mm) in many areas, unleashing widespread flooding. Climate scientists predict more hurricanes for Florida and the Texas coastline in particular. Earthquakes are extremely rare to the area, but a 6.0 earthquake in the Gulf of Mexico on September 10, 2006, could be felt from the cities of New Orleans to Tampa.\nRising sea levels.\nDue to the release of greenhouse gas emissions, glaciers and ice sheets are melting and expanding the oceans. The United States coastlines are projected to rise 1 foot in three decades or between 10 and 12 inches on average by 2050. The Gulf Coast will likely see the biggest change, with sea levels expected to rise between 14 and 18 inches. The Global and Regional Sea Level Rise Report predicted more frequent, major and destructive high tide flooding events along with taller storm surges by 2050 after scientists determined high tide flooding has been \"increasingly common\" over the past few years due to the rising sea levels. The impacts are expected to be dramatic. Low-lying coastal areas are expected to experience multiple factors, including increased levels of flooding, accelerated erosion, loss of wetlands and low-lying terrestrial ecosystems, and seawater intrusion into freshwater sources. Rising sea level and erosion will also imperil critical habitats for many commercially important fisheries that depend on inshore waters for either permanent residence or nursery area. In 2021 alone rising sea levels cost the United States approximately $2.6 billion in relief efforts and caused at least seven deaths. By 2051, the cost of flood damage is expected to increase by 61%, or $32 billion.\nEconomic activities.\nThe Gulf Coast is a major center of economic activity. The marshlands along the Louisiana and Texas coasts provide breeding grounds and nurseries for ocean life that drive the fishing and shrimping industries. The Port of South Louisiana (Metropolitan New Orleans in Laplace) and the Port of Houston are two of the ten busiest ports in the world by cargo volume. As of 2004, seven of the top ten busiest ports in the U.S. are on the Gulf Coast.\nThe discovery of oil and gas deposits along the coast and offshore, combined with easy access to shipping, have made the Gulf Coast the heart of the U.S. petrochemical industry. The coast contains nearly 4,000 oil platforms.\nBesides the above, the region features other important industries including aerospace and biomedical research, as well as older industries such as agriculture and\u2014especially since the development of the Gulf Coast beginning in the 1920s and the increase in wealth throughout the United States\u2014tourism.\nHistory.\nHurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita have destroyed a number of museums and archives in the Gulf Coast. In 2008 floods in Iowa destroyed the local \"Flood Museum\" which held materials from the Great Mississippi and Missouri Rivers Flood of 1993.\nBefore European settlers arrived in the region, the Gulf Coast was home to several pre-Columbian kingdoms which had extensive trade networks with empires such as the Aztecs and the Mississippi Mound Builders. Shark and alligator teeth and shells from the Gulf have been found as far north as Ohio, in the mounds of the Hopewell culture.\nThe first Europeans to settle the Gulf Coast were primarily the French and the Spanish. The Louisiana Purchase (1803), Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty (1819) and the Texas Revolution (1835\u20131836) made the Gulf Coast a part of the United States during the first half of the 19th century. As the U.S. population continued to expand its frontiers westward, the Gulf Coast was a natural magnet in the South providing access to shipping lanes and both national and international commerce. The development of sugar and cotton production (enabled by slavery) allowed the South to prosper. By the mid-19th century the city of New Orleans, being situated as a key to commerce on the Mississippi River and in the Gulf, had become the largest U.S. city not on the Atlantic seaboard and the fourth largest in the U.S. overall.\nTwo major events were turning points in the earlier history of the Gulf Coast region. The first was the American Civil War, which caused severe damage to some economic sectors in the South, including the Gulf Coast. The second event was the Galveston Hurricane of 1900. At the end of the 19th century Galveston was, with New Orleans, one of the most developed cities in the region. The city had the third busiest port in the U.S. and its financial district was known as the \"Wall Street of the South\".\nSince then the Gulf Coast has been hit with numerous other hurricanes. On August 29, 2005, Hurricane Katrina struck the Gulf Coast as a Category 3 hurricane. It was the most damaging storm in the history of the United States, causing upwards of $80 billion in damages, and leaving over 1,800 dead. Again in 2008, the Gulf Coast was struck by a catastrophic hurricane. Due to its immense size, Hurricane Ike caused devastation from the Louisiana coastline all the way to the Kenedy County, Texas, region near Corpus Christi. In addition, Ike caused flooding and significant damage along the Mississippi coastline and the Florida panhandle. Ike killed 112 people and left upwards of 300 people missing, never to be found. Hurricane Ike was the third most damaging storm in the history of the United States, causing more than $25 billion in damage along the coast, leaving hundreds of thousands of people homeless, and sparking the largest search-and-rescue operation in U.S. history.\nOther than the hurricanes, the Gulf Coast has redeveloped dramatically over the course of the 20th century. The gulf coast is highly populated. The petrochemical industry, launched with the major discoveries of oil in Texas and spurred on by further discoveries in the Gulf waters, has been a vehicle for development in the central and western Gulf which has spawned development on a variety of fronts in these regions. Texas in particular has benefited tremendously from this industry over the course of the 20th century and economic diversification has made the state a magnet for population and home to more \"Fortune\" 500 companies than any other U.S. state. Florida has grown as well, driven to a great extent by its long established tourism industry but also by its position as a gateway to the Caribbean and Latin America. As of 2024, Texas and Florida are the second and third most populous states in the nation, respectively. Other areas of the Gulf Coast have benefited less, though economic development fueled by tourism has greatly increased property values along the coast, and is now a severe danger to the valuable but fragile ecosystems of the Gulf Coast.\nSince January 24, 2025, U.S. federal government agencies are required to refer to the Gulf of Mexico as the \"Gulf of America\".\nMetropolitan areas.\nThe following table lists the 14 largest core-based statistical areas along the Gulf Coast.\nTransportation.\nAir.\nInternational service.\nInternational destinations\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11971", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11971", "title": "Galaxy formation and evolution", "text": "Subfield of cosmology\nIn cosmology, the study of galaxy formation and evolution is concerned with the processes that formed a heterogeneous universe from a homogeneous beginning, the formation of the first galaxies, the way galaxies change over time, and the processes that have generated the variety of structures observed in nearby galaxies. Galaxy formation is hypothesized to occur from structure formation theories, as a result of tiny quantum fluctuations in the aftermath of the Big Bang. The simplest model in general agreement with observed phenomena is the Lambda-CDM model\u2014that is, clustering and merging allows galaxies to accumulate mass, determining both their shape and structure. Hydrodynamics simulation, which simulates both baryons and dark matter, is widely used to study galaxy formation and evolution.\nCommonly observed properties of galaxies.\nBecause of the inability to conduct experiments in outer space, the only way to \u201ctest\u201d theories and models of galaxy evolution is to compare them with observations. Explanations for how galaxies formed and evolved must be able to predict the observed properties and types of galaxies.\nEdwin Hubble created an early galaxy classification scheme, now known as the Hubble tuning-fork diagram. It partitioned galaxies into ellipticals, normal spirals, barred spirals (such as the Milky Way), and irregulars. These galaxy types exhibit the following properties which can be explained by current galaxy evolution theories:\nAstronomers now believe that disk galaxies likely formed first, then evolved into elliptical galaxies through galaxy mergers.\nCurrent models also predict that the majority of mass in galaxies is made up of dark matter, a substance which is not directly observable, and might not interact through any means except gravity. This observation arises because galaxies could not have formed as they have, or rotate as they are seen to, unless they contain far more mass than can be directly observed.\nFormation of disk galaxies.\nThe earliest stage in the evolution of galaxies is their formation. When a galaxy forms, it has a disk shape and is called a spiral galaxy due to spiral-like \"arm\" structures located on the disk. There are different theories on how these disk-like distributions of stars develop from a cloud of matter: however, at present, none of them exactly predicts the results of observation.\nTop-down theories.\nOlin J. Eggen, Donald Lynden-Bell, and Allan Sandage in 1962, proposed a theory that disk galaxies form through a monolithic collapse of a large gas cloud. The distribution of matter in the early universe was in clumps that consisted mostly of dark matter. These clumps interacted gravitationally, putting tidal torques on each other that acted to give them some angular momentum. As the baryonic matter cooled, it dissipated some energy and contracted toward the center. With angular momentum conserved, the matter near the center speeds up its rotation. Then, like a spinning ball of pizza dough, the matter forms into a tight disk. Once the disk cools, the gas is not gravitationally stable, so it cannot remain a singular homogeneous cloud. It breaks, and these smaller clouds of gas form stars. Since the dark matter does not dissipate as it only interacts gravitationally, it remains distributed outside the disk in what is known as the dark halo. Observations show that there are stars located outside the disk, which does not quite fit the \"pizza dough\" model. It was first proposed by Leonard Searle and Robert Zinn that galaxies form by the coalescence of smaller progenitors. Known as a top-down formation scenario, this theory is quite simple yet no longer widely accepted.\nBottom-up theory.\nMore recent theories include the clustering of dark matter halos in the bottom-up process. Instead of large gas clouds collapsing to form a galaxy in which the gas breaks up into smaller clouds, it is proposed that matter started out in these \u201csmaller\u201d clumps (mass on the order of globular clusters), and then many of these clumps merged to form galaxies, which then were drawn by gravitation to form galaxy clusters. This still results in disk-like distributions of baryonic matter with dark matter forming the halo for all the same reasons as in the top-down theory. Models using this sort of process predict more small galaxies than large ones, which matches observations.\nAstronomers do not currently know what process stops the contraction. In fact, theories of disk galaxy formation are not successful at producing the rotation speed and size of disk galaxies. It has been suggested that the radiation from bright newly formed stars, or from an active galactic nucleus can slow the contraction of a forming disk. It has also been suggested that the dark matter halo can pull the galaxy, thus stopping disk contraction.\nThe Lambda-CDM model is a cosmological model that explains the formation of the universe after the Big Bang. It is a relatively simple model that predicts many properties observed in the universe, including the relative frequency of different galaxy types; however, it underestimates the number of thin disk galaxies in the universe. The reason is that these galaxy formation models predict a large number of mergers. If disk galaxies merge with another galaxy of comparable mass (at least 15 percent of its mass) the merger will likely destroy, or at a minimum greatly disrupt the disk, and the resulting galaxy is not expected to be a disk galaxy (see next section). While this remains an unsolved problem for astronomers, it does not necessarily mean that the Lambda-CDM model is completely wrong, but rather that it requires further refinement to accurately reproduce the population of galaxies in the universe.\nGalaxy mergers and the formation of elliptical galaxies.\nElliptical galaxies (most notably supergiant ellipticals, such as ESO 306-17) are among some of the largest known thus far. Their stars are on orbits that are randomly oriented within the galaxy (i.e. they are not rotating like disk galaxies). A distinguishing feature of elliptical galaxies is that the velocity of the stars does not necessarily contribute to flattening of the galaxy, such as in spiral galaxies. Elliptical galaxies have central supermassive black holes, and the masses of these black holes correlate with the galaxy's mass.\nElliptical galaxies have two main stages of evolution. The first is due to the supermassive black hole growing by accreting cooling gas. The second stage is marked by the black hole stabilizing by suppressing gas cooling, thus leaving the elliptical galaxy in a stable state. The mass of the black hole is also correlated to a property called sigma which is the dispersion of the velocities of stars in their orbits. This relationship, known as the M-sigma relation, was discovered in 2000. Elliptical galaxies mostly lack disks, although some bulges of disk galaxies resemble elliptical galaxies. Elliptical galaxies are more likely found in crowded regions of the universe (such as galaxy clusters).\nAstronomers now see elliptical galaxies as some of the most evolved systems in the universe. It is widely accepted that the main driving force for the evolution of elliptical galaxies is mergers of smaller galaxies. Many galaxies in the universe are gravitationally bound to other galaxies, which means that they will never escape their mutual pull. If those colliding galaxies are of similar size, the resultant galaxy will appear similar to neither of the progenitors, but will instead be elliptical. There are many types of galaxy mergers, which do not necessarily result in elliptical galaxies, but result in a structural change. For example, a minor merger event is thought to be occurring between the Milky Way and the Magellanic Clouds.\nMergers between such large galaxies are regarded as violent, and the frictional interaction of the gas between the two galaxies can cause gravitational shock waves, which are capable of forming new stars in the new elliptical galaxy. By sequencing several images of different galactic collisions, one can observe the timeline of two spiral galaxies merging into a single elliptical galaxy.\nIn the Local Group, the Milky Way and the Andromeda Galaxy are gravitationally bound, and currently approaching each other at high speed. Simulations show that the Milky Way and Andromeda are on a collision course, and are expected to collide in less than five billion years. During this collision, it is expected that the Sun and the rest of the Solar System will be ejected from its current path around the Milky Way. The remnant could be a giant elliptical galaxy.\nGalaxy quenching.\nOne observation that must be explained by a successful theory of galaxy evolution is the existence of two different populations of galaxies on the galaxy color-magnitude diagram. Most galaxies tend to fall into two separate locations on this diagram: a \"red sequence\" and a \"blue cloud\". Red sequence galaxies are generally non-star-forming elliptical galaxies with little gas and dust, while blue cloud galaxies tend to be dusty star-forming spiral galaxies.\nAs described in previous sections, galaxies tend to evolve from spiral to elliptical structure via mergers. However, the current rate of galaxy mergers does not explain how all galaxies move from the \"blue cloud\" to the \"red sequence\". It also does not explain how star formation ceases in galaxies. Theories of galaxy evolution must therefore be able to explain how star formation turns off in galaxies. This phenomenon is called galaxy \"quenching\".\nStars form out of cold gas (see also the Kennicutt\u2013Schmidt law), so a galaxy is quenched when it has no more cold gas. However, it is thought that quenching occurs relatively quickly (within 1 billion years), which is much shorter than the time it would take for a galaxy to simply use up its reservoir of cold gas. Galaxy evolution models explain this by hypothesizing other physical mechanisms that remove or shut off the supply of cold gas in a galaxy. These mechanisms can be broadly classified into two categories: (1) preventive feedback mechanisms that stop cold gas from entering a galaxy or stop it from producing stars, and (2) ejective feedback mechanisms that remove gas so that it cannot form stars.\nOne theorized preventive mechanism called \u201cstrangulation\u201d keeps cold gas from entering the galaxy. Strangulation is likely the main mechanism for quenching star formation in nearby low-mass galaxies. The exact physical explanation for strangulation is still unknown, but it may have to do with a galaxy's interactions with other galaxies. As a galaxy falls into a galaxy cluster, gravitational interactions with other galaxies can strangle it by preventing it from accreting more gas. For galaxies with massive dark matter halos, another preventive mechanism called \u201cvirial shock heating\u201d may also prevent gas from becoming cool enough to form stars.\nEjective processes, which expel cold gas from galaxies, may explain how more massive galaxies are quenched. One ejective mechanism is caused by supermassive black holes found in the centers of galaxies. Simulations have shown that gas accreting onto supermassive black holes in galactic centers produces high-energy jets; the released energy can expel enough cold gas to quench star formation.\nOur own Milky Way and the nearby Andromeda Galaxy currently appear to be undergoing the quenching transition from star-forming blue galaxies to passive red galaxies.\nHydrodynamics Simulation.\nDark energy and dark matter account for most of the Universe's energy, so it is valid to ignore baryons when simulating large-scale structure formation (using methods such as N-body simulation). However, since the visible components of galaxies consist of baryons, it is crucial to include baryons in the simulation to study the detailed structures of galaxies. At first, the baryon component consists of mostly hydrogen and helium gas, which later transforms into stars during the formation of structures. From observations, models used in simulations can be tested and the understanding of different stages of galaxy formation can be improved.\nEuler equations.\nIn cosmological simulations, astrophysical gases are typically modeled as inviscid ideal gases that follow the Euler equations, which can be expressed mainly in three different ways: Lagrangian, Eulerian, or arbitrary Lagrange-Eulerian methods. Different methods give specific forms of hydrodynamical equations. When using the Lagrangian approach to specify the field, it is assumed that the observer tracks a specific fluid parcel with its unique characteristics during its movement through space and time. In contrast, the Eulerian approach emphasizes particular locations in space that the fluid passes through as time progresses.\nBaryonic Physics.\nTo shape the population of galaxies, the hydrodynamical equations must be supplemented by a variety of astrophysical processes mainly governed by baryonic physics.\nGas cooling.\nProcesses, such as collisional excitation, ionization, and inverse Compton scattering, can cause the internal energy of the gas to be dissipated. In the simulation, cooling processes are realized by coupling cooling functions to energy equations. Besides the primordial cooling, at high temperature,formula_1, heavy elements (metals) cooling dominates. When formula_2, the fine structure and molecular cooling also need to be considered to simulate the cold phase of the interstellar medium.\nInterstellar medium.\nComplex multi-phase structure, including relativistic particles and magnetic field, makes simulation of interstellar medium difficult. In particular, modeling the cold phase of the interstellar medium poses technical difficulties due to the short timescales associated with the dense gas. In the early simulations, the dense gas phase is frequently not modeled directly but rather characterized by an effective polytropic equation of state. More recent simulations use a multimodal distribution to describe \nthe gas density and temperature distributions, which directly model the multi-phase structure. However, more detailed physics processes needed to be considered in future simulations, since the structure of the interstellar medium directly affects star formation.\nStar formation.\nAs cold and dense gas accumulates, it undergoes gravitational collapse and eventually forms stars. To simulate this process, a portion of the gas is transformed into collisionless star particles, which represent coeval, single-metallicity stellar populations and are described by an initial underlying mass function. Observations suggest that star formation efficiency in molecular gas is almost universal, with around 1% of the gas being converted into stars per free fall time. In simulations, the gas is typically converted into star particles using a probabilistic sampling scheme based on the calculated star formation rate. Some simulations seek an alternative to the probabilistic sampling scheme and aim to better capture the clustered nature of star formation by treating star clusters as the fundamental unit of star formation. This approach permits the growth of star particles by accreting material from the surrounding medium. In addition to this, modern models of galaxy formation track the evolution of these stars and the mass they return to the gas component, leading to an enrichment of the gas with metals.\nStellar feedback.\nStars have an influence on their surrounding gas by injecting energy and momentum. This creates a feedback loop that regulates the process of star formation. To effectively control star formation, stellar feedback must generate galactic-scale outflows that expel gas from galaxies. Various methods are utilized to couple energy and momentum, particularly through supernova explosions, to the surrounding gas. These methods differ in how the energy is deposited, either thermally or kinetically. However, excessive radiative gas cooling must be avoided in the former case. Cooling is expected in dense and cold gas, but it cannot be reliably modeled in cosmological simulations due to low resolution. This leads to artificial and excessive cooling of the gas, causing the supernova feedback energy to be lost via radiation and significantly reducing its effectiveness. In the latter case, kinetic energy cannot be radiated away until it thermalizes. However, using hydrodynamically decoupled wind particles to inject momentum non-locally into the gas surrounding active star-forming regions may still be necessary to achieve large-scale galactic outflows. Recent models explicitly model stellar feedback. These models not only incorporate supernova feedback but also consider other feedback channels such as energy and momentum injection from stellar winds, photoionization, and radiation pressure resulting from radiation emitted by young, massive stars. During the Cosmic Dawn, galaxy formation occurred in short bursts of 5 to 30 Myr due to stellar feedbacks.\nSupermassive black holes.\nSimulation of supermassive black holes is also considered, numerically seeding them in dark matter haloes, due to their observation in many galaxies and the impact of their mass on the mass density distribution. Their mass accretion rate is frequently modeled by the Bondi-Hoyle model.\nActive galactic nuclei.\nActive galactic nuclei (AGN) have an impact on the observational phenomena of supermassive black holes, and further have a regulation of black hole growth and star formation. In simulations, AGN feedback is usually classified into two modes, namely quasar and radio mode. Quasar mode feedback is linked to the radiatively efficient mode of black hole growth and is frequently incorporated through energy or momentum injection. The regulation of star formation in massive galaxies is believed to be significantly influenced by radio mode feedback, which occurs due to the presence of highly collimated jets of relativistic particles. These jets are typically linked to X-ray bubbles that possess enough energy to counterbalance cooling losses.\nMagnetic fields.\nThe ideal magnetohydrodynamics approach is commonly utilized in cosmological simulations since it provides a good approximation for cosmological magnetic fields. The effect of magnetic fields on the dynamics of gas is generally negligible on large cosmological scales. Nevertheless, magnetic fields are a critical component of the interstellar medium since they provide pressure support against gravity and affect the propagation of cosmic rays.\nCosmic rays.\nCosmic rays play a significant role in the interstellar medium by contributing to its pressure, serving as a crucial heating channel, and potentially driving galactic gas outflows. The propagation of cosmic rays is highly affected by magnetic fields. So in the simulation, equations describing the cosmic ray energy and flux are coupled to magnetohydrodynamics equations.\nRadiation Hydrodynamics.\nRadiation hydrodynamics simulations are computational methods used to study the interaction of radiation with matter. In astrophysical contexts, radiation hydrodynamics is used to study the epoch of reionization when the Universe had high redshift. There are several numerical methods used for radiation hydrodynamics simulations, including ray-tracing, Monte Carlo, and moment-based methods. Ray-tracing involves tracing the paths of individual photons through the simulation and computing their interactions with matter at each step. This method is computationally expensive but can produce very accurate results.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11973", "revid": "47712184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11973", "title": "Generation X", "text": "Cohort born from 1965 to 1980\nGeneration X, often shortened to Gen X, is the demographic cohort following the Baby Boomers and preceding Millennials. Researchers and popular media often use the mid-1960s as its starting birth years and the late 1970s to early 1980s as its ending birth years, with the generation generally defined as people born from 1965 to 1980. By this definition and U.S. census data, there are 65.2 million Gen Xers in the United States as of 2019. Most Gen Xers are the children of the Silent Generation and older Baby Boomers, and many are the parents of Generation Z.\nAs children in the 1970s, 1980s, and early 1990s, a time of shifting societal values, Gen Xers were sometimes called the \"Latchkey Generation\", a reference to their returning as children from school to an empty home and using a key to let themselves in. This was a result of what is now called free-range parenting, increasing divorce rates, and increased maternal participation in the workforce before widespread availability of childcare options outside the home.\nAs adolescents and young adults in the 1980s and 1990s, Xers were dubbed the \"MTV Generation\" (a reference to the music video channel) and sometimes characterized as slackers, cynical, and disaffected. Some of the many cultural influences on Gen X youth included a proliferation of musical genres with strong social-tribal identity, such as dance-pop, punk rock, hip-hop, heavy metal, alternative rock, rave, and grunge. Film was also a notable cultural influence, via both the birth of franchise mega-sequels and a proliferation of independent film (enabled in part by video). Video games, in both amusement parlors and devices in Western homes, were also a major part of juvenile entertainment for the first time. Politically, Generation X experienced the last days of communism in the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc countries of Central and Eastern Europe, witnessing the transition to capitalism in these regions during their youth. In much of the Western world, a similar time period was defined by a dominance of conservatism and free market economics.\nIn their midlife during the early 21st century, research describes Gen Xers as active, happy, and achieving a work\u2013life balance. The cohort has also been more broadly described as entrepreneurial and productive in the workplace.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"Generation X\" has been used at various times to describe alienated youth. In the early 1950s, Hungarian photographer Robert Capa first used \"Generation X\" as the title for a photo-essay about young men and women growing up immediately after World War II (later called the Silent Generation). The term first appeared in print in a December 1952 issue of \"Holiday\" magazine announcing its upcoming publication of Capa's photo-essay. In 1964, Jane Deverson and Charles Hamblett published the book \"Generation X\", about British youth (who were older baby boomers at the time) and their culture. From 1976 to 1981, English musician Billy Idol (himself a younger boomer) used the term as the name of his punk rock band, as his mother had owned a copy of the 1964 book. These uses of the term appear to have no connection to Capa's photo-essay.\nThe term gained a modern application after the release of Canadian author Douglas Coupland's 1991 novel \"\". The characters in the novel were born in the late 1950s and early 1960s, ironically making them younger baby boomers, or Generation Jones. In 1999, Coupland described his book as being about \"the fringe of Generation Jones which became the mainstream of Generation X\". In 1987, he had written a piece in \"Vancouver Magazine\" titled \"Generation X\" that was \"the seed of what went on to become the book\". Coupland initially claimed the term was derived from Billy Idol's band, but in 1995 he denied this connection, saying:\nThe book's title came not from Billy Idol's band, as many supposed, but from the final chapter of a funny sociological book on American class structure titled \"\", by Paul Fussell. In his final chapter, Fussell named an \"X\" category of people who wanted to hop off the merry-go-round of status, money, and social climbing that so often frames modern existence.\nAuthor William Strauss noted that around the time Coupland's novel was published the symbol \"X\" was prominent in popular culture, as the film \"Malcolm X\" was released in 1992, and that the name \"Generation X\" stuck. The \"X\" refers to an unknown variable or to a desire not to be defined. Strauss's coauthor Neil Howe noted the delay in naming this demographic cohort: \"Over 30 years after their birthday, they didn't have a name. I think that's germane.\" Previously, the cohort had been called post-Boomers, Baby Busters (which refers to the drop in birth rates after the baby boom in the western world, particularly in the U.S.), the New Lost Generation, latchkey kids, the MTV Generation, and the 13th Generation (the 13th generation since American independence).\nDate and age range definitions.\nGeneration X is the demographic cohort following the post\u2013World War II baby-boom, representing a generational change from the baby boomers. Many researchers and demographers use dates that correspond to the fertility-patterns in the population. For Generation X, in the U.S. (and broadly, in the Western world), the period begins at a time when fertility rates started to significantly decrease in the mid-1960s (due to increased access to birth control), until an upswing in the late 1970s and recovery at the start of the 1980s.\nIn the U.S., the Pew Research Center, a nonpartisan think tank, delineates a Generation X period of 1965\u20131980 which has gradually gained acceptance in academic circles. Moreover, although fertility rates are preponderant in the definition of start and end dates, the center remarks: \"Generations are analytical constructs, it takes time for popular and expert consensus to develop as to the precise boundaries that demarcate one generation from another.\" Pew takes into account other factors, notably the labor market as well as a group's attitudinal and behavioral trends. Writing for Pew's \"Trend\" magazine in 2018, psychologist Jean Twenge observed that the \"birth year boundaries of Gen X are debated but settle somewhere around 1965\u20131980\". According to this definition, as of 2025 the oldest members of Generation X are and the youngest are .\nThe Brookings Institution, another U.S. think tank, sets the Gen X period as from 1965 to 1981. The U.S. Federal Reserve Board uses 1965\u20131980. The U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) uses 1965 to 1980. In their 2002 book \"When Generations Collide\", Lynne Lancaster and David Stillman use 1965 to 1980, and in 2012 authors Jain and Pant also used 1965 to 1980. U.S. news outlets such as \"The New York Times\" and \"The Washington Post\" describe Generation X as people born between 1965 and 1980. Gallup, Bloomberg, \"Business Insider\", and \"Forbes\" use 1965\u20131980. \"Time\" magazine wrote that Generation X is \"roughly defined as anyone born between 1965 and 1980\".\nIn Australia, the McCrindle Research Center uses 1965\u20131979. PricewaterhouseCoopers, a multinational professional services network headquartered in London, describes Generation X employees as those born from 1965 to 1980. In the UK, the Resolution Foundation think tank defines Gen X as those born between 1966 and 1980. In the 2021 census, Statistics Canada defined Generation X as born between 1966 and 1980.\nOther age range markers.\nU.S. authors William Strauss and Neil Howe define Generation X as those born between 1961 and 1981, and divide the cohort into two waves: the \"Atari Wave\" and \"Nintendo Wave\". Jeff Gordinier, in his 2008 book \"X Saves the World\", includes those born between 1961 and 1977 but possibly as late as 1980. George Masnick of the Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies defines this generation as 1965 to 1984 to satisfy the condition that boomers, Xers, and millennials \"cover equal 20-year age spans\". In 2004, journalist J. Markert acknowledged the 20-year increments but went a step further, dividing the generation into two 10-year cohorts. The first begins in 1966 and ends in 1975 and the second begins in 1976 and ends in 1985; this thinking is applied to each generation (Silent, boomers, Gen X, millennials, etc.).\nBased on events of historical importance, Schewe and Noble in 2002 argued that a cohort is formed against significant milestones and can be any length of time. They said Generation X began in 1966 and ended in 1976, with those born between 1955 and 1965 called \"trailing-edge boomers\". George Barna's 1994 book \"Baby Busters: The Disillusioned Generation\" called those born between 1965 and 1983 the \"baby busters\" generation. In his 1996 book \"Boom Bust &amp; Echo: How to Profit from the Coming Demographic Shift\", David Foot describes Generation X as late boomers and includes those born between 1960 and 1966, while the \"Bust Generation\", those born between 1967 and 1979, is considered a separate generation.\nGenerational cuspers.\nPeople born in the latter half of the Baby Boom, from the early 1960s to the early years of Generation X, are sometimes called Generation Jones. People born in the Generation X / millennial cusp years of the late 1970s and early to mid-1980s are sometimes called Xennials. Other names include the \"Star Wars\" Generation, Generation Catalano, and the \"Oregon Trail\" Generation. These \"microgenerations\" share characteristics of both generations.\nDemographics.\nUnited States.\nThere are differences in Gen X population numbers depending on the date-range selected. In the U.S., using Census population projections, the Pew Research Center found that the Gen X population born from 1965 to 1980 numbered 65.2\u00a0million in 2019. The cohort is likely to overtake Boomers in 2028. A 2010 Census report counted approximately 84\u00a0million people living in the US who are defined by birth years ranging from the early 1960s to the early 1980s. Numerous other pieces of information, however, show the Generation X cohort were born from 1966 to 1981.\nIn a 2012 article for the Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University, George Masnick wrote that the \"Census counted 82.1\u00a0million\" Gen Xers in the U.S. Masnick concluded that immigration filled in any birth year deficits during low fertility years of the late 1960s and early 1970s. Jon Miller at the Longitudinal Study of American Youth at the University of Michigan wrote that \"Generation X refers to adults born between 1961 and 1981\" and it \"includes 84 million people\". In their 1991 book \"Generations\", authors Howe and Strauss indicated that the total number of Gen X individuals in the U.S. was 88.5\u00a0million.\nImpact of family planning programs.\nThe birth control pill, introduced in 1960 and further popularized in 1964, was one contributing factor of declining birth rates. Initially, the pill spread rapidly amongst married women as an approved treatment for menstrual disturbance. However, it was also found to prevent pregnancy and was prescribed as a contraceptive in 1964. \"The pill\", as it became commonly known, reached younger, unmarried college women in the late 1960s when state laws were amended and reduced the age of majority from 21 to ages 18\u201320. These policies are commonly referred to as the Early Legal Access (ELA) laws.\nAnother major factor was abortion, only available in a few states until its legalisation in a 1973 US Supreme Court decision in \"Roe v. Wade.\" This was replicated elsewhere, with reproductive rights legislation passed, notably in the UK (1967), France (1975), West Germany (1976), New Zealand (1977), Italy (1978), and the Netherlands (1980). From 1973 to 1980, the abortion rate per 1,000 US women aged 15\u201344 increased from 16% to 29% with more than 9.6\u00a0million terminations of pregnancy practiced. Between 1970 and 1980, on average, for every 10 American citizens born, 3 were aborted. However, increased immigration during the same period of time helped to partially offset declining birth-rates and contributed to making Generation X an ethnically and culturally diverse demographic cohort.\nParental lineage.\nGenerally, Gen Xers are the children of the Silent Generation and older Baby Boomers.\nCharacteristics.\nIn the United States.\nAs children and adolescents.\nRising divorce rates and women workforce participation.\nStrauss and Howe, who wrote several books on generations, including one specifically on Generation X titled \"13th Gen: Abort, Retry, Ignore, Fail?\" (1993), reported that Gen Xers were children at a time when society was less focused on children and more focused on adults. Xers were children during a time of increasing divorce rates, with divorce rates doubling in the mid-1960s, before peaking in 1980. Strauss and Howe described a cultural shift where the long-held societal value of staying together for the sake of the children was replaced with a societal value of parental and individual self-actualization. Strauss wrote that society \"moved from what Leslie Fiedler called a 1950s-era 'cult of the child' to what Landon Jones called a 1970s-era 'cult of the adult'\". \"The Generation Map\", a report from Australia's McCrindle Research Center writes of Gen X children: Boomer parents were the most divorced generation in Australian history\". According to Christine Henseler in the 2012 book \"Generation X Goes Global: Mapping a Youth Culture in Motion\", \"We watched the decay and demise (of the family), and grew callous to the loss.\"\nThe Gen X childhood coincided with the sexual revolution of the 1960s to 1980s, which Susan Gregory Thomas described in her book \"In Spite of Everything\" as confusing and frightening for children in cases where a parent would bring new sexual partners into their home. Thomas also discussed how divorce was different during the Gen X childhood, with the child having a limited or severed relationship with one parent following divorce, often the father, due to differing societal and legal expectations. In the 1970s, only nine U.S. states allowed for joint custody of children, which has since been adopted by all 50 states following a push for joint custody during the mid-1980s. \"Kramer vs. Kramer\", a 1979 American legal drama based on Avery Corman's best-selling novel, came to epitomize the struggle for child custody and the demise of the traditional nuclear family.\nThe rapid influx of Boomer women into the labor force that began in the 1970s was marked by the confidence of many in their ability to successfully pursue a career while meeting the needs of their children. This resulted in an increase in latchkey children, leading to the terminology of the \"latchkey generation\" for Generation X. These children lacked adult supervision in the hours between the end of the school day and when a parent returned home from work in the evening, and for longer periods of time during the summer. Latchkey children became common among all socioeconomic demographics, but this was particularly so among middle- and upper-class children. The higher the educational attainment of the parents, the higher the odds the children of this time would be latchkey children, due to increased maternal participation in the workforce at a time before childcare options outside the home were widely available. McCrindle Research Centre described the cohort as \"the first to grow up without a large adult presence, with both parents working\", stating this led to Gen Xers being more peer-oriented than previous generations.\nConservative and neoliberal turn.\nSome older Gen Xers started high school in the waning years of the Carter presidency, but much of the cohort became socially and politically conscious during the Reagan Era. President Ronald Reagan, voted in office principally by the Boomer generation, embraced \"laissez-faire\" economics with vigor. His policies included cuts in the growth of government spending, reduction in taxes for the higher echelon of society, legalization of stock buybacks, and deregulation of key industries. The early 1980s recession saw unemployment rise to 10.8% in 1982; requiring, more often than not, dual parental incomes. One in five American children grew up in poverty during this time. The federal debt almost tripled during Reagan's time in office, from $998\u00a0billion in 1981 to $2.857\u00a0trillion in 1989, placing greater burden of repayment on the incoming generation.\nGovernment expenditure shifted from domestic programs to defense. Remaining funding initiatives, moreover, tended to be diverted away from programs for children and often directed toward the elderly population, with cuts to Medicaid and programs for children and young families, and protection and expansion of Medicare and Social Security for the elderly population. These programs for the elderly were not tied to economic need. Congressman David Durenberger criticized this political situation, stating that while programs for poor children and for young families were cut, the government provided \"free health care to elderly millionaires\".\nCrack epidemic and AIDS.\nGen Xers came of age or were children during the 1980s crack epidemic, which disproportionately impacted urban areas as well as the African-American community in the U.S. Drug turf battles increased violent crime, and crack addiction impacted communities and families. Between 1984 and 1989, the homicide rate for black males aged 14 to 17 doubled in the U.S., and the homicide rate for black males aged 18 to 24 increased almost as much. The crack epidemic had a destabilizing impact on families, with an increase in the number of children in foster care. In 1986, President Reagan signed the Anti-Drug Abuse Act to enforce strict mandatory minimum sentencing for drug users. He also increased the federal budget for supply-reduction efforts.\nThe AIDS epidemic of the 1980s and 1990s loomed over the adolescence and young adulthood of Generation X. The disease was first clinically observed in the U.S. in 1981; by 1985, an estimated one-to-two million Americans were HIV-positive. This particularly hit the LGBT community. As the virus spread, at a time before effective treatments were available, a public panic ensued. Sex education programs in schools were adapted to address the AIDS epidemic, which taught Gen X students that sex could kill them.\nRise of home computing.\nGen Xers were the first children to have access to personal computers in their homes and at schools. In the early 1980s, the growth in the use of personal computers exploded. Manufacturers such as Commodore, Atari, and Apple responded to the demand via 8-bit and 16-bit machines. This in turn stimulated the software industries with corresponding developments for backup storage, use of the floppy disk, zip drive, and CD-ROM.\nAt school, several computer projects were supported by the Department of Education under United States Secretary of Education Terrel Bell's \"Technology Initiative\". This was later mirrored in the UK's 1982 Computers for Schools programme and, in France, under the 1985 scheme \"Plan Informatique pour Tous (IPT).\"\nPost\u2013civil rights generation.\nIn the U.S., Generation X was the first cohort to grow up post-integration after the racist Jim Crow laws. They were described in a marketing report by \"Specialty Retail\" as the kids who \"lived the civil rights movement\". They were among the first children to be bused to attain integration in the public school system. In the 1990s, Strauss reported Gen Xers were \"by any measure the least racist of today's generations\". In the U.S., Title IX, which passed in 1972, provided increased athletic opportunities to Gen X girls in the public school setting. \"Roots\", based on the novel by Alex Haley and broadcast as a 12-hour series, was viewed as a turning point in the country's ability to relate to Afro-American history.\nAs young adults.\nContinued growth in college enrollments.\nIn the U.S., compared to the Boomer generation, Generation X was more educated than their parents. The share of young adults enrolling in college steadily increased from 1983, before peaking in 1998. In 1965, as early Boomers entered college, total enrollment of new undergraduates was just over 5.7\u00a0million individuals across the public and private sectors. By 1983, the first year of Gen X college enrollments (as per Pew Research's definition), this figure had reached 12.2\u00a0million. This was an increase of 53%, effectively a doubling in student intake. As the 1990s progressed, Gen X college enrollments continued to climb, with increased loan borrowing as the cost of an education became substantially more expensive compared to their peers in the mid-1980s. By 1998, the generation's last year of college enrollment, those entering the higher education sector totaled 14.3\u00a0million. In addition, unlike Boomers and previous generations, women outpaced men in college completion rates.\nAdjusting to a new societal environment.\nFor early Gen Xer graduates entering the job market at the end of the 1980s, economic conditions were challenging and did not show signs of major improvements until the mid-1990s. In the U.S., restrictive monetary policy to curb rising inflation and the collapse of a large number of savings and loan associations (private banks that specialized in home mortgages) impacted the welfare of many American households. This precipitated a large government bailout, which placed further strain on the budget. Furthermore, three decades of growth came to an end. The social contract between employers and employees, which had endured during the 1960s and 1970s and was scheduled to last until retirement, was no longer applicable. By the late 1980s, there were large-scale layoffs of Boomers, corporate downsizing, and accelerated offshoring of production.\nOn the political front, in the U.S. the generation became ambivalent if not outright disaffected with politics. They had been reared in the shadow of the Vietnam War and the Watergate scandal. They came to maturity under the Reagan and George H. W. Bush presidencies, with first-hand experience of the impact of neoliberal policies. Few had experienced a Democratic administration and even then, only, at an atmospheric level. For those on the left of the political spectrum, the disappointments with the previous Boomer student mobilizations of the 1960s and the collapse of those movements towards a consumerist \"greed is good\" and \"yuppie\" culture during the 1980s felt, to a great extent, like hypocrisy if not outright betrayal. Hence, the preoccupation on \"authenticity\" and not \"selling-out\". The Revolutions of 1989 and the collapse of the socialist utopia with the fall of the Berlin Wall, moreover, added to the disillusionment that any alternative to the capitalist model was possible.\nBirth of the \"slacker\".\nIn 1990, \"Time\" magazine published an article titled \"Living: Proceeding with Caution\", which described those then in their 20s as aimless and unfocused. Media pundits and advertisers further struggled to define the cohort, typically portraying them as \"unfocused twentysomethings\". A MetLife report noted: \"media would portray them as the \"Friends\" generation: rather self-involved and perhaps aimless...but fun\". \nGen Xers were often portrayed as apathetic or as \"slackers\", lacking bearings, a stereotype which was initially tied to Richard Linklater's comedic and essentially plotless 1991 film \"Slacker\". After the film was released, \"journalists and critics thought they put a finger on what was different about these young adults in that 'they were reluctant to grow up' and 'disdainful of earnest action'\". Ben Stiller's 1994 film \"Reality Bites\" also sought to capture the zeitgeist of the generation with a portrayal of the attitudes and lifestyle choices of the time.\nNegative stereotypes of Gen X young adults continued, including that they were \"bleak, cynical, and disaffected\". In 1998, such stereotypes prompted sociological research at Stanford University to study the accuracy of the characterization of Gen X young adults as cynical and disaffected. Using the national General Social Survey, the researchers compared answers to identical survey questions asked of 18\u201329-year-olds in three different time periods. Additionally, they compared how older adults answered the same survey questions over time. The surveys showed 18\u201329-year-old Gen Xers did exhibit higher levels of cynicism and disaffection than previous cohorts of 18\u201329-year-olds surveyed. However, they also found that cynicism and disaffection had increased among all age groups surveyed over time, not just young adults, making this a period effect, not a cohort effect. In other words, adults of all ages were more cynical and disaffected in the 1990s, not just Generation X.\nIn a 2023 interview with television host Bill Maher on the podcast \"Club Random with Bill Maher\", vocalist and guitarist Billy Corgan hinted at how the Smashing Pumpkins spoke to the disillusionment felt by many Gen Xers as they reached adulthood, noting:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At least generationally, I think that's why I connected with so many people\u2014because I was speaking the patois of: \"Gilligan's Island\" meets \"What the fuck happened in my life?\"\nRise of the Internet and the dot-com bubble.\nBy the mid-late 1990s, under Bill Clinton's presidency, economic optimism had returned to the U.S., with unemployment reduced from 7.5% in 1992 to 4% in 2000. Younger members of Gen X, straddling across administrations, politically experienced a \"liberal renewal\". In 1997, \"Time\" magazine published an article titled \"Generation X Reconsidered\", which retracted the previously reported negative stereotypes and reported positive accomplishments. The article cited Gen Xers' tendency to found technology startup companies and small businesses, as well as their ambition, which research showed was higher among Gen X young adults than older generations. Yet, the slacker moniker stuck. As the decade progressed, Gen X gained a reputation for entrepreneurship. In 1999, \"The New York Times\" dubbed them \"Generation 1099\", describing them as the \"once pitied but now envied group of self-employed workers whose income is reported to the Internal Revenue Service not on a W-2 form, but on Form 1099\".\nConsumer access to the Internet and its commercial development throughout the 1990s witnessed a frenzy of IT initiatives. Newly created companies, launched on stock exchanges globally, were formed with dubitable revenue generation or cash flow. When the dot-com bubble eventually burst in 2000, older Gen Xers who had embarked as entrepreneurs in the IT industry while riding the Internet wave, as well as younger Gen Xers who were newly qualified programmers (having used AOL and the first web browsers in high school or college), were both caught in the crash. This had major repercussions, with cross-generational consequences; five years after the bubble burst, new matriculation of IT Millennial undergraduates fell by 40% and by as much as 70% in some information systems programs.\nHowever, following the crisis, sociologist Mike Males reported continued confidence and optimism among the cohort. He reported \"surveys consistently find 80% to 90% of Gen Xers self-confident and optimistic\". Males wrote \"these young Americans should finally get the recognition they deserve\", praising the cohort and stating that \"the permissively raised, universally deplored Generation X is the true 'great generation', for it has braved a hostile social climate to reverse abysmal trends\". He described them as the hardest-working group since the World War II generation. He reported Gen Xers' entrepreneurial tendencies helped create the high-tech industry that fueled the 1990s economic recovery. In 2002, \"Time\" magazine published an article titled \"Gen Xers Aren't Slackers After All\", reporting that four out of five new businesses were the work of Gen Xers.\nResponse to 9/11.\nIn the U.S., Gen Xers were described as the major heroes of the September 11 terrorist attacks by author William Strauss. The firefighters and police responding to the attacks were predominantly from Generation X. Additionally, the leaders of the passenger revolt on United Airlines Flight 93 were also, by majority, Gen Xers. Author Neil Howe reported survey data which showed that Gen Xers were cohabiting and getting married in increasing numbers following the terrorist attacks. Gen X survey respondents reported that they no longer wanted to live alone. \nIn October 2001, the \"Seattle Post-Intelligencer\" wrote of Gen Xers: \"Now they could be facing the most formative events of their lives and their generation.\" The \"Greensboro News &amp; Record\" reported members of the cohort \"felt a surge of patriotism since terrorists struck\" by giving blood, working for charities, donating to charities, and by joining the military to fight the war on terror. \"The Jury Expert\", a publication of The American Society of Trial Consultants, reported: \"Gen X members responded to the terrorist attacks with bursts of patriotism and national fervor that surprised even themselves.\"\nIn midlife.\nAchieving a work-life balance.\nIn 2011, survey analysis from the \"Longitudinal Study of American Youth\" found Gen Xers (defined as those who were then between the ages of 30 and 50) to be \"balanced, active, and happy\" in midlife and as achieving a work-life balance. The Longitudinal Study of Youth is an NIH-NIA funded study by the University of Michigan which has been studying Generation X since 1987. The study asked questions such as \"Thinking about all aspects of your life, how happy are you? If zero means that you are very unhappy and 10 means that you are very happy, please rate your happiness.\" LSA reported that \"mean level of happiness was 7.5 and the median (middle score) was 8. Only four percent of Generation X adults indicated a great deal of unhappiness (a score of three or lower). Twenty-nine percent of Generation X adults were very happy with a score of 9 or 10 on the scale.\"\nIn 2014, Pew Research provided further insight, describing the cohort as \"savvy, skeptical and self-reliant; they're not into preening or pampering, and they just might not give much of a hoot what others think of them. Or whether others think of them at all.\" Furthermore, guides regarding managing multiple generations in the workforce describe Gen Xers as: independent, resilient, resourceful, self-managing, adaptable, cynical, pragmatic, skeptical of authority, and as seeking a work-life balance.\nEntrepreneurship as an individual trait.\nIndividualism is one of the defining traits of Generation X, and is reflected in their entrepreneurial spirit. In the 2008 book \"X Saves the World: How Generation X Got the Shaft but Can Still Keep Everything from Sucking\", author Jeff Gordinier describes Generation X as a \"dark horse demographic\" which \"doesn't seek the limelight\". Gordiner cites examples of Gen Xers' contributions to society such as: Google, Wikipedia, Amazon.com, and YouTube, arguing that if Boomers had created them, \"we'd never hear the end of it\". In the book, Gordinier contrasts Gen Xers to Baby Boomers, saying Boomers tend to trumpet their accomplishments more than Gen Xers do, creating what he describes as \"elaborate mythologies\" around their achievements. Gordiner cites Steve Jobs as an example, while Gen Xers, he argues, are more likely to \"just quietly do their thing\".\nIn a 2007 article published in the Harvard Business Review, authors Strauss and Howe wrote of Generation X: \"They are already the greatest entrepreneurial generation in U.S. history; their high-tech savvy and marketplace resilience have helped America prosper in the era of globalization.\" According to authors Michael Hais and Morley Winograd:\nSmall businesses and the entrepreneurial spirit that Gen Xers embody have become one of the most popular institutions in America. There's been a recent shift in consumer behavior and Gen Xers will join the \"idealist generation\" in encouraging the celebration of individual effort and business risk-taking. As a result, Xers will spark a renaissance of entrepreneurship in economic life, even as overall confidence in economic institutions declines. Customers, and their needs and wants (including Millennials) will become the North Star for an entire new generation of entrepreneurs.\nA 2015 study by Sage Group reports Gen Xers \"dominate the playing field\" with respect to founding startups in the United States and Canada, with Xers launching the majority (55%) of all new businesses in 2015.\nIncome benefits of a college education.\nGeneration X was the last generation in the U.S. for whom higher education was broadly financially remunerative. In 2019, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis published research (using data from the 2016 \"Survey of Consumer Finances\") demonstrating that after controlling for race and age, families with heads of household born before 1980 had higher wealth and income when the head of household had post-secondary education. For those born after 1980, the wealth premium (of college education) was no longer statistically significant (in part because of the rising cost of college). The income premium, while remaining positive, had declined to historic lows, with more pronounced downward trajectories among heads of household with postgraduate degrees.\nParenting and volunteering.\nIn terms of advocating for their children in the educational setting, author Neil Howe describes Gen X parents as distinct from Baby Boomer parents. Howe argues that Gen Xers are not helicopter parents, which Howe describes as a parenting style of Boomer parents of Millennials. Howe described Gen Xers instead as \"stealth fighter parents\", due to the tendency of Gen X parents to let minor issues go and to not hover over their children in the educational setting, but to intervene forcefully and swiftly in the event of more serious issues. In 2012, the Corporation for National and Community Service ranked Gen X volunteer rates in the U.S. at \"29.4% per year\", the highest compared with other generations. The rankings were based on a three-year moving average between 2009 and 2011.\nCommunication style.\nGeneration X prefers the communication modes of face-to-face and phone, whereas the younger generations prefer e-mail and texting. In terms of writing, Generation X is more likely than Generation Z to know cursive and more likely than Millennials to use postal mail. Also, Generation X is less likely to ghost than Millennials and Generation Z. Social media usage is also different, with Generation X preferring LinkedIn and Facebook, while Millennials and Generation Z prefer Snapchat and TikTok.\nIncome differential with previous generations.\nA report titled \"Economic Mobility: Is the American Dream Alive and Well?\" focused on the income of males 30\u201339 in 2004 (those born April 1964\u00a0\u2013 March 1974). The study was released on 25 May 2007 and emphasized that this generation's men made less (by 12%) than their fathers had at the same age in 1974, thus reversing a historical trend. It concluded that, per year increases in household income generated by fathers/sons slowed from an average of 0.9% to 0.3%, barely keeping pace with inflation. \"Family incomes have risen though (over the period 1947 to 2005) because more women have gone to work\", \"supporting the incomes of men, by adding a second earner to the family. And as with male income, the trend is downward.\"\nGlobally.\nAlthough, globally, children and adolescents of Generation X will have been heavily influenced by U.S. cultural industries with shared global currents (e.g., rising divorce rates, the AIDS epidemic, advancements in ICT), there is not one U.S.-born-and-raised concept but multiple perspectives and geographical outgrowths. Even within the period of analysis, inside national communities, commonalities will have differed on the basis of one's birth date. The generation, Christine Henseler also remarks, was shaped as much by real-world events, within national borders, determined by specific political, cultural, and historical incidents. She adds \"In other words, it is in between both real, clearly bordered spaces and more fluid global currents that we can spot the spirit of Generation X.\" \nIn 2016, a global consumer insights project from Viacom International Media Networks and Viacom, based on over 12,000 respondents across 21 countries, reported on Gen X's unconventional approach to sex, friendship, and family, their desire for flexibility and fulfillment at work and the absence of midlife crisis for Gen Xers. The project also included a 20\u00a0min documentary titled \"Gen X Today\".\nRussia.\nIn Russia, Generation Xers are referred to as \"the last Soviet children\", as the last children to come of age prior to the downfall of communism in their nation and prior to the Dissolution of the Soviet Union. Those that reached adulthood in the 1980s and grew up educated in the doctrines of Marxism and Leninism found themselves against a background of economic and social change, with the advent of Mikhail Gorbachev to power and \"Perestroika\". However, even before the collapse of the Soviet Union and the disbanding of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, surveys demonstrated that Russian young people repudiated the key features of the Communist worldview that their party leaders, schoolteachers, and even parents had tried to instill in them. This generation, caught in the transition between Marxism\u2013Leninism and an unknown future, and wooed by the new domestic political classes, remained largely apathetic.\nFrance.\nIn France, \"Generation X\" is not as widely known or used to define its members. Politically, this loosely denotes those born in the early 1960s to the early 1980s. Although fertility rates started to fall in 1965, number of births in France only followed suit in 1975. There is general agreement that, domestically, the event that is accepted in France as the separating point between the Baby Boomer generation and Generation X are the French strikes and violent riots of May 1968 with those of the generation too young to participate. Those at the start of the cohort are sometimes referred to as 'G\u00e9n\u00e9ration Bof' because of their tendency to use the word 'bof', which, translated into English, means \"whatever\".\nThe generation is closely associated with socialist Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand who served as President of France during two consecutive terms between 1981 and 1995 as most transitioned from teenagers into adulthood during that period. Economically, Xers started when the new labour market was emerging and were the first to fully experience the advent of the post-industrial society. For those at the tail-end of the generation, educational and defence reforms, a new style \"baccalaur\u00e9at g\u00e9n\u00e9ral\" with three distinct streams in 1995 (the preceding programme, introduced in 1968) the 2002 licence-master-doctorat reform for first Millennial graduates (DEUG, Ma\u00eetrise, DESS and DEA degrees no longer awarded), and the cessation of military conscription in 1997 (for those born after January 1979) are considered as new transition points to the next.\nRepublic of Ireland.\nIn Ireland, \"Generation X\" came of age during The Troubles, the 1980s economic recession, and the Celtic Tiger prosperity of the 1990s onward. The appropriateness of the term to Ireland has been questioned, with Darach \u00d3 S\u00e9aghdha noting that \"Generation X is usually contrasted with the one before by growing up in smaller and different family units on account of their parents having greater access to contraception and divorce \u2013 again, things that were not widely available in Ireland. [\"Contraception was only available under prescription in 1978 and without prescription in 1985; divorce was illegal until 1996.\"] However, this generation was in prime position to benefit from the Celtic Tiger, the Peace Process and liberalisations introduced on foot of EU membership and was less likely to emigrate than those that came before and after. You could say that in many ways, these are Ireland's real Boomers.\"\nCulturally, Britpop, Celtic rock, the trad revival, \"Father Ted\", the 1990 FIFA World Cup and rave culture were significant. The Divine Comedy song \"Generation Sex\" (1998) painted a picture of hedonism in the late 20th century, as well as its effect on the media. David McWilliams' 2005 book \"The Pope's Children: Ireland's New Elite\" profiled Irish people born in the 1970s (just prior to the papal visit to Ireland), which was a baby boom that saw Ireland's population increase for the first time since the 1840s Great Famine. The Pope's Children were in position to benefit from the Celtic Tiger and the newly liberal culture, where the Catholic Church had significantly less social power.\nUnited Kingdom.\nAs children, adolescents and young adults.\nPolitical environment.\nThe United Kingdom's Economic and Social Research Council described Generation X as \"Thatcher's children\" because the cohort grew up while Margaret Thatcher was Prime Minister from 1979 to 1990, \"a time of social flux and transformation\". Those born in the late 1960s and early 1970s grew up in a period of social unrest. While unemployment was low in the early 1970s, industrial and social unrest escalated. Strike action culminated in the \"Winter of Discontent\" in 1978\u201379, and the Troubles began to unfold in Northern Ireland. The turn to neoliberal policies introduced and maintained by consecutive conservative governments from 1979 to 1997 marked the end of the post-war consensus.\nEducation.\nThe almost universal dismantling of the grammar school system in Great Britain during the 1960s and the 1970s meant that the vast majority of the cohort attended comprehensive schools. Compulsory education ended at the age of 16. As older members of the cohort reached the end of their mandatory schooling, levels of educational enrollment among older adolescents remained below much of the Western world. By the early 1980s, some 80% to 90% of school leavers in France and West Germany received vocational training, compared with 40% in the United Kingdom. By the mid-1980s, over 80% of pupils in the United States and West Germany and over 90% in Japan stayed in education until the age of eighteen, compared with 33% of British pupils. There was, however, broadly a rise in education levels among this age range as Generation X passed through it.\nIn 1990, 25% of young people in England stayed in some kind of full-time education after the age of 18, this was an increase from 15% a decade earlier. Later, the Further and Higher Education Act 1992 and the liberalisation of higher education in the UK saw greater numbers of those born towards the tail-end of the generation gaining university places.\nEmployment.\nThe 1980s, when some of Generation X reached working age, was an era defined by high unemployment rates. This was particularly true of the youngest members of the working aged population. In 1984, 26% of 16 to 24 year olds were neither in full-time education or participating in the workforce. However, this figure did decrease as the economic situation improved reaching 17% by 1993.\nIn midlife.\nGeneration X were far more likely to have children out of wedlock than their parents. The number of babies being born to unmarried parents in England and Wales rose from 11% in 1979, a quarter in 1998, 40% by 2002 and almost half in 2012. They were also significantly more likely to have children later in life than their predecessors. The average age of a mother giving birth rose from 27 in 1982 to 30 in 2012. That year saw 29,994 children born to mothers over the age 40, an increase of 360% from 2002.\nA 2016 study of over 2,500 British office workers conducted by Workfront found that survey respondents of all ages selected those from Generation X as the hardest-working employees and members of the workforce (chosen by 60%). Gen X was also ranked highest among fellow workers for having the strongest work ethic (chosen by 59.5%), being the most helpful (55.4%), the most skilled (54.5%), and the best troubleshooters/problem-solvers (41.6%).\nPolitical evolution.\nIpsos MORI reports that at the 1987 and 1992 general elections, the first United Kingdom general elections where significant numbers of Generation X members could vote, a plurality of 18 to 24 year olds opted for the Labour Party by a small margin. The polling organisation's figures suggest that in 1987, 39% of that age group voted Labour, 37% for the Conservatives and 22% for the SDP\u2013Liberal Alliance. Five years later, these numbers were fairly similar at 38% Labour, 35% Conservative and 19% Liberal Democrats, a party by then formed from the previously mentioned alliance. Both these elections saw a fairly significant lead for the Conservatives in the popular vote among the general population.\nAt the 1997 General election where Labour won a large majority of seats and a comfortable lead in the popular vote, research suggests that voters under the age of 35 were more likely to vote Labour if they turned out than the wider electorate but significantly less likely to vote than in 1992. Analysts suggested this may have been due to fewer differences in policies between the major parties and young people having less of a sense of affiliation with particular political parties than older generations. A similar trend continued at the 2001 and 2005 general elections as turnout dropped further among both the relatively young and the wider public.\nVoter turnout across the electorate began to recover from a 2001 low until the 2017 general election. Generation X also became more likely to vote as they entered the midlife age demographics. Polling suggests a plurality of their age group backed the Conservatives in 2010 and 2015 but less overwhelming than much of the older generation. At the 2016 EU membership referendum and 2017 general election, Generation X was split with younger members appearing to back remain and Labour and older members tending towards Leave and Conservative in a British electorate more polarised by age than ever before. At the 2019 general election, voting trends continued to be heavily divided by age but a plurality of younger as well as older generation X members (then 39 to 55 year olds) voted Conservative.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, \"Generation X\" is not widely used or applied. Instead, reference is sometimes made to \"Generation Golf\" in the previous West German republic, based on a novel by Florian Illies. In the east, children of the \"Mauerfall\" or coming down of the wall. For former East Germans, there was adaptation, but also a sense of loss of accustomed values and structures. These effects turned into romantic narratives of their childhood. For those in the West, there was a period of discovery and exploration of what had been a forbidden land.\nSouth Africa.\nIn South Africa, Gen Xers spent their formative years of the 1980s during the \"hyper-politicized environment of the final years of apartheid\".\nArts and culture.\nMusic.\nGen Xers were the first cohort to come of age with MTV. They were the first generation to experience the emergence of music videos as teenagers and are sometimes called the MTV Generation. Gen Xers were responsible for the alternative rock movement of the 1980s and 1990s, including the grunge subgenre.\nPunk rock.\nIn the mid-to-late 1970s, a new generation of rock bands arose, including the Ramones, Johnny Thunders and the Heartbreakers, and the Dictators in New York City; the Sex Pistols, the Clash, the Damned, and Buzzcocks in the United Kingdom; and the Saints in Australia. These acts became recognized as forming the vanguard of \"punk rock\", which spawned its own subculture and soon became more pervasive worldwide. The genre generally took root in local scenes that tended to reject affiliation with the mainstream. At first, many punk musicians and fans were not Gen Xers but younger boomers, or Generation Jones.\nAs more Gen Xers entered adolescence and young adulthood in the 1980s, both the musicians and fanbase for punk became increasingly Gen X, and it therefore made a significant imprint on the cohort. By the 1980s, faster and more aggressive subgenres such as hardcore punk (e.g., Minor Threat, Bad Religion), street punk (e.g., the Exploited, NOFX) and anarcho-punk (e.g., Subhumans) became the predominant modes of punk rock. Musicians identifying with or inspired by punk often later pursued other musical directions, resulting in a broad range of spinoffs. This development gave rise to genres such as post-punk, new wave, and later indie pop, alternative rock, and noise rock. By the 1990s, punk rock reemerged into the mainstream. Skate punk and pop punk bands with Gen X members such as Green Day, Rancid, and The Offspring brought widespread popularity to the genre.\nHard rock.\nArguably in a similar way to punk, a sense of disillusionment, angst and anger catalysed hard rock and heavy metal to grow from the earlier influence of rock.\nPost-punk.\nThe energy generated by the punk movement launched a subsequent proliferation of weird and eclectic post-punk sub cultures, spanning new wave, goth, etc., and influencing the New Romantics.\nGrunge.\nA notable example of alternative rock is grunge and the associated subculture that developed in the Pacific Northwest of the U.S. Grunge lyrics have been called the \"product of Generation X malaise\". Vulture wrote, \"the best bands arose from the boredom of latchkey kids\". Producer Jack Endino said, \"People made records entirely to please themselves because there was nobody else to please\". \nGrunge lyrics are typically dark, nihilistic, angst-filled, and anguished. They often address themes such as social alienation, despair, and apathy. \"The Guardian\" wrote that grunge \"didn't recycle banal cliches but tackled weighty subjects\". Topics of grunge lyrics include homelessness, suicide, rape, broken homes, drug addiction, self-loathing, misogyny, domestic abuse, and finding \"meaning in an indifferent universe\". Grunge lyrics tend to be introspective and aim to enable the listener to see into hidden personal issues and examine depravity. Notable grunge bands include Nirvana, Pearl Jam, Alice in Chains, Stone Temple Pilots, and Soundgarden.\nHip hop.\nThe golden age of hip hop refers to hip hop music made from the mid-1980s to mid-1990s, typically by artists originating from the New York metropolitan area. The music is characterized by its diversity, quality, innovation, and influence after the genre's emergence and establishment in the previous decade. It has various subject matter, while the music is experimental and the sampling eclectic. Artists associated with the era include LL Cool J, Run\u2013D.M.C., Eric B. &amp; Rakim, Beastie Boys, N.W.A., De La Soul, A Tribe Called Quest, Public Enemy, Tupac Shakur, and The Notorious B.I.G.\nIn addition to lyrical boasting, hip hop was also often used as social protest. Lyrics from the era often draw attention to social issues, including afrocentric living, drug use, poverty, crime and gang violence, religion, culture, the state of the U.S. economy, and the modern man's struggle. There was also often an emphasis on black nationalism. Conscious and political hip hop tracks of the time were a response to the effects of American capitalism and President Reagan's conservative political economy. Public Enemy's most influential song, \"Fight the Power\", came out at this time; the song speaks up to the government, proclaiming that people in the ghetto have freedom of speech and rights like every other American. According to Rose Tricia, \"In rap, relationships between black cultural practice, social and economic conditions, technology, sexual and racial politics, and the institution policing of the popular terrain are complex and in constant motion\".\nFilm.\nIndie films.\nGen Xers are largely responsible for the \"indie film\" movement of the 1990s, both as young directors and in large part as the audiences fueling demand for such films. Increased accessibility to video mediums in the consumer market (such as VHS) supported the growth and popularity of independent film. In cinema, directors Kevin Smith, Quentin Tarantino, Sofia Coppola, Wes Anderson, John Singleton, Spike Jonze, David Fincher, Christopher Nolan, Paul Thomas Anderson, Steven Soderbergh, and Richard Linklater have been called Generation X filmmakers. Smith is best known for his View Askewniverse films, the flagship being \"Clerks\", which is set in New Jersey circa 1994 and focuses on two convenience-store clerks in their twenties. Linklater's \"Slacker\" similarly explores young adult characters interested in philosophizing.\nWhile not a member of Gen X himself, director John Hughes has been recognized as having created classic 1980s teen films with early Gen X characters which \"an entire generation took ownership of\", including \"The Breakfast Club\", \"Sixteen Candles\", \"Weird Science\", \"Pretty in Pink\", and \"Ferris Bueller's Day Off\".\nIn France, a new movement emerged, the \"Cin\u00e9ma du look\", spearheaded by filmmakers Luc Besson, Jean-Jacques Beineix, and Leos Carax. Although not Gen Xers themselves, their films \"Subway\" (1985), \"37\u00b02 le matin\" (English: \"Betty Blue\"; 1986), and \"Mauvais Sang\" (1986) sought to capture on screen the generation's malaise, sense of entrapment, and desire to escape.\nFranchise mega sequels.\nThe birth of franchise mega-sequels in the science fiction, fantasy, and horror fiction genres, such as the epic space opera \"Star Wars\" and the \"Halloween\" franchise, had a notable cultural influence.\nNostalgia.\nIn the United States, there was more 1970s nostalgia among Generation X than any other generation in 1995. Gen Xers are nostalgic for the Saturday-morning cartoons of the 1970s and 1980s, such as \"Scooby-Doo\", \"The Herculoids\", \"Super Friends\", \"Schoolhouse Rock!\", \"The Smurfs\", \"Transformers\", \"\", and \"He-Man\". In 2005, Generation X was less nostalgic than baby boomers. By 2016, Generation X had introduced its children to 1980s popular culture, and as of 2018, Generation X was contributing to 1980s nostalgia. The television show \"Stranger Things\" appeals to Gen X's nostalgia for the 1980s.\nLiterature.\nThe literature of early Gen Xers is often dark and introspective. In the U.S., authors such as Elizabeth Wurtzel, David Foster Wallace, Bret Easton Ellis, and Douglas Coupland captured the generation's zeitgeist. In France, Michel Houellebecq and Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Beigbeder rank among major novelists whose work reflects the cohort's dissatisfaction and melancholy. In the UK, Alex Garland, author of \"The Beach\" (1996), added to the genre.\nHealth problems.\nWhile previous research indicated that the likelihood of heart attacks was declining among Americans aged 35 to 74, a 2018 study published in the American Heart Association's journal \"Circulation\" found that this did not apply to the younger half of that cohort (controlling for age, Generation X have not seen a reduction in heart attack risk versus previous generations). Data from 28,000 patients from across the U.S. who were hospitalized for heart attacks between 1995 and 2014 showed that a growing proportion were between the ages of 35 and 54. The proportion of heart-attack patients in this age group at the end of the study was 32%, up from 27% at the start of the study. This increase is most pronounced among women, for whom the number rose from 21% to 31%. Many of those who had heart attacks also had high blood pressure, diabetes, and chronic kidney disease. These changes have been faster for women than for men. Experts suggest a number of reasons for this. Conditions such as coronary artery disease are traditionally viewed as a man's problem, and so female patients are not considered high-risk. More often than in previous generations, Generation X women are both the primary caretakers of their families and full-time employees, reducing time for self-care.\nOffspring.\nGeneration X are usually the parents of Generation Z, and sometimes Millennials. Jason Dorsey, who works for the Center of Generational Kinetics, observed that like their parents from Generation X, members of Generation Z tend to be autonomous and pessimistic. They need validation less than Millennials and typically become financially literate at an earlier age, as many of their parents bore the full brunt of the Great Recession.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11974", "revid": "48886350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11974", "title": "Guam", "text": "U.S. territory in Micronesia\nGuam ( ; ) is an island that is an organized, unincorporated territory of the United States in the Micronesia subregion of the western Pacific Ocean. Guam's capital is Hag\u00e5t\u00f1a, and the most populous village is Dededo. It is the westernmost point and territory of the United States, as measured from the geographic center of the U.S. In Oceania, Guam is the largest and southernmost of the Mariana Islands and the largest island in Micronesia. In 2022, its population was 168,801. Chamorros are its largest ethnic group, but a minority on the multiethnic island. The territory spans and has a population density of .\nIndigenous Guamanians are the Chamorro, who are related to the Austronesian peoples of the Malay Archipelago, the Philippines, Taiwan, and Polynesia. Unlike most of its neighbors, the Chamorro language is not classified as a Micronesian or Polynesian language. Like Palauan, it possibly constitutes an independent branch of the Malayo-Polynesian language family. The Chamorro people settled Guam and the Mariana islands approximately 3,500 years ago. Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan, while in the service of Spain, was the first European to visit and claim the island in March 1521. Guam was fully colonized by Spain in 1668. Between the 17th and 19th centuries, Guam was an important stopover for Spanish Manila galleons. During the Spanish\u2013American War, the United States captured Guam in June 1898. Under the 1898 Treaty of Paris, Spain ceded Guam to the U.S. effective April 11, 1899.\nBefore World War II, Guam was one of five American jurisdictions in the Pacific Ocean, along with Wake Island in Micronesia, American Samoa and Hawaii in Polynesia, and the Philippines. On December 8, 1941, hours after the attack on Pearl Harbor, Guam was captured by the Japanese, who occupied the island for two and a half years before American forces recaptured it on July 21, 1944, which is commemorated there as Liberation Day. Since the 1960s, Guam's economy has been supported primarily by tourism and the U.S. military, for which Guam is a major strategic asset. Its future political status has been a matter of significant discussion, with public opinion polls indicating a strong preference for American statehood.\nGuam's \"de facto\" motto is \"Where America's Day Begins\", which refers to the island's proximity to the International Date Line. Guam is among the 17 non-self-governing territories listed by the United Nations, and has been a member of the Pacific Community since 1983.\nGuam is called by Chamorro speakers, from the word , meaning 'to have'. Its English gloss 'we have' references the island's providing everything needed to live.\nHistory.\nPre-Contact era.\nGuam and the other Mariana Islands were the first islands settled by humans in Remote Oceania. It was the first and the longest of the ocean-crossing voyages of the Austronesian peoples, and is separate from the later Polynesian settlement of the rest of Remote Oceania. They were first settled around 1500 to 1400 BC, by migrants departing from the Philippines. This was followed by a second migration from the Caroline Islands in the first millennium AD. A third migration wave took place from Island Southeast Asia, likely the Philippines or eastern Indonesia, by 900 AD.\nThese original settlers of Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands evolved into the Chamorro people, historically known as Chamorros after first contact with the Spaniards. The ancient Chamorro society had four classes: (chiefs), (upper class), (middle class), and (lower class). The were located in the coastal villages, which meant they had the best access to fishing grounds. The were located in the island's interior. and rarely communicated with each other. The often used as intermediaries.\nThere were also \" or \", shamans with magical powers and \"'\" or \", healers who used different kinds of plants and natural materials to make medicine. Belief in spirits of ancient Chamorros called \" still persists as a remnant of pre-European culture. It is believed that \" or \" are the only ones who can safely harvest plants and other natural materials from their homes or \"\" without incurring the wrath of the \".\" Their society was organized along matrilineal clans.\nThe Chamorro people raised colonnades of megalithic capped pillars called upon which they built their homes. Latte stones are stone pillars that are found only in the Mariana Islands. They are a recent development in Pre-Contact Chamorro society. The latte stone was used as a foundation on which thatched huts were built. Latte stones consist of a base shaped from limestone called the and with a capstone, or , made either from a large brain coral or limestone, placed on top. A possible source for these stones, the Rota Latte Stone Quarry, was discovered in 1925 on Rota.\nSpanish era.\nThe first European to travel to Guam was Portuguese navigator Ferdinand Magellan, sailing for the King of Spain, when he sighted the island on March 6, 1521, during his fleet's circumnavigation of the globe. Despite Magellan's visit, Guam was not officially claimed by Spain until January 26, 1565, by Miguel L\u00f3pez de Legazpi. From 1565 to 1815, Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands, the only Spanish outposts in the Pacific Ocean east of the Philippines, were reprovisioning stops for the Manila galleons, a fleet that covered the Pacific trade route between Acapulco and Manila.\nSpanish colonization commenced on June 15, 1668, with the arrival of a mission led by Diego Luis de San Vitores, who established the first Catholic church. The islands were part of the Spanish East Indies, and part of the Viceroyalty of New Spain, based in Mexico City. The Spanish-Chamorro Wars on Guam began in 1670 over growing tensions with the Jesuit mission, with the last large-scale uprising in 1683.\nIntermittent warfare, plus the typhoons of 1671 and 1693, and in particular the smallpox epidemic of 1688, reduced the Chamorro population from 50,000 to 10,000, and finally to less than 5,000. Up until the late 19th century, Guam was encountered by adventurers and pirates, including Thomas Cavendish, Olivier van Noort, John Eaton, William Dampier, Woodes Rogers, John Clipperton, George Shelvocke and William \"Bully\" Hayes.\nThe island became a rest stop for whalers starting in 1823. A devastating typhoon struck the island on August 10, 1848, followed by a severe earthquake on January 25, 1849, which resulted in many refugees from the Caroline Islands, victims of a resultant tsunami. This earthquake was much more powerful than the 8.2 one that occurred on August 8, 1993. After a smallpox epidemic killed 3,644 Guamanians in 1856, Carolinians and Japanese were permitted to settle in the Marianas.\nAmerican era.\nAfter almost four centuries as part of the Kingdom of Spain, the United States occupied the island following Spain's defeat in the 1898 Spanish\u2013American War, as part of the Treaty of Paris of 1898. Guam was transferred to the United States Navy control on December 23, 1898, by from 25th President William McKinley.\nThe U.S. Navy assumed administrative control, with Captain Richard P. Leary appointed as the first naval governor in 1899. This era marked the introduction of American governance structures and cultural influences to the island.\nThe naval administration prioritized the development of Guam's infrastructure to support its strategic military position in the Pacific. One notable project was the establishment of a coaling station to service naval vessels traveling between Hawaii and the Philippines. Additionally, efforts were made to improve the island's roads, sanitation systems, and public health facilities. Educational reforms were also introduced, including the establishment of public schools with English as the medium of instruction, aiming to assimilate the local Chamorro population into American culture.\nDespite these developments, the Chamorro people faced significant challenges under the naval administration. Civil liberties were limited, and the local population had minimal input in governmental decisions. Recognizing these constraints, Chamorro leaders petitioned for U.S. citizenship and greater political autonomy as early as 1901, though these efforts were largely unsuccessful during this period.\nThese advocacy efforts continued over the years, with Chamorro representatives seeking citizenship and self-governance. For instance, in 1936, delegates Baltazar J. Bordallo and Francisco B. Leon Guerrero traveled to Washington, D.C., to personally petition for Chamorro citizenship. Despite these persistent efforts, substantial political reforms were not achieved during this period.\nWorld War I.\nOn December 10, 1914, the SMS \"Cormoran\", a German armed merchant raider, was forced to seek port at Apra Harbor after running short on coal after pursued by the Japanese. The United States, which was neutral at the time refused to supply provisions sufficient for the \"Cormoran\" to reach a German port, so the ship and her crew were interned until 1917.\nOn the morning of April 7, 1917, word reached Guam by telegraph cable that the U.S. Congress had declared war on Germany. The Naval Governor of Guam, Roy Campbell Smith, sent two officers to inform the \"Cormoran\" that a state of war existed between the two countries, that the crew were now prisoners of war, and that the ship must be surrendered. Meanwhile, the USS \"Supply\" blocked the entrance to Apra Harbor to prevent any attempt to flee. In a separate boat, the two officers were accompanied by a barge commanded by Lt. W.A. Hall, who was designated prize master, and had brought 18 sailors and 15 Marines from the barracks at Sumay.\nSeeing a launch from \"Cormoran\" hauling a barge of supplies back shore, Hall ordered shots fired across the bow of the launch until it hove to. Meanwhile, the two officers reached \"Cormoran\" and informed Captain Adalbert Zuckschwerdt of the situation. Zuckschwerdt agreed to surrender his crew but refused to turn over the ship. The U.S. officers informed Zuckschwerdt that the \"Cormoran\" would be treated as an enemy combatant and left to inform Governor Smith of the situation. Unbeknownst to the Americans, the Germans had secreted an explosive device in the ship's coal bunker.\nMinutes after the Americans left, an explosion aboard \"Cormoran\" hurled debris across the harbor and her crew began abandoning ship. The two American boats and USS \"Supply\" immediately began to recover German sailors from the water, saving all but seven of the roughly 370 \"Cormoran\" crew. This incident, including the warning shots against the launch, accounted for the first violent action of the United States in World War I, the first shots fired by the U.S. against Germany in World War I, the first German prisoners of war captured by the U.S., and the first Germans killed in action by the U.S. in World War I.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, the Empire of Japan invaded and occupied Guam in the 1941 Battle of Guam on December 8, at the same time as the attack on Pearl Harbor. The Japanese renamed Guam (Great Shrine Island). The Japanese occupation of Guam lasted about 31 months. During this period, the indigenous people of Guam were subjected to beatings, forced labor, family separation, concentration camps, massacres, beheadings and rape.\nDuring the nearly three years of occupation approximately 1,100 Chamorros were killed, according to later US Congressional committee testimony in 2004. Some historians estimate that war violence killed 10% of Guam's 20,000 population. The United States returned and recaptured the island in the 1944 Battle of Guam from July 21 to August 10. July 21 became a territorial holiday, Liberation Day.\nPost-war.\nAfter World War II, the Guam Organic Act of 1950 established Guam as an unincorporated organized territory of the United States, provided for the structure of the island's civilian government, and granted the people U.S. citizenship. However, the grant of citizenship did not include full civil and political rights. The Organic Act excluded the right to trial by jury, leading to further mobilization until the first jury trial in the territory was held in 1956. The Governor of Guam was federally appointed until 1968 when the Guam Elective Governor Act provided for the office's popular election. Since Guam is not a U.S. state, U.S. citizens residing on Guam are not allowed to vote for president and their only representation in the U.S. Congress is a non-voting member in the House of Representatives. They do, however, vote for party delegates in presidential primaries. \nIn 1969, a referendum on unification with the Northern Mariana Islands was held and rejected. In the 1970s, Maryly Van Leer Peck started an engineering program, expanded University of Guam, and founded Guam Community College. In the same period, Alby Mangels, Australian adventurer and filmmaker of \"World Safari\" visited Guam during his six-year escapade on the Pacific leg of his voyage aboard the \"Klaraborg\".\nIn 1963, the removal of Guam's security clearance by President John F. Kennedy allowed for the development of a tourism industry. In the early 1990s, when the United States closed U.S. Naval Base Subic Bay and Clark Air Base bases in the Philippines after the expiration of their leases, many of the forces stationed there were relocated to Guam.\nThe 1997 Asian financial crisis, which hit Japan particularly hard, severely affected Guam's tourism industry. Military cutbacks in the 1990s also disrupted the island's economy. Economic recovery was further hampered by devastation from super typhoons Paka in 1997 and Pongsona in 2002, as well as the effects of the September 11 terrorist attacks and the crash of Korean Air Flight 801 on tourism.\nGeography and environment.\nGuam is long and wide. It has an area of . It is the 32nd largest island of the United States. It is the southernmost and largest island in the Mariana Islands, as well as the largest in Micronesia. Guam's Point Udall is the westernmost point of the U.S., as measured from the geographic center of the United States.\nThe Mariana chain, of which Guam is a part, was created by collision of the Pacific and Philippine Sea tectonic plates. Guam is located on the micro Mariana Plate between the two. Guam is the closest land mass to the Mariana Trench, the deep subduction zone that runs east of the Marianas. Volcanic eruptions established the base of the island in the Eocene, roughly 56 to 33.9 million years ago. The north of Guam is a result of this base being covered with layers of coral reef, turning into limestone, and then being thrust upward by tectonic activity to create a plateau.\nThe rugged south of the island is a result of more recent volcanic activity. Cocos Island off the southern tip of Guam is the largest of the many small islets along the coastline. Guam's highest point is Mount Lamlam at above sea level. If its base is considered to be the nearby \"Challenger\" Deep, the deepest surveyed point in the Oceans, Mount Lamlam is the world's tallest mountain at .\nPolitically, Guam is divided into 19 villages. The majority of the population lives on the coralline limestone plateaus of the north, with political and economic activity concentrated in the central and northern regions. The rugged geography of the south largely limits settlement to rural coastal areas. The western coast is leeward of the trade winds and is the location of Apra Harbor, the capital Hag\u00e5t\u00f1a, and the tourist center of Tumon. The U.S. Defense Department owns about 29% of the island, under the management of Joint Region Marianas.\nClimate.\nGuam has a tropical rainforest climate on the K\u00f6ppen scale (K\u00f6ppen \"Af\"). Its driest month of March almost qualifies as a tropical monsoon climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Am\"). The weather is generally hot and humid throughout the year, with little seasonal temperature variation. Guam is known to have equable temperatures year-round. Trade winds are fairly constant throughout the year. There is often a weak westerly monsoon influence in the summer months.\nGuam has two distinct seasons: Wet season, and dry season. The dry season runs from January to May. June is the transitional period. The wet season runs from July to November. Guam's average annual rainfall was between 1981 and 2010.\nThe wettest month on record at Guam Airport is August 1997, with . The driest was February 2015 with . The wettest calendar year was 1976 with . The driest year was in 1998 with . The most rainfall in a single day occurred on October 15, 1953, when fell.\nThe mean high temperature is . The mean low is . Temperatures rarely exceed or fall below . The relative humidity commonly exceeds 84 percent at night throughout the year, but the average monthly humidity hovers near 66 percent.\nThe highest temperature ever recorded in Guam was on April 18, 1971, and April 1, 1990. A record low of was set on February 1, 2021. The lowest recorded temperature was 65\u00a0\u00b0F (18.3\u00a0\u00b0C), set on February 8, 1973.\nGuam lies in the path of typhoons and it is common for the island to be threatened by tropical storms and possible typhoons in the wet season. The highest risk of typhoons is from August to November, where typhoons and tropical storms are most probable in the western Pacific. They can, however, occur year-round. Typhoons that have caused major damage on Guam in the American period include the Typhoon of 1900, Karen (1962), Pamela (1976), Paka (1997), Pongsona (2002), and Mawar (2023).\nSince Typhoon Pamela in 1976, wooden structures have been largely replaced by concrete structures. In the 1980s, wooden utility poles began to be replaced by typhoon-resistant concrete and steel poles. After the local Government enforced stricter construction codes, many home and business owners have built their structures out of reinforced concrete, with installed typhoon shutters.\nEcology.\nGuam is home to a diverse array of ecosystems, including coral reefs, deep seas, sea grasses, beach strand, mangroves, a variety of different limestone forest types, volcanic forests and grasslands, riparian systems, and caves. There are approximately 17 species of plant that are endemic only to the island of Guam, and many more that are endemic to the Mariana Islands. Numerous endemic insects have been described. There are approximately 29 land snails listed as endemic to the island of Guam, although many are now endangered or presumed extinct. \nGuam once hosted 14 kinds of terrestrial birds, 7 of which were endemic to Guam on the species or subspecies level, although all but one of the 14 are now extinct, extirpated, or endangered. Three locations on Guam (Guam National Wildlife Refuge, Cocos Island, and Mahlac Caves) have been identified as Important Bird Areas (IBA) by BirdLife International because they support populations of Micronesian starlings, Mariana swiftlets, Mariana crows, and Guam rails. The Guam rail became the second bird species to ever be downlisted from Extinct in the wild after a population was established on Cocos Island. Guam was home to three native bat species: the little Mariana fruit bat (\"Pteropus tokudae\"), now extinct; the endangered Pacific sheath-tailed bat (\"Emballonura semicaudata rotensis\"); and the endangered Mariana fruit bat (\"Pteropus mariannus mariannus\").\nGuam has experienced severe effects of invasive species upon the natural biodiversity of the island. These include the local extinction of endemic bird species after the introduction of the brown tree snake, an infestation of the coconut rhinoceros beetle destroying coconut palms, and the effect of introduced feral mammals and amphibians.\nWildfires plague the forested areas of Guam every dry season despite the island's humid climate. Most fires are caused by humans with 80% resulting from arson. Poachers often start fires to attract deer to the new growth. Invasive grass species that rely on fire as part of their natural life cycle grow in many regularly burned areas. Grasslands and \"barrens\" have replaced previously forested areas leading to greater soil erosion.\nDuring the rainy season, sediment is carried by the heavy rains into the Fena Lake Reservoir and Ugum River, leading to water quality problems for southern Guam. Eroded silt also destroys the marine life in reefs around the island. Soil stabilization efforts by volunteers and forestry workers planting trees have had little success in preserving natural habitats.\nEfforts have been made to protect Guam's coral reef habitats from pollution, eroded silt and overfishing, problems that have led to decreased fish populations. This has both ecological and economic value, as Guam is a significant vacation spot for scuba divers, and one study found that Guam's reefs are worth US$127 million per year. In recent years, the Department of Agriculture, Division of Aquatic and Wildlife Resources has established several new marine preserves where fish populations are monitored by biologists. These are located at Pati Point, Piti Bomb Holes, Sasa Bay, Achang Reef Flat, and Tumon Bay.\nBefore adopting U.S. Environmental Protection Agency standards, portions of Tumon Bay were dredged by the hotel chains to provide a better experience for hotel guests. Tumon Bay has since been made into a preserve. A federal Guam National Wildlife Refuge in northern Guam protects the decimated sea turtle population in addition to a small colony of Mariana fruit bats.\nHarvest of sea turtle eggs was a common occurrence on Guam before World War II. The green sea turtle (\"Chelonia mydas\") was harvested legally on Guam before August 1978, when it was listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act. The hawksbill sea turtle (\"Eretmochelys imbricata\") has been on the endangered list since 1970. In an effort to ensure the protection of sea turtles on Guam, routine sightings are counted during aerial surveys and nest sites are recorded and monitored for hatchlings.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2020 United States census, the largest ethnic group were the native Chamorros, accounting for 32.8% of the population. Asians, including Filipinos, Koreans, Chinese, and Japanese, accounted for 35.5% of the population. Other ethnic groups of Micronesia, including those of Chuukese, Palauan, and Pohnpeians, accounted for 13.2%. 10% of the population were multiracial, (two or more races). European Americans made up 6.8% of the population. 1% are African Americans. 3% are Hispanic; there are 1,740 Mexicans in Guam, and there are other Hispanic ethnicities on the island. The estimated interracial marriage rate is over 40%.\nThe official languages of the island are English and Chamorro. Unlike most of its neighboring languages, Chamorro is not classified as Micronesian or Polynesian. Rather, like Palauan, it possibly constitutes an independent branch of the Malayo-Polynesian language family. Filipino is also commonly spoken across the island. Other Pacific and Asian languages are spoken in Guam as well. Spanish, which was the language of administration for 300 years, is no longer widely spoken, but has had a deep influence on the Chamorro language.\nThe predominant religion of Guam is Christianity. Three-quarters of the population adheres to Catholicism, while most of the remainder belong to Protestant churches. According to the Pew Research Center, the religious demography of Guam in 2010 was as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2020, the Vatican claimed that 87.72% of the population was Catholic, with 54 priests and 64 nuns across 27 parishes.\nCulture.\nThe culture of Guam is a reflection of traditional Chamorro customs, in combination with American, Spanish and Mexican traditions. Post-European-contact Chamorro Guamanian culture is a combination of American, Spanish, Filipino, other Micronesian Islander and Mexican traditions. Few indigenous pre-Hispanic customs remained following Spanish contact, but include plaiting and pottery. There has been a resurgence of interest among the Chamorro to preserve the language and culture.\nHispanic influences are manifested in the local language, music, dance, sea navigation, cuisine, fishing, games (such as , , , and ), songs, and fashion. The island's original community are Chamorro natives, who have inhabited Guam for almost 4000 years. They had their own language related to the languages of Indonesia and southeast Asia. The Spanish later called them Chamorros. A derivative of the word, Chamorri, means \"noble race\". They began to grow rice on the island.\nHistorically, the native people of Guam venerated the bones of their ancestors. They kept the skulls in their houses in small baskets, and practiced incantations before them when it was desired to attain certain objects. During Spanish rule (1668\u20131898) the majority of the population was converted to Catholicism and religious festivities such as Easter and Christmas became widespread. Many Chamorros have Spanish surnames, although few of the inhabitants are themselves descended from the Spaniards. Instead, Spanish names and surnames became commonplace after their conversion to Catholicism and the imposition of the Cat\u00e1logo alfab\u00e9tico de apellidos in Guam.\nHistorically, the diet of the native inhabitants of Guam consisted of fish, fowl, rice, breadfruit, taro, yams, bananas, and coconuts used in a variety of dishes. Post-contact Chamorro cuisine is largely based on corn, and includes tortillas, tamales, atole, and chilaquiles, which are a clear influence from Mesoamerica, principally Mexico, from Spanish trade with Asia.\nDue to foreign cultural influence from Spain, most aspects of the early indigenous culture have been lost, though there has been a resurgence in preserving any remaining pre-Hispanic culture in the last few decades. Some scholars have traveled throughout the Pacific Islands, conducting research to study what the original Chamorro cultural practices such as dance, language, and canoe building may have been like.\nSports.\nGuam's most popular sport is American football, followed by basketball and baseball respectively. Soccer, jiu-jitsu, and rugby are also somewhat popular. Guam hosted the Pacific Games in 1975 and 1999. At the 2007 Games, Guam finished 7th of 22 countries in the medal count, and 14th at the 2011 Games.\nGuam men's national basketball team and the women's team are traditionally strong competitors in the Oceania region, behind the Australia men's national basketball team and the New Zealand national basketball team. As of 2019[ [update]], the men's team is the reigning champion of the Pacific Games Basketball Tournament. Guam is home to various basketball organizations, including the Guam Basketball Association.\nThe Guam national football team was founded in 1975 and joined FIFA in 1996. It was once considered one of FIFA's weakest teams, and experienced their first victory over a FIFA-registered side in 2009. Guam hosted qualifying games on the island for the first time in 2015 and, in 2018, gained their first FIFA World Cup-qualifying win. The Guam national rugby union team played its first match in 2005 and has never qualified for a Rugby World Cup.\nAs an aspect of cultural revival, sling competitions are also being organized on Guam. As a national pastime of cultural import, the ovoid shape on Guamanian flag is that of a sling stone.\nEconomy.\nGuam's economy depends primarily on tourism, Department of Defense installations and locally owned businesses. Under the provisions of a special law by Congress, it is Guam's treasury rather than the U.S. treasury that receives the federal income taxes paid by local taxpayers, including military and civilian federal employees assigned to Guam.\nTourism.\nGuam, situated in the western Pacific, has long been a favored destination for tourists, particularly from Japan and South Korea. The island's tourism hub, Tumon, boasts over 20 large hotels, the Duty Free Shoppers Galleria, the Pleasure Island district, an indoor aquarium, Sandcastle Las Vegas\u2013styled shows, and various shopping and entertainment venues. Additionally, Guam offers seven public golf courses, catering to a diverse range of visitors.\nHistorically, Japanese tourists comprised a significant portion of Guam's visitors. In 2019, approximately 685,000 Japanese travelers visited the island. This number declined to around 135,760 in 2023, reflecting broader shifts in travel patterns and external factors affecting global tourism. In recent years, South Korean tourists have become increasingly prominent. For instance, in May and June 2024, South Korean visitors accounted for over 51% of Guam's total arrivals, while Japanese tourists comprised over 21%. Other significant visitor groups include travelers from the United States mainland, Hawaii, the Philippines, and Taiwan.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic had a profound impact on Guam's tourism industry. In 2023, the island recorded approximately 656,000 visitor arrivals, a 50% decrease compared to 2013 figures. Despite these challenges, the industry has shown signs of recovery, with 775,000 passenger arrivals reported at the Guam International Airport during the 2024 fiscal year (October-July). While this indicated an upward trend, it remained below the pre-pandemic levels of 2019.\nThe tourism industry remains a cornerstone of Guam's economy, providing over 21,000 jobs, which constitute about one-third of the island's workforce. Major attractions contributing to the island's appeal include duty-free designer shopping outlets and American-style malls such as Micronesia Mall, Guam Premier Outlets, Agana Shopping Center, and the world's largest (and notably 1 of 4 remaining) Kmart.\nBudget and unemployment.\nIn 2003, Guam had a 14% unemployment rate, and the government suffered a $314 million budget shortfall. As of 2019 the unemployment rate had dropped to 6.1%. By September 2020, the unemployment rate had risen again to 17.9%. As of June 2023 the unemployment rate had fallen to 4.0%. The unemployment rate in Guam for September 2023 was 4.1%, an increase of 0.1 percentage points from the June 2023 figure of 4.0%, and a reduction of 0.3 percentage points from the September 2022 figure one year earlier of 4.4%.\nPacific migration to Guam.\nThe Compacts of Free Association (COFA) between the United States, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and the Republic of Palau accords the former entities of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands a political status of \"free association\" with the United States. The Compacts generally allow citizens of these island nations to reside in the 50 United States, and in US territories. Many people from other Pacific islands were attracted to Guam due to its proximity, environmental, and cultural familiarity.\nDue to the impact of increased utilization of public assistance programs due to immigration, aid has been provided to the nations receiving immigrants. In 2003, the amended COFA was enacted, which provided 30 million dollars annually to Guam, Hawaii, American Samoa and the Northern Mariana Islands, as well as to forgive 157 million dollars of Guam's debt to the federal government to offset money already spent on public assistance programs. In 2024, the COFA was amended again to renew aid the freely associated nations as well as Guam and other U.S. Pacific territories.\nMilitary bases.\nJoint Region Marianas maintains jurisdiction over installations, which cover approximately , or 29% of the island's total land area. These include:\nIn 2010, the U.S. military proposed building a new aircraft carrier berth on Guam and moving 8,600 Marines, and 9,000 of their dependents, to Guam from Okinawa, Japan. Including the required construction workers, this buildup would increase Guam's population by a total of 79,000, a 49% increase over its 2010 population of 160,000.\nIn a February 2010 letter, the United States Environmental Protection Agency sharply criticized these plans because of a water shortfall, sewage problems and the impact on coral reefs. In 2022, the Marine Corps decided to place 5,000 Marines on the island within the first half of the 2020s, with 1,300 already stationed on the base.\nGovernment and politics.\nGuam is governed by a popularly elected governor and a unicameral 15-member legislature, whose members are known as senators. Its judiciary is overseen by the Supreme Court of Guam.\nThe District Court of Guam is the court of United States federal jurisdiction in the territory. Guam elects one delegate to the United States House of Representatives, currently Republican James Moylan. The delegate does not have a vote on the final passage of legislation, but is accorded a vote in committee, and the privilege to speak to the House.\nU.S. citizens in Guam vote in a presidential straw poll for their choice in the U.S. presidential general election, but since Guam has no votes in the Electoral College, the poll has no real effect. However, in sending delegates to the Republican and Democratic national conventions, Guam does have influence in the national presidential race. These delegates are elected by local party conventions.\nPolitical status.\nIn the 1980s and early 1990s, there was a significant movement in favor of this U.S. territory becoming a commonwealth, which would give it a level of self-government similar to Puerto Rico and the Northern Mariana Islands. In a 1982 plebiscite, voters indicated interest in seeking commonwealth status. The federal government rejected the version of a commonwealth that the government of Guam proposed, because its clauses were incompatible with the Territorial Clause (Art. IV, Sec. 3, cl. 2) of the U.S. Constitution. Other movements advocate U.S. statehood for Guam, union with the state of Hawaii, or union with the Northern Mariana Islands as a single territory, or independence.\nThe first Guam Constitutional Convention was funded by the 10th Guam Legislature and met from June 1, 1969, to June 29, 1970, with 43 elected delegates. The second Guam Constitutional Convention was convened on July 1, 1977, to create a constitution for Guam that would redefine the island's relationship with the US rather than merely modifying the existing relationship. The convention met periodically to October 31, 1977. Although approved at the federal level, the people of Guam overwhelmingly rejected the Constitution in a referendum held in August 1979, with 82% opposed. No new convention has been held pursuant to US congressional authority since 1979.\nIn 1997, a Commission on Decolonization was established to educate the people of Guam about the political status options in its relationship with the U.S.: statehood, free association, and independence. The island has been considering another non-binding plebiscite on decolonization since 1998. The group was dormant for some years. In 2013, the commission began seeking funding to start a public education campaign. There were few subsequent developments until late 2016.\nIn early December 2016, the Commission scheduled a series of education sessions in various villages about the current status of Guam's relationship with the U.S. and the self-determination options that might be considered. The commission's current executive director is Edward Alvarez and there are ten members. The group is expected to release position papers on independence and statehood but the contents have not yet been completed.\nThe United Nations is in favor of greater self-determination for Guam and other such territories. The UN's Special Committee on Decolonization has agreed to endorse the Governor's education plan. The commission's May 2016 report states: \"With academics from the University of Guam, [the Commission] was working to create and approve educational materials. The Office of the Governor was collaborating closely with the Commission\" in developing educational materials for the public.\nThe United States Department of the Interior approved a $300,000 grant for decolonization education, Edward Alvarez told the United Nations Pacific Regional Seminar in May 2016. \"We are hopeful that this might indicate a shift in [United States] policy to its Non-Self-Governing Territories such as Guam, where they will be more willing to engage in discussions about our future and offer true support to help push us towards true self-governances and self-determination.\"\nIn July 2020, the Government of Guam joined the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization (UNPO).\nIts future political status has been a matter of significant discussion, with public opinion polls indicating a strong preference of becoming a U.S state.\nVillages.\nGuam is divided into 19 municipal villages:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe entirety of Guam is treated as both a territory and a county equivalent by the US Census. The USGS counts the villages as county equivalents.\nTransportation and communications.\nMost of the island has state-of-the-art mobile phone services and high-speed internet widely available through either cable or DSL. Guam was added to the North American Numbering Plan (NANP) in 1997. The country code 671 became NANP area code 671. This removed the barrier of high-cost international long-distance calls to the continental U.S.\nGuam is a major hub for submarine communications cables between the Western U.S., Hawaii, Australia and Asia. Guam currently serves twelve submarine cables, with most continuing to China. In 2012 \"Slate\" stated that the island has \"tremendous bandwidth\" and internet prices comparable to those of the U.S. Mainland due to being at the junction of undersea cables.\nIn 1899, the local postage stamps were overprinted \"Guam\" as was done for the other former Spanish colonies, but this was discontinued shortly thereafter and regular U.S. postage stamps have been used ever since. Guam is part of the U.S. Postal System (postal abbreviation: GU, ZIP code range: 96910\u201396932). Mail to Guam from the U.S. mainland is considered domestic and no additional charges are required. Private shipping companies, such as FedEx, UPS, and DHL have no obligation to do so, and do not regard Guam as domestic.\nThe speed of mail traveling between Guam and the states varies depending on size and time of year. Light, first-class items generally take less than a week to or from the mainland. Larger first-class or Priority items can take a week or two. Fourth-class mail, such as magazines, are transported by sea after reaching Hawaii. Most residents use post office boxes or private mail boxes, although residential delivery is becoming increasingly available.\nThe Port of Guam is the island's lifeline, because most products must be shipped into Guam for consumers. It receives the weekly calls of the Hawaii-based shipping line Matson, Inc. whose container ships connect Guam with Honolulu, Hawaii; Los Angeles, California; Oakland, California; and Seattle, Washington. The port is also the regional transhipment hub for over 500,000 customers throughout the Micronesian region. The port is the shipping and receiving point for containers designated for the island's U.S. Department of Defense installations, Andersen Air Force Base and Commander, Naval Forces Marianas and eventually the Third Marine Expeditionary Force.\nGuam is served by the Antonio B. Won Pat International Airport. The island is outside the United States customs zone, so Guam is responsible for establishing and operating its own customs and quarantine agency and jurisdiction. Therefore, the U.S. Customs and Border Protection only carries out immigration, but not customs functions. Since Guam is under federal immigration jurisdiction, passengers arriving directly from the United States skip immigration and proceed directly to Guam Customs and Quarantine.\nDue to the Guam and CNMI visa waiver program for certain countries, an eligibility pre-clearance check is carried on Guam for flights to the States. For travel from the Northern Mariana Islands to Guam, a pre-flight passport and visa check is performed before boarding the flight to Guam. On flights from Guam to the Northern Mariana Islands, no immigration check is performed. Traveling between Guam and the States through a foreign point requires a passport.\nMost residents travel within Guam using personally owned vehicles. The Guam Regional Transit Authority provides fixed route bus and paratransit services, and some commercial companies operate buses between tourist-frequented locations.\nEducation.\nGuam Public Library System operates the Nieves M. Flores Memorial Library in Hag\u00e5t\u00f1a and five branch libraries.\nThe Guam Department of Education serves the entire island of Guam. In 2000, 32,000 students attended Guam's public schools, including 26 elementary schools, eight middle schools, and six high schools and alternative schools. Guam Public Schools have struggled with problems such as high dropout rates and poor test scores.\nGuam's educational system has always faced unique challenges as a small community located from the U.S. mainland with a very diverse student body including many students who come from backgrounds without traditional American education. An economic downturn in Guam since the mid-1990s has compounded the problems in schools.\nBefore September 1997, the U.S. Department of Defense partnered with the Guam Board of Education. In September 1997, the Department of Defense Education Activity (DoDEA) opened its own schools for children of military personnel. DoDEA schools, which also serve children of some federal civilian employees, had an attendance of 2,500 in 2000. DoDEA Guam operates three elementary/middle schools and one high school.\nThe University of Guam (UOG) and Guam Community College, both fully accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, offer courses in higher education. UOG is a member of the exclusive group of only 106 land-grant institutions in the entire United States. Pacific Islands University is a small Christian liberal arts institution, nationally accredited by the Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools.\nHealth care.\nThe Government of Guam maintains the island's main health care facility, Guam Memorial Hospital, in Tamuning. U.S. board certified doctors and dentists practice in all specialties. The U.S. Naval Hospital in Agana Heights serves active-duty members and dependents of the military community.\nThere is one subscriber-based air ambulance located on the island, CareJet, which provides emergency patient transportation across Guam and surrounding islands. A private hospital, the Guam Regional Medical City, opened in early 2016. Medicaid is accepted in Guam.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11976", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11976", "title": "George Washington/First Inaugural Address", "text": ""}
{"id": "11977", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11977", "title": "George Washington/Second Inaugural Address", "text": ""}
{"id": "11978", "revid": "25820411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11978", "title": "George W", "text": ""}
{"id": "11979", "revid": "628775", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11979", "title": "Game Boy family", "text": ""}
{"id": "11980", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11980", "title": "Geologic age", "text": "Smallest hierarchical geochronologic unit"}
{"id": "11981", "revid": "15371737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11981", "title": "Green alga", "text": ""}
{"id": "11982", "revid": "43810547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11982", "title": "Gemini 10", "text": "1966 crewed spaceflight within NASA's Gemini program\nGemini 10 (officially Gemini X) was a 1966 crewed spaceflight in NASA's Gemini program. It was the 8th crewed Gemini flight, the 16th crewed American flight, and the 24th spaceflight of all time (includes X-15 flights over ). During the mission, flown by command pilot John Young and pilot Michael Collins, Collins became the first person to perform two extravehicular activities.\nCrew.\nSupport crew.\nJim Lovell and Buzz Aldrin had originally been named the backup crew, but after Charles Bassett and Elliot See died in a T-38 crash, they were moved to the backup crew for Gemini 9A and Alan Bean and Clifton Williams were moved to the Gemini 10 flight.123\nObjectives.\nGemini 10 was designed to achieve rendezvous and docking with an Agena Target Vehicle (ATV), and EVA. It was also planned to dock with the ATV from the Gemini 8 mission. This Agena's battery power had failed months earlier, and an approach and docking would demonstrate the ability to rendezvous with a passive object. It would also be the first mission to fire the Agena's own rocket, allowing them to reach higher orbits.\nGemini 10 established that radiation at high altitude was not a problem. After docking with their Agena booster in low orbit, Young and Collins used it to climb temporarily to . After leaving the first Agena, they then rendezvoused with the derelict Agena left over from the aborted Gemini 8 flight\u2014thus executing the program's first double rendezvous. With no electricity on board the second Agena, the rendezvous was accomplished with eyes only\u2014no radar.\nAfter the rendezvous, Collins spacewalked over to the dormant Agena at the end of a tether, making him the first person to meet another spacecraft in orbit. Collins then retrieved a cosmic dust-collecting panel from the side of the Agena. As he was concentrating on keeping his tether clear of the Gemini and Agena, Collins' Hasselblad camera worked itself free and drifted away, so he was unable to take photographs during the spacewalk.\nFlight.\nThe Agena launched perfectly for the second time, after problems had occurred with the targets for Gemini 6 and 9. Gemini 10 followed 100 minutes later and entered a orbit. They were behind the Agena. Two anomalous events occurred during the launch. At liftoff, a propellant fill umbilical became snared with its release lanyard. It ripped out of the LC-19 service tower and remained attached to the second stage during ascent. Tracking camera footage also showed that the first stage oxidizer tank dome ruptured after staging and released a cloud of nitrogen tetroxide. The telemetry package on the first stage had been disabled at staging, so visual evidence was the only data available. Film review of the Titan II ICBM launches found at least seven other instances of post-staging tank ruptures, most likely caused by flying debris, second stage engine exhaust, or structural bending. NASA finally decided that this phenomenon did not pose any safety risk to the astronauts and took no corrective action.\nFirst rendezvous.\nCollins was unable to use the sextant for navigation as it did not seem to work as expected. At first he mistook airglow as the real horizon when trying to make some fixes on stars. When the image didn't seem right he tried another instrument, but this was not practical to use as it had a very small field of view.\nThey had a backup in the form of the computers on the ground. They made their first burn to put them into a orbit. However Young didn't realize that during the next burn, he had the spacecraft turned slightly, which meant that they introduced an out-of-plane error. This meant two extra burns were necessary, and by the time they had docked with the Agena, 60% of their fuel had been consumed. It was decided to keep the Gemini docked to the Agena as long as possible, as this would mean that they could use the fuel on board the Agena for attitude control.\nThe first burn of the Agena engine lasted 80 seconds and put them in a orbit. This was the highest a person had ever been, although the record was soon surpassed by Gemini 11, which went to over . This burn was quite a ride for the crew. Because the Gemini and Agena docked nose-to-nose, the forces experienced were \"eyeballs out\" as opposed to \"eyeballs in\" for a launch from Earth. The crew took a couple of pictures when they reached apogee but were more interested in what was going on in the spacecraft \u2014 checking the systems and watching the radiation dosage meter.\nAfter this they had their sleep period which lasted for eight hours and then they were ready for another busy day. The crew's first order of business was to make a second burn with the Agena engine to put them into the same orbit as the Gemini 8 Agena. This was at 20:58 UTC on July 19 and lasted 78 seconds and took off their speed, putting them into a orbit. They made one more burn of the Agena to circularize their orbit to .\nEVA 1.\nThe first of two EVAs on Gemini 10 was a standup EVA, where Collins would stand in the open hatch and take photographs of stars as part of experiment S-13. They used a 70\u00a0mm general purpose camera to image the southern Milky Way in ultraviolet. After orbital sunrise Collins photographed a color plate on the side of the spacecraft (MSC-8) to see whether film reproduced colors accurately in space. He reentered the spacecraft six minutes early when both astronauts found that their eyes were irritated, which was caused by a minor leak of lithium hydroxide in the astronauts' oxygen supply. After repressurizing the cabin, they ran the oxygen at high rates and flushed the environment system.\nAfter the exercise of the EVA Young and Collins slept in their second 'night' in space. The next 'morning' they started preparing for the second rendezvous and another EVA.\nSecond rendezvous.\nAfter undocking from their Agena, the crew thought they sighted the Gemini 8 Agena. It however turned out to be their own Agena away, while their target was away. It was not until just over away that they saw it as a faint star. After a few more correction burns, they were station-keeping away from the Gemini 8 Agena. They found the Agena to be very stable and in good condition.\nEVA 2.\nAt 48 hours and 41 minutes into the mission, the second EVA began. Collins' first task was to retrieve a Micrometeorite Collector (S-12) from the side of the spacecraft. This he accomplished with some difficulty (similar to that encountered by Eugene Cernan on Gemini 9A). The collector floated out of the cabin at some time during the EVA, and was lost.\nCollins next traveled over to the Agena and tried to grab onto the docking cone but found this impossible as it was smooth and had no grip. He used a nitrogen-propelled Hand-Held Maneuvering Unit (HHMU) to move himself towards the Gemini and then back to the Agena. This time he was able to grab hold of some wire bundles and retrieved the Micrometeorite Collector (S-10) from the Agena. He decided against replacing it as a piece of shroud had come loose on the Agena which could have snared the umbilical, and returning to the Gemini was deemed the safest course of action.\nThe last tasks remaining on this EVA were to test out the HHMU, test orbital mechanics using a tether between the Gemini and Agena, and for Young in the spacecraft to translate over to a passive Collins. However, due to low propellant quantity remaining, combined with intermittent telemetry to monitor it, these fuel costly manoeuvres were abandoned and the EVA was finished after only 39 minutes. During this time, it took the crew eight minutes to close the hatch as they had some difficulty with the umbilical. It was jettisoned along with the chestpack used by Collins an hour later when they opened the hatch for the third and final time.\nExperiments.\nThere were ten other experiments that the crew performed during the mission. Three were interested in radiation: MSC-3 was the Tri-Axis Magnetometer which measured levels in the South Atlantic Anomaly. There was also MSC-6, a beta spectrometer, which measured potential radiation doses for Apollo missions, and MSC-7, a bremsstrahlung spectrometer which detected radiation flux as a function of energy when the spacecraft passed through the South Atlantic Anomaly.\nS-26 investigated the ion and electron wake of the spacecraft. This provided limited results due to the lack of fuel for attitude control, but found that electron and ion temperatures were higher than expected and it registered shock effects during docking and undocking.\nThe S-5 and S-6 experiments were performed, which were previously carried on Gemini 9A; these were Synoptic Terrain and Synoptic Weather photography respectively. There was also S-1 which was intended to image the Zodiacal light. All of these experiments were of little use as the film used was only half as sensitive as Gemini 9A and the dirty windows lowered the transmission of light by a factor of six.\nThe crew also tried to perform D-5, a navigation experiment. They were only able to track five stars, with six needed for accurate measurements. The last experiment, D-10, was to investigate an ion-sensing attitude control system. This experiment measured the attitude of the spacecraft from the flow of ions and electrons around the spacecraft in orbit. The results from this experiment showed the system to be accurate and responsive.\nRe-entry.\nThe last day of the mission was short and retrofire came at 70 hours and 10 minutes into the mission. They landed only away from the intended landing site and were recovered by .\nThe Gemini 10 mission was supported by the following U.S. Department of Defense resources: 9,067 personnel, 78 aircraft and 13 ships.\nInsignia.\nThe patch is simple in design but highly symbolic. The main feature is a large X with a Gemini and Agena orbiting around it. The two stars have a variety of meanings: the two rendezvous attempts, Castor and Pollux in Gemini or the two crew members. This is one of the few crew patches without the crew's name. It is able to be displayed \"upside down\" but is correctly shown with the spacecraft to the right. It was designed by Young's first wife, Barbara.\nSpacecraft location.\nFor many years the spacecraft was the centerpiece of a space exhibition at Norsk Teknisk Museum, Oslo, Norway. It was returned on request in 2002.\nThe spacecraft is currently on display at the Cosmosphere in Hutchinson, Kansas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11984", "revid": "10863197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11984", "title": "Gardening", "text": "Practice of growing and cultivating plants\nGardening is the process of growing plants for their vegetables, fruits, flowers, herbs, and appearances within a designated space. Gardens fulfill a wide assortment of purposes, notably the production of aesthetically pleasing areas, medicines, cosmetics, dyes, foods, poisons, wildlife habitats, and saleable goods (see market gardening). People often partake in gardening for its therapeutic, health, educational, cultural, philosophical, environmental, and religious benefits.\nGardening varies in scale from the 800 hectare Versailles gardens down to container gardens grown inside. Gardens take many forms; some only contain one type of plant, while others involve a complex assortment of plants with no particular order.\nGardening can be difficult to differentiate from farming. They are most easily differentiated based on their primary objectives. Farming prioritizes saleable goods and may include livestock production, whereas gardening often prioritizes aesthetics and leisure. As it pertains to food production, gardening generally happens on a much smaller scale with the intent of personal or community consumption. There are cultures which do not differentiate between farming and gardening. This is primarily because subsistence agriculture has been the main method of farming throughout its 12,000 year history and is virtually indistinguishable from gardening.\nPrehistory.\nPlant domestication is seen as the birth of agriculture. However, it is arguably preceded by a very long history of gardening wild plants. While the 12,000-year-old date is the commonly accepted timeline describing plant domestication, there is now evidence from the Ohalo II hunter-gatherer site showing earlier signs of disturbing the soil and cultivation of pre-domesticated crop species. This evidence pushes early stage plant domestication to 23,000 years ago which aligns with research done by Allaby (2022) showing slight selection pressure of desirable traits in Southwest Asian cereals (einkorn, emmer, barley). Despite not qualifying as plant domestication, many archaeological studies are pushing the potential date of hominin selective ecosystem disturbance back up to 125,000 years ago. Much of these early recorded ecosystem disturbances were made through hominin use of fire, which dates back to 1.5 Mya (although at this time fire was not likely being wielded as a landscape-changing tool by hominids). This anthropogenic ecosystem disturbance may be the origin of gardening.\nEvery hunter-gatherer society has developed a niche of some sort, allowing them to thrive or even just survive amongst their environments. Many of these prehistoric hunter-gatherers had constructed a niche allowing for easier access to, or a higher amount of, edible plant species. This shift from hunting and gathering to increasingly modifying the environment in a way which produces an abundance of edible plant species marks the beginning of gardening. One of the most documented hominin niches is the use of off-site fire. When done intentionally, this is often called forest gardening or fire stick farming in Australia. The modern study of fire ecology describes the many benefits that off-site fires may have granted these early humans. Some of these agroecological practices have been well documented and studied during colonial contact. However, they are vastly under represented in research done on early hominin fire use. Based on current research, it is evident that these niches developed separately in different societies across different times and locations. Many of the Indigenous gardening methods were and still are often overlooked by colonizers due to the lack of resemblance to western gardens with well-defined borders and non-naturalized plant species.\nThe Americas.\nThere are long traditions of gardening within Indigenous societies spanning from the northernmost parts of Canada down to the southernmost tip of Chile and Argentina. The Arctic and Subarctic societies relied primarily on hunting and fishing due to the harsh climate, although they have been known to collectively use at least 311 different plants as foods or medicines. The substantial knowledge and use of these plants along with the communal harvesting sites and emphasis on reciprocity between humans and plants indicates a basic level of gardening. Similarly, the Fuegian Indigenous groups in South America had developed seemingly comparable niches due to a similar tundra ecosystem. While there are very few studies on the Fuegians, Darwin mentioned wild edible plants such as fungi, kelp, and wild celery growing next to the various Fuegian shelters.\nHorticulture plays a relatively small role in these northern and southern tundra inhabitants compared with Indigenous societies in grassland and forest ecosystems. From the boreal forests of Canada to the temperate forests and grasslands of Chile and Argentina, different communities have developed food production niches. These include the use of fire for ecosystem maintenance and resetting successional sequences, the sowing of wild annuals, the sowing of domesticated annuals (e.g. three sisters, New World crops), creating berry patches and orchards, manipulation of plants to encourage desired traits(e.g. increased nut, fruit, or root production), and landscape modification to encourage plant and animal growth (e.g. complex irrigation, sea gardens, or terraces). These modified landscapes as recorded by early American philosophers such as Thoreau, and Emmerson were described as exhibiting pristine beauty. Indigenous gardens such as forest gardens therefore do not only serve as a producer of foods, medicines, or materials, but also pleasant aesthetics.\nMany popular crops originate from pre-colonial Indigenous agricultural societies. Some of these include maize, quinoa, common bean, peanut, pumpkin, squash, pepper, tomato, cassava, potato, blueberry, cactus pear, cashew, papaya, pineapple, strawberry, cacao, sunflower, cotton, Par\u00e1 rubber, and tobacco.\nHistory.\nAncient times.\nForest gardening, a forest-based food production system, is the world's oldest form of gardening.\nAfter the emergence of the first civilizations, wealthy individuals began to create gardens for aesthetic purposes. Ancient Egyptian tomb paintings from the New Kingdom (around 1500 BC) provide some of the earliest physical evidence of ornamental horticulture and landscape design; they depict lotus ponds surrounded by symmetrical rows of acacias and palms. A notable example of ancient ornamental gardens was the Hanging Gardens of Babylon\u2014one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World \u2014while ancient Rome had dozens of gardens.\nWealthy ancient Egyptians used gardens to provide shade. Egyptians associated trees and gardens with gods, believing that their deities were pleased by gardens. Gardens in ancient Egypt were often surrounded by walls with trees planted in rows. Among the most popular species planted were date palms, sycamores, fig trees, nut trees, and willows. These gardens were a sign of higher socioeconomic status. In addition, wealthy ancient Egyptians grew vineyards, as wine was a sign of the higher social classes. Roses, poppies, daisies and irises could all also be found in the gardens of the Egyptians.\nAssyria was renowned for its beautiful gardens. These tended to be wide and large, some of them used for hunting game, rather like a game reserve today, and others as leisure gardens. Cypresses and palms were some of the most frequently planted types of trees.\nGardens were also available in Kush. In Musawwarat es-Sufra, the Great Enclosure, dated to the 3rd century BC, included splendid gardens.\nAncient Roman gardens were laid out with hedges and vines and contained a wide variety of flowers\u2014acanthus, cornflowers, crocus, cyclamen, hyacinth, iris, ivy, lavender, lilies, myrtle, narcissus, poppy, rosemary and violets\u2014as well as statues and sculptures. Flower beds were popular in the courtyards of rich Romans.\nThe Middle Ages.\nThe Middle Ages represent a period of decline in gardens for aesthetic purposes. After the fall of Rome, gardening was done for the purpose of growing medicinal herbs and/or decorating church altars. Monasteries carried on a tradition of garden design and intense horticultural techniques during the medieval period in Europe.\nGenerally, monastic garden types consisted of kitchen gardens, infirmary gardens, cemetery orchards, cloister garths and vineyards. Individual monasteries might also have had a \"green court\", a plot of grass and trees where horses could graze, as well as a cellarer's garden or private gardens for obedientiaries, monks who held specific posts within the monastery.\nIslamic gardens were built after the model of Persian gardens, and they were usually enclosed by walls and divided into four by watercourses. Commonly, the centre of the garden would have a reflecting pool or pavilion. Specific to the Islamic gardens are the mosaics and glazed tiles used to decorate the rills and fountains that were built in these gardens.\nBy the late 13th century, rich Europeans began to grow gardens for leisure and medicinal herbs and vegetables. They surrounded the gardens by walls to protect them from animals and to provide seclusion. During the next two centuries, Europeans started planting lawns and raising flowerbeds and trellises of roses. Fruit trees were common in these gardens, and also in some, there were turf seats. At the same time, the gardens in the monasteries were a place to grow flowers and medicinal herbs, but they were also a space where the monks could enjoy nature and relax.\nThe gardens in the 16th and 17th centuries were symmetric, proportioned and balanced with a more classical appearance. Most of these gardens were built around a central axis, and they were divided into different parts by hedges. Commonly, gardens had flowerbeds laid out in squares and separated by gravel paths.\nGardens during the Renaissance were adorned with sculptures, topiary and fountains. In the 17th century, knot gardens became popular along with the hedge mazes. By this time, Europeans started planting new flowers such as tulips, marigolds and sunflowers.\nCottage gardens.\nCottage gardens, which emerged in Elizabethan times, appear to have originated as a local source for herbs and fruits. One theory is that they arose out of the Black Death of the 1340s, when the death of so many laborers made land available for small cottages with personal gardens. According to the late 19th-century legend of origin, These gardens were originally created by the workers who lived in the cottages of the villages to provide them with food and herbs, with flowers planted among them for decoration. Farm workers were provided with cottages that had architectural quality set in a small garden\u2014about \u2014where they could grow food and keep pigs and chickens.\nAuthentic gardens of the yeoman cottager would have included a beehive and livestock, and frequently a pig and sty, along with a well. The peasant cottager of medieval times was more interested in meat than flowers, with herbs grown for medicinal use rather than for their beauty. By Elizabethan times, there was more prosperity, and thus more room to grow flowers. Even the early cottage garden flowers typically had their practical use\u2014violets were spread on the floor (for their pleasant scent and keeping out vermin); calendulas and primroses were both attractive and used in cooking. Others, such as sweet William and hollyhocks, were grown entirely for their beauty.\n18th century.\nIn the 18th century, gardens were laid out more naturally, without any walls. This style of smooth, undulating grass, which would run straight to the house, clumps, belts and scattering of trees and serpentine lakes formed by invisibly damming small rivers, was a new style within the English landscape. This was a \"gardenless\" form of landscape gardening, which swept away almost all the remnants of previous, formally patterned styles. The English landscape garden usually included a lake, lawns set against groves of trees, and often contained shrubberies, grottoes, pavilions, bridges and follies such as mock temples, Gothic ruins, bridges, and other picturesque architecture, designed to recreate an idyllic pastoral landscape. This new style emerged in England in the early 18th century, and spread across Europe, replacing the more formal, symmetrical garden \u00e0 la fran\u00e7aise of the 17th century as the principal gardening style of Europe. The English garden presented an idealized view of nature. They were often inspired by paintings of landscapes by Claude Lorraine and Nicolas Poussin, and some were Influenced by the classic Chinese gardens of the East, which had recently been described by European travelers. The work of Lancelot 'Capability' Brown was particularly influential. Also, in 1804, the Horticultural Society was formed.\nGardens of the 19th century contained plants such as the monkey puzzle or Chile pine. This is also the time when the so-called \"gardenesque\" style of gardens evolved. These gardens displayed a wide variety of flowers in a rather small space. Rock gardens increased in popularity in the 19th century.\nIn ancient India, patterns from sacred geometry and mandalas were used to design gardens. Distinct mandala patterns denoted specific deities, planets, or even constellations. Such a garden was also referred to as a 'Mandala Vaatika'. The word 'Vaatika' can mean garden, plantation or parterre.\nTypes.\nResidential gardening takes place near the home, in a space referred to as the garden. Although a garden typically is located on the land near a residence, it may also be located on a roof, in an atrium, on a balcony, in a window box, on a patio or vivarium.\nGardening also takes place in non-residential green areas, such as parks, public or semi-public gardens (botanical gardens or zoological gardens), amusement parks, along transportation corridors, and around tourist attractions and garden hotels. In these situations, a staff of gardeners or groundskeepers maintains the gardens.\nTools.\nRegardless of historical time period, location, scale, or type of garden, all gardening requires some basic tools. For the majority of human history, people have managed with significantly fewer resources compared to modern times. Agriculture was built on the use of hands, stones, sticks, human ingenuity, and fire. The essential tools used in pre-Bronze Age gardening were non-metal (primarily stone, bone, wood, or copper) knives, axes, adzes, foot ploughs, sickles, hoes, baskets, pottery, digging sticks, animal-driven ploughs, animals, and fire for clearing land. Up until the green revolution, these simple tools, although continually improved upon, would continue to be the backbone of agricultural societies.\nThe industrial revolution created a large increase in the availability and impact of agricultural tools. These tools include tractors with modern implements, manure spreaders, cultivators, mowers, earth-moving machines, hedge trimmers, strimmer's, wood-chippers, two-wheel tractors, complex irrigation systems, plastic mulch, plastic shelters, seeding trays, indoor grow lights, packaging, chemical fertilizers, pesticides, genetically modified seeds, and many more.\nPlant propagation.\nPlants may be propagated through many different methods. These methods are classified as either sexual or asexual propagation.\nAsexual reproduction.\nAsexual reproduction occurs when plants produce clonal offspring. This method of reproduction is often more simplistic and provides rapid population growth. Cloning may result in highly vulnerable plant populations if they do not also reproduce sexually in order to create genetic diversity, thus allowing for certain levels of natural selection and hybrid vigor. There are various methods of asexual plant propagation taken advantage of by gardeners. These include vegetative propagation, which involves the growth of new plants from vegetative parts of the parent plant, such as roots, stems, and leaves. Certain plants such as strawberries and raspberries produce stolons or rhizomes which are stems which grow horizontally above or below ground, developing new plants at nodes. Another common method of asexual reproduction in garden plants is fragmentation which involves a separation from the parent plant. This is common for shrubs, and trees such as willows which may shed their branches which is termed cladoptosis. Placing the shed limb into water or soil produces budding and causes roots to form.\nPerhaps the most commonly known method of asexual reproduction in gardening and farming is grafting. A human may choose to graft an excellent fruit-producing cultivar on a selected rootstock cultivar of the same species. This involves cutting each plant and connecting the cuttings by mechanical means until they inosculate or fuse together. Grafting is done for many purposes. Firstly, the scion (portion of the plant above the graft site) can undergo artificial selection for specific desirable traits such as flavor while the rootstock can undergo selection for traits such as disease resistance or cold tolerance. This effectively allows for much more efficiency in the artificial selection process as certain traits such as fruit taste can be ignored altogether in the rootstock allowing for a focused selection with less backcrossing to a plant that had good tasting fruit. Secondly, grafting allows for plants that require cross-pollination for fruit generation, such as apples, to all grow together as one tree. Thirdly, this allows for quick reproduction where one mother plant can produce many semi-developed clones each year.\nSexual reproduction.\nSexual reproduction occurs through the pollination of an ovule. This pollination must occur between the female and male parts of a single flower or between flowers. A plant may undergo self pollination as a sexual means of reproduction, where the genes of the mother plant will not perfectly match those of the progeny. Progeny from self-pollination will, however, have less genetic diversity which may result in inbreeding depression versus plants from cross-pollination. Pollen is typically carried by wind, insects, or animals to complete pollination. Some greenhouses may have to manually pollinate their plants to produce fruit and seeds due to a lack of these conditions. Sexual reproduction can only be done by members of the same species and this produces varying levels of genetic diversity in the plants' offspring. This genetic diversity is responsible for the survival of every plant as we know it today. The diversity allows for disease resistance, adaptations to changing climate, changes in soil, changes in pollination methods, changes in animal grazing pressure, changes in weed pressure, and any other variations that arise in their growing conditions. Crossing plants, or hybridizing, results in hybrid vigor and increases the genetic diversity.\nMany commercially grown plants are F1 hybrids, which ensures certain desirable traits. A common alternative to growing hybrid plants is to grow heirloom or open-pollinated plants, which, unlike F1 hybrids, will produce viable seed with progeny similar to its parent. Many modern gardeners will save seeds from heirloom varieties but not hybrids due to the certainty of desirable traits heirloom seeds provide. Historically, a lack of plant breeding knowledge would have led to more hybridization and the creation of new genetically diverse landraces. Each plant varies in its likelihood of outcrossing. Highly outcrossing plants such as spinach are more likely to create landraces. Many landraces and heirloom varieties along with their genetics are being lost due to the decrease in seed saving by modern farmers. This leads plant geneticists to search for desirable genetics in wild ancestral varieties of commonly grown plants. Plants have been artificially selected and bred since at least 7800 BCE. Despite the decrease in farmer seed saving, many landraces are also being created through artificial selection and genetic modification. Gardeners remain vital in the preservation of diverse genetics whether they maintain a family heirloom variety bred to fit conditions from the distant past, or they breed new landraces with traits matching their modern climate and growing condition.\nCertain seeds may not sprout without certain environmental conditions. These seeds either require scarification or stratification. Gardeners may grow frustrated if they lack this crucial knowledge before attempting to propagate certain plants such as hard neck garlic (asexual reproduction), which requires a cold dormant period to sprout, or saskatoon berries which have improved germination after being digested by bears through a process called endozoochory.\nTransplanting.\nMany gardeners, especially those who live in colder climates, will start seeds indoors prior to transplanting the young plants outside. This provides many benefits such as elongating the growing season, ensuring adequate quantities and quality of light, ensuring seedlings have adequate nutrients in the seed starting mix, ensuring seeds stay at correct humidity, heat, and moisture level for germination, and saving space in the garden. Many crops will not be harvestable unless they are started inside so if a gardener wants to plant these crops in their garden without starting the plants themselves, they will need to purchase transplants which are commonly available at garden centers, plant nurseries, and big-box stores. It is crucial that transplanting is done correctly. This generally implies providing the plants with enough soil so they do not become root-bound (roots wrapping in circles around transplant container), providing a hardening-off period (slow exposure to sun, wind, and cold), providing sufficient light, water, and nutrients, and choosing the correct plants to start indoors as some plants do not do well with the transplanting process.\nThere are varying methods of starting your seeds. The most prevalent method would be to start seeds in transplant (plug) trays or in planters/pots. Another method is starting seeds in soil blocks (small cubes of compressed potting soil, compost, and/or other seed-starting media), which may reduce transplant shock and stop root-binding because they allow air pruning of the roots. Some plants such as onions and various herbs may be efficiently started by scattering their seeds on top of soil in a large tray where the seedlings will later be teased apart from each other and replanted in the garden or pots.\nPests.\nGarden pests are generally plants, fungi, or animals (frequently insects) that engage in activity that the gardener considers undesirable. A pest may crowd out desirable plants, disturb soil, stunt the growth of young seedlings, steal or damage fruit, or otherwise kill plants, hamper their growth, damage their appearance, or reduce the quality of the edible or ornamental portions of the plant. Aphids, spider mites, slugs, snails, ants, birds, and even cats are commonly considered to be garden pests.\nThroughout history, ecosystems that have undergone rapid changes are typically those that harbor the most pests. For example, a highly and rapidly altered landscape such as modern canola fields in the Americas can be a breeding ground for pests of the Brassicaceae family. A natural ecosystem will typically regulate pest levels through many biological means whether that be the natural introduction of a disease or an increase in the population of a predator species of animal. \nBecause gardeners may have different goals, organisms considered \"garden pests\" vary from gardener to gardener. \"Tropaeolum speciosum\", for example, may be considered a desirable and ornamental garden plant, or it may be considered a pest if its seeds and starts to grow where it is not wanted. As another example, in lawns, moss can become dominant and be impossible to eradicate. In some lawns, lichens, especially very damp lawn lichens such as \"Peltigera lactucfolia\" and \"P.\u00a0membranacea\", can become difficult to control and are considered pests.\nPest control.\nThere are many ways by which unwanted pests are removed from a garden. The techniques vary depending on the pest, the gardener's goals, and the gardener's philosophy. For example, snails may be dealt with through the use of a chemical pesticide, an organic pesticide, hand-picking, barriers, or simply growing snail-resistant plants.\nOn a large scale, pest control is often done through the use of pesticides and herbicides, which may be either organic or artificially synthesized. Pesticides may affect the ecology of a garden due to their effects on the populations of both target and non-target species. For example, unintended exposure to some neonicotinoid pesticides has been proposed as a factor in the recent decline in honey bee populations. Pesticides and herbicides are also known to cause medical issues, typically to those in proximity during their application. While farm workers are by far the most affected by the use of pesticides and herbicides, they are often under-informed or accept the consequences due to financial necessity. Fungicides may be applied to the seed coat to reduce mortality of germinating seedlings. The improper use of pesticides often leads to pesticide resistance which poses a risk in global food security. With climate change affecting the distribution of pests, a global increase in pesticide usage has been observed which in turn has caused an increase of human health risks due to exposure. Creating new pesticides in order to manage resistant organisms is an immense expense and is often heavily criticized as an ineffective method of pest control.\nOther means of control include the removal of infected plants, using fertilizers and bio stimulants to improve the health and vigor of plants so they better resist attack, practicing crop rotation to prevent pest build-up, using foliar sprays, companion planting, and practicing good garden hygiene, such as disinfecting tools and clearing debris and weeds which may harbor pests. Another common method of pest control, used frequently in market gardening, is using insect netting or plastic greenhouse covers. Gardeners may rely on one type of pest in order to eliminate another. Some examples of this are cats which hunt mice and rats, wild birds, bats, chickens, and ducks which hunt insects and slugs, or thorny hedges to deter deer and other creatures. Using these organisms to help control pests is called biological pest control. There are also targeted measures of animal pest control, such as a mole vibrator, which can deter mole activity in a garden, or automated gun shots to scare off birds.\nGarden guns.\nGarden guns are smooth-bore shotguns specifically made to fire .22 caliber snake shot, and are commonly used by gardeners and farmers for pest control. Garden guns are short-range weapons that can do little harm past and are relatively quiet when fired with snake shot, compared to standard ammunition. These guns are especially effective inside barns and sheds, as the snake shot will not shoot holes in the roof or walls, or more importantly, injure livestock with a ricochet. They are also used for pest control at airports, warehouses, and stockyards.\nSocial aspects.\nPeople can express their political or social views in gardens, intentionally or not. The lawn vs. garden issue is played out in urban planning as the debate over the \"land ethic\" that is to determine urban land use and whether hyper hygienist bylaws (e.g. weed control) should apply, or whether land should generally be allowed to exist in its natural wild state. In a famous Canadian Charter of Rights case, \"Sandra Bell vs. City of Toronto\", 1997, the right to cultivate all native species, even most varieties deemed noxious or allergenic, was upheld as part of the right of free expression.\nCommunity gardening comprises a wide variety of approaches to sharing land and gardens.\nPeople often surround their house and garden with a hedge. Common hedge plants are privet, hawthorn, beech, yew, leyland cypress, hemlock, arborvitae, barberry, box, holly, oleander, forsythia, and lavender. \nThe Slow Food movement has sought in some countries to add an edible school yard and garden classrooms to schools, e.g. in Fergus, Ontario, where these were added to a public school to augment the kitchen classroom. Garden sharing, where urban landowners allow gardeners to grow on their property in exchange for a share of the harvest, is associated with the desire to control the quality of one's food, and reconnect with soil and community.\nIn US and British usage, the production of ornamental plantings around buildings is called \"landscaping\", \"landscape maintenance,\" or \"grounds keeping\", while international usage uses the term \"gardening\" for these same activities.\nAlso gaining popularity is the concept of \"Green Gardening\" which involves growing plants using organic fertilizers and pesticides so that the gardening process \u2013 or the flowers and fruits produced thereby \u2013 doesn't adversely affect the environment or people's health in any manner.\nGardening can be a very pleasant and relaxing activity with rewarding results. It allows for a connection with nature and creating a green space that presents a vision of beauty but also contributes to the eco system. A thriving and flourishing garden can be created by understanding and adapting to the climate and environmental changes.\nPlants and flowers grow in varying temperatures and weather conditions. Most plants thrive in temperatures between 18 and 24\u00b0C during the day and slightly cooler at night. This range allows for optimal photosynthesis and overall growth for many common plant species. Usually, there is a variety of plants in a garden, therefore, it is always best to learn about the best weather for your plants to have success with your planting.\nLaws and restrictions.\nIn some parts of the world, particularly the United States, gardening can be restricted by law or by rules and regulations imposed by a Homeowners Association. In the United States, such rules may prohibit homeowners from growing vegetable gardens, prohibit xeriscaping or meadow gardens, or require garden plants to be chosen from a pre-approved list, to preserve the aesthetics of the neighborhood. Numerous challenges to these laws, ordinances and regulations have emerged in recent years, with some resulting in legislation protecting a homeowner's right to cultivate native plants or grow vegetables. Laws protecting a homeowner's right to grow food plants have been termed \"right to garden\" laws.\nWaste management.\nYard waste includes leaves, brush, grass clippings, and other organic materials. It can be chipped into a mulch or made into a finished compost that can be sold.\nBenefits.\nGardening is considered by many people to be a relaxing activity. There are also many studies about the positive effects on mental and physical health in relation to gardening. Specifically, gardening is thought to increase self-esteem and reduce stress. As writer and former teacher Sarah Biddle notes, one's garden may become a \"tiny oasis to relax and recharge [one's] batteries.\" Involving in gardening activities aids in creativity, observational skills, learning, planning and physical movement.\nOthers consider gardening to be a good hedge against supply chain disruptions, with increased worries that the public cannot always trust that the grocery store shelves will be fully stocked. In April 2022, about 31% of grocery products were out of stock which is an 11% increase from November 2021.\nGardening can also support good numbers and a wide range of pollinators, but worryingly bees and other pollinators are in decline. Gardeners can make a difference to help reverse this trend. The main thing that matters is that they get their share of nectar to fuel their busy lifestyles, and this is where gardening can help them.\nA way to both positively impact humans and pollinators is to implement pollinator gardens. Including native flowers has been shown to increase pollinators, and even protects bee populations against urbanization and landscapes that do not include flowers. Small patches in urban landscapes that are diverse in flowers have been noted to match or even exceed wild landscapes when it comes to bees pollinating. Areas like golf courses, cemeteries, community gardens as well as residential gardens are all areas in urban settings that could benefit pollinator diversity by implementing native flowers to the landscape.\nOrnaments and accessories.\nThere is a wide range of garden ornaments and accessories available in the market for both the professional gardener and the amateur to exercise their creativity, for example, sculptures, lights or fountains. These are used to add decoration or functionality, and may be made from a wide range of materials such as copper, stone, wood, bamboo, stainless steel, clay, stained glass, concrete, or iron. Examples include trellis, garden furniture, gnomes, statues, outdoor fireplaces, fountains, rain chains, urns, bird baths and feeders, wind chimes, and garden lighting such as candle lanterns and oil lamps. The use of these items can be part of the expression of a gardener's gardening personality.\nAs art.\nGarden design is considered to be an art in most cultures, distinguished from gardening, which generally means \"garden maintenance\". Garden design can include different themes such as perennial, butterfly, wildlife, Japanese, water, tropical, or shade gardens.\nIn Japan, Samurai and Zen monks were often required to build decorative gardens or practice related skills like flower arrangement known as \"ikebana\". In 18th-century Europe, country estates were refashioned by landscape gardeners into formal gardens or landscaped park lands, such as at Versailles, France, or Stowe, England. Today, landscape architects and garden designers continue to produce artistically creative designs for private garden spaces. In the US, professional landscape designers are certified by the Association of Professional Landscape Designers.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11985", "revid": "17859592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11985", "title": "Graffiti", "text": "Drawings and paintings on walls\nGraffiti (singular graffiti, or graffito only in graffiti archeology) is writing or drawings made on a wall or other surface, usually without permission and within public view. Graffiti ranges from simple written \"monikers\" to elaborate wall paintings, and has existed since ancient times, with examples dating back to ancient Egypt, ancient Greece, and the Roman Empire.\nModern graffiti is a controversial subject. In most countries, marking or painting property without permission is considered vandalism. Modern graffiti began in the New York City subway system and Philadelphia in the early 1970s and later spread to the rest of the United States and throughout the world.\nEtymology.\n\"Graffiti\" (usually both singular and plural) and the rare singular form \"graffito\" are from the Italian word \"graffiato\" (\"scratched\"). In ancient times graffiti were carved on walls with a sharp object, although sometimes chalk or coal were used. The word originates from Greek \u2014\"graphein\"\u2014meaning \"to write\".\nHistory.\nPrehistoric.\nMost petroglyphs and geoglyphs date between 40,000 and 10,000 years old, the oldest being cave paintings in Australia. Paintings in the Chauvet Cave were made 35,000 years ago, but little is known about who made them or why. Early artists created stencil graffiti of their hands with paint blown through a tube. These stencils may have functioned similarly to a modern-day tag.\nAncient.\nThe oldest known written graffito was found on the Greek island of Astypalaia and is dated to around 500 BC. Most graffiti from the time was boasts about sexual experiences, but also includes word games such as the Sator Square, \"I was here\" type markings, and comments on gladiators. Graffiti in Ancient Rome was a form of communication, and was generally not considered vandalism. The Alexamenos graffito was later seen as blasphemous and removed. It may contain one of the earliest depictions of Jesus. The graffito features a human with the head of a donkey on a cross with a Greek inscription translated as 'Alexamenos worships [his] god'.\nMedieval.\nThe only known source of the Safaitic language, an ancient form of Arabic, is from graffiti: inscriptions scratched on to the surface of rocks and boulders in the predominantly basalt desert of southern Syria, eastern Jordan and northern Saudi Arabia. Safaitic dates from the first century BC to the fourth century AD.\nAncient tourists visiting the 5th-century citadel at Sigiriya in Sri Lanka write their names and commentary over the \"mirror wall\", adding up to over 1800 individual graffiti produced there between the 6th and 18th centuries. Most of the graffiti refer to the frescoes of semi-nude females found there.\nAmong the ancient political graffiti examples were Arab satirist poems. Yazid al-Himyari, an Umayyad Arab and Persian poet, was most known for writing his political poetry on the walls between Sajistan and Basra, manifesting a strong hatred towards the Umayyad regime and its \"walis\", and people used to read and circulate them very widely.\nGraffiti, known as Tacherons, were frequently scratched on Romanesque Scandinavian church walls. When Renaissance artists such as Pinturicchio, Raphael, Michelangelo, Ghirlandaio, or Filippino Lippi descended into the ruins of Nero's Domus Aurea, they carved or painted their names and returned to initiate the \"grottesche\" style of decoration.\nContemporary.\nIn the 1790s, French soldiers carved their names on monuments during the Napoleonic . Lord Byron's survives on one of the columns of the Temple of Poseidon at Sounion in Attica, Greece.\nThe oldest known example of graffiti monikers were found on traincars created by hobos and railworkers since the late 1800s. The Bozo Texino monikers were documented by filmmaker Bill Daniel in his 2005 film, \"Who is Bozo Texino?\".\nContemporary graffiti has been seen on landmarks in the US, such as Independence Rock, a national landmark along the Oregon Trail.\nIn World War II, an inscription on a wall at the fortress of Verdun was seen as an illustration of the US response twice in a generation to the wrongs of the Old World:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDuring World War II and for decades after, the phrase \"Kilroy was here\" with an accompanying illustration was widespread throughout the world, due to its use by American troops and ultimately filtering into American popular culture. Shortly after the death of Charlie Parker (nicknamed \"Yardbird\" or \"Bird\"), graffiti began appearing around New York with the words \"Bird Lives\".\nModern.\nModern graffiti style has been heavily influenced by hip hop culture and started with young people in 1960s and 70s in New York City and Philadelphia. Tags were the first form of stylised contemporary graffiti, starting with artists like TAKI 183 and Cornbread. Later, artists began to paint throw-ups and pieces on trains on the sides of subway trains. and eventually moved into the city after the NYC metro began to buy new trains and paint over graffiti.\nWhile the art had many advocates and appreciators\u2014including the cultural critic Norman Mailer\u2014others, including New York City mayor Ed Koch, considered it to be defacement of public property, and saw it as a form of public blight. While those who did early modern graffiti called it \"writing\", the 1974 essay \"The Faith of Graffiti\" referred to it using the term \"graffiti\", which stuck.\nAn early graffito outside of New York or Philadelphia was the inscription in London reading \"Clapton is God\" in reference to the guitarist Eric Clapton. Creating the cult of the guitar hero, the phrase was spray-painted by an admirer on a wall in Islington, north London, in the autumn of 1967. The graffito was captured in a photograph, in which a dog is urinating on the wall.\nFilms like Style Wars in the 80s depicting famous writers such as Skeme, DONDI, MinOne, and ZEPHYR reinforced graffiti's role within New York's emerging hip-hop culture. Although many officers of the New York City Police Department found this film to be controversial, Style Wars is still recognized as the most prolific film representation of what was going on within the young hip hop culture of the early 1980s. Fab5 Freddy and Futura 2000 took hip hop graffiti to Paris and London as part of the New York City Rap Tour in 1983.\nCommercialization and pop culture.\nWith the popularity and legitimization of graffiti has come a level of commercialization. In 2001, computer giant IBM launched an advertising campaign in Chicago and San Francisco which involved people spray painting on sidewalks a peace symbol, a heart, and Tux (Linux penguin mascot), to represent \"Peace, Love, and Linux.\" IBM paid Chicago and San Francisco collectively US$ for punitive damages and clean-up costs.\nIn 2005, a similar ad campaign was launched by Sony and executed by its advertising agency in New York, Chicago, Atlanta, Philadelphia, Los Angeles, and Miami, to market its handheld PlayStation Portable (PSP) gaming system. In this campaign, taking notice of the legal problems of the IBM campaign, Sony paid building owners for the rights to paint on their buildings \"a collection of dizzy-eyed urban kids playing with the PSP as if it were a skateboard, a paddle, or a rocking horse\".\nGlobal movements.\nWhen graffiti is done as an art form, it often uses the Latin script even in countries where it is not the primary writing system. English words are also often used as monikers.\nEurope.\nStencil graffiti artists such as Blek le Rat existed in Western Europe, especially in Paris, before the arrival of American graffiti and was associated more with the punk rock scene than with hip-hop. In the 1980s, American graffiti and hiphop began to influence the European graffiti scene. Modern graffiti reached Eastern Europe in the 1990s.\nSome of the earliest graffiti exhibitions outside of the USA were in Amsterdam, The Netherlands.\nMiddle East.\nGraffiti in the Middle East has emerged slowly, with taggers operating in Egypt, Lebanon, the Gulf countries like Bahrain or the United Arab Emirates, Israel, and in Iran. The major Iranian newspaper \"Hamshahri\" has published two articles on illegal writers in the city with photographic coverage of Iranian artist A1one's works on Tehran walls. Tokyo-based design magazine, \"PingMag\", has interviewed A1one and featured photographs of his work. The Israeli West Bank barrier has become a site for graffiti, reminiscent in this sense of the Berlin Wall. Many writers in Israel come from other places around the globe, such as JUIF from Los Angeles and DEVIONE from London. The religious reference \"\u05e0 \u05e0\u05d7 \u05e0\u05d7\u05de \u05e0\u05d7\u05de\u05df \u05de\u05d0\u05d5\u05de\u05df\" (\"Na Nach Nachma Nachman Meuman\") is commonly seen in graffiti around Israel.\nGraffiti has played an important role within the street art scene in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA), especially following the events of the Arab Spring of 2011 or the Sudanese Revolution of 2018/19. Graffiti is a tool of expression in the context of conflict in the region, allowing people to raise their voices politically and socially. Famous street artist Banksy has had an important effect in the street art scene in the MENA area, especially in Palestine where some of his works are located in the West Bank barrier and Bethlehem.\nSouth America.\nSouth America has a very active graffiti culture, and graffiti are very common in Brazilian cities. This is blamed on the high uneven distribution of income, changing laws, and disenfranchisement. \"Picha\u00e7\u00e3o\" is a form of graffiti found in Brazil, which involves tall characters and is usually used as a form of protest. It contrasts with the more conventionally artistic values of the practitioners of \"grafite\".\nProminent Brazilian writers include Os G\u00eameos, Boleta, Nunca, Nina, Speto, Tikka, and T.Freak.\nSoutheast Asia.\nThere are also a large number of graffiti influences in Southeast Asian countries that mostly come from modern Western culture, such as Malaysia, where graffiti have long been a common sight in Malaysia's capital city, Kuala Lumpur. Since 2010, the country has begun hosting a street festival to encourage all generations and people from all walks of life to enjoy and encourage Malaysian street culture.\nTypes.\nTools.\nSpray paint and markers are the main tools used for tagging, throw ups, and pieces. Paint markers, paint dabbers, and scratching tools are also used. Some art companies, such as Montana Colors, make art supplies specifically for graffiti and street art. Many major cities have graffiti art stores.\nStencil graffiti.\nStencil graffiti is created by cutting out shapes and designs in a stiff material (such as cardboard or subject folders) to form an overall design or image. The stencil is then placed on the \"canvas\" gently and with quick, easy strokes of the aerosol can, the image begins to appear on the intended surface. Some of the first examples were created in 1981 by artists Blek le Rat in Paris, in 1982 by Jef Aerosol in Tours (France); by 1985 stencils had appeared in other cities including New York City, Sydney, and Melbourne, where they were documented by American photographer Charles Gatewood and Australian photographer Rennie Ellis.\nStickers.\nStickers, also known as slaps, are drawn or written on before being put up in public. Stickers that became widely used include the United States Postal Service's Label 228 and name tags stickers. Name tag stickers that were printed with the text \"Hello my name is\", first introduced by C-Line Products in 1959, became widely used in both graffiti and sticker art. Eggshell stickers are also frequently used and they are named \"Eggshell\" as an attempt to remove them results in tiny pieces breaking off, like an eggshell. Stickers allow artists to put up their art quickly and discreetly, making them a relatively safer option for illegal graffiti.\nTags.\nTagging is the practice of writing one's \"name, initial or logo onto a public surface\" in a handstyle unique to the writer. Tags were the first form of modern graffiti.\nA number of recent examples of graffiti make use of hashtags.\nThrow ups.\nThrow ups, or throwies are large, bubble-writing graffiti which aim to be \"thrown onto\" a surface as largely and quickly as possible. Throw ups can have fills or be \"hollow\". They prioritise minimal negative space and consistency or letter space and height.\nPieces.\nPieces are large, elaborate, letter-based graffiti which usually use spray paint or rollers. Pieces often have multi-coloured fills and outlines, and may use highlights, shadows, backgrounds, extensions, 3D effects, and sometimes characters.\nWildstyle.\nWildstyle is the most complex form of modern graffiti. It can be difficult for those unfamiliar with the art form to read. Wildstyle draws inspiration from calligraphy and has been described as partially abstract. The term \"wildstyle\" was popularized by the Wild Style graffiti crew formed by Tracy 168 of the Bronx, New York in 1974.\nModern experimentation.\nModern graffiti art often incorporates additional arts and technologies. For example, Graffiti Research Lab has encouraged the use of projected images and magnetic light-emitting diodes (throwies) as new media for graffitists. Yarnbombing is another recent form of graffiti. Yarnbombers occasionally target previous graffiti for modification, which had been avoided among the majority of graffitists.\nPurpose.\nTheories on the use of graffiti by avant-garde artists have a history dating back at least to the Asger Jorn, who in 1962 painting declared in a graffiti-like gesture \"the avant-garde won't give up\".\nPublic art.\nPeople who appreciate graffiti often believe that it should be on display for everyone in public spaces, not hidden away in a museum or a gallery. Art should color the streets, not the inside of some building. Graffiti is a form of art that cannot be owned or bought. It does not last forever, it is temporary, yet one of a kind. It is a form of self promotion for the artist that can be displayed anywhere from sidewalks, roofs, subways, building wall, etc. Art to them is for everyone and should be shown to everyone for free.\nPersonal expression.\nGraffiti is a way of communicating and a way of expressing oneself. It is art and a functional thing that can warn people of something or inform people of something. However, graffiti is to some people a form of art, but to some a form of vandalism. And many graffitists choose to protect their identities and remain anonymous to hinder prosecution.\nWith the commercialization of graffiti (and hip hop in general), in most cases, even with legally painted \"graffiti\" art, graffitists tend to choose anonymity. This may be attributed to various reasons or a combination of reasons. Graffiti still remains the one of four hip hop elements that is not considered \"performance art\" despite the image of the \"singing and dancing star\" that sells hip hop culture to the mainstream. Being a graphic form of art, it might also be said that many graffitists still fall in the category of the introverted archetypal artist.\nBanksy is one of the world's most notorious and popular street artists who continues to remain faceless in today's society. He is known for his political, anti-war stencil art mainly in Bristol, England, but his work may be seen anywhere from Los Angeles to Palestine. In the UK, Banksy is the most recognizable icon for this cultural artistic movement and keeps his identity a secret to avoid arrest. Much of Banksy's artwork may be seen around the streets of London and surrounding suburbs, although he has painted pictures throughout the world, including the Middle East, where he has painted on Israel's controversial West Bank barrier with satirical images of life on the other side. One depicted a hole in the wall with an idyllic beach, while another shows a mountain landscape on the other side. A number of exhibitions also have taken place since 2000, and recent works of art have fetched vast sums of money. Banksy's art is a prime example of the classic controversy: vandalism vs. art. Art supporters endorse his work distributed in urban areas as pieces of art and some councils, such as Bristol and Islington, have officially protected them, while officials of other areas have deemed his work to be vandalism and have removed it.\nGraffiti artists may become offended if photographs of their art are published in a commercial context without their permission. In March 2020, the Finnish graffiti artist Psyke expressed his displeasure at the newspaper \"Ilta-Sanomat\" publishing a photograph of a Peugeot 208 in an article about new cars, with his graffiti prominently shown on the background. The artist claims he does not want his art being used in commercial context, not even if he were to receive compensation.\nTerritorial.\nTerritorial graffiti marks urban neighborhoods with tags and logos to differentiate certain groups from others. These images are meant to show outsiders a stern look at whose turf is whose. The subject matter of gang-related graffiti consists of cryptic symbols and initials strictly fashioned with unique calligraphies. Gang members use graffiti to designate membership throughout the gang, to differentiate rivals and associates and, most commonly, to mark borders which are both territorial and ideological.\nRadical and political.\nMany analysts and art critics see artistic value in some graffiti and recognize it as a form of public art. According to many art researchers, particularly in the Netherlands and in Los Angeles graffiti is an effective tool of social emancipation, or for the achievement of a political goal.\nIn times of conflict graffiti has offered a means of communication and self-expression for members of these socially, ethnically, or racially divided communities, and has been an effective tool for establishing dialog. The Berlin Wall was extensively covered by graffiti reflecting social pressures related to the oppressive Soviet rule over the GDR.\nGraffiti often has a reputation as part of a subculture that rebels against authority, although the considerations of the practitioners often diverge and can relate to a wide range of attitudes. It can express a political practice and can form just one tool in an array of resistance techniques. One early example includes the anarcho-punk band Crass, who conducted a campaign of stenciling anti-war, anarchist, feminist, and anti-consumerist messages throughout the London Underground system during the late 1970s and early 1980s. In Amsterdam, graffiti was a major part of the punk scene. The city was covered in names such as \"De Zoot\", \"Vendex\", and \"Dr Rat\". To document the graffiti, a punk magazine was started that was called \"Gallery Anus\". So when hip hop came to Europe in the early 1980s, there was already a vibrant graffiti culture.\nThe student protests and general strike of May 1968 saw Paris bedecked in revolutionary, anarchistic, and situationist slogans such as \"L'ennui est contre-r\u00e9volutionnaire\" (\"Boredom is counterrevolutionary\") and \"Lisez moins, vivez plus\" (\"Read less, live more\"). While not exhaustive, the graffiti gave a sense of the 'millenarian' and rebellious spirit, tempered with a good deal of verbal wit, of the strikers.\nBillboards and other consumer advertising have been the target of graffiti. From 1978 to 1994 tobacco, alcohol and other advertising was regularly painted over in Australia by the group Billboard Utilising Graffitists Against Unhealthy Promotions (BUGA UP). At one point, up to fifty billboards were altered a week, with the group specialising in altering advertising slogans and images to change their meaning.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI think graffiti writing is a way of defining what our generation is like. Excuse the French, we're not a bunch of p---- artists. Traditionally artists have been considered soft and mellow people, a little bit kooky. Maybe we're a little bit more like pirates that way. We defend our territory, whatever space we steal to paint on, we defend it fiercely.\n\u2014Sandra \"Lady Pink\" Fabara\nThe developments of graffiti art which took place in art galleries and colleges as well as \"on the street\" or \"underground\", contributed to the resurfacing in the 1990s of a far more overtly politicized art form in the subvertising, culture jamming, or tactical media movements. These movements or styles tend to classify the artists by their relationship to their social and economic contexts, since, in most countries, graffiti art remains illegal in many forms except when using non-permanent paint. Since the 1990s with the rise of Street Art, a growing number of artists are switching to non-permanent paints and non-traditional forms of painting.\nContemporary practitioners, accordingly, have varied and often conflicting practices. Some individuals, such as Alexander Brener, have used the medium to politicize other art forms, and have used the prison sentences enforced on them as a means of further protest.\nThe practices of anonymous groups and individuals also vary widely, and practitioners by no means always agree with each other's practices. For example, the anti-capitalist art group the Space Hijackers did a piece in 2004 about the contradiction between the capitalistic elements of Banksy and his use of political imagery.\nBerlin human rights activist Irmela Mensah-Schramm has received global media attention and numerous awards for her 35-year campaign of effacing neo-Nazi and other right-wing extremist graffiti throughout Germany, often by altering hate speech in humorous ways.\nGenocide denial.\nIn the Serbian capital, Belgrade, the graffiti depicting a uniformed former general of Serb army and War Criminal, convicted at ICTY for war crimes and crimes against humanity, including genocide and ethnic cleansing in Bosnian War, Ratko Mladi\u0107, appeared in a military salute alongside the words \"General, thanks to your mother\".\nAleks Eror, Berlin-based journalist, explains how \"veneration of historical and wartime figures\" through street art is not a new phenomenon in the region of former Yugoslavia, and that \"in most cases is firmly focused on the future, rather than retelling the past\". In a long expose on the subject of Bosnian genocide denial, at Balkan Diskurs magazine and multimedia platform website, Kristina Gad\u017ee and Taylor Whitsell referred to these experiences as a young generations' \"cultural heritage\", in which youths are being exposed to the celebration and affirmation of war-criminals as part of their \"formal education\" and \"inheritance\".\nThere are examples of genocide denial through the celebration and affirmation of war criminals throughout the region of Western Balkans, inhabited by Serbs, using graffiti. Several of these are found in the Serbian capital, and many more across Serbia and the Bosnian and Herzegovinian administrative entity, Republika Srpska, which is the ethnic Serbian majority enclave. Critics point that Serbia as a state, is willing to defend the mural of convicted war criminal, and have no intention to react on cases of genocide denial, noting that Interior Minister of Serbia, Aleksandar Vulin decision to ban any gathering with an intent to remove the mural, with the deployment of riot police, sends the message of \"tacit endorsement\". Consequently, on 9 November 2021, Serbian heavy police in riot gear, with the graffiti creators and their supporters, blocked the access to the mural to prevent human rights groups and other activists to paint over it and mark the International Day Against Fascism and Antisemitism in that way, and even arrested two civic activist for throwing eggs at the graffiti.\nOffensive graffiti.\nGraffiti may also be used as an offensive expression. This form of graffiti may be difficult to identify, as it is mostly removed by the local authority (as councils which have adopted strategies of criminalization also strive to remove graffiti quickly). Therefore, existing racist graffiti is mostly more subtle and at first sight, not easily recognized as \"racist\". It can then be understood only if one knows the relevant \"local code\" (social, historical, political, temporal, and spatial), which is seen as heteroglot and thus a 'unique set of conditions' in a cultural context.\nA spatial local code for example, could be that there is a certain youth group in an area that is engaging heavily in racist activities. So, for residents (knowing the local code), a graffiti containing only the name or abbreviation of this gang already is a racist expression, reminding the offended people of their gang activities. Also a graffiti is in most cases, the herald of more serious criminal activity to come. A person who does not know these gang activities would not be able to recognize the meaning of this graffiti. Also if a tag of this youth group or gang is placed on a building occupied by asylum seekers, for example, its racist character is even stronger.\nBy making the graffiti less explicit (as adapted to social and legal constraints), these drawings are less likely to be removed, but do not lose their threatening and offensive character.\nElsewhere, activists in Russia have used painted caricatures of local officials with their mouths as potholes, to show their anger about the poor state of the roads. In Manchester, England, a graffitists painted obscene images around potholes, which often resulted in them being repaired within 48 hours.\nDecorative and high art.\nIn the early 1980s, the first art galleries to show graffitists to the public were Fashion Moda in the Bronx, Now Gallery and Fun Gallery, both in the East Village, Manhattan.\nA 2006 exhibition at the Brooklyn Museum displayed graffiti as an art form that began in New York's outer boroughs and reached great heights in the early 1980s with the work of Crash, Lee, Daze, Keith Haring, and Jean-Michel Basquiat. It displayed 22 works by New York graffitists, including Crash, Daze, and Lady Pink. In an article about the exhibition in the magazine \"Time Out\", curator Charlotta Kotik said that she hoped the exhibition would cause viewers to rethink their assumptions about graffiti.\nFrom the 1970s onwards, Burhan Do\u011fan\u00e7ay photographed urban walls all over the world; these he then archived for use as sources of inspiration for his painterly works. The project today known as \"Walls of the World\" grew beyond even his own expectations and comprises about 30,000 individual images. It spans a period of 40 years across five continents and 114 countries. In 1982, photographs from this project comprised a one-man exhibition titled \"Les murs murmurent, ils crient, ils chantent...\" (The walls whisper, shout and sing...) at the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris.\nIn Australia, art historians have judged some local graffiti of sufficient creative merit to rank them firmly within the arts. Oxford University Press's art history text \"Australian Painting 1788\u20132000\" concludes with a long discussion of graffiti's key place within contemporary visual culture, including the work of several Australian practitioners.\nBetween March and April 2009, 150 artists exhibited 300 pieces of graffiti at the Grand Palais in Paris.\nEnvironmental effects.\nSpray paint has many negative environmental effects. The paint contains toxic chemicals, and the can uses volatile hydrocarbon gases to spray the paint onto a surface.\nVolatile organic compound (VOC) leads to ground level ozone formation and most of graffiti related emissions are VOCs. A 2010 paper estimates 4,862 tons of VOCs were released in the United States in activities related to graffiti.\nGovernment responses.\nAsia.\nIn China, Mao Zedong in the 1920s used revolutionary slogans and paintings in public places to galvanize the country's communist movement.\nBased on different national conditions, many people believe that China's attitude towards Graffiti is fierce, but in fact, according to Lance Crayon in his film \"Spray Paint Beijing: Graffiti in the Capital of China\", Graffiti is generally accepted in Beijing, with artists not seeing much police interference. Political and religiously sensitive graffiti, however, is not allowed.\nIn Hong Kong, Tsang Tsou Choi was known as the \"King of Kowloon\" for his calligraphy graffiti over many years, in which he claimed ownership of the area. Now some of his work is preserved officially.\nIn Taiwan, the government has made some concessions to graffitists. Since 2005 they have been allowed to freely display their work along some sections of riverside retaining walls in designated \"Graffiti Zones\". From 2007, Taipei's department of cultural affairs also began permitting graffiti on fences around major public construction sites. Department head Yong-ping Lee (\u674e\u6c38\u840d) stated, \"We will promote graffiti starting with the public sector, and then later in the private sector too. It's our goal to beautify the city with graffiti\". The government later helped organize a graffiti contest in Ximending, a popular shopping district. Graffitists caught working outside of these designated areas still face fines up to NT$6,000 under a department of environmental protection regulation. However, Taiwanese authorities can be relatively lenient, one veteran police officer stating anonymously, \"Unless someone complains about vandalism, we won't get involved. We don't go after it proactively.\"\nIn 1993, after several expensive cars in Singapore were spray-painted, the police arrested a student from the Singapore American School, Michael P. Fay, questioned him, and subsequently charged him with vandalism. Fay pleaded guilty to vandalizing a car in addition to stealing road signs. Under the 1966 Vandalism Act of Singapore, originally passed to curb the spread of communist graffiti in Singapore, the court sentenced him to four months in jail, a fine of S$3,500 (US$2,233), and a caning. \"The New York Times\" ran several editorials and op-eds that condemned the punishment and called on the American public to flood the Singaporean embassy with protests. Although the Singapore government received many calls for clemency, Fay's caning took place in Singapore on 5 May 1994. Fay had originally received a sentence of six strokes of the cane, but the presiding president of Singapore, Ong Teng Cheong, agreed to reduce his caning sentence to four lashes.\nIn South Korea, Park Jung-soo was fined two million South Korean won by the Seoul Central District Court for spray-painting a rat on posters of the G-20 Summit a few days before the event in November 2011. Park alleged that the initial in \"G-20\" sounds like the Korean word for \"rat\", but Korean government prosecutors alleged that Park was making a derogatory statement about the president of South Korea, Lee Myung-bak, the host of the summit. This case led to public outcry and debate on the lack of government tolerance and in support of freedom of expression. The court ruled that the painting, \"an ominous creature like a rat\" amounts to \"an organized criminal activity\" and upheld the fine while denying the prosecution's request for imprisonment for Park.\nEurope.\nIn Europe, community cleaning squads have responded to graffiti, in some cases with reckless abandon, as when in 1992 in France a local Scout group, attempting to remove modern graffiti, damaged https:// of bison in the Cave of Mayri\u00e8re sup\u00e9rieure near the French village of Bruniquel in Tarn-et-Garonne, earning them the 1992 Ig Nobel Prize in archeology.\nIn September 2006, the European Parliament directed the European Commission to create urban environment policies to prevent and eliminate dirt, litter, graffiti, animal excrement, and excessive noise from domestic and vehicular music systems in European cities, along with other concerns over urban life.\nIn Budapest, Hungary, both a city-backed movement called \"I Love Budapest\" and a special police division tackle the problem, including the provision of approved areas.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003 became Britain's latest anti-graffiti legislation. In August 2004, the Keep Britain Tidy campaign issued a press release calling for zero tolerance of graffiti and supporting proposals such as issuing \"on the spot\" fines to graffiti offenders and banning the sale of aerosol paint to anyone under the age of 16. The press release also condemned the use of graffiti images in advertising and in music videos, arguing that real-world experience of graffiti stood far removed from its often-portrayed \"cool\" or \"edgy'\" image.\nTo back the campaign, 123 Members of Parliament (MPs) (including then Prime Minister Tony Blair), signed a charter which stated: \"Graffiti is not art, it's crime. On behalf of my constituents, I will do all I can to rid our community of this problem.\"\nIn the UK, city councils have the power to take action against the owner of any property that has been defaced under the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003 (as amended by the http://) or, in certain cases, the Highways Act. This is often used against owners of property that are complacent in allowing protective boards to be defaced so long as the property is not damaged.\nIn July 2008, a conspiracy charge was used to convict graffitists for the first time. After a three-month police surveillance operation, nine members of the DPM crew were convicted of conspiracy to commit criminal damage costing at least \u00a31 million. Five of them received prison sentences, ranging from eighteen months to two years. The unprecedented scale of the investigation and the severity of the sentences rekindled public debate over whether graffiti should be considered art or crime.\nSome councils, like those of Stroud and Loerrach, provide approved areas in the town where graffitists can showcase their talents, including underpasses, car parks, and walls that might otherwise prove a target for the \"spray and run\".\nAustralia.\nAncient rock art in Australia is seen as a sacred part of First Nations histories, and many of it is legally protected, and some are given National Heritage status.\nIn an effort to reduce vandalism, many cities in Australia have designated walls or areas exclusively for use by writers. One early example is the \"Graffiti Tunnel\" located at the Camperdown Campus of the University of Sydney, which is available for use by any student at the university to tag, advertise, poster, and paint. Advocates of this idea suggest that this discourages petty vandalism yet encourages artists to take their time and produce great art, without worry of being caught or arrested for vandalism or trespassing. Others disagree with this approach, arguing that the presence of legal graffiti walls does not demonstrably reduce illegal graffiti elsewhere. Some local government areas throughout Australia have introduced \"anti-graffiti squads\", who clean graffiti in the area, and such crews as BCW (Buffers Can't Win) have taken steps to keep one step ahead of local graffiti cleaners.\nMany state governments have banned the sale or possession of spray paint to those under the age of 18 (age of majority). However, a number of local governments in Victoria have taken steps to recognize the cultural heritage value of some examples of graffiti, such as prominent political graffiti. Tough new graffiti laws have been introduced in Australia with fines of up to A$26,000 and two years in prison.\nMelbourne is a prominent graffiti city of Australia with many of its lanes being tourist attractions, such as Hosier Lane in particular, a popular destination for photographers, wedding photography, and backdrops for corporate print advertising. The Lonely Planet travel guide cites Melbourne's street as a major attraction. All forms of graffiti, including sticker art, poster, stencil art, and wheatpasting, can be found in many places throughout the city. Prominent street art precincts include; Fitzroy, Collingwood, Northcote, Brunswick, St. Kilda, and the CBD, where stencil and sticker art is prominent. As one moves farther away from the city, mostly along suburban train lines, graffiti tags become more prominent. Many international artists such as Banksy have left their work in Melbourne and in early 2008 a perspex screen was installed to prevent a Banksy stencil art piece from being destroyed, it has survived since 2003 through the respect of local street artists avoiding posting over it, although it has recently had paint tipped over it.\nNew Zealand.\nIn February 2008 Helen Clark, the New Zealand prime minister at that time, announced a government crackdown on tagging and other forms of graffiti vandalism, describing it as a destructive crime representing an invasion of public and private property. New legislation subsequently adopted included a ban on the sale of paint spray cans to persons under 18 and increases in maximum fines for the offence from NZ$200 to NZ$2,000 or extended community service. The issue of tagging become a widely debated one following an incident in Auckland during January 2008 in which a middle-aged property owner stabbed one of two teenage taggers to death and was subsequently convicted of manslaughter.\nUnited States.\nTracker databases.\nGraffiti databases have increased in the past decade because they allow vandalism incidents to be fully documented against an offender and help the police and prosecution charge and prosecute offenders for multiple counts of vandalism. They also provide law enforcement the ability to rapidly search for an offender's moniker or tag in a simple, effective, and comprehensive way. These systems can also help track costs of damage to a city to help allocate an anti-graffiti budget. The theory is that when an offender is caught putting up graffiti, they are not just charged with one count of vandalism; they can be held accountable for all the other damage for which they are responsible. This has two main benefits for law enforcement. One, it sends a signal to the offenders that their vandalism is being tracked. Two, a city can seek restitution from offenders for all the damage that they have committed, not merely a single incident. These systems give law enforcement personnel real-time, street-level intelligence that allows them not only to focus on the worst graffiti offenders and their damage, but also to monitor potential gang violence that is associated with the graffiti.\nGang injunctions.\nMany restrictions of civil gang injunctions are designed to help address and protect the physical environment and limit graffiti. Provisions of gang injunctions include things such as restricting the possession of marker pens, spray paint cans, or other sharp objects capable of defacing private or public property; spray painting, or marking with marker pens, scratching, applying stickers, or otherwise applying graffiti on any public or private property, including, but not limited to the street, alley, residences, block walls, and fences, vehicles or any other real or personal property. Some injunctions contain wording that restricts damaging or vandalizing both public and private property, including but not limited to any vehicle, light fixture, door, fence, wall, gate, window, building, street sign, utility box, telephone box, tree, or power pole.\nHotlines and reward programs.\nTo help address many of these issues, many local jurisdictions have set up graffiti abatement hotlines, where citizens can call in and report vandalism and have it removed. San Diego's hotline receives more than 5,000 calls per year, in addition to reporting the graffiti, callers can learn more about prevention. One of the complaints about these hotlines is the response time; there is often a lag time between a property owner calling about the graffiti and its removal. The length of delay should be a consideration for any jurisdiction planning on operating a hotline. Local jurisdictions must convince the callers that their complaint of vandalism will be a priority and cleaned off right away. If the jurisdiction does not have the resources to respond to complaints in a timely manner, the value of the hotline diminishes. Crews must be able to respond to individual service calls made to the graffiti hotline as well as focus on cleanup near schools, parks, and major intersections and transit routes to have the biggest impact. Some cities offer a reward for information leading to the arrest and prosecution of suspects for tagging or graffiti related vandalism. The amount of the reward is based on the information provided, and the action taken.\nSearch warrants.\nWhen police obtain search warrants in connection with a vandalism investigation, they are often seeking judicial approval to look for items such as cans of spray paint and nozzles from other kinds of aerosol sprays; etching tools, or other sharp or pointed objects, which could be used to etch or scratch glass and other hard surfaces; permanent marking pens, markers, or paint sticks; evidence of membership or affiliation with any gang or tagging crew; paraphernalia including any reference to \"(tagger's name)\"; any drawings, writing, objects, or graffiti depicting taggers' names, initials, logos, monikers, slogans, or any mention of tagging crew membership; and any newspaper clippings relating to graffiti crime.\nAccidents.\nCommon accidents that occur with graffiti include collisions with moving trains, people being electrocuted by overhead power lines and live third-rails, people falling from moving trains, collisions with cars alongside roads, falling from height and electric shocks from electricity transformers.\nOverhead power lines on railways are also able to create an electric arc and it has been commented that \"Importantly, electrocution may occur even in the absence of direct contact, as high voltage arcs can discharge through the air and cause devastating injuries.\" In 2013 Julius Gerhardt was spraying graffiti on freight carriages when they climbed on top of a carriage intending to tag a bridge. They were holding a spray can in their right hand, and an electric arc jumped over to the spray can and went through their hand, arm, and chest, then exited out of their right foot. They lost consciousness and were then lifted up and carried to a street by the people with them. They were in a coma in hospital for 36 hours, and then later put into a medically induced coma for a week. They received burns to over 90% of their body. The person commented that \"I didn't know about arcs. In the arc, like lightning, electricity is conducted through the air. I had the spray can in my right hand. When I raised my hand, the metal became an antenna. The air transmitted the voltage\u2014and I flew off the train car.\" It has further been commented that \"...it is quite possible that from a distance of one meter, a breakdown [electric arc] will occur on a wristwatch, a phone in a pocket or a belt buckle, that is, on any metal object.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11986", "revid": "28146993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11986", "title": "Godzilla", "text": "Fictional monster\n \n is a monster, or \"kaiju\", that debuted in the eponymous 1954 film, directed and co-written by Ishir\u014d Honda. The character has since become an international pop culture icon, appearing in various media: 33 Japanese films produced by Toho Co., Ltd., five American films, and numerous video games, novels, comic books, and television shows. Godzilla has been dubbed the King of the Monsters, an epithet first used in \"Godzilla, King of the Monsters!\" (1956), the American localization of the 1954 film.\nOriginally and in most iterations of the creature, Godzilla is a colossal prehistoric reptilian or dinosaurian monster that is amphibious or resides partially in the ocean, awakened and empowered after many years by exposure to nuclear radiation and nuclear testing. With the nuclear bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the \"Lucky Dragon 5\" incident still fresh in the Japanese consciousness, Godzilla was conceived as a metaphor for nuclear weapons. Others have suggested that Godzilla is a metaphor for the United States, a \"giant beast\" woken from its \"slumber\" that then takes terrible vengeance on Japan. As the film series expanded, some storylines took on less serious undertones, portraying Godzilla as an antihero or lesser threat who defends humanity. Later films address disparate themes and commentary, including Japan's apathy, neglect, and ignorance of its imperial past, natural disasters, and the human condition.\nGodzilla has been featured alongside many supporting characters and, over the decades, has faced off against various human opponents, such as the Japan Self-Defense Forces (JSDF), in addition to other gargantuan monsters, including Gigan, King Ghidorah, and Mechagodzilla. Godzilla has fought alongside allies such as Anguirus, Mothra, and Rodan and has had offsprings, including Godzilla Junior and Minilla. Godzilla has also battled characters and creatures from other franchises in crossover media\u2014such as King Kong\u2014as well as various Marvel Comics characters, like S.H.I.E.L.D., the Fantastic Four, and the Avengers, as well as DC Comics characters such as the Justice League, the Legion of Doom, and the Green Lantern Corps.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAppearances.\nFirst appearing in the 1954 film of the same name, Godzilla has starred in a total of 38 films: 33 Japanese films produced and distributed by Toho Co., Ltd. and five American films, one produced by TriStar Pictures and four produced by Legendary Pictures. The monster has also appeared in countless other entertainment mediums, which include comic book lines, novelizations, and video games; each appearance expands upon the universe created by the films.\nDevelopment.\nNaming.\nAlthough the process of creating Godzilla's first film is comprehensively recorded, exactly how its name came to be remains unclear. The most widely accepted report of its origin is that producer Tomoyuki Tanaka named the monster after Toho employee Shir\u014d Amikura, who was nicknamed then , a portmanteau of the Japanese words and , because of his sturdy build and his fondness for whale meat. The account has been acknowledged by Toho themselves, director Ishir\u014d Honda, producer Tanaka, special effects director Eiji Tsuburaya, producer Ichir\u014d Sat\u014d, and production head Iwao Mori, with Sat\u014d and Mori recalling that the employee was Amikura. However, Honda's widow Kimi dismissed the story in a 1998 BBC documentary on Godzilla, believing that Honda, Tanaka, and Tsuburaya gave \"considerable thought\" to the name of the monster, stating, \"the backstage boys at Toho loved to joke around with tall stories, but I don't believe that one\". Honda's longtime assistant director K\u014dji Kajita added: \"Those of us who were closest to them don't even know how and why they came up with \"Gojira\".\"\nToho later translated the monster's Japanese name as \"Godzilla\" for overseas distribution. The first recorded foreign usage of \"Godzilla\" was printed in the \"Hawaii Tribune-Herald\" on November 20, 1955.\nDuring the development of the American version of \"Godzilla Raids Again\" (1955), Godzilla's name was changed to \"Gigantis\" by producer Paul Schreibman, who wanted to create a character distinct from Godzilla.\nCharacterization.\nWithin the context of the Japanese films, Godzilla's exact origins vary, but it is generally depicted as an enormous, violent, prehistoric sea monster awakened and empowered by nuclear radiation. Although the specific details of Godzilla's appearance have varied slightly over the years, the overall impression has remained consistent. Inspired by the fictional \"Rhedosaurus\" created by animator Ray Harryhausen for the film \"The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms\", Godzilla's character design was conceived as that of an amphibious reptilian monster based around the loose concept of a dinosaur with an erect standing posture, scaly skin, an anthropomorphic torso with muscular arms, lobed bony plates along its back and tail, and a furrowed brow.\nArt director Akira Watanabe combined attributes of a \"Tyrannosaurus\", an \"Iguanodon\", a \"Stegosaurus\" and an alligator to form a sort of blended chimera, inspired by illustrations from an issue of \"Life\" magazine. To emphasize the monster's relationship with the atomic bomb, its skin texture was inspired by the keloid scars seen on the survivors of Hiroshima. The basic design has a reptilian visage, a robust build, an upright posture, a long tail and three rows of serrated plates along the back. In the original film, the plates were added for purely aesthetic purposes, in order to further differentiate Godzilla from any other living or extinct creature. Godzilla is sometimes depicted as green in comics, cartoons, and movie posters, but the costumes used in the movies were usually painted charcoal gray with bone-white dorsal plates up until the film \"Godzilla 2000: Millennium\".\nIn the original Japanese films, Godzilla and all the other monsters are referred to with gender-neutral pronouns equivalent to \"it\", while in the English dubbed versions, Godzilla is explicitly described as a male. In his book, Godzilla co-creator Tomoyuki Tanaka suggested that the monster was probably male; but also suggested that the original 1954 version could have been female. In the 1998 film \"Godzilla\", the monster is referred to as a male and is depicted laying eggs through parthenogenesis. In the Legendary Pictures \"Godzilla\" films, Godzilla is specified as a male.&lt;ref name=\"/Film Gender\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nFor the English translations for the \"Godzilla and Godzilla Raids Again\" novellas, writer Jeffrey Angles settled on male pronouns for Godzilla, stating that \"Kayama [writer of the original novellas] thought about Godzilla as a stand-in for the nuclear bomb, and it was men in America who were developing the hydrogen bombs that frightened Japan so much in 1954. So maybe it's perhaps not inappropriate to call Godzilla 'he'.\" Angles also noted that Toho prefers to keep Godzilla and their other \"kaiju\" characters as gender-neutral as they see them more as objects akin to natural disasters.\nGodzilla's allegiance and motivations, as well as its level of intelligence, have changed from film to film to suit the needs of the story. Although Godzilla does not like humans, it will fight alongside humanity against common threats. However, it makes no special effort to protect human life or property and will turn against its human allies on a whim. It is generally not motivated to attack by predatory instinct; it does not usually eat people and instead sustains itself on nuclear radiation and an omnivorous or piscivorian diet consisting especially of cetaceans and large fish. When inquired if Godzilla was \"good or bad\", producer Sh\u014dgo Tomiyama likened it to a Shinto \"God of Destruction\" which lacks moral agency and cannot be held to human standards of good and evil. \"He totally destroys everything and then there is a rebirth. Something new and fresh can begin.\" Tomoyuki Tanaka noted in his book that Godzilla and humanity can become temporary allies against greater threats, but they are essentially enemies due to the difficulty to co-exist. Later Showa film's heroic and child-friendly representations of the character distancing from fears and destructions were controversial among their own filmmakers, such as by Ishiro Honda and Yukiko Takayama; the latter described the period a \"sad era\" for Godzilla for its heroic deeds, lacks of city destructions, and insufficient budgets.\nAbilities.\nGodzilla's signature weapon is its \"atomic heat beam\" (also known as \"atomic breath\"), nuclear energy that it generates inside of its body, uses electromagnetic force to concentrate it into a laser-like high velocity projectile and unleashes it from its jaws in the form of a blue or red radioactive beam. Toho's special effects department has used various techniques to render the beam, from physical gas-powered flames to hand-drawn or computer-generated fire. Godzilla is shown to possess immense physical strength and muscularity. Haruo Nakajima, the actor who played Godzilla in the original films, was a black belt in judo and used his expertise to choreograph the battle sequences.\nGodzilla is amphibious: it has a preference for traversing Earth's hydrosphere when in hibernation or migration, can breathe underwater due to pore-shaped gills and is described in the original film by the character Dr. Yamane as a transitional form between a marine and a terrestrial reptile. Godzilla is shown to have great vitality: it is immune to conventional weaponry thanks to its rugged hide and ability to regenerate, and as a result of surviving a nuclear explosion, it cannot be destroyed by anything less powerful. One incarnation possesses an electromagnetic pulse-producing organ in its body which generates an asymmetrical permeable shield, making it impervious to all damage except for a short period when the organ recycles.\nVarious films, non-canonical television shows, comics, and games have depicted Godzilla with additional powers, such as an atomic pulse, magnetism, precognition, fireballs, convert electromagnetic energy into intensive body heat, converting shed blood into temporary tentacle limbs, an electric bite, superhuman speed, laser beams emitted from its eyes and even flight.\nRoar.\nGodzilla has a distinctive disyllabic roar (transcribed in several comics as \"Skreeeonk!\"), which was created by composer Akira Ifukube, who produced the sound by rubbing a pine tar-resin-coated glove along the string of a contrabass and then slowing down the playback. In the American version of \"Godzilla Raids Again\" (1955) titled \"Gigantis the Fire Monster\" (1959), Godzilla's roar was mostly substituted with that of the monster Anguirus. From \"The Return of Godzilla\" (1984) to \"Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah\" (1991), Godzilla was given a deeper and more threatening-sounding roar than in previous films, though this change was reverted from \"Godzilla vs. Mothra\" (1992) onward. For the 2014 American film, sound editors Ethan Van der Ryn and Erik Aadahl refused to disclose the source of the sounds used for their Godzilla's roar. Aadahl described the two syllables of the roar as representing two different emotional reactions, with the first expressing fury and the second conveying the character's soul.\nSize.\nGodzilla's size is inconsistent, changing from film to film and even from scene to scene for the sake of artistic license. The miniature sets and costumes were typically built at a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204425\u2013&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204450 scale and filmed at 240 frames per second to create the illusion of great size. In the original 1954 film, Godzilla was scaled to be tall. This was done so Godzilla could just peer over the largest buildings in Tokyo at the time. In the 1956 American version, Godzilla is estimated to be tall, because producer Joseph E. Levine felt that 50 m did not sound \"powerful enough\".\nAs the series progressed, Toho would rescale the character, eventually making Godzilla as tall as . This was done so that it would not be dwarfed by the newer, bigger buildings in Tokyo's skyline, such as the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building which Godzilla destroyed in the film \"Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah\" (1991). Supplementary information, such as character profiles, would also depict Godzilla as weighing between .\nIn the American film \"Godzilla\" (2014) from Legendary Pictures, Godzilla was scaled to be and weighing , making it the largest film version at that time. Director Gareth Edwards wanted Godzilla \"to be so big as to be seen from anywhere in the city, but not too big that he couldn't be obscured\". For \"Shin Godzilla\" (2016), Godzilla was made even taller than the Legendary version, at . In ' (2017), Godzilla's height was increased further still to . In ' (2019) and \"Godzilla vs. Kong\" (2021), Godzilla's height was increased to from the 2014 incarnation.\nSpecial effects.\nGodzilla's appearance has traditionally been portrayed in the films by an actor wearing a latex costume, though the character has also been rendered in animatronic, stop-motion and computer-generated form. Taking inspiration from \"King Kong\", special effects artist Eiji Tsuburaya had initially wanted Godzilla to be portrayed via stop-motion, but prohibitive deadlines and a lack of experienced animators in Japan at the time made suitmation more practical.\nPractical effects.\nThe first suit, weighing in excess of , consisted of a body cavity made of thin wires and bamboo wrapped in chicken wire for support and covered in fabric and cushions, which were then coated in latex. It was held together by small hooks on the back, though subsequent Godzilla suits incorporated a zipper. Prior to 1984, most Godzilla suits were made from scratch, thus resulting in slight design changes in each film appearance. The most notable changes from 1962 to 1975 were the reduction in Godzilla's number of toes and the removal of the character's external ears and prominent fangs, features which would all later be reincorporated in the Godzilla designs from \"The Return of Godzilla\" (1984) onward. The most consistent Godzilla design was maintained from \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\" (1989) to \"Godzilla vs. Destoroyah\" (1995), when the suit was given a cat-like face and double rows of teeth.\nSeveral suit actors had difficulties in performing as Godzilla due to the suits' weight, lack of ventilation and diminished visibility. Haruo Nakajima, who portrayed Godzilla from 1954 to 1972, said the materials used to make the 1954 suit (rubber, plastic, cotton, and latex) were hard to find after World War II. The suit weighed 100 kilograms after its completion and required two men to help Nakajima put it on. When he first put it on, he sweated so heavily that his shirt was soaked within seconds. Kenpachiro Satsuma in particular, who portrayed Godzilla from 1984 to 1995, described how the Godzilla suits he wore were even heavier and hotter than their predecessors because of the incorporation of animatronics. Satsuma himself suffered numerous medical issues during his tenure, including oxygen deprivation, near-drowning, concussions, electric shocks and lacerations to the legs from the suits' steel wire reinforcements wearing through the rubber padding. The ventilation problem was partially solved in the suit used in 1994's \"Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla\", which was the first to include an air duct that allowed suit actors to last longer during performances. In \"Godzilla\" (1998), several scenes had the monster portrayed by stuntmen in suits similar to those used in the Toho films, with the actors' heads being located in the monster's neck region and the facial movements controlled via animatronics. However, because of the creature's horizontal posture, the stuntmen had to wear metal leg extenders, which allowed them to stand off the ground with their feet bent forward. Kurt Carley performed the suitmation sequences for the adult Godzilla.\nIn \"The Return of Godzilla\" (1984), some scenes made use of a 16-foot high robotic Godzilla (dubbed the \"Cybot Godzilla\") for use in close-up shots of the creature's head. The Cybot Godzilla consisted of a hydraulically powered mechanical endoskeleton covered in urethane skin containing 3,000 computer operated parts which permitted it to tilt its head and move its lips and arms. For \"Godzilla\" (1998), the film's special effects crew built a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20446 scale animatronic Godzilla for close-up scenes, whose size outmatched that of Stan Winston's \"Rexy\" in \"Jurassic Park\".\nCGI.\nIn \"Godzilla\" (1998), special effects artist Patrick Tatopoulos was instructed to redesign Godzilla as an incredibly fast runner. At one point, it was planned to use motion capture from a human to create the movements of the computer-generated Godzilla, but it was said to have ended up looking too much like a man in a suit. Tatopoulos subsequently reimagined the creature as a lean, digitigrade bipedal, iguana-like creature that stood with its back and tail parallel to the ground, rendered via CGI.\nIn \"Godzilla\" (2014), the character was portrayed entirely via CGI. Godzilla's design in the reboot was intended to stay true to that of the original series, though the film's special effects team strove to make the monster \"more dynamic than a guy in a big rubber suit.\" To create a CG version of Godzilla, the Moving Picture Company (MPC) studied various animals such as bears, Komodo dragons, lizards, lions and wolves, which helped the visual effects artists visualize Godzilla's body structure, like that of its underlying bone, fat and muscle structure, as well as the thickness and texture of its scales. Motion capture was also used for some of Godzilla's movements. T. J. Storm provided the performance capture for Godzilla by wearing sensors in front of a green screen. Storm reprised the role of Godzilla in \"\", portraying the character through performance capture.\nIn \"Shin Godzilla\", a majority of the character was portrayed via CGI, with Mansai Nomura portraying Godzilla through motion capture. In 2024, \"Godzilla Minus One\" was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects, becoming the first \"Godzilla\" film nominated for an Oscar. At the 96th Academy Awards ceremony, it won the award.\nCultural impact.\nGodzilla is one of the most recognizable symbols of Japanese popular culture worldwide and remains an important facet of Japanese films, embodying the \"kaiju\" subset of the \"tokusatsu\" genre. Godzilla's vaguely humanoid appearance and strained, lumbering movements endeared it to Japanese audiences, who could relate to Godzilla as a sympathetic character, despite its wrathful nature. Audiences respond positively to the character because it acts out of rage and self-preservation and shows where science and technology can go wrong.\nIn 1967, the Keukdong Entertainment Company of South Korea, with production assistance from Toei Company, produced \"Yongary, Monster from the Deep\", a reptilian monster who invades South Korea to consume oil. The film and character has often been branded as an imitation of Godzilla.\nGodzilla has been considered a filmographic metaphor for the United States, as well as an allegory of nuclear weapons in general. The earlier \"Godzilla\" films, especially the original, portrayed Godzilla as a frightening nuclear-spawned monster. Godzilla represented the fears that many Japanese held about the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the possibility of recurrence.\nAs the series progressed, so did Godzilla, changing into a less destructive and more heroic character. \"Ghidorah\" (1964) was the turning point in Godzilla's transformation from villain to hero, by pitting him against a greater threat to humanity, King Ghidorah. Godzilla has since been viewed as an anti-hero. Roger Ebert cited Godzilla as a notable example of a villain-turned-hero, along with King Kong, Jaws (\"James Bond\"), the Terminator and John Rambo.\nGodzilla is considered \"the original radioactive superhero\" due to his accidental radioactive origin story predating Spider-Man (1962 debut), though Godzilla did not become a hero until \"Ghidorah\" in 1964. By the 1970s, Godzilla came to be viewed as a superhero, with the magazine \"King of the Monsters\" in 1977 describing Godzilla as \"Superhero of the '70s.\" Godzilla had surpassed Superman and Batman to become \"the most universally popular superhero of 1977\" according to Donald F. Glut. Godzilla was also voted the most popular movie monster in \"The Monster Times\" poll in 1973, beating Count Dracula, King Kong, the Wolf Man, the Mummy, the Creature from the Black Lagoon and the Frankenstein Monster.\nIn 1996, Godzilla received the MTV Lifetime Achievement Award, as well as being given a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2004 to celebrate the premiere of the character's 50th anniversary film, \"\". Godzilla's pop-cultural impact has led to the creation of numerous parodies and tributes, as seen in media such as \"Bambi Meets Godzilla\", which was ranked as one of the \"50 greatest cartoons\", two episodes of \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\" and the song \"Godzilla\" by Blue \u00d6yster Cult. Godzilla has also been used in advertisements, such as in a commercial for Nike, where Godzilla lost an oversized one-on-one game of basketball to a giant version of NBA player Charles Barkley. The commercial was subsequently adapted into a comic book illustrated by Jeff Butler. Godzilla has also appeared in a commercial for Snickers candy bars, which served as an indirect promo for the 2014 film. Godzilla's success inspired the creation of numerous other monster characters, such as Gamera, Reptilicus of Denmark, Yonggary of South Korea, Pulgasari of North Korea, Gorgo of the United Kingdom and the \"Cloverfield\" monster of the United States.\n\"Dakosaurus\" is an extinct sea crocodile of the Jurassic Period, which researchers informally nicknamed \"Godzilla\". Paleontologists have written tongue-in-cheek speculative articles about Godzilla's biology, with Kenneth Carpenter tentatively classifying it as a ceratosaur based on its skull shape, four-fingered hands, and dorsal scutes and paleontologist Darren Naish expressing skepticism, while commenting on Godzilla's unusual morphology.\nGodzilla's ubiquity in pop culture has led to the mistaken assumption that the character is in the public domain, resulting in litigation by Toho to protect their corporate asset from becoming a generic trademark. In April 2008, Subway depicted a giant monster in a commercial for their Five Dollar Footlongs sandwich promotion. Toho filed a lawsuit against Subway for using the character without permission, demanding $150,000 in compensation. In February 2011, Toho sued Honda for depicting a fire-breathing monster in a commercial for the Honda Odyssey. The monster was never mentioned by name, being seen briefly on a video screen inside the minivan. The Sea Shepherd Conservation Society christened a vessel the \"MV Gojira\". Its purpose is to target and harass Japanese whalers in defense of whales in the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary. The \"MV Gojira\" was renamed the in May 2011, due to legal pressure from Toho. Gojira is the name of a French death metal band, formerly known as Godzilla; legal problems forced the band to change their name. In May 2015, Toho launched a lawsuit against Voltage Pictures over a planned picture starring Anne Hathaway. Promotional material released at the Cannes Film Festival used images of Godzilla.\nSteven Spielberg cited \"Godzilla\" as an inspiration for \"Jurassic Park\" (1993), specifically \"Godzilla, King of the Monsters!\" (1956), which he grew up watching. Spielberg described \"Godzilla\" as \"the most masterful of all the dinosaur movies because it made you believe it was really happening.\" \"Godzilla\" also influenced the Spielberg film \"Jaws\" (1975). \"Godzilla\" has also been cited as an inspiration by filmmakers Martin Scorsese and Tim Burton.\nA carnivorous dinosaur from the Triassic period was named \"Gojirasaurus\" in 1997\".\" The main-belt asteroid 101781 Gojira, discovered by American astronomer Roy Tucker at the Goodricke-Pigott Observatory in 1999, was named in honor of the creature. The official naming citation was published by the Minor Planet Center on July 11, 2018 (M.P.C. 110635). The largest megamullion, located 600 kilometers to the south-east of Okinotorishima, the southernmost Japanese island, is named the Godzilla Megamullion. The Japan Coast Guard played a role in name, reaching an agreement with Toho. Toho's Chief Godzilla officer Keiji Ota stated that \"I am truly honored that (the megamullion) bears Godzilla's name, the Earth's most powerful monster.\"\nIn a 2007 interview, Japanese defense minister Shigeru Ishiba said that he would mobilize the Japan Self-Defense Forces in response to an appearance by Godzilla.\nCultural ambassador.\nIn April 2015, the Shinjuku ward of Tokyo named Godzilla a special resident and official tourism ambassador to encourage tourism. During an unveiling of a giant Godzilla bust at Toho headquarters, Shinjuku mayor Kenichi Yoshizumi stated, \"Godzilla is a character that is the pride of Japan.\" The mayor extended a residency certificate to an actor in a rubber suit representing Godzilla, but as the suit's hands were not designed for grasping, it was accepted on Godzilla's behalf by a Toho executive. Reporters noted that Shinjuku's ward has been flattened by Godzilla in three Toho movies.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11987", "revid": "48547537", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11987", "title": "Gigantis the Fire Monster", "text": ""}
{"id": "11988", "revid": "2142701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11988", "title": "King Kong vs. Godzilla", "text": "1962 film directed by Ishir\u014d Honda\n is a 1962 Japanese \"kaiju\" film directed by Ishir\u014d Honda, with special effects by Eiji Tsuburaya. Produced and distributed by Toho Co., Ltd, it is the third film in both the \"Godzilla\" and \"King Kong\" franchises, as well as the first Toho-produced film featuring King Kong. It is also the first time that each character appeared on film in color and widescreen. The film stars Shoichi Hirose as King Kong and Haruo Nakajima as Godzilla with Shoichi Hirose, Tadao Takashima, Kenji Sahara, Y\u016b Fujiki, Ichir\u014d Arishima, and Mie Hama playing other prominent roles. In the film, Godzilla is reawakened by an American submarine and a pharmaceutical company captures King Kong for promotional uses, culminating in a battle on Mount Fuji.\nThe project began with a story outline devised by \"King Kong\" stop motion animator Willis O'Brien around 1960, in which Kong battles a giant Frankenstein's monster; O'Brien gave the outline to producer John Beck for development. Behind O'Brien's back and without his knowledge, Beck gave the project to Toho to produce the film, replacing the giant Frankenstein's monster with Godzilla and scrapping O'Brien's original story.\n\"King Kong vs. Godzilla\" was released theatrically in Japan on August 11, 1962, and grossed \u00a5, making it the second-highest-grossing Japanese film in history upon its release. The film remains the most attended \"Godzilla\" film in Japan to date, and is credited with encouraging Toho to prioritize the continuation of the \"Godzilla\" series after seven years of dormancy. A heavily re-edited \"Americanized\" version of the film was released theatrically in the United States by Universal International Inc. on June 26, 1963 as Universal's first \"King Kong\" film, the second being \"King Kong Escapes\" on June 19, 1968, and the third being the second remake of the 1933 film on December 14, 2005.\nThe film was followed by \"Mothra vs. Godzilla\", released on April 29, 1964.\nPlot.\nMr. Tako, head of Pacific Pharmaceuticals, is frustrated with the television shows his company is sponsoring and wants something to boost his ratings. When a doctor tells Tako about a giant monster he discovered on the small Faro Island, Tako believes that it would be a brilliant idea to use the monster to gain publicity. Tako sends two men, Osamu Sakurai and Kinsaburo Furue, to find and bring back the monster. Meanwhile, the American nuclear submarine \"Seahawk\" gets caught in an iceberg. The iceberg collapses, unleashing Godzilla, who had been trapped within it since 1955. Godzilla destroys the submarine and makes its way towards Japan, attacking a military base as it journeys southward.\nOn Faro Island, a gigantic octopus crawls ashore and attacks the native village in search of Farolacton juice, taken from a species of red berry native to the island. The mysterious Faro monster, revealed to be King Kong, arrives and defeats the octopus. Kong drinks several vases full of the juice while the islanders perform a ceremony, which causes him to fall asleep. Sakurai and Furue place Kong on a large raft and begin to transport him back to Japan. Mr. Tako arrives on the ship transporting Kong, but a JSDF ship stops them and orders that Kong must be kept out of Japan. Meanwhile, Godzilla arrives in Japan and terrorizes the countryside. Kong wakes up and breaks free from the raft. Reaching the mainland, Kong confronts Godzilla and proceeds to throw giant rocks at him. Godzilla is not fazed by King Kong's rock attack and uses its heat ray to burn him. Kong retreats after realizing that he is not yet ready to take on Godzilla.\nThe JSDF digs a large pit laden with explosives and poison gas and lures Godzilla into it, but Godzilla is unharmed. They next string up a barrier of power lines around the city filled with 1,000,000 volts of electricity, which proves effective against Godzilla. Kong approaches Tokyo and tears through the power lines, feeding off the electricity, which seems to make Kong stronger. Kong then enters Tokyo and captures Fumiko, Sakurai's sister, taking her to the National Diet Building which he then scales. The JSDF launches capsules full of vaporised Farolacton juice, which puts Kong to sleep, and rescue Fumiko. The JSDF decides to transport Kong via balloons to Godzilla, in hopes that they will kill each other.\nThe next morning, Kong is deployed by helicopters next to Godzilla at the summit of Mount Fuji and the two engage in battle. Godzilla initially has the advantage, dazing Kong with a devastating dropkick and repeated tail blows to his head. Godzilla attempts to burn Kong to death by using its atomic breath to set fire to the foliage around Kong's body. A bolt of lightning from thunder clouds strikes Kong, reviving him and charging him up, and the battle resumes. Godzilla and King Kong fight their way down the mountain and into Atami, where the two monsters destroy Atami Castle while trading blows, before falling off a cliff together into Sagami Bay. After a brief underwater battle, only Kong resurfaces from the water, and he swims back toward his home island. There is no sign of Godzilla, but the JSDF speculates that it may have survived.\nCast.\nJapanese version.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Shoichi Hirose as King Kong\nAmerican version.\nCast taken from \"Japan's Favorite Mon-Star\", except where cited otherwise.\nProduction.\nCrew.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAmerican version.\nPersonnel taken from \"Japan's Favorite Mon-Star\".\nConception.\n\"King Kong vs. Godzilla\" had its roots in an earlier concept for a new \"King Kong\" feature developed by Willis O'Brien, animator of the original stop-motion Kong. Around 1960, O'Brien came up with a proposed treatment, \"King Kong Meets Frankenstein\", where Kong would fight against a giant Frankenstein's monster in San Francisco. O'Brien took the project (which consisted of some concept art and a screenplay treatment) to RKO to secure permission to use the King Kong character. During this time, the story was renamed \"King Kong vs. the Ginko\" when it was believed that Universal had the rights to the Frankenstein name. O'Brien was introduced to producer John Beck, who promised to find a studio to make the film (at this point, RKO was no longer a production company). Beck took the story treatment and hired George Worthing Yates to write the screenplay for the film. The story was slightly altered and the title changed to \"King Kong vs. Prometheus\", returning the name to the original Frankenstein concept (\"The Modern Prometheus\" is the subtitle to the original novel).\nThe November 2, 1960 issue of \"Variety\" reported that Beck had even asked a filmmaker named Jerry Guran (a possible misspelling of filmmaker Nathan Juran's pseudonym Jerry Juran) to direct the film. However, the cost of stop-motion animation discouraged potential studios from putting the film into production. After shopping the script around overseas, Beck eventually attracted the interest of the Japanese studio Toho, which had long wanted to make a \"King Kong\" film. After purchasing the script, they decided to replace the giant Frankenstein's monster with Godzilla to be King Kong's opponent and would have Shinichi Sekizawa rewrite Yates' script. The studio thought that it would be the perfect way to celebrate its 30th year in production. It was one of five big banner releases for the company to celebrate the anniversary alongside \"Sanjuro\", \"\", \"Lonely Lane\", and \"Born in Sin\".\nJohn Beck's dealings with Willis O'Brien's project were done behind his back, and O'Brien was never credited for his idea. O'Brien attempted to sue Beck, but lacked the money to do so, and on November 8, 1962, he died in his home in Los Angeles at the age of 76. O'Brien's wife Darlyne later cited \"the frustration of the \"King Kong vs. Frankenstein\" deal\" as the cause of his death. Merian C. Cooper, the producer and Co-Director of the 1933 \"King Kong\" film, was bitterly opposed to the project, stating in a letter addressed to his friend Douglas Burden, \"I was indignant when some Japanese company made a belittling thing, to a creative mind, called \"King Kong vs. Godzilla\". I believe they even stooped so low as to use a man in a gorilla suit, which I have spoken out against so often in the early days of \"King Kong\"\".\nIn 1963, he filed a lawsuit to enjoin distribution of the movie against John Beck, as well as Toho and Universal (the film's U.S. copyright holder) claiming that he outright owned the King Kong character, but the lawsuit never went through, as it turned out he was not Kong's sole legal owner as he had previously believed.\nThemes.\nDirector Ishir\u014d Honda wanted the theme of the movie to be a satire of the television industry in Japan. In April 1962, TV networks and their various sponsors started producing outrageous programming and publicity stunts to grab audiences' attention after two elderly viewers reportedly died at home while watching a violent wrestling match on TV.\nThe various rating wars between the networks and banal programming that followed this event caused widespread debate over how TV would affect Japanese culture with S\u014dichi \u014cya stating TV was creating \"a nation of 100 million idiots\". Honda stated \"People were making a big deal out of ratings, but my own view of TV shows was that they did not take the viewer seriously, that they took the audience for granted...so I decided to show that through my movie\" and \"the reason I showed the monster battle through the prism of a ratings war was to depict the reality of the times\".\nHonda addressed this by having a pharmaceutical company sponsor a TV show and going to extremes for a publicity stunt for ratings by capturing a giant monster stating \"All a medicine company would have to do is just produce good medicines you know? But the company doesn't think that way. They think they will get ahead of their competitors if they use a monster to promote their product.\" Honda would work with screenwriter Shinichi Sekizawa on developing the story stating that \"Back then Sekizawa was working on pop songs and TV shows so he really had a clear insight into television\". Sekizawa remembered the excitement about the project stating \"I remember thinking, \"I might get to write about that guy who climbed the Empire State Building\".\"\nFilming.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe excitement about making a King Kong movie in Japan was much greater than making a new Godzilla film.\n \u2013 Special Effects crew member Koichi Kawakita.\nSpecial effects director Eiji Tsuburaya was planning on working on other projects at this point in time such as a new version of a fairy tale film script called \"Princess Kaguya\", but he postponed those to work on this project with Toho instead since he was such a huge fan of King Kong. He stated in an early 1960s interview with the Mainichi Newspaper, \"But my movie company has produced a very interesting script that combined King Kong and Godzilla, so I couldn't help working on this instead of my other fantasy films. The script is special to me; it makes me emotional because it was \"King Kong\" that got me interested in the world of special photographic techniques when I saw it in 1933.\"\nEarly drafts of the script were sent back with notes from the studio asking that the monster antics be made as \"funny as possible\". This comical approach was embraced by Tsuburaya, who wanted to appeal to children's sensibilities and broaden the genre's audience. Much of the monster battle was filmed to contain a great deal of humor but the approach was not favoured by most of the effects crew, who \"couldn't believe\" some of the things Tsuburaya asked them to do, such as Kong and Godzilla volleying a giant boulder back and forth. With the exception of the next film, \"Mothra vs. Godzilla\", this film began the trend to portray Godzilla and the monsters with more and more anthropomorphism as the series progressed, to appeal more to younger children. Ishir\u014d Honda was not a fan of the dumbing down of the monsters. Years later, Honda stated in an interview. \"I don't think a monster should ever be a comical character,\" and \"The public is more entertained when the great King Kong strikes fear into the hearts of the little characters.\" Honda also believed that if Godzilla acted like a human, it showed off the fact that it was a man in a suit. The decision was also taken to shoot the film in a (2.35:1) scope ratio (TohoScope) and to film in color (Eastman Color), marking both monsters' first widescreen and color portrayals.\nToho originally planned to shoot the film on location in Sri Lanka, but abandoned the idea after being forced to pay RKO roughly \u00a5 ($220,000) for the rights to the King Kong character, which forced the company to scale down their original production costs. The bulk of the film was shot on the Japanese island of Izu \u014cshima instead. The movie's production budget came out to \u00a5 ($).\nSuit actors Shoichi Hirose (as King Kong) and Haruo Nakajima (as Godzilla) were given mostly free rein by Tsuburaya to choreograph their own moves. The men would rehearse for hours and would base their moves on those of professional wrestling (a sport that was growing in popularity in Japan), in particular the moves of Toyonobori.\nDuring pre-production, Tsuburaya toyed with the idea of using Willis O'Brien's stop-motion technique instead of the suitmation process used in the first two \"Godzilla\" films, but budgetary concerns prevented him from using the process, and the more cost-efficient suitmation was used instead. However, some brief stop-motion was used in a couple of quick sequences. Two of these sequences were animated by Minoru Nakano.\nA brand new Godzilla suit was designed for this film and some slight alterations were done to its overall appearance. These alterations included the removal of its tiny ears, three toes on each foot rather than four, enlarged central dorsal fins, and a bulkier body. These new features gave Godzilla a more reptilian/dinosaurian appearance. Outside of the suit, a meter-high model and a small puppet were also built. Another puppet (from the waist up) was also designed that had a nozzle in the mouth to spray out liquid mist simulating Godzilla's atomic breath. However the shots in the film where this prop was employed (far away shots of Godzilla breathing its atomic breath during its attack on the Arctic Military base) were ultimately cut from the film. These cut scenes can be seen in the Japanese theatrical trailer. Finally, a separate prop of Godzilla's tail was also built for close-up practical shots when its tail would be used (such as the scene where Godzilla trips Kong with its tail). The tail prop would be swung offscreen by a stagehand.\nSadamasa Arikawa (who worked with Tsuburaya) said that the sculptors had a hard time coming up with a King Kong suit that appeased Tsuburaya. The first suit was rejected for being too fat with long legs giving Kong what the crew considered an almost cute look. A few other designs were done before Tsuburaya would approve the final look that was ultimately used in the film. The suit's body design was a team effort by brothers Koei Yagi and Kanji Yagi and was covered with expensive yak hair, which Eiz\u014d Kaimai hand-dyed brown.\nBecause RKO instructed that the face must be different from the original's design, sculptor Teiz\u014d Toshimitsu based Kong's face on the Japanese macaque rather than a gorilla, and designed two separate masks. As well, two separate pairs of arms were also created. One pair were extended arms operated by poles inside the suit to give Kong a gorilla-like illusion, while the other pair were at normal arms-length and featured gloves that were used for scenes that required Kong to grab items and wrestle with Godzilla. Suit actor Hirose was sewn into the suit in order to hide the zipper. This would force him to be trapped inside the suit for large amounts of time and would cause him much physical discomfort. In the scene where Kong drinks the berry juice and falls asleep, he was trapped in the suit for three hours. Besides the suit with the two separate arm attachments, a meter-high model and a puppet of Kong (used for closeups) were also built. As well, a huge prop of Kong's hand was built for the scene where he grabs Mie Hama (Fumiko) and carries her off.\nFor the attack of the giant octopus, four live octopuses were used. They were forced to move among the miniature huts by having hot air blown onto them. After the filming of that scene was finished, three of the four octopuses were released. The fourth became special effects director Tsuburaya's dinner. These sequences were filmed on a miniature set outdoors on the Miura Coast, According to assistant special effects cinematographer K\u014dichi Kawakita, the crew had difficulty getting the live octopuses to move. Along with the live animals, two rubber octopus puppets were built, with the larger one being covered with plastic wrap to simulate mucous. Some stop-motion tentacles were also created for the scene where the octopus grabs a native and tosses him. These sequences were shot indoors at Toho's studios.\nThe special effects crew filmed a sequence in which Godzilla rampages through Takasaki, Gunma Prefecture, and destroys the Takasaki Kannon Statue, but this scene was cut from the final film. Despite this scene being cut, Godzilla is still said to have passed through Takasaki in the film.\nSince King Kong was seen as the bigger draw and Godzilla was still considered a 'villain' at this point in the series, the decision was made to not only give King Kong top billing but also to present him as the winner of the climactic fight. While the ending of the film does look somewhat ambiguous, Toho confirmed that King Kong was indeed the winner in their 1962\u201363 English-language film program \"Toho Films Vol. 8\", which states in the film's plot synopsis, \"A spectacular duel is arranged on the summit of Mt. Fuji and King Kong is victorious. But after he has won...\" While producer Tomoyuki Tanaka stated in his 1983 and 1984 books, \"The Complete History of Toho Special Effects Movies\", and \"Definitive Edition Godzilla Introduction\" that he believed the battle ended in a draw, Toho still maintains that Kong was the victor on their global website in 2023.\nRelease.\nTheatrical.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt was such an entertaining film. The house was packed, you know? We could barely get a seat.\n\u2013 Filmmaker Masaaki Tezuka reminisces on watching the film in his childhood.\n\"King Kong vs. Godzilla\" was released in Japan by Toho on August 11, 1962, where it played alongside ' for two weeks, afterward, it was extended by one more week and screened alongside the anime film '. The film was re-released twice as part of the , a children's festival centered on marathon screenings of \"kaiju\" films and cartoons. The film was first heavily re-cut and screened at the festival on March 21, 1970, and again on March 19, 1977, to coincide with the Japanese release of the 1976 version of \"King Kong\". The 1970 Champion Festival version was edited by the film\u2019s director Ishir\u014d Honda, who shortened the runtime to just 74 minutes. In 1983, the film was screened across Japan alongside 9 other \"kaiju\" films as part of the \"Godzilla 1983 Revival Festival\". The festival's success became the catalyst for relaunching the \"Godzilla\" series with \"The Return of Godzilla\".\nIn North America, \"King Kong vs. Godzilla\" premiered in New York City on June 26, 1963. The film was also released in many international markets. In Germany, it was known as \"Die R\u00fcckkehr des King Kong\" (\"The Return of King Kong\") and in Italy as \"Il trionfo di King Kong\" (\"The Triumph of King Kong\").\nTo celebrate the film's 50th anniversary, Bay Area Film Events (BAFE) planned to screen the film at the Historic BAL Theatre in San Leandro, California, on June 16, 2012, as a double feature with \"\".\nAmerican version.\nWhen John Beck sold the \"King Kong vs Prometheus\" script to Toho (which became \"King Kong vs. Godzilla\"), he was given exclusive rights to produce a version of the film for release in non-Asian territories. He was able to line up a couple of potential distributors in Warner Bros. and Universal-International even before the film began production. Beck, accompanied by two Warner Bros. representatives, attended at least two private screenings of the film on the Toho Studios lot before it was released in Japan.\nJohn Beck enlisted the help of two Hollywood writers, Paul Mason and Bruce Howard, to write a new screenplay. After discussions with Beck, the two wrote the American version and worked with editor Peter Zinner to remove scenes, recut others, and change the sequence of several events. To give the film more of an American feel, Mason and Howard decided to insert new footage that would convey the impression that the film was actually a newscast. The television actor Michael Keith played newscaster Eric Carter, a United Nations reporter who spends much of the time commenting on the action from the U.N. Headquarters via an International Communications Satellite (ICS) broadcast. Harry Holcombe was cast as Dr. Arnold Johnson, the head of the Museum of Natural History in New York City, who tries to explain Godzilla's origin and his and Kong's motivations.\nBeck and his crew were able to obtain library music from a host of older films, including \"Creature from the Black Lagoon\" (1954). Cues from these scores were used to almost completely replace the original Japanese score by Akira Ifukube and give the film a more Western sound. They also obtained stock footage from the film \"The Mysterians\" from RKO (the film's U.S. copyright holder at the time) which was used not only to represent the ICS, but which was also utilized during the film's climax. Stock footage of a massive earthquake from \"The Mysterians\" was employed to make the earthquake caused by Kong and Godzilla's plummet into the ocean much more violent than the comparatively tame tremor seen in the Japanese version. This added footage features massive tidal waves, flooded valleys, and the ground splitting open swallowing up various huts.\nBeck spent roughly $12,000 making his English version and sold the film to Universal-International for roughly $200,000 on April 29, 1963. The film was released theatrically in the United States on June 26 of that year, as a double feature with \"The Traitors\".\nStarting in 1963, Toho's international sales booklets began advertising an English dub of \"King Kong vs. Godzilla\" alongside Toho-commissioned, unedited international dubs of movies such as \"Giant Monster Varan\" and \"The Last War\". By association, it is thought that this \"King Kong vs. Godzilla\" dub is an unedited English-language international version not known to have been released on home video.\nHome media.\nIn July 2014, the Japanese version was released for the first time on Blu-ray in Japan as part of Toho's plan to release the entire series on the Blu-ray format for Godzilla's 60th anniversary. Universal Pictures released the English-language version of the film on Blu-ray on April 1, 2014, along with \"King Kong Escapes\". The Blu-ray sold $738,063 in domestic video sales. In 2019, the Japanese and American versions were included in a Blu-ray box set released by The Criterion Collection, which included all 15 films from the franchise's Sh\u014dwa era. The 4K remaster of the Japanese version was released on Blu-ray and 4K Blu-ray in May 2021. The special features for the 2021 Blu-ray include one of the Toho Champion Festival reissues of the film, the film's theatrical trailer, and a still gallery.\nReception.\nBox office.\nIn Japan, this film has the highest box office attendance figures of all of the \"Godzilla\" films to date. It sold 11.2 million tickets during its initial theatrical run, accumulating \u00a5 ($972,000) in distribution rental earnings. The film became the second-highest-grossing Japanese-produced film in history upon its release and was the fourth-highest-grossing film released in Japan that year as well as Toho's second-biggest release. At an average 1962 Japanese ticket price, 11.2 million ticket sales were equivalent to estimated gross receipts of approximately \u00a5 ($). Haruo Nakajima recalled how he and Shoichi Hirose were given bonuses for their work stating, \"It was the one and only time that they gave us a bonus. The film was that big of a hit\".\nIncluding re-releases, the film accumulated a lifetime figure of 12.55 million tickets sold in Japan, with distribution rental earnings of \u00a5. The 1970 re-release sold 870,000 tickets, equivalent to estimated gross receipts of approximately \u00a5 ($). The 1977 re-release sold 480,000 tickets, equivalent to estimated gross receipts of approximately \u00a5 ($). This adds up to total estimated Japanese gross receipts of approximately \u00a5 ($). In the United States, the film grossed $2.7 million, accumulating a profit (via rentals) of $1.25 million. Overall, the film is estimated to have earned $ worldwide.\nCritical response.\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 21 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 5.1/10. Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 40 out of 100, based on 4 critics, indicating .\nThe reviews tended to evaluate the film as an exploitation or kiddie film. Some of the more positive reviews were from James Powers of \"The Hollywood Reporter\" who wrote \"A funny monster picture? That's what Universal has in \"\"King Kong Versus Godzilla\" [\"sic\"]\". Audiences which patronize this kind of picture will eat it up. It should be a big success via the multiple booking, exploitation route.\" While the review from \"Box Office\" stated \"Exploitation-minded exhibitors should have a field day with this Japanese import. While the story is preposterous and loaded with stilted dialogue...the special effects are unusual and merit considerable praise\". John Cutts of \"Films and Filming\" wrote \"Sublime stuff. Richly comic, briskly paced, oddly touching, and thoroughly irresistible. Outrageous of course, and deplorably acted and atrociously dubbed to boot. But what matters most is the sheer invention of its exemplary trick work.\"\nThe review from \"Variety\" stated \"To the list of this century's great preliminary bouts\u2014Dempsey-Firpo, Sullivan-Paar, Nixon-Kennedy, Paterson-Liston, Steve Reeves-Gordon Scott\u2014add the main event \"\"King Kong Versus Godzilla\" [\"sic\"]\". From the mysterious East comes the monstrosity to end all monstrosities, the epic clash between the 30-year-old, breast-beating, Hollywood-born-and-bred gorilla with the overactive pituitary and the seven-year-old, pea-brained, flame-throated, tail-wagging cross between a Stegosaurus and a Tyrannosaurus rex who fights out of Tokyo, Japan. Onward and upward with the arts\". While Eugene Archer of \"The New York Times\" said \"\"King Kong Versus Godzilla\" [\"sic\"] should be explicit enough title for anyone. Viewers who attend the ridiculous melodrama unveiled at neighborhood theaters should know exactly what to expect and get what they deserve. The one real surprise of this cheap reprise of earlier Hollywood and Japanese horror films is the ineptitude of its fakery. When the pair of prehistoric monsters finally get together for their battle royal, the effect is nothing more than a couple of dressed-up stuntmen throwing cardboard rocks at each other.\"\n\"Den of Geek\" ranked the film at number eight in their 2019 ranking of the Sh\u014dwa \"Godzilla\" films, writing that the film has a \"sturdy, surprisingly crafty story\" but calling Kong's design and appearance a \"major drawback.\" \"Variety\" listed it number sixteen on their 2021 ranking of every \"Godzilla\" film. \"Collider\" ranked the film number two on their Sh\u014dwa Godzilla list in 2022, describing the fight choreography as \"beautiful.\"\nPreservation.\nThe original Japanese version of \"King Kong vs. Godzilla\" is infamous for being one of the most poorly-preserved \"tokusatsu\" films. In 1970, director Ishir\u014d Honda prepared an edited version of the film for the , a children's matinee program that showcased edited re-releases of older \"kaiju\" films along with cartoons and then-new \"kaiju\" films. Honda cut 24 minutes from the film's original negative and, as a result, the highest quality source for the cut footage was lost. For years, all that was thought to remain of the uncut 1962 version was a faded, heavily damaged 16mm element from which rental prints were made. 1980s restorations for home video integrated the 16mm deleted scenes into the 35mm Champion cut, resulting in wildly inconsistent picture quality.\nOn July 14, 2016, a 4K restoration of a completely 35mm sourced version of the film aired on \"The Godzilla First Impact\", a series of 4K broadcasts of Godzilla films on the Nihon Eiga Senmon Channel.\nLegacy.\nDue to the great box office success of this film, Toho wanted to produce a sequel immediately. Shinichi Sekizawa was brought back to write the screenplay tentatively titled . Sekizawa revealed that Kong killed Godzilla during their underwater battle in Sagami Bay with a line of dialogue stating \"Godzilla, who sank and died in the waters off Atami\". As the story progressed, Godzilla's body is salvaged from the Ocean by a group of entrepreneurs who hope to display the remains at a planned resort. Meanwhile, King Kong is found in Africa where he had been protecting a baby (the sole survivor of a plane crash). After the baby is rescued by investigators, and is taken back to Japan, Kong follows the group and rampages through the country looking for the infant. Godzilla is then revived with hopes of driving off Kong. The story ends with both monsters plummeting into a volcano. The project was ultimately cancelled. A couple of years later, United Productions of America (UPA) and Toho conceived the idea to pit Godzilla against a giant Frankenstein's monster and commissioned Takeshi Kimura to write a screenplay titled \"Frankenstein vs. Godzilla\", with Jerry Sohl and Reuben Bercovitch writing the story and synopsis for the film. However, Toho would cancel this project as well and instead decided to match Mothra against Godzilla in \"Mothra vs. Godzilla\". This began a formula where \"kaiju\" from past Toho films would be added into the \"Godzilla\" franchise.\nToho was interested in producing a series around their version of King Kong but were refused by RKO. However, Toho would handle the character once more in 1967 to help Rankin/Bass co-produce their film \"King Kong Escapes\", which was loosely based on a cartoon series Rankin/Bass produced.\nHenry G. Saperstein was impressed with the giant octopus scene and requested a giant octopus to appear in \"Frankenstein Conquers the World\" and \"The War of the Gargantuas\". The giant octopus appeared in an alternate ending for \"Frankenstein Conquers the World\" that was intended for overseas markets, but went unused. As a result, the octopus instead appeared in the opening of \"The War of the Gargantuas\". The film's King Kong suit was recycled and altered to depict Goro in the second episode of \"Ultra Q\", and the suit's torso was later reused to portray King Kong in the water scenes of \"King Kong Escapes\".\nFilmmaker Shizuo Nakajima recreated several scenes from this film in his 1983 fan film \"Legendary Giant Beast Wolfman vs. Godzilla\", including the scenes where Godzilla emerges from an iceberg and attacks a train during his rampage on the Japanese mainland.\nIn 1990, Toho expressed interest in remaking the film as \"Godzilla vs. King Kong\". However, producer Tomoyuki Tanaka stated that obtaining the rights to King Kong proved difficult. Toho then considered producing \"Godzilla vs. Mechani-Kong\" but effects director Koichi Kawakita confirmed that obtaining the likeness of King Kong also proved difficult. Mechani-Kong was replaced by Mechagodzilla, and the project was developed into \"Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II\" in 1993.\nIn October 2015, Legendary Pictures announced plans for a King Kong vs Godzilla film of their own (unrelated to Toho's version), which was released in the United States on March 31, 2021, simultaneously in theaters and on HBO Max.\nDual ending myth.\nFor many years, a popular myth has persisted that in the Japanese version of the film, Godzilla emerges as the winner. The myth originated in the pages of \"Spacemen\" magazine, a 1960s sister magazine to the influential publication \"Famous Monsters of Filmland\". In an article about the film, it is incorrectly stated that there were two endings and \"If you see \"King Kong vs Godzilla\" in Japan, Hong Kong or some Oriental sector of the world, Godzilla wins!\" The article was reprinted in various issues of \"Famous Monsters of Filmland\" in the years following, such as in issues #51 and #114. This misinformation would be accepted as fact and persist for decades. For example, a question in the \"Genus III\" edition of the popular board game \"Trivial Pursuit\" asked, \"Who wins in the Japanese version of \"King Kong vs. Godzilla\"?\" and stated that the correct answer was \"Godzilla\". Various media have repeated this falsehood, including the \"Los Angeles Times\".\nThere are technically minor differences in the ending between both versions. For example, in the Japanese version, both Godzilla and King Kong's roars are heard during the film's fade to black while in the American version only Kong's roar is heard. However in both versions, the final shot of Kong swimming away alone is unchanged.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11989", "revid": "110322", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11989", "title": "Godzilla vs The Thing", "text": ""}
{"id": "11990", "revid": "11061", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11990", "title": "Ghidorah the Three Headed Monster", "text": ""}
{"id": "11991", "revid": "48617839", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11991", "title": "Monster Zero", "text": ""}
{"id": "11992", "revid": "26386571", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11992", "title": "Ebirah, Horror of the Deep", "text": "1966 film by Jun Fukuda\n is a 1966 Japanese \" kaiju\" film directed by Jun Fukuda and produced and distributed by Toho Co., Ltd. The film stars Akira Takarada, Kumi Mizuno, Akihiko Hirata and Eisei Amamoto, and features the fictional monster characters Godzilla, Mothra, and Ebirah. It is the seventh film in the \" Godzilla\" franchise, and features special effects by Sadamasa Arikawa, under the supervision of Eiji Tsuburaya. In the film, Godzilla and Ebirah are portrayed by Haruo Nakajima and Hiroshi Sekita, respectively.\nDuring its development, \"Ebirah, Horror of the Deep\" was intended to feature King Kong, but the character was replaced by Godzilla. The film was released to theaters in Japan on December 17, 1966, and was released directly to television in the United States under the title Godzilla vs. the Sea Monster in 1968 by Continental Distributing.\nThe film was followed by \"Son of Godzilla\", released on December 16, 1967.\nPlot.\nAfter Yata is lost at sea, his brother Ryota steals a yacht with his two friends and a bank robber. However, the crew runs afoul of Ebirah, a giant lobster-like creature, and washes ashore on Letchi Island. There, the Red Bamboo, a terrorist organization, manufactures heavy water for selling weapons of mass destruction and a yellow liquid that keeps Ebirah at bay, presumably controlling him. The Red Bamboo has enslaved natives from nearby Infant Island to create the yellow liquid, while the natives hope that Mothra will awaken in her winged, adult form and rescue them.\nIn their efforts to avoid capture, Ryota and his friends, aided by Daiyo, a native girl, come across Godzilla, who previously fought King Ghidorah and is now sleeping within a cliffside cavern. The group devises a plan to defeat the Red Bamboo and escape the island. In the process, they awaken Godzilla using a makeshift lightning rod. Godzilla fights Ebirah, but the huge crustacean escapes. Godzilla is then attacked by a giant condor and a squadron of Red Bamboo fighter jets. Using its atomic breath, Godzilla destroys the jets and kills the giant bird.\nRyota and his friends retrieve the missing Yata and free the enslaved natives as Godzilla begins to destroy the Red Bamboo's base of operations, smashing a tower that causes a countdown that will destroy the island in a nuclear explosion. Godzilla fights Ebirah and defeats it, ripping its claws off, and forcing it to retreat into the sea. The natives await for Mothra to carry them off in a large net. However, when she gets to the island, Mothra is challenged by Godzilla due to a previous confrontation. Mothra manages to repel Godzilla and save her people and the human heroes. Godzilla also escapes just before the bomb detonates and destroys the island.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Akira Takarada as Yoshimura\nProduction.\nWriting.\nBy 1966, Toho had their sights set on bringing back King Kong back to the silver screen. Their deal with RKO allowed them the use of King Kong for five years, an agreement that would be over in 1967. Why Toho waited so long to produce another Kong film is unknown. The planned movie, \"Operation Robinson Crusoe: King Kong vs. Ebirah\" (\u30ed\u30d3\u30f3\u30bd\u30f3\u00b7\u30af\u30eb\u30fc\u30bd\u30fc\u4f5c\u6226 \u30ad\u30f3\u30b0\u30b3\u30f3\u30b0\u5bfe\u30a8\u30d3\u30e9 \"Robinson Kur\u016bs\u014d Sakusen: Kingu Kongu tai Ebira\"), was to be a co-production with Rankin/Bass, who was about to debut their animated program, \"The King Kong Show\", in September of that same year. According to Toho Special Effects Movies Complete Works, Jun Fukuda was approached about an untitled US\u2013Japanese \"King Kong\" co-production on April 21, 1966. Even before that, in February 1966, Toho's senior staff member Makoto Fujimoto met with a movie theater owner in Kansai and revealed that the New Year's season would see the release of a new \"King Kong\" movie.\nThe concept was first pitched by Shinichi Sekizawa on July 13, 1966. However, Rankin-Bass was displeased that Toho was dead-set on Jun Fukuda directing the live-action and Eiji Tsuburaya's protege, Sadamasa Arikawa, directing special effects. Rankin-Bass was equally dead set on the creative team being Ishiro Honda and Eiji Tsuburaya. When Toho refused to budge and was unable to compromise, Rankin-Bass dropped out of the project. Toho liked the script so much that they decided to simply substitute Godzilla in place of Kong and release it as \"Godzilla, Ebirah, Mothra: Big Duel in the South Seas\" for their New Year's blockbuster. Rankin-Bass and Toho would settle their differences the next year and would begin work on \"King Kong Escapes\" (1967), which was based on the recent King Kong cartoon and would feature Honda at the director's helm.\nEven with the loss of one of the title characters, though, Toho continued with production on Sekizawa's screenplay. Little was done to tweak the script and Godzilla displays a Kong-inspired interest in Daiyo. It's even possible the electric shock to revive Kong was a nod to the ape's love of electricity in \"King Kong vs. Godzilla\".\nAccording to Teruyoshi Nakano, Godzilla was supposed to fight a giant octopus in this film. However, Nakano likely confused this film with an early version of \"All Monsters Attack\" (1969). Both Nakano and Fukuda acted as though they were unaware the film ever started out starring King Kong. Fukuda said, \"Godzilla was in the first draft of the script that I saw. I don't know what the earlier drafts were like.\" Fukuda further elaborated that making the film \"was like pouring two cups of water into one. I had to cut one sequence after another.\" What these cut scenes contained are unknown, but Godzilla's infamous helicopter spin of Ebirah, which exists only in publicity photos, was apparently planned for the film, as storyboards exist of the scene.\nFilming.\nThis is the first of two \"Godzilla\" films in which a Pacific island is the primary setting, rather than a location inside Japan. The second and final one is \"Son of Godzilla\" (1967).\nDirector Jun Fukuda\u00a0notes that producer Tomoyuki Tanaka\u00a0was not particularly active on this production, with the exception of being involved with the budget. The producer would, however, visit the set \"often\" to watch progress.\nDaiyo was originally to be played by Noriko Takahashi, from \"Frankenstein vs. Baragon\" (1965), but fell ill with appendicitis during production was replaced with Kumi Mizuno at the last second.\nAlthough\u00a0Eiji Tsuburaya\u00a0is credited as the special effects director, actual directorial duties were handed over to Teisho Arikawa, who at this stage had been promoted to Tsuburaya's first assistant director. Tsuburaya still had the final say on effects sequences but served more of a supervisor role on the production.\nWith a new special effects director in the seat, Toho tried to limit the effects budget. Sadamasa Arikawa lamented that Toho likely did this due to his inexperience and TV history, noting that \"Toho couldn't have made too many demands about the budget if Mr. Tsuburaya had been in charge\" and that he \"was also doing TV work then, so they must have figured I could produce the movie cheaply.\" To keep the budget down, Toho instructed Arikawa to avoid expensive composite shots as much as possible. Although the movie has minimal composite shots, it is not devoid of them as scenes such as Godzilla's foot composited near actress\u00a0Kumi Mizuno\u00a0or a sequence of Mothra composited as her followers rush toward her are some examples of these sequences that made it into the final film.\nJun Fukuda was not fond of the film. In an interview, he was quoted saying, \"Toho sent me a copy of the VHS tape edition of Godzilla vs The Sea Monsters when it was released. It was like opening up an old wound, I didn't watch the tape.\"\nMusic.\nDirector Jun Fukuda\u00a0selected Masaru Sato\u00a0to score his films to give it a \"different touch from Ishiro Honda's\", noting Sato's music was lighter than Akira Ifukube's. Producer Tomoyuki Tanaka\u00a0didn't agree with this decision but Fukuda won out in the end.\nSpecial effects.\nThe underwater sequences were filmed on an indoor soundstage where the Godzilla and Ebirah suits were filmed through the glass of a water-filled aquarium, with some scenes of the Godzilla suit shot separately underwater as well. Haruo Nakajima wore a wet suit under the Godzilla suit for every scene that required him to be in the water, which took a week to complete the water scenes, Nakajima stated, \"I worked overtime until about eight o'clock every day. I lived in the water! Generally, in the summer, everybody wants to go in the pool and play, but, when it comes to kaiju movies, it is totally different. Most of the scenes that they shoot in the water are not in the summer, but in the winter. In the middle of winter, shooting started at nine in the morning, going until noon, and then we'd take an hour off. But we'd go from 1:00 P.M. until around 5:00 at night. I needed to stay in the water all day in the suit, and shooting took a week.\"\nThe Side Monsters that featured in this film were largely dictated by suits and props that were still available from previous films. For example, the Mothra was the same prop seen in Ghidorah, the Three-Headed Monster and the giant condor was a repurposed Rodan prop used in flying scenes. Other places where the low budget of the movie can be seen is in the island setting which was picked, as islands are much cheaper to make miniatures of compared to cities. This island trend carries on in other movies such as Son of Godzilla.\nRelease.\nTheatrical.\n\"Ebirah, Horror of the Deep\" was released theatrically in Japan on December 17, 1966 where it was distributed by Toho.\nThe American version of the film was released directly to television by Continental Distributing in 1968 under the title \"Godzilla versus the Sea Monster\". The film may have received theatrical distribution in the United States as a Walter Reade Jr. Presentation, but this has not been confirmed. It was also featured on \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\" as the last episode for the second season.\nHome media.\nThe film was released on DVD on February 8, 2005, by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment. The film was released on Blu-ray on May 6, 2014, by Kraken Releasing. In 2019, the Japanese version was included in a Blu-ray box set released by the Criterion Collection, which included all 15 films from the franchise's Sh\u014dwa era.\nThere are two English versions. The first one was dubbed in the 1960s by a company called Titra and featured Hal Linden. He was the voice dub for the character, Yoshimura or \u201cYoshi,\u201d who was played onscreen by Akira Takarada. The first English version was featured on VHS releases. The second one was dubbed with extra scenes and dialogue for DVD and Blu-ray releases. The Titra version did not use the entire movie for dubbing.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11993", "revid": "22404104", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11993", "title": "Son of Godzilla", "text": "1967 film by Jun Fukuda\n is a 1967 Japanese \"kaiju\" film directed by Jun Fukuda, with special effects by Sadamasa Arikawa, under the supervision of Eiji Tsuburaya. Produced and distributed by Toho Co., Ltd, it is the eighth film in the \"Godzilla\" franchise. It stars Tadao Takashima, Akira Kubo, Akihiko Hirata, and Beverly Maeda, with Hiroshi Sekita, Seiji Onaka, and Haruo Nakajima as Godzilla, and Marchan the Dwarf as Minilla.\n\"Son of Godzilla\" received a theatrical release in Japan on December 16, 1967, it received mixed reactions from critics and audience. It was released directly to television in the United States in 1969 through the Walter Reade Organization.\nThe film was followed by \"Destroy All Monsters\", released on August 1, 1968.\nPlot.\nA team of scientists are trying to perfect a weather-controlling system. Their efforts are hampered by the arrival of a nosy reporter and by the sudden presence of giant mantises. A reporter, Maki Goro, arrives on the island to find the scientists somewhat stir-crazy from the events, and is allowed to stay as a maintenance worker. Whilst there he also glimpses a mysterious woman the scientists were unaware of, apparently living in the jungle. The first test of the weather control system goes awry when the remote control for a radioactive balloon is jammed by an unexplained signal coming from the center of the island. Eventually finding the woman, Saeko Matsumiya, she is revealed to be the daughter of a previous researcher on the island who warned about a gigantic species of spider. The balloon detonates prematurely, creating a radioactive storm that causes the giant mantises to grow to enormous sizes. Investigating the mantises, which are named Kamacuras (Gimantis in the English-dubbed version), the scientists find the monstrous insects digging an egg out from under a pile of earth.\nThe egg hatches, revealing a baby Godzilla. The scientists realize that the baby's telepathic cries for help were the cause of the interference that ruined their experiment. Shortly afterwards, Godzilla arrives on the island in response to the infant's cries, demolishing the scientists' base while rushing to defend the baby. Godzilla kills two of the Kamacuras during the battle while one manages to fly away to safety. Saeko introduces herself to and bonds with the baby kaiju, feeding him a mango. Godzilla then returns and adopts the baby as his son.\nThe baby Godzilla, named Minilla, quickly grows to about half the size of the adult Godzilla, and Godzilla begins instructing him on the important monster skills of roaring and using the atomic ray, as Maki and Saeko observe them. At first, Minilla has difficulty producing anything more than atomic smoke rings, but Godzilla discovers that stressful conditions (i.e. stomping on his tail) or motivation produces a true radioactive blast. Minilla comes to the aid of Saeko when she is attacked by a Kamacuras, but inadvertently awakens Kumonga (Spiga in the English-dubbed version), a giant spider that was sleeping in a valley which Saeko's father witnessed roaming on the island before. Kumonga attacks Saeko's cave where the scientists are hiding and Minilla stumbles into the fray.\nKumonga traps Minilla and the final Kamacuras with its webbing, but as Kumonga begins to feed on the deceased Kamacuras, Godzilla arrives. Godzilla saves Minilla and they work together to defeat Kumonga by using their atomic rays on the giant spider. Hoping to keep the monsters from interfering in their attempt to escape the island, the scientists finally use their perfected weather altering device on the island and the once tropical island becomes buried in snow and ice. As the scientists are saved by an American submarine, Godzilla and Minilla embrace and begin to hibernate as they wait for the island to become tropical again.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Akira Kubo as Maki Goro\nProduction.\nWriting.\nFor the second \"Godzilla\" film in a row, Toho produced an island themed adventure with a smaller budget than most of their monster films from this time period. While the a-list crew of talent was hired to work on that year's \"King Kong Escapes\", (Ishir\u014d Honda, Eiji Tsuburaya, and Akira Ifukube), the second string crew of cheaper talent was once again tapped to work on this project as they had done with \"Ebirah, Horror of the Deep\". This included Jun Fukuda (director), Sadamasa Arikawa (special effects), and Masaru Sato (composer). This was the first film where Arikawa was officially listed as the director of Special Effects, although he did receive some supervision from Tsuburaya when he was available.\nThe early draft of the film, done by Kazue Shiba, titled Two Godzilla's: Japan S.O.S. (2\u3064\u306e\u30b4\u30b8\u30e9\uff1a\u65e5\u672cS.O.S.!, Gojira: Tsu no Nihon S.O.S.!). The overall plot is the same but Kumonga and the Kamacuras are not in the story.\nFilming.\nFilming took place in Guam and areas in Japan including Gotemba, Lake Yamana, the Fuji Five Lakes region, and Oshima.\nToho wanted to create a baby Godzilla to appeal to the \"date crowd\" (a genre of films that were very popular among young couples during this time period), with the idea that girls would like a \"cute\" baby monster. For the idea behind Minilla, Fukuda stated, \"We wanted to take a new approach, so we gave Godzilla a child. We thought it would be a little strange if we gave Godzilla a daughter, so instead we gave him a son\". Fukuda also wanted to portray the monsters almost as people in regards to the father-son relationship between Godzilla and Minilla, as Fukuda stated \"We focused on the relationship between Godzilla and his son throughout the course of \"Son of Godzilla\".\nAt the time, Sekizawa was already tired of writing the series and likely complained that he had run out of ideas for further monster movies, and director Jun Fukuda\u00a0heartily agreed. Producer Tomoyuki Tanaka\u00a0then proposed the idea of introducing a son to Godzilla.\nThe budget for the film was 260,000,000 yen. When\u00a0Son of Godzilla\u00a0was released on December 16, 1967 in Japan, it sold 2,480,000 tickets. When the film was re-issued on August 1, 1973, it received 610,000 attendees, adding up to a rough attendance total of 3,090,000.\nSpecial effects.\nThe Godzilla suit built for this film was the biggest in terms of size and girth. This was done in order to give Godzilla a \"paternal\" appearance and to give a parent-like stature in contrast next to Minilla. Because of the size of the suit, seasoned Godzilla suit actor Haruo Nakajima was only hired to play Godzilla in two scenes because the suit was much too big for him to wear. The smaller suit he had worn for the films \"Ebirah, Horror of the Deep\" and \"Invasion of Astro-Monster\" was used for these sequences. The much larger Seji Onaka instead played Godzilla in the film, although he was replaced midway through filming by Hiroshi Sekita after he broke his fingers.\nMinilla was designed to incorporate features of not only a baby Godzilla but a human baby was well. Minilla's face was patterned after the character Chibita from the popular manga\u00a0\"Osomatsu-kun\"\u00a0published by\u00a0Shogakukan\u00a0in\u00a0Weekly Shonen Saturday\u00a0at the time. \"Marchan the Dwarf\" was hired to play the character due to his ability to play-act and to give the character a childlike ambiance. He was also hired because of his ability to perform athletic rolls and flips inside the thick rubber suit.\nOutside of the two monster suits, various marionettes and puppets were used to portray the Island's gigantic inhabitants. The various giant preying mantises known as Kamacuras and the huge spider Kumonga. Arikawa would usually have 20 puppeteers at a time working on the various marionettes. The massive Kumonga puppet needed 2 to 3 people at a time to operate each leg.\nStyrofoam and paraffin were used for the snow falling on Solgell Island.\nDeleted scenes.\nMany scenes were shot but deleted showing Godzilla being mean or harsh to Minilla. One sequence shows Godzilla leaving Minilla behind on the freezing Sollgel Island and making it to shore before turning back was cut from the final film's ending. A portion of this sequence has been preserved in both the trailer and an outtake reel included with the Godzilla Final Box DVD collection as supplemental material. More deleted footage included Godzilla expecting the newborn Minilla to get up and walk after the Kamacuras have been defeated. Another featured Godzilla head-butting Minilla to make him stop following Saeko. One scene included Minilla being able to fire his own type of atomic breath during his fight with Kamacuras. However, in the final film, the smoke rings and his Godzilla breath were utilized instead. It is unknown who was responsible for these bits being deleted, but it was possibly Tsuburaya since he would not have allowed time and resources to be wasted shooting each such scenes if he was not okay with them in the first place.\nRelease.\nTheatrical.\n\"Son of Godzilla\" was distributed theatrically in Japan by Toho on December 16, 1967. The film was released theatrically in the United Kingdom in August 1969, as a double feature with \"Ebirah, Horror of the Deep\". \"Son of Godzilla\" was never released theatrically in the United States, instead being released directly to television by Walter Reade Sterling as well as American International Pictures (AIP-TV) in some markets in 1969. The American television version was cut to 84 minutes.\nHome media.\nIn 2005, the film was released on DVD by Sony Pictures in its original uncut length with the original Japanese audio and Toho's international English dub. In 2019, the Japanese version and export English version was included in a Blu-ray box set released by the Criterion Collection, which included all 15 films from the franchise's Sh\u014dwa era.\nReception.\nIn a contemporary review, the \"Monthly Film Bulletin\" declared the film to be \"out of the top drawer of the Toho Company's monster file, with the special effects department achieving their best results in monster locomotion\" and that the film \"has the advantage of a more soundly constructed story than most of its predecessors and a delightful vein of humor that allows for a gentle parody of the genre.\"\nAccording to the Polish writer Aleksandra Zi\u00f3\u0142kowska-Boehm, the film appealed to Polish journalist Melchior Wa\u0144kowicz: \"On August 9, Tomu\u015b's birthday, we all went to see \"Son of Godzilla\". I was afraid [Melchior] would be irritated by this film's type. I was again surprised, I watched with what interest he looked at the picture. Later he said that he had never seen this genre, but he was delighted with the technique of realization.\"\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 16 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 4.9/10.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11994", "revid": "12533792", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11994", "title": "Destroy All Monsters", "text": "1968 Japanese science fiction Kaiju film directed by Ishir\u014d Honda\n is a 1968 Japanese epic \"kaiju\" film directed by Ishir\u014d Honda, with special effects directed by Sadamasa Arikawa and supervised by Eiji Tsuburaya. The film, which was produced and distributed by Toho Co., Ltd, is the ninth film in the \"Godzilla\" franchise. The film stars Akira Kubo, Jun Tazaki, Yukiko Kobayashi and Yoshio Tsuchiya.\nIn the film, humans have achieved world peace by the year 1999, and various giant monsters are confined to an area known as Monsterland. The monsters are freed from the area and are mind-controlled by aliens known as Kilaaks, who send them to attack major cities. When the monsters are freed from the Kilaaks' influence, the aliens send Ghidorah to challenge the other monsters.\n\"Destroy All Monsters\" was released theatrically in Japan on August 1, 1968. The film was released by American International Pictures with an English-language dub in the United States on May 23, 1969. Contemporary American reviews were mixed, with praise mainly held for the climactic monster battle. Retrospectively, the film has received more praise, and is considered a favorite among \"Godzilla\" fans for its \"audacious and simple story\", \"innovative action sequences\", and a \"memorably booming\" score by Akira Ifukube.\nThe film was followed by \"All Monsters Attack,\" released on December 20, 1969.\nPlot.\nAt the end of the 20th century, all of the Earth's monsters have been collected by the United Nations Science Committee and confined in an area known as Monsterland, located in the Ogasawara island chain. A special control center is constructed underneath the island to ensure that the monsters stay secure and to serve as a research facility to study them.\nWhen communications with Monsterland are suddenly and mysteriously severed, and all of the monsters begin attacking world capitals, Dr. Yoshida of the UNSC orders captain Katsuo Yamabe and the crew of his spaceship, Moonlight SY-3, to investigate Monsterland. There, they discover that the scientists, led by Dr. Otani, have become mind-controlled slaves of a feminine extraterrestrial race identifying themselves as the Kilaaks, who reveal that they are in control of the monsters. Their leader demands that the human race surrender, or face total annihilation.\nGodzilla attacks New York City, Rodan invades Moscow, Mothra larva lays waste to Beijing, Gorosaurus destroys Paris, and Manda attacks London. The attacks were set in to motion to draw attention away from Japan, so that the Kilaaks can establish an underground stronghold near Mount Fuji. The Kilaaks then turn their next major attack onto Tokyo and, without serious opposition, become arrogant in their aims until the UNSC discover, after recovering the Kilaaks' monster mind-control devices from around the world, that they have switched to broadcasting the control signals from their base under the Moon's surface. In a desperate battle, the crew of the SY-3 destroys the Kilaak's lunar outpost and returns the Kilaak control system to Earth.\nWith all of the monsters under the control of the UNSC, the Kilaaks call King Ghidorah, who is dispatched to protect the Kilaak stronghold, battling Godzilla, Minilla, Mothra larva, Rodan, Gorosaurus, Anguirus, Kumonga, Baragon and Varan. While seemingly invincible, Ghidorah is eventually overpowered by the combined strength of the Earth monsters and is killed. Refusing to admit defeat, the Kilaaks produce their ace, a burning monster they call the Fire Dragon, which begins to torch Tokyo and destroys the control center on Ogasawara.\nSuddenly, Godzilla attacks and destroys the Kilaaks' underground base, revealing that the Earth's monsters instinctively know who their enemies are. Yamabe then pursues the Fire Dragon in the SY-3 and narrowly achieves victory for the human race. The Fire Dragon is revealed to be a flaming Kilaak UFO and is destroyed. With the Kilaaks defeated, Godzilla and the other monsters eventually return to Monsterland to live in peace.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;*Akira Kubo as Captain Katsuo Yamabe\nProduction.\nWriting.\nSpecial effects director Sadamasa Arikawa noted that Toho were going to potentially end the \"Godzilla\" series as \"Producer Tanaka figured that all the ideas had just run out.\" Several sources attest that the film was announced alongside \"Son of Godzilla\", possibly as a competing project.\nThe film was written by Takeshi Kimura and Ishir\u014d Honda, making it the first \"Godzilla\" film since \"Godzilla Raids Again\" not written by Shinichi Sekizawa. Takeshi Kimura is credited by his pen name Kaoru Mabuchi in the film's credits. Kimura and Honda's script developed the concept of Monsterland (referred to as Monster Island in future films).\nThe earliest screenplay, written by Kimura in 1967, was titled \"Monster Chushingura\" (\u602a\u7363\u5fe0\u81e3\u8535, Kaiju Ch\u016bshingura). (The word \"chushingura\" refers to a famous historical story in Japan about the rebellion of 47 samurai who took revenge after their master was unjustly forced to commit suicide). Supposedly, in this version, every monster in Toho's arsenal was to be included, even King Kong, Sanda, and Gaira. In an interview with David Miller, Ishiro Honda even said \u201cthe original idea was to show all of the monsters.\u201d\nThe first initial screenplay, preliminary titled \"Monster Total Advancement Order\" (\u602a\u7363\u7dcf\u9032\u6483\u547d\u4ee4, Kaij\u016b S\u014dshingeki Meirei), by Takashi Kamura (as Kaoru Mabuchi) was submitted on November 22, 1967, and included a confirmed roster of Godzilla, Mothra (larva), King Ghidorah, Rodan, Baragon, Varan, Kumonga, Manda, Maguma, and Ebirah. Everything plays out just as in the finished film except that Maguma and Baragon guard the Kilaak base and Baragon actually attacks Paris. Also, in this iteration, Varan and Rodan work in tandem to attack Ghidorah in the final battle.\nWhen it was decided to adapt \"Two Godzillas!: Japan SOS\" (an earlier version of \"Son of Godzilla\") instead, the script was shelved for next year. By then the rights to Kong had expired. Honda also wanted to show lunar colonies and brand new hybrid monsters, the results of interbreeding and genetic splicing. He planned to delve more deeply into undersea farming to feed the monsters, but because of budget constraints this was not included. In later scripts, the number of monsters was cut as well.\nFilming.\nDirector Honda was fascinated by the concept of a \"monster farm\", in particular the idea of how humanity could feed them. He noted that a \"huge amount of protein\" would be needed and envisioned cloning along with undersea farming to accomplish this. However, despite the director's fascination with this concept, the final movie devotes very little time to it outside of the brief introduction to Monsterland and showing Rodan feasting on a dolphin. The director laments that of the original complex idea only the basic \"idea of [a] Monster Island survived.\"\nAs the film has several monsters who continuously return in the films, the location was developed to be a faraway island where the monsters are pacified. This tied other films not related to the \"Godzilla\" series within its universe, as creatures such as Manda (from \"Atragon\") and Varan (\"Varan the Unbelievable\") exist. The film features footage from \"Ghidorah, the Three-Headed Monster\" (1964), specifically King Ghidorah's fiery birth scene.\nAs with \"Ebirah, Horror of the Deep\", Teisho Arikawa was the actual special effects director for the movie, although Eiji Tsuburaya is credited for it. Tsuburaya had more of a supervisor role regarding the special effects.\nDuring the monster's attack on Tokyo, you can see Godzilla steps over a construction crane model. Looking back on it, Haruo Nakajima did so because he worried he might trip over it and fall. He regretted doing that since he should have kicked it out of the way since it was a very non-monster like thing to do.\nDuring the movie's production, Toho arranged for a visit to the Mount Fuji set by a group of around 100 kids who were entering first grade, who got to see all the monsters in action, as well as actors Akira Kubo and Jun Tazaki. Actress Yukiko Kobayashi, as well as the monsters, also paid a visit to a member of the child actors cast of an Imperial Theater of London production of Oliver! in Tokyo.\nAt the climactic battle at Mount Fuji, Haruo Nakajima wanted Godzilla to reprise his \u201cjumping shie\u201d from \"Invasion of Astro-Monster\", but Ishiro Honda removed it from the final film.\nSpecial effects.\nNew monster suits for Godzilla and Anguirus were constructed for the film, while Rodan, Kumonga, Minilla, Gorosaurus, Manda, Baragon, Mothra, and King Ghidorah suits were modified from previous films, with Ghidorah having less detail than he had in previous films.\nThere were 3 different scales of the Moonlight SY-3 created or the film. The largest was 1 meter (3 feet) long used mainly used for shots of the spaceship flying across the surface of the Moon, landing and taking off, and for battle with the Fire Dragon (UFO). The core of the model was solid wood with surface details made of balsa wood and molded fiber glass with putty and paint used to disguise the wood grain and the seams. This model had collapsible wings, functional landing gear and fully firing engines. A 50\u00a0cm version was made for use for the booster stage and a 30\u00a0cm version was made for perspective flying shots. Both smaller versions were made of balsa wood covered in putty and paint.\nFor the scene when Gorosaurus comes out of the ground (through a tunnel presumably dug by Baragon) under the Arc de Triomphe, the floor of the set was six and half feet above the ground with the arc built on top of it. A forklift was brought in under the set and the monster was put on the forklift. They then raised the monster up through the ground by raising the forklift.\nThe fire trap set by the Kilaaks to trap the Moonlight SY-3 used real flamethrowers. Fire retardant materials were used in the rock walls in the crater.\nDeleted scene.\nAfter attacking New York, Godzilla was to arrive in London and fight Manda but the scene was cut. The scene was included in the 1990s bonus features of the film's Japanese LaserDisc. Director Ishir\u00f4 Honda said about it, \"Why was the scene is cut? Because it doesn't makes sense storywise. Godzilla and Manda were being mind-controlled by the same villains, they wouldn\u2019t just start fighting each other. \"\nRelease.\nBox office.\n\"Destroy All Monsters\" was released in Japan on 1 August 1968 where it was distributed by Toho. It was released on a double bill with a reissue of the film \"Atragon\". The film had a budget of roughly \u00a5200,000,000 and received an attendance of 2,580,000. The film was reissued theatrically in Japan in 1972 where it was re-edited by Honda to a 74-minute running time and released with the title \"Godzilla: Lightning Fast Strategy\" (\u30b4\u30b8\u30e9\u96fb\u6483\u5927\u4f5c\u6226, Gojira Dengeki Daisakusen). \"Destroy All Monsters\" continued the decline in ticket sales in Japan for the \"Godzilla\" series, earning 2.6 million in ticket sales. In comparison, \"Invasion of Astro-Monster\" brought in 3.8 million and \"Son of Godzilla\" collected 2.5 million.\nUS release.\nThe film was released in the United States by American International Pictures with an English-language dub on 23 May 1969. The film premiered in the United States in Cincinnati. American International Pictures hired Titra Studios to dub the film into English. The American version of the film remains relatively close to the Japanese original. Among the more notable removed elements include Akira Ifukube's title theme (the credits are moved to the end of the film) and a brief shot of Minilla shielding his eyes and ducking when King Ghidorah drops Anguirus from the sky. \"Destroy All Monsters\" was shown on American television until the early 1980s. It resurfaced on cable broadcast on the Sci-Fi Channel in 1996.\nHome media.\nThe AIP release of \"Destroy All Monsters\" was never released on home video in the United States, despite Orion Home Video at one point having distribution rights. It was finally released on VHS by ADV Films in 1998 which featured English-dubbed dialogue from Toho's own international version of the film. In 2011, Tokyo Shock released the film on DVD and Blu-ray and in 2014 the company re-released it on DVD and Blu-ray. In 2019, the Japanese version and export English version were included in a Blu-ray box set released by the Criterion Collection, which included all 15 films from the franchise's Sh\u014dwa era.\nIn 2021, Toho premiered a 4K remaster of the film on the Nippon Classic Movie Channel, along with seven other Godzilla films also remastered in 4K. The film was downscaled to 2K for broadcast.\nCritical response.\nFrom contemporary reviews, both \"Variety\" and \"Monthly Film Bulletin\" noted the film's best scenes involved the monsters together, while criticizing the filmmaking. \"Variety\" reviewed the English-dubbed version of the film stating that it may appeal to \"Sci-fi addicts and monster fans\" while stating that the \"plot is on comic strip level, special effects depend on obvious miniatures and acting (human) is from school of \"Flash Gordon\"\" and that the film's strength relied on its \"monster rally\". The \"Monthly Film Bulletin\" opined that \"the model work is poor, and as usual the script is junior comic-strip\". Both reviews mentioned the monsters' final scene with \"Variety\" commenting that it was \"clever\" and the \"Monthly Film Bulletin\" stating that \"apart from [the monsters] statutory devastation of world capitals [...] the monsters have disappointingly little to do until they get together in the last reel for a splendid battle\" The \"Monthly Film Bulletin\" commented that the film was \"almost worth sitting through the banalities for the final confrontation on Mount Fuji\" noting the son of Godzilla \"endearingly applauding from a safe distance\" and \"the victorious monsters performing a celebratory jig\".\nFrom retrospective reviews, Steve Biodrowski of \"Cinefantastique\" commented that the film \"is too slim in its storyline, too thin in its characterizations, to be considered a truly great film [...] But for the ten-year-old living inside us all, it is entertainment of the most awesome sort.\" Matt Paprocki of \"Blogcritics\" said the film is \"far from perfect\" and \"can be downright boring at times\" but felt that \"the destruction scenes make up for everything else\" and \"the final battle is an epic that simply can't be matched\".\nThe film is considered a cult favorite among fans of the \"Godzilla\" franchise. In Steve Ryfle and Ed Godziszewski's 2017 book covering Ishiro Honda's filmography, they expressed that \"Destroy All Monsters\" is now seen as the \"last truly spirited entry\" in Toho's initial series of \"kaiju\" films, due to \"its audacious and simple story, a bounty of monsters and destruction, and a memorably booming soundtrack from Akira Ifukube\".\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 11 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 6.6/10.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11995", "revid": "31528597", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11995", "title": "Godzilla's Revenge", "text": ""}
{"id": "11996", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11996", "title": "Godzilla/Godzilla vs Gigan", "text": ""}
{"id": "11997", "revid": "105499", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11997", "title": "Godzilla vs The Smog Monster", "text": ""}
{"id": "11998", "revid": "12700675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11998", "title": "Godzilla vs. Megalon", "text": " is a 1973 Japanese \"kaiju\" film directed by Jun Fukuda, written by Fukuda and Shinichi Sekizawa, and produced by Tomoyuki Tanaka, with special effects by Teruyoshi Nakano. Distributed by Toho and produced under their effects subsidiary Toho\u2013Eizo, it is the 13th film in the \"Godzilla\" franchise. The film stars Katsuhiko Sasaki, Hiroyuki Kawase, Yutaka Hayashi, and Robert Dunham, alongside Shinji Takagi as Godzilla, Hideto Date as Megalon, Kenpachiro Satsuma as Gigan, and Tsugutoshi Komada as Jet Jaguar.\n\"Godzilla vs. Megalon\" was released theatrically in Japan on March 17, 1973, it received generally mixed reviews from critics and audiences with criticism of its special effects and use of stock footage from previous Godzilla films. The film was given a theatrical release in the United States during the summer of 1976 by Cinema Shares. Given this release and subsequent home media, the film has become one of the most well-known kaiju films in the United States. The film's popularity might also be a major contributor to Western perceptions of kaiju films as comedic or campy. The film received revived recognition after an appearance on \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\" in 1991.\nThe film was followed by \"Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla\", released on March 21, 1974.\nPlot.\nIn the first part of 1971, the second of a series of underground nuclear tests is conducted, near the Aleutians, sending shockwaves as far as Monster Island in the South Pacific, severely damaging the island paradise and sending Anguirus plummeting into the depths of the Earth, with Godzilla narrowly escaping the fissure into which its friends tumble.\nFor millions of years, Seatopia, an opulent undersea civilization that resides in vast cities reminiscent of those of Ancient Greece and Rome, has existed in relative peace, ruled by Emperor Antonio, but nuclear tests in recent years have severely affected the cities via the earthquakes the tests produced. With the Seatopian capital badly affected by the most recent test, the Seatopians plan to unleash their civilization's beetle-styled titan, Megalon, to destroy the surface world out of vengeance.\nOn the surface, an inventor named Goro Ibuki, his little brother Rokuro, and Goro's friend Hiroshi Jinkawa are relaxing near a lake, when Seatopia makes itself known to the Earth by drying up the lake and using it as a base of operation. As they return home they are ambushed by agents of Seatopia who are trying to steal Jet Jaguar, a humanoid shaped robot under construction by the trio of inventors. However, the agents' first attempt is botched and they are forced to flee to safety.\nSome time later, Jet Jaguar is completed but the trio of inventors are knocked unconscious by the returning Seatopian agents. The agents' plan is to use Jet Jaguar to guide Megalon to destroy whatever city Seatopia commands him. Goro and Rokuro are sent to be killed, while Hiroshi is taken hostage. Megalon is finally released to the surface while Jet Jaguar is put under the control of the Seatopians and is used to guide Megalon to attack Tokyo with the JSDF failing to defeat the monster. Eventually, the trio of heroes manage to escape and devise a plan to send Jet Jaguar to get Godzilla's help using Jet Jaguar's secondary control system.\nAfter uniting with Japan's Defense Force, Goro manages to regain control of Jet Jaguar and sends the robot to Monster Island to bring Godzilla to fight Megalon. Without a guide to control its actions, Megalon flails around relentlessly and aimlessly fighting with the Defense Force and destroying the outskirts of Tokyo. The Seatopians learn of Jet Jaguar's turn and thus send out a distress call to their allies, the Nebulans to send Gigan to assist Megalon.\nAs Godzilla journeys to fight Megalon, Jet Jaguar starts acting on its own and ignoring commands to the surprise of its inventors and grows to gigantic proportions to face Megalon itself until Godzilla arrives. The battle is roughly at a standstill until Gigan arrives and both Megalon and Gigan double team Jet Jaguar. Godzilla finally arrives to assist Jet Jaguar and the odds become even.\nAfter a long and brutal fight, Gigan and Megalon both retreat and Godzilla and Jet Jaguar shake hands on a job well done. Jet Jaguar bids Godzilla farewell and Godzilla returns to Monster Island. Jet Jaguar returns to his human-size form and returns home with Goro and Rokuro.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Katsuhiko Sasaki as Inventor Goro Ibuki\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nThe origins of Megalon can be traced back to 1969's \"All Monsters Attack\", as the original working idea for the film's antagonist Gabara was initially envisioned as a giant mole cricket called Gebara. The character was later reworked into Kaoru Mabuchi's 1971 treatment for \"Godzilla vs. the Space Monsters: Earth Defense Directive\", a precursor to 1972's \"Godzilla vs. Gigan\". The proposal called for Megalon to be paired with Gigan and King Ghidorah under the command of the hostile alien invader Miko, only to be defeated and driven off by the combined might of Godzilla, Anguirus, and a brand new monster called Majin Tuol. The next draft of the script, titled \"The Return of King Ghidorah!\", retained the core villain cast of Gigan, King Ghidorah, and Megalon, but replaced Anguirus and Majin Tuol with Varan and Rodan. However, most of the proposed monsters were cut, leading to the final version of \"Godzilla vs. Gigan\".\nContrary to popular belief, there is no evidence \"Godzilla vs. Megalon\" was originally planned as a Jet Jaguar solo film, and no Japanese sources have surfaced which claim otherwise. Rather, the creation of Jet Jaguar was the result of a contest Toho had for children in mid-to-late 1972. The winner of the contest was an elementary school student, who submitted the drawing of a robot called Red Arone. Red Arone was turned into a monster suit, but when the child was shown the suit, he became upset because the suit did not resemble his original design. The boy's original design was white but the costume was colored red, blue and yellow. Red Arone was used for publicity, but Toho had renamed the character Jet Jaguar and had special effects director Teruyoshi Nakano redesign the character, only keeping the colors from the Red Arone suit. The Red Arone suit had a different head and wings.\nAccording to Teruyoshi Nakano, \"Godzilla vs. Megalon\" was a replacement project for another film that was cancelled at the last minute, and evidence suggests this cancelled film was \"Godzilla vs. Red Moon\", slated for 1973. As a result, the project was postponed during pre-production. Screenwriter Shinichi Sekizawa had no time to write out a full script, and instead thought out a general story. Director Jun Fukuda ultimately ended up writing the screenplay.\nThe film had three early treatments, each written by Shinichi Sekizawa, one was titled \"Godzilla vs. The Megalon Brothers: The Undersea Kingdom's Annihilation Strategy\" which was completed in September 1972. The second was titled \"Insect Monster Megalon vs. Godzilla: Undersea Kingdom's Annihilation Strategy\", which was turned in on September 5, 1972, and the third draft was submitted on September 7, 1972. The production time totaled nearly six months from planning to finish.\nCreature design.\nAccording to Teruyoshi Nakano, the Godzilla suit used in this film (nicknamed \"MegaroGoji\" \u30e1\u30ac\u30ed\u30b4\u30b8 ) was made in a week, making it the fastest Godzilla suit ever made to date. They did not have time to make the eyes work correctly, something they had more time to fix for Godzilla's five appearances on Toho's superhero TV series \"Zone Fighter\" (1973), which was produced around the same time.\nThe Megalon suit was one of the heaviest suits produced since the 1954 \"Godzilla\" suit, which made it even more difficult to raise the Megalon suit via wires in certain scenes up to the point where Nakano almost decided to scrap those scenes altogether. Since the film was shot in the winter, Katsuhiko Sasaki stated that director Jun Fukuda gave him and Yutaka Hayashi a shot of whiskey to warm them up.\nThe Gigan suit is similar to the previous design, but the suit was made thinner, less bulky, the horn on the head was less pointed, and the buzzsaw didn't move, since it was made of static pieces. This suit also has different-sized back fins, a more circular visor, scales running up the back/sides of the neck and longer legs compared to the original version.\nFilming.\nTeruyoshi Nakano recalls how the film was rushed and that it took three weeks to shoot, stating, \"It went into productions without enough preparation. There was no time to ask Mr. Sekizawa to write the script, so Mr. Sekizawa kind of thought up the general story and director Fukuda wrote the screenplay. The screenplay was completed right before crank-in\". The film also heavily employs stock footage from previous films such as \"Mothra vs. Godzilla\", \"Ghidorah the Three-Headed Monster\" (both from 1964), \"The War of the Gargantuas\" (1966), \"Ebirah, Horror of the Deep\" (1966), \"Destroy All Monsters\" (1968), \"Godzilla vs. Hedorah\" (1971), and \"Godzilla vs. Gigan\" (1972).\nEnglish versions.\nIn 1976, Cinema Shares gave \"Godzilla vs. Megalon\" a wide theatrical release in the United States and launched a massive marketing campaign for the film, along with the poster, buttons with one of the four monsters' faces on them were released. Given away at theatrical showings was a comic that told a simplified version of the film, which incorrectly named Jet Jaguar as \"Robotman\" and Gigan as \"Borodan\". These incorrect names were also featured in the U.S. trailer.\nCinema Shares originally planned to use the uncut Toho international English version, but to ensure a G rating, several minor cuts were made, which resulted in the film running three minutes shorter than the original version. These cuts included a majority of the opening titles, several mild obscenities and some shots of barely-visible pornographic magazine clips when the main characters are kidnapped in a truck.\n\"Godzilla vs. Megalon\" is the first Godzilla film to receive an American prime time network television premiere, where it was broadcast nationwide at 9:00 PM on NBC on March 15, 1977. However, to accommodate commercials, the film was only shown in a one-hour time slot, which resulted in the film being cut down to 48 minutes. John Belushi hosted the broadcast where he did some skits, all in a Godzilla suit.\nMel Maron (who was president of Cinema Shares at the time) chose to release \"Godzilla vs. Megalon\" because he saw Godzilla as a heroic figure by that point and felt the timing was right to show children a hero who was a friendly monster and not Superman.\nThe U.S. rights for the film eventually fell into the public domain in the late 80s, which resulted in companies releasing poorly-cropped, fullscreen VHS tapes mastered from pan and scan sources. This also led to the film being featured in \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\". In 1988, New World Video intended to release the original uncut version of the English dub but declined the project because it lacked the budget that was required for a full release. However, despite this, the film was released uncut and in widescreen in 1992 by UK company Polygram Ltd as a double feature with \"Godzilla vs. Gigan\". In 1998 the film was again released by UK company, 4 Front Video. As of now it appears those are the only two VHS tapes on the film that are unedited and in high quality. It was also released on DVD by Power Multimedia in 1999 in Taiwan. Originally the Sci-Fi Channel (now SyFy) showed the cut version, until finally in 2002 as Toho regained ownership of that title alongside \"Godzilla vs. Gigan\" and \"Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla\" (both of which also were released by Cinema Shares) and broadcast the film fully uncut for the first time in the U.S.\nRelease.\nBox office.\nIn Japan, \"Godzilla vs. Megalon\" sold approximately 980,000 tickets. It was the first \"Godzilla\" film to sell less than one million admissions. It earned \u00a5220 million in Japan distribution income (rentals).\nThe film was a success in American theaters, earning $383,744 in its first three days in Texas and Louisiana alone. The film grossed about $ worldwide.\nCritical response.\n\"Godzilla vs. Megalon\" was released theatrically in America on May 9, 1976, though the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" indicates that it opened there in June, and \"The New York Times\" indicates that it opened in New York City on July 11. \"The New York Times\" film critic Vincent Canby, who a decade before had given a negative review to \"Ghidorah, the Three-Headed Monster\", gave \"Godzilla vs. Megalon\" a generally positive review. In his review on July 12, 1976, Canby said, \"\"Godzilla vs. Megalon\" completes the canonization of Godzilla...It's been a remarkable transformation of character - the dragon has become St. George...It's wildly preposterous, imaginative and funny (often intentionally). It demonstrates the rewards of friendship, between humans as well as monsters, and it is gentle.\"\n\"Godzilla vs. Megalon\" has attracted the ire of many \"Godzilla\" fans in the decades since its original release. The film contributed to the reputation of \"Godzilla\" films in the United States as cheap children's entertainment that should not be taken seriously. It has been described as \"incredibly, undeniably, mind-numbingly bad\" and one of the \"poorer moments\" in the history of kaiju films.\nAuthor Stephen Mark Rainey's critique of the film was strongly negative, published in Japanese Giants, issue four. 1977. Edited and published by Bradford G. Boyle.https://\nIn particular, the special effects of the film have been heavily criticized. One review described the Godzilla costume as appearing to be \"crossed with Kermit the Frog\" and another sneeringly compared it to \"Godzilla vs. Gigan\", stating that it did \"everything wrong that \"Gigan\" did, and then some.\" However, most of the criticism is of the lack of actual special effects work, as most of it consists of stock footage from previous films, including \"Godzilla vs. Gigan\" and \"Ghidorah, the Three-Headed Monster\", but a few pieces of effects work have garnered praise, specifically a scene where Megalon breaks through a dam and the draining of the lake.\nThe other aspects of the film have been similarly skewered. The acting is usually described as flat and generally poor, and as not improving, or sometimes, worsening, the already weak script. One part of the film, on the other hand, has garnered almost universal praise: Godzilla's final attack on Megalon, a flying kick. It has been called the saving grace of the film, and was made famous by the mock exclamations of shock and awe displayed on \"Godzilla vs. Megalon\"'s appearance on \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\". Through the end of season three to the middle of season five, that clip would be shown during the opening of each show.\nDespite all this, the film is also one of the most widely seen \"Godzilla \"films in the United States \u2014 it was popular in its initial theatrical release, largely because of an aggressive marketing campaign, including elaborate posters of the two title monsters battling atop New York City's World Trade Center towers, presumably to capitalize on the hype surrounding the Dino De Laurentiis remake of \"King Kong\", which used a similar image for its own poster.\nOn review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, approval rating of 38% based on 8 reviews, with an average rating of 4.7/10.\nHome media.\nThe film was released numerous times in the VHS format, mostly as videos from bargain basement studios that featured the edited TV version (which was wrongly assumed to be in the public domain for many years), while PolyGram and 4 Front released the unedited version of the film in 1992 and 1998, respectively. Some rumors have circulated that the film's original VHS releases in the States were uncut, but there is no evidence confirming or denying this. \u00a0\nMedia Blasters acquired the DVD rights to both \"Godzilla vs. Megalon\" and \"Destroy All Monsters\". Both films were released under one of the company's divisions, Tokyo Shock. Media Blasters originally planned to release \"Godzilla vs. Megalon\" on DVD and Blu-ray on December 20, 2011; however, because of technical difficulties with the dubbing and Toho having yet to give its approval for the release, the DVD/Blu-ray release was delayed. Media Blasters finally released the film on August 14, 2012, but only on a bare-bones DVD and Blu-ray. Despite this, a manufacturing error led to several copies of the originally planned version featuring bonus content being released by accident. These special features versions are incredibly rare and are not labeled differently from the standard version, making them nearly impossible to find. This release was commercially the first to remaster the film to its original full-length version.\nIn 2019, the Japanese version and export English dub were included in a Blu-ray box set released by the Criterion Collection, which included all 15 films from the franchise's Sh\u014dwa era.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11999", "revid": "110322", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11999", "title": "Godzilla vs The Cosmic Monster", "text": ""}
{"id": "12000", "revid": "20908161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12000", "title": "Godzilla vs. Biollante", "text": "1989 film by Kazuki \u014cmori\n is a 1989 Japanese \"kaiju\" film directed and written by Kazuki \u014cmori, with special effects by K\u014dichi Kawakita. Distributed by Toho and produced under their subsidiary Toho Pictures, it is the 17th film in the \"Godzilla\" franchise, the second film in the franchise's Heisei period, and a sequel to 1984's \"The Return of Godzilla\". The film stars Kunihiko Mitamura, Yoshiko Tanaka, Masanobu Takashima, Megumi Odaka, Toru Minegishi, Yasuko Sawaguchi, Toshiyuki Nagashima, Yoshiko Kuga, Ryunosuke Kaneda and K\u014dji Takahashi. This was Odaka's first appearance in the \"Godzilla\" franchise as Miki Saegusa, and would reprise the role in every film for the remainder of the Heisei series.\nIn the film, corporations struggle for control over samples of Godzilla's cells, while the monster himself battles Biollante, a monster born from a combination of Godzilla's cells, the cells of a plant, and the cells of a human. The idea originated from a public story-writing contest, and set a trend common to all Heisei era movies, in which Godzilla faces off against opponents capable of metamorphosing into new, progressively more powerful forms.\n\"Godzilla vs. Biollante\" was released theatrically in Japan on December 16, 1989. It received generally positive reviews who praised the storyline, visual effects, and Sugiyama's score, but was a disappointment at the Japanese box office due to competition with \"Back to the Future Part II\". It received a direct-to-video release in the United States on November 25, 1992, through HBO Video.\nIt was followed by \"Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah\" which was released on December 14, 1991.\nPlot.\nIn the aftermath of Godzilla's attack on Tokyo and later imprisonment at Mount Mihara, in 1985, Godzilla's cells are secretly delivered to the Saradia Institute of Technology and Science in Saradia, where they are to be merged with genetically modified plants in the hope of transforming Saradian deserts into fertile land and ending the country's economic dependence on oil wells. Dr. Genshiro Shiragami and his daughter, Erika, are enlisted to aid with the project, but a terrorist bombing destroys the institute's laboratory, ruining the cells and killing Erika.\nFive years later, Shiragami has returned to Japan and merged some of Erika's cells with those of a rose in an attempt to preserve her soul. Meanwhile, scientist Kazuhito Kirishima and Lieutenant Goro Gondo of the JSDF are using the Godzilla cells they collected to create \"Anti-Nuclear Energy Bacteria\" (ANEB), hoping it can serve as a weapon against Godzilla should it return. They attempt to recruit Shiragami to aid them, but are rebuffed.\nInternational tensions increase over the Godzilla cells, as they are coveted by both the Saradia Institute of Technology and Science and the American rival Bio-Major organization. An eruption from Mount Mihara causes tremors across the area, including Shiragami's home, badly damaging the roses. Shiragami agrees to join the JSDF's effort and is given access to the Godzilla cells, which he secretly merges with one of the roses. A night later, Bio-Major and Saradian agents break into Shiragami's lab, but are attacked by a large plant-like monster, named \"Biollante\" by Shiragami, which later escapes to Lake Ashi.\nBio-Major agents plant explosives around Mount Mihara and blackmail the National Diet, warning the explosives will be detonated and thus free Godzilla if the cells are not handed over. Kirishima and Gondo attempt to trade, but Saradian agent SSS9 thwarts the attempt and escapes with the cells. The explosives are detonated, and Godzilla is released. Godzilla attempts to reach the nearest power plant to replenish his supply of nuclear energy, but Biollante calls out to Godzilla.\nGodzilla arrives at the lake to engage Biollante in a vicious battle, and emerges as the victor. Godzilla then proceeds toward the power plant at Tsuruga, but psychic Miki Saegusa uses her powers to divert Godzilla toward Osaka instead. The city is quickly evacuated before Godzilla makes landfall. A team led by Gondo meet Godzilla at the central district and fire rockets infused with the ANEB into its body, but Gondo is killed in the process, leaving Godzilla unharmed.\nKirishima recovers the cells and returns them to the JSDF. Shiragami theorizes that if Godzilla's body temperature is increased, the ANEB should work against it. The JSDF erects microwave-emitting plates during an artificial thunderstorm, hitting Godzilla with lightning and heating up its body temperature during a battle near the shores of Wakasa Bay. Godzilla is only moderately affected, but Biollante, having evolved into a more powerful form, arrives to engage Godzilla in battle once again.\nAfter a long battle, Godzilla fires an atomic breath inside Biollante's mouth, mortally wounding Biollante. Godzilla is exhausted by the effects of the ANEB and faints. Biollante escapes by splitting apart into glowing spores, rising into space. As the spores ascend, they form an image of Erika. As Shiragami watches the scene, he is shot by SSS9. Kirishima chases and briefly fights with SSS9, with the agent being killed when Sho Kuroki activates a microwave plate he was standing on. Afterwards, Godzilla reawakens and returns to the ocean to recover.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Kunihiko Mitamura as \nProduction.\nPre-production.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe original idea was to find something that could match Godzilla's power and terror if we were bringing back Godzilla. But simply letting the monsters fight each other had been done many times and, clearly, there was a limit to it. So in order to bring back Godzilla properly we had to create an opponent that can fight properly. If there was something equivalent to the terror of nuclear power it must be the bio-technology [with] which human beings would manipulate life, because it can be very dangerous if it goes the wrong way, ethically, I guess. That's where I found the connection, so the idea of a monster [that] was created by biotechnology was born.\n\u2014Shinichiro Kobayashi\nTomoyuki Tanaka announced a sequel to \"The Return of Godzilla\" in 1985, but was skeptical of its possibilities, as the film had been of little financial benefit to Toho, and the failure of \"King Kong Lives\" following year convinced him that audiences were not ready for a continuation of the \"Godzilla\" series. He relented after the success of \"Little Shop of Horrors\", and proceeded to hold a public story-writing contest for a possible script. In consideration of \"The Return of Godzilla\"'s marginal success in Japan, Tanaka insisted that the story focus on a classic monster vs. monster theme. Tanaka handed the five finalist entries to director Kazuki \u014cmori, despite the two's initially hostile relationship; the latter had previously held Tanaka responsible for the decline in the \"Godzilla\" series' quality during the 1970s. \u014cmori chose the entry of dentist Shinichiro Kobayashi, who wrote his story with the hypothetical death of his daughter in mind.\nKobayashi's submission was notable for its emphasis on dilemmas concerning biotechnology rather than nuclear energy, and revolved around a scientist grieving for his deceased daughter and attempting to keep her soul alive by merging her genes with those of a plant. The scientist's initial experiments would have resulted in the creation of a giant rat-like amphibian called Deutalios, which would have landed in Tokyo Bay and been killed by Godzilla. A female reporter investigating the scientist's activities would have suffered from psychic visions of plants with humanoid faces compelling her to infiltrate the scientist's laboratory. The scientist would have later confessed his intentions, and the finale would have had Godzilla battling a human-faced Biollante who defeats him by searing his flesh with acid.\n\u014cmori proceeded to modify the story into a workable script over a period of three years, using his background as a biologist to create a plausible plot involving genetic engineering and botany. In order to preserve the series' anti-nuclear message, he linked the creation of Biollante to the use of Godzilla cells, and replaced Kobayashi's journalist character with Miki Saegusa. He openly admitted that directing a \"Godzilla\" film was secondary to his desire to make a James Bond movie, and thus added elements of the spy film genre into the plot. Unlike the case with later, more committee-driven \"Godzilla\" films, \u014cmori was given considerable leeway in writing and directing the film, which Toho staff later judged to have been an error resulting in a movie with a very narrow audience.\nSpecial effects.\nKoichi Kawakita, who had previously worked for Tsuburaya Productions, replaced Teruyoshi Nakano as head of the series' special effects unit after Toho became impressed at his work in \"Gunhed\". Kawakita made use of \"Gunhed\"'s special effects team Studio OX, and initially wanted to make Godzilla more animal-like, using crocodiles as references, but was berated by Tanaka, who declared Godzilla to be \"a monster\" rather than an animal. Kenpachiro Satsuma returned to portray Godzilla, hoping to improve his performance by making it less anthropomorphic than in previous films. Suitmaker Noboyuki Yasamaru created a Godzilla suit made specifically with Satsuma's measurements in mind, unlike the previous one which was initially built for another performer and caused Satsuma discomfort. The resulting 242 lb suit proved more comfortable than the last, having a lower center of gravity and more mobile legs. A second 176 lb suit was built for outdoor underwater scenes. The head's size was reduced, and the whites around the eyes removed. On the advice of story finalist Shinichiro Kobayashi, a double row of teeth was incorporated in the jaws. As with the previous film, animatronic models were used for close-up shots. These models were an improvement over the last, as they were made from the same molds used for the main costume, and included an articulated tongue and intricate eye motion. The suit's dorsal plates were filled with light bulbs for scenes in which Godzilla uses his atomic ray, thus lessening reliance on optical animation, though they electrocuted Satsuma the first time they were activated. Satsuma was also obliged to wear protective goggles when in the suit during scenes in which Godzilla battles the JSDF, as real explosives were used on set. The film was mainly shot at the Toho lot, although some filming occued on location at the East Fuji Maneuver Area.\nDesigning and building the Biollante props proved problematic, as traditional suitmation techniques made realizing the requested design of the creature's first form difficult, and the resulting cumbersome model for Biollante's final form was met with disbelief from the special effects team. Biollante's first form was performed by Masao Takegami, who sat within the model's trunk area on a platform just above water level. While the creature's head movements were simple to operate, its vines were controlled by an intricate array of overhead wires which proved difficult for Satsuma to react to during combat scenes as they offered no tension, thus warranting Satsuma to feign receiving blows from them, despite not being able to perceive them. Biollante's final form was even more difficult to operate, as its vine network took hours to rig up on set. Visibility in both the Godzilla and final form Biollante suits was poor, thus causing difficulties for Takegami in aiming the creature's head when firing sap, which permanently stained anything it landed on.\nWhile it was initially decided to incorporate stop motion animation into the film, the resulting sequences were scrapped, as Kawakita felt they failed to blend in with the live-action footage effectively. The film however became the first of its kind to use CGI, though its usage was limited to scenes involving computer generated schematics. The original cut of the movie had the first battle culminating in Biollante's spores falling around the hills surrounding Lake Ashino and blooming into fields of flowers, though this was removed as the flowers were out of scale.\nMusic.\nUnlike the previous film, \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\" incorporates themes from Akira Ifukube's original \"Godzilla\" theme, though the majority of the soundtrack was composed of original themes by Koichi Sugiyama. The score was orchestrated by conductor David Howell through the Kansai Philharmonic, though Howell himself had never viewed the movie, and thus was left to interpret what the scenes would consist of when conducting the orchestra.\nEnglish version.\nAfter the film was released in Japan, Toho commissioned a Hong Kong company named Omni Productions to dub the film into English.\nIn early 1990, Toho entered discussions with Miramax to distribute the film. When talks broke off, Toho filed a lawsuit in Los Angeles Federal Court, accusing Miramax of entering an oral agreement in June to pay Toho $500,000 to distribute the film. This lawsuit delayed the film's release for two years. An out of court settlement was reached with Miramax buying the rights to the film for an unreported figure. Miramax would have entertained thoughts of releasing the film in theaters, but in the end it was decided to release the film straight to home video instead. HBO Video released the film on VHS in 1992 and LaserDisc in 1993. Miramax utilized the uncut English international version of the film for this release (though The Criterion Collection did not utilize the uncut English international version of the film).\nRelease.\nHome media.\n\"Godzilla vs. Biollante\" was released on VHS by HBO Video on November 25, 1992. It was later relicensed by Miramax and released on Blu-ray and DVD by Echo Bridge Home Entertainment on December 4, 2012. It was released as a double feature and 8-disc movie pack on both Blu-ray and DVD with \"Mega Shark Versus Giant Octopus\" (2009) by Echo Bridge Home Entertainment in 2013. It was last released by Lionsgate on Blu-ray and DVD on October 7, 2014. On the latter two releases, the film is rated PG by the Motion Picture Association for \"traditional Godzilla violence\".\nIn 2021, Toho premiered a 4K remaster of the film on the Nippon Classic Movie Channel, along with seven other Godzilla films also remastered in 4K. The film was downscaled to 2K for broadcast. The Criterion Collection released the film on 4K and Blu-ray on March 18, 2025.\nReception.\nBox office.\nIn Japan, the film sold approximately 2 million tickets, grossing \u00a5.\nCritical response.\n\"Godzilla vs. Biollante\" has received positive reviews, with praise for the story, music and visuals.\nEd Godziszewski of Monster Zero said the film is \"by no means a classic\" but felt that \"for the first time in well over 20 years, a [Godzilla] script is presented with some fresh, original ideas and themes.\" Joseph Savitski of Beyond Hollywood said the film's music is \"a major detraction\", but added that it's \"not only one of the most imaginative films in the series, but also the most enjoyable to watch.\" Japan Hero said, \"[T]his is definitely a Godzilla movie not to be missed.\"\nIn their scholarly book on kaiju cinema, \"Japan's Green Monsters\", Rhoads and McCorkle offer an ecocritical assessment of \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\". The scholars focus on the film's critique of genetic engineering and biotechnology years before the subject appeared in more popular Hollywood blockbusters like Steven Spielberg's 1993 blockbuster \"Jurassic Park\". Rhoads and McCorkle counter prior reviews of the film and argue that \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\" possesses far deeper environmental messages than the obvious ones present on the film's surface.\nIn July 2014, in a poll reported by the Nihon Eiga Satellite Broadcasting Corporation, \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\" was selected as the best \"Godzilla\" film by a group of fans and judges.\nComposer Akira Ifukube, who had refused to compose the film's score, stated on interview that he disliked the way Koichi Sugiyama had modernized his Godzilla theme, and defined the Saradia theme as \"ridiculous\", on account of it sounding more European than Middle Eastern.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, approval rating of 75% based on 12 reviews, with a rating average of 6.0/10.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12001", "revid": "48867554", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12001", "title": "Terror of Mechagodzilla", "text": "1975 film by Ishir\u014d Honda\n is a 1975 Japanese \"kaiju\" film directed by Ishir\u014d Honda, written by Yukiko Takayama, and produced by Tomoyuki Tanaka and Henry G. Saperstein, with special effects by Teruyoshi Nakano. Distributed by Toho and produced under their effects subsidiary Toho\u2013Eizo, it is the 15th film in the \"Godzilla\" franchise, serving as a direct sequel to the 1974 film \"Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla\" and the final entry of the franchise's Sh\u014dwa era and the last to be directed by series co-creator Ishir\u014d Honda before his death in 1993. The franchise would be rebooted nine years later with \"The Return of Godzilla\", beginning the franchise's Heisei era.\n\"Terror of Mechagodzilla\" stars Katsuhiko Sasaki, Tomoko Ai, Akihiko Hirata, and Gor\u014d Mutsumi, and features Toru Kawai, Kazunari Mori, and Tatsumi Nikamoto as the fictional monster characters Godzilla, Mechagodzilla 2, and Titanosaurus, respectively. The film was released theatrically in Japan on March 15, 1975, to mostly positive reviews. It was released in the UK in June 1976 under the title Monsters From an Unknown Planet. It received a limited release in the United States in 1978 by Bob Conn Enterprises under the title The Terror of Godzilla. The film remains the least financially successful entry in the \"Godzilla\" franchise to this day.\nPlot.\nFollowing Mechagodzilla's and the Simeons' defeat by Godzilla and Okinawan guardian monster King Caesar, Interpol agents search for Mechagodzilla's remains at the bottom of the Okinawan Sea in the hopes of gathering information on the Simeons. Their submarine is attacked by a giant marine dinosaur they name Titanosaurus and the crew vanishes.\nInterpol launches an investigation into the incident. With the help of marine biologist Akira Ichinose, they trace Titanosaurus to a reclusive mad scientist named Shinz\u00f4 Mafune, who wants to destroy mankind. While the group visits Mafune's home, they meet his daughter, Katsura, who secretly underwent surgery and became a cyborg after she was injured during one of her father's experiments. Katsura claims her father is dead and that she burned his notes about Titanosaurus. Mafune is visited by Tsuda, an aide to the Simeon supreme leader Mugal, who is leading a project to rebuild Mechagodzilla into Mechagodzilla 2. Mugal offers the Simeons' services to Mafune so that their respective monsters can wipe out mankind. A control device for Mechagodzilla 2 is implanted into Katsura.\nIchinose falls in love with Katsura and unwittingly gives her Interpol's information on the Simeons, Mechagodzilla, and Titanosaurus. An impatient Mafune releases Titanosaurus on Yokosuka without the Simeons' permission. While Interpol discovers Titanosaurus is vulnerable to supersonic waves, Katsura destroys their supersonic wave oscillator. Godzilla arrives and easily defeats Titanosaurus, causing the latter to retreat.\nWhen Ichinose visits Katsura, the Simeons capture him and unleash Mechagodzilla 2 and Titanosaurus on Tokyo. Interpol repairs their wave oscillator and the Japanese armed forces struggle to fend off the monsters. Godzilla arrives but is outmatched until Interpol distracts Titanosaurus with the repaired wave oscillator, allowing Godzilla to focus on Mechagodzilla 2. Interpol agents infiltrate the Simeons' hideout, rescue Ichinose, and kill Mafune and many of the Simeons. The remaining Simeons attempt to escape, but Godzilla shoots down their ships with atomic breath. The wounded Katsura shoots herself to disable Mechagodzilla 2's control device. Godzilla destroys Mechagodzilla 2, but Katsura dies in Ichinose's arms. With help from Interpol, Godzilla defeats Titanosaurus and returns to the ocean.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;*Katsuhiko Sasaki as Akira Ichinose\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nThe original screenplay that Yukiko Takayama created after winning Toho's story contest for the next installment in the Godzilla series was picked by assistant producer Kenji Tokoro and was submitted for approval on July 1, 1974, less than four months after \"Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla\" was released.\nThe original concept is similar to the finished version of \"Terror of Mechagodzilla\", with many of the changes being budgetary in nature. The most obvious alteration is the removal of the two dinosaurs called the Titans, which merged to become Titanosaurus in the first draft. It was an interesting concept, although something that was also under-explained, considering the magnitude of such an occurrence of the creatures merging. Another noticeable change to the script is that of the final battle, which does not move to the countryside but instead would have reduced Tokyo to rubble during the ensuing conflict between the three monsters.\nAfter her initial draft, Takayama submitted a revised version on October 14, 1974. This went through a third revision on December 4, and then yet another on December 28 of that same year before it was met with approval and filming began.\nJun Fukuda was initially offered the role of director for this installment but refused having finally had enough of the series. Before Ishiro Honda agreed to return rumours persist Yoshimitsu Banno was also asked to direct due to Tomoyuki Tanaka being pleased with his work on \"Prophecies of Nostradamus.\"\nDirector Ishiro Honda later lamented not having been able to work with the story's writer, Yukiko Takayama, on other films, enjoying that a \"woman's perspective was especially fresh\" for the genre.\nKensho Yamashita, who would later direct \"Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla\" was the chief assistant director on the project. He notes, though, that Honda never actually assigned any of the shooting to him, possibly because he was happy to be directing again after a long gap in his career and wanted to do the work himself.\nNudity.\nThis film is one of two \"Godzilla\" films with brief nudity (the other being 1994's \"Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla\"). The scene occurs when Katsura undergoes an operation to have Mechagodzilla 2's control device placed inside her body, at which point her breasts are exposed. While she was portrayed by a mannequin in the scene, the scene was cut when the film was released in the U.S., both from the theatrical and TV versions of the film, and was also missing from the UK theatrical version, though the scene was intact in the 1992 VHS release which used the \"Terror of Mechagodzilla\" title.\nEnglish version.\nToho titled its English version of the film \"Terror of Mechagodzilla\" and had it dubbed into English in Hong Kong. This \u201cinternational version\u201d has never seen wide release in the United States, but has been issued on VHS in the United Kingdom by PolyGram Video Ltd. and on DVD in Taiwan by Power Multimedia.\nThe film was given a North American theatrical release in March 1978 by independent distributor Bob Conn Enterprises under the title \"The Terror of Godzilla\". Just as Cinema Shares had done with the previous three \"Godzilla\" movies, Bob Conn Enterprises chose to utilize the Toho-commissioned English dub instead of hiring a new crew to re-dub the film. \"The Terror of Godzilla\" was heavily edited to obtain a \"G\" rating from the MPAA. Several scenes with violent content were entirely removed, disrupting the flow of the narrative.\nHenry G. Saperstein, who sold the theatrical rights to Bob Conn Enterprises, also released the film to television in late 1978, this time under Toho's international title, \"Terror of Mechagodzilla\". Unlike \"The Terror of Godzilla\", the television version remained mostly uncut, with only the shot of Katsura's naked breasts excised. Saperstein's editors also added a 10-minute prologue that served as a brief history of Godzilla, with footage from Saperstein's English versions of \"Invasion of Astro-Monster\" and \"All Monsters Attack\" (the latter of which utilized stock footage from both \"Ebirah, Horror of the Deep\" and \"Son of Godzilla\").\nIn the mid-1980s, the U.S. television version, \"Terror of Mechagodzilla\", was replaced by the theatrical edit, \"The Terror of Godzilla\", on television and home video. For some reason, the title was also changed to \"Terror of Mechagodzilla\". The 1994 Paramount release of \"Terror of Mechagodzilla\" listed a running time of 89 minutes on the slipcase, implying that this release would be the longer version first shown on American TV. The actual video cassette featured the edited theatrical version. In a 1995 interview with \"G-Fan\" magazine, Saperstein was surprised to hear about this mistake. In 1997 on Channel 4 in the U.K., three Godzilla movies were shown back to back late at night, starting with \"Godzilla vs. Megalon\", \"Godzilla vs. Gigan\" and then \"Terror of Mechagodzilla\"; all were dubbed versions. This showing was uncut, including the Katsura nudity scene, but it did not have the Western-made prologue.\nIn the mid-2000s, the television version showed up again on Monsters HD, and in 2007, it made its home video debut as the U.S. version on the Classic Media DVD. Although the added prologue was originally framed for fullscreen television, it was cropped and shown in widescreen on the disc. The rest of the movie featured the audio from Saperstein's television version synced to the video from the Japanese version.\nThe first article about the movie's storyline was published in Japanese Giants #4 https:// in 1977, edited and published by Bradford G. Boyle, and was written by Richard H. Campbell, creator of \"The Godzilla Fan News Letter\" (a.k.a. \"The Gang\").\nReception.\nCritical response.\nOn American Rotten Tomatoes, approval rating of 43% based on 7 reviews, with a rating average of 6/10.\"\nBox office.\nIn Japan, the film sold 980,000 tickets. Despite earning mixed, though generally positive reviews, it sold poorly; the film was the least-attended \"Godzilla\" film in Japan and also one of only two \"Godzilla\" films to sell less than 1 million tickets. The film's poor performance was part of a wider downturn in ticket sales for monster movies as a genre, and Toho put the production of monster movies on hold. However, Toho had no intention of permanently ending the \"Godzilla\" series, and intended for the pause to only be a temporary hiatus. Throughout the remainder of the 1970s, several treatments for new \"Godzilla\" films were proposed by various writers and producers. None of these films, however, were ultimately made. It was not until 1984 and \"Godzilla\"'s 30th anniversary that Toho would start production on a new \"Godzilla\" movie.\nHome media.\nThe film has been released several times on DVD in the United States. The first release, by Simitar Entertainment, was on May 6, 1998, in a fullscreen version under the title \"The Terror of Godzilla\". The second release, by First Classic Media and distributed by Sony Music Entertainment, was on September 17, 2002. It was released both individually and as part of the \"Ultimate Godzilla DVD Collection\" box set, the latter being released on the same day.\nIt was then re-released by Second Classic Media, this time distributed by Genius Entertainment, on November 20, 2007, both individually and as part of the \"Godzilla Collection\" box set on April 29, 2008.\nIn 2019, both the Japanese version and the export English version were included in a Blu-ray box set released by the Criterion Collection, which included all 15 films from the franchise's Sh\u014dwa era.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12002", "revid": "8097292", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12002", "title": "Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah", "text": "1991 film by Kazuki \u014cmori\n is a 1991 Japanese \"kaiju\" film written and directed by Kazuki \u014cmori and produced by Sh\u014dgo Tomiyama. Distributed by Toho and produced under their subsidiary Toho Pictures, it is the 18th film in the \"Godzilla\" franchise, and is the third film in the franchise's Heisei period. The film features the monster characters Godzilla and King Ghidorah, and stars K\u014dsuke Toyohara, Anna Nakagawa, Megumi Odaka, Katsuhiko Sasaki, Akiji Kobayashi, Yoshio Tsuchiya, and Robert Scott Field, with Kenpachiro Satsuma as Godzilla and Hurricane Ryu as Ghidorah and his cyborg form Mecha-King Ghidorah. The plot revolves around time-travelers from the future who convince Japan to travel back in time to prevent Godzilla's mutation, only to reveal their true motives by unleashing King Ghidorah onto the nation.\nThe production crew of \"Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah\" remained largely unchanged from that of the previous film in the series, \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\". Because the previous installment was a box office disappointment, due to a lack of child viewership and alleged competition with the \"Back to the Future\" franchise, the producers of \"Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah\" were compelled to create a film with more fantasy elements, along with time travel.\n\"Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah\" was the first \"Godzilla\" film since 1975's \"Terror of Mechagodzilla\" to feature a newly orchestrated score by Akira Ifukube. The film was released theatrically in Japan on December 14, 1991, and was followed by \"Godzilla vs. Mothra\" released on December 12, 1992. It was released direct-to-video in North America in 1998 by Columbia TriStar Home Entertainment. Despite mixed reviews from critics, \"Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah\" was more financially successful at the box office than \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\". The film attracted controversy outside Japan due to its perceived Japanese nationalist themes.\nPlot.\nTwo years after his battle with Biollante, Godzilla is still weakened from being infected by the Anti-Nuclear Energy Bacteria (ANEB). Meanwhile, science fiction author Kenichiro Terasawa learns of a group of Japanese soldiers stationed on Lagos Island during the Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign; where they were threatened by American forces, before being saved by a mysterious dinosaur, Godzillasaurus, which Terasawa theorizes to have mutated into the first Godzilla due to nuclear notes on the island.. Powerful businessman and veteran, Yasuaki Shindo, who commanded the Lagos Garrison, confirms Godzillasaurus' existence.\nSoon, a UFO named MOTHER lands near Mount Fuji. When the JSDF investigates, MOTHER is revealed to be a time machine piloted by the Futurians \u2014 Wilson, Grenchiko, Emmy Kano, and the android M-11 \u2014 who explain that they are from the year 2204, claiming Godzilla has completely destroyed Japan. The Futurians plan to travel back to 1944 and remove Godzillasaurus from Lagos Island before the nuclear tests, preventing its mutation into Godzilla. To prove themselves, Emmy presents a copy of Terasawa's book, which he's yet to publish.\nThe Futurians, Terasawa, Miki Saegusa, and Professor Mazaki, travel back to 1944 to Lagos Island, where Japanese forces led by Shindo fight with attacking American forces. As per Shindo's story, Godzillasaurus fights off the Americans, but is mortally wounded by U.S. Navy. After Shindo and his men leave the island, M-11 has Godzillasaurus teleported from Lagos Island to the Bering Strait. Before departing, the Futurians secretly leave three genetic-engineered dragons called Dorats on Lagos Island, which are later irradiated by nuclear tests, mutating and merging King Ghidorah. Returning to 1992, the Futurians use Ghidorah to subjugate Japan and issue an ultimatum of surrender.\nBecoming sympathetic for Japan\u2019s people, Emmy reveals to Terasawa the truth behind the Futurians' mission: in the 23rd century, Japan is an economic superpower surpassing the United States, Russia, and China, even buying out South America and Africa. The Futurians sought to change history and prevent this by creating Ghidorah and having him destroy present-day Japan; and planned to erase Godzilla from history to prevent him from threatening their plans. After M-11 brings Emmy back to MOTHER, she reprograms the android to help her.\nShindo plans to send his nuclear submarine to the Bering Strait and irradiate Godzillasaurus, and recreate Godzilla. However, Terasawa discovers that a Soviet nuclear submarine sank there in the 1970s, releasing enough radiation to mutate Godzillasaurus into the current Godzilla. Godzilla destroys Shindo's submarine and feeds on the radiation, consequently recovering from the ANEB and becoming larger. Godzilla arrives in Japan and faces Ghidorah. M-11 and Terasawa help Emmy sabotage MOTHER's control over Ghidorah, causing Ghidorah to lose focus, before Godzilla blasts off Ghidorah's middle head. After sending Ghidorah crashing into the Sea of Okhotsk, Godzilla destroys MOTHER, killing Wilson and Grenchiko.\nGodzilla turns his ire on Japan, rampaging from Sapporo to Tokyo, where he kills Shindo after seemingly recognizing him. Emmy travels to the future with M-11 and returns having created Mecha-King Ghidorah, a cyborg version of Ghidorah. The cyborg is initially ineffective in its battle with Godzilla, but manages to restrain and carry Godzilla out of Japan. Godzilla breaks from his restraints causing both to fall into the ocean, destroying Mecha-King Ghidorah. Emmy returns to the future with M-11, but not before revealing to Terasawa that she is his descendant. Back in the ocean floor, a still living Godzilla regains consciousness over Ghidorah's remains.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* K\u014dsuke Toyohara as , science fiction author and one of the film's main protagonists.\nProduction.\nConception.\nAlthough the previously filmed \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\" had been the most expensive \"Godzilla\" film produced at the time, its low audience attendance and loss of revenue convinced executive producer and \"Godzilla\" series creator Tomoyuki Tanaka to revitalize the series by bringing back iconic monsters from pre-1984 \"Godzilla\" movies, specifically Godzilla's archenemy King Ghidorah.\n\"Godzilla vs. Biollante\" director and writer Kazuki \u014cmori had initially hoped to start a standalone series centered on Mothra, and was in the process of rewriting a 1990 script for the unrealized film \"Mothra vs. Bagan\". The film was ultimately scrapped by Toho, under the assumption that, unlike Godzilla, Mothra would have been a difficult character to market overseas. The planning stages for a sequel to \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\" were initially hampered by Tanaka's deteriorating health, thus prompting the takeover of Sh\u014dgo Tomiyama as producer. The new producer felt that the financial failure of \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\" was due to the plot being too sophisticated for child audiences, and thus intended to return some of the fantasy elements of the pre-1984 \"Godzilla\" films to the series. \u014cmori himself blamed the lackluster performance of \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\" on competition with \"Back to the Future Part II\", and thus concluded that audiences wanted plots involving time travel. His approach to the film also differed from \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\" in his greater emphasis on developing the personalities of the monsters rather than the human characters.\nAkira Ifukube agreed to compose the film's score on the insistence of his daughter, although he had been dissatisfied with the way his compositions had been treated in \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\".\nSpecial effects.\nThe Godzilla suits used in \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\" were reused in \"Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah\", though with slight modifications. The original suit used for land-based and full body shots had its head replaced with a wider and flatter one, and the body cut in half. The upper half was used in scenes where Godzilla emerges from the sea and during close-ups during the character's first fight with King Ghidorah. The suit used previously for scenes set at sea was modified with rounder shoulders, a more prominent chest, and an enhanced face, and was used throughout the majority of the film's Godzilla scenes.\nThe redesigned King Ghidorah featured much more advanced wirework puppetry than its predecessors, and effects team leader Koichi Kawakita designed the \"Godzillasaurus\" as a more paleontologically accurate-looking dinosaur than Godzilla itself as a nod to American filmmakers aspiring to direct their own \"Godzilla\" films with the intention of making the monster more realistic. \u014cmori's original draft specified that the dinosaur that would become Godzilla was a \"Tyrannosaurus\", though this was rejected by creature designer Shinji Nishikawa, who stated that he \"couldn't accept that a tyrannosaur could become Godzilla\". The final suit combined features of \"Tyrannosaurus\" with Godzilla, and real octopus blood was used during the bombardment scene. Because the Godzillasaurus' arms were much smaller than Godzilla's, suit performer Wataru Fukuda had to operate them with levers within the costume. The creature's distress calls were recycled Gamera cries.\nHome media.\nThe Columbia/TriStar Home Video DVD version was released in 1998 as a single disc double feature with \"Godzilla vs. Mothra\". The picture was full frame (1.33:1) [NTSC] and the audio in English (2.0). There were no subtitles. Extras included the trailer for \"Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah\" and \"Godzilla vs. Mothra\".\nThe Sony Blu-ray version was released on May 6, 2014, as a two-disc double feature with \"Godzilla vs. Mothra\". The picture was MPEG-4 AVC (1.85:1) [1080p] and the audio was in Japanese and English (DTS-HD Master Audio 2.0). Subtitles were added in English, English SDH and French. Extras included the theatrical trailer and three teasers in HD with English subtitles.\nReception.\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 9 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 4.80/10.\nJoseph Savitski of \"Beyond Hollywood\" said \"This entry in the popular monster series is a disappointing and flawed effort unworthy of the 'Godzilla' name.\" Film historian and critic David Kalat wrote \"Despite its shortcomings, illogic, and overpopulated cast, \"Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah\" is crammed full of ideas, richly visualized innovations, a genuine spirit of fun, and some of the most complex emotional manipulation ever to grace the series.\"\nControversy.\nThe film was considered controversial at the time of its release, being contemporary to a period of between America and Japan, but mainly due to its fictional World War II depictions. Gerald Glaubitz of the Pearl Harbor Survivors Association appeared alongside director Kazuki \u014cmori on \"Entertainment Tonight\" and condemned the film as being in \"very poor taste\" and detrimental to American-Japanese relations. Ishir\u014d Honda also criticized \u014cmori, stating that the scene in which Godzilla attacks and crushes American G.I.s went \"too far\". Conversely, Godzilla historian Steve Ryfle said American media reports of supposed anti-Americanism \"weren't really thought-provoking or insightful.\" \u014cmori has denied all such allegations, stating that the American extras in the film had been \"happy about being crushed and squished by Godzilla.\" Commenting on the controversy in 2006, \u014cmori stated: {\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12003", "revid": "1101673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12003", "title": "Godzilla vs. Mothra", "text": "1992 Japanese kaiju film\n is a 1992 Japanese \"kaiju\" film directed by Takao Okawara, with special effects by K\u014dichi Kawakita. Distributed by Toho and produced under their subsidiary Toho Pictures, it is the 19th film in the \"Godzilla\" franchise, and is the fourth film in the franchise's Heisei era. The film features the fictional monster characters Godzilla, Mothra, and Battra, and stars Tetsuya Bessho, Satomi Kobayashi, Takehiro Murata, Megumi Odaka, Shiori Yonezawa, Makoto Otake, Akiji Kobayashi, Koichi Ueda, Shinya Owada, Keiko Imamura, Sayaka Osawa, Saburo Shinoda and Akira Takarada, with Kenpachiro Satsuma as Godzilla and Hurricane Ryu as the Battra larva. The plot follows Battra and Mothra's attempts to prevent Godzilla from rampaging Yokohama.\nOriginally conceived as a standalone Mothra film entitled \"Mothra vs. Bagan\", the film is notable for its return to a more fantasy-based, family-oriented atmosphere, evocative of older \"Godzilla\" films. Although he did not return as director, \u014cmori continued his trend of incorporating Hollywood elements into his screenplay, in this case nods to the \"Indiana Jones\" franchise.\n\"Godzilla vs. Mothra\" was released theatrically in Japan on December 12, 1992. The film received critical acclaim and became the highest-grossing Japanese film of 1993. \"Godzilla vs. Mothra\" was released direct-to-video in the United States in 1998 by Columbia Tristar Home Video under the title \"Godzilla and Mothra: The Battle for Earth\". The film was the second highest-grossing film in Japan in 1993, with \"Jurassic Park\" being the highest-grossing.\nThe film was followed by \"Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II\", which was released on December 11, 1993.\nPlot.\nFollowing the battle with Mecha-King Ghidorah in mid-1992, a meteoroid crashes in the Izu\u2013Ogasawara Trench and awakens Godzilla from hibernation.\nSix months later, ex-archaeologist Takuya Fujito is detained after stealing an ancient artifact in Thailand. Later, Ryuzo Dobashi, a representative of the Japanese prime minister, offers to drop Takuya's charges in exchange for exploring Infant Island in Indonesia with his ex-wife, Masako Tezuka and Kenji Ando, the secretary of the rapacious Marutomo Company. \nAfter arriving on Infant Island, the trio find a cave containing a depiction of two giant moths in battle. Further exploration leads them to a giant egg and a pair of diminutive humanoids called the Cosmos, who identify the egg as belonging to Mothra. The Cosmos tell of an ancient civilization that tried to control the Earth's climate 12,000 years ago, thus provoking the Earth into creating Battra, a male divine moth with a ferocious appearance that vaguely resembles Mothra. Battra destroyed the civilization and their weather-controlling device but then became uncontrollable, and started to harm the very planet that created him. Mothra was then sent by the Earth to fight Battra, who eventually sealed in the Arctic Ocean by the former.\nThe Cosmos explain how the meteoroid uncovered Mothra's egg, and may have awoken Battra, who is still embittered over humanity's interference in the Earth's natural orders. The Marutomo Company sends a freighter to Infant Island to pick up the egg, ostensibly to protect it. As they are sailing, Godzilla surfaces and heads toward the newly hatched Mothra larva. Battra soon appears in his larval form and joins the battle, allowing Mothra to retreat. The battle between Godzilla and Battra is eventually taken underwater, where the force of the battle causes a giant crack on the Philippine Sea Plate that swallows the two.\nAt Manila, Masako and Takuya later discover Ando's true intentions when he takes the Cosmos to Marutomo headquarters, where its president Takeshi Tomokane intends to use them for publicity purposes. Mothra enters Tokyo in an attempt to rescue the Cosmos, but the Japan Self-Defense Forces attack her. The wounded Mothra heads for the National Diet Building and starts constructing a cocoon around herself. Meanwhile, Godzilla surfaces from Mount Fuji, while Battra frees himself from the Earth's crust and continues towards Japan. Both Mothra and Battra metamorphose into their imago forms and converge at Yokohama Cosmo World where they begin to fight once more. Godzilla interrupts the battle and initially attacks Battra. Mothra then briefly incapacitates Godzilla and comes to Battra's aid before returning to battle with Godzilla. Battra then returns the favor coming to Mothra's defense.\nRegrouping, Mothra and Battra decide to join forces against Godzilla, determining Godzilla to be the greater threat to the planet. Eventually, the two moths overwhelm and carry Godzilla over the ocean. Godzilla kills Battra by biting his throat and blasting his wound with atomic breath. An exhausted Mothra drops Godzilla and the lifeless Battra into the ocean and seals Battra's resting place below the surface by creating a mystical glyph with scales from her wings.\nThe next morning, the Cosmos explain that Battra had been waiting many years to destroy an even larger meteoroid that would threaten the Earth in 1999. Mothra had promised she would stop the future collision if Battra were to die, and she and the Cosmos leave Earth as the humans bid farewell.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Tetsuya Bessho as \nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nThe idea of a film featuring a revamped Mothra dated back to a screenplay written in 1990 by Kazuki Omori entitled \"Mothra vs. Bagan\", which revolved around a vengeful dragon called Bagan who sought to destroy humanity for its abuse of the Earth's resources, only to be defeated by Mothra, the goddess of peace. However, following the poor box office performance of \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\", the project was ultimately scrapped by Toho, under the assumption that Mothra was a character born purely out of Japanese culture, and thus would have been difficult to market overseas unlike the more internationally recognized Godzilla.\nAfter the success of \"Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah\", producer Sh\u014dgo Tomiyama and \"Godzilla\" series creator Tomoyuki Tanaka proposed resurrecting King Ghidorah in a film entitled \"Ghidorah's Counterattack\", but relented when polls demonstrated that Mothra was more popular with women, which makes up a larger percentage of Japan's population compared to men. Tomiyama replaced \u014cmori with Takao Okawara as director, but maintained \u014cmori as screenwriter. Hoping to maintain as much of \"Mothra vs. Bagan\" as possible, \u014cmori reconceptualized Bagan as Badora, a dark twin to Mothra. The character was later renamed Battra (a portmanteau of \"battle\" and \"Mothra\"), as the first name was disharmonious in Japanese. Tomiyama had intended to feature \"Mothra\" star Frankie Sakai, but was unable to because of scheduling conflicts. The final battle between Godzilla, Mothra and Battra was originally meant to have a more elaborate conclusion; as in the final product, Godzilla would have been transported to sea, only to kill Battra and plunge into the ocean. However, the site of their fall would have been the submerged, Stonehenge-like ruins of the Cosmos civilization, which would have engulfed and trapped Godzilla with a forcefield activated by Mothra.\nIshir\u014d Honda, director of the original 1954 \"Godzilla\" film and many others, visited the set shortly before dying.\nPost-production.\nKoichi Kawakita continued his theme of giving Godzilla's opponents the ability to metamorphose, and had initially intended to have Mothra killed off, only to be reborn as the cybernetic moth \"MechaMothra\", though this was scrapped early in production, thus making \"Godzilla vs. Mothra\" the first post-1984 \"Godzilla\" movie to not feature a mecha contraption. The underwater scenes were filmed through an aquarium filled with fish set between the performers and the camera. Kawakita's team constructed a new Godzilla suit from previously used molds, though it was made slimmer than previous suits, the neck given more prominent ribbing, and the arrangement of the character's dorsal plates was changed so that the largest plate was placed on the middle of the back. The arms were more flexible at the biceps, and the face was given numerous cosmetic changes; the forehead was reduced and flattened, the teeth scaled down, and the eyes given a golden tint. The head was also electronically modified to allow more vertical mobility. Filming the Godzilla scenes was hampered when the suit previously used for \"Biollante\" and \"King Ghidorah\", which was needed for some stunt-work, was stolen from Toho studios, only to be recovered at Lake Okutama in bad condition.\nThe remains of the suit were recycled for the first battle sequence. Godzilla's roar was reverted to the high-pitched shriek from pre-1984 \"Godzilla\" films, while Battra's sound effects were recycled from those of Rodan. In designing Battra, which the script described as a \"black Mothra\", artist Shinji Nishikawa sought to distance its design from Mothra's by making its adult form more similar to its larval one than is the case with Mothra, and combining Mothra's two eyes into one.\nRelease.\n\"Godzilla vs. Mothra\" was released in Japan on December 12, 1992, where it was distributed by Toho. The film sold approximately 4,200,000 tickets in Japan, becoming the number one Japanese film on the domestic market in the period that included the year 1993. It earned \u00a52.22 billion in distribution income, and grossed \u00a5 in total.\nThe film was released in the United States as \"Godzilla and Mothra: The Battle for Earth\" on April 28, 1998, on home video by Columbia TriStar Home Video.\nCritical response.\n\"Godzilla vs. Mothra\" received critical acclaim upon its Japanese release. Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes has a 78% approval rating from critics, based on 9 reviews with an average score of 5.7/10.\nEd Godziszewski of Monster Zero said, \"Rushed into production but a few months after \"Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah\", this film is unable to hide its hurried nature [but] effects-wise, the film makes up for the story's shortcomings and then some.\" Japan Hero said, \"While this movie is not the best of the Heisei series, it is still a really interesting movie. The battles are cool, and Battra was an interesting idea. If you have never seen this movie, I highly recommend it.\"\nStomp Tokyo said the film is \"one of the better \"Godzilla\" movies in that the scenes in which monsters do not appear actually make some sort of sense. And for once, they are acted with some gusto, so that we as viewers can actually come to like the characters on screen, or at least be entertained by them.\" Mike Bogue of American Kaiju said the film \"[does] not live up to its potential\", but added that \"[its] colorful and elaborate spectacle eventually won [him] over\" and \"the main story thread dealing with the eventual reconciliation of the divorced couple adequately holds the human plot together.\"\nHome media.\nThe film was released by Sony on Blu-ray in \"The Toho Godzilla Collection\" on May 6, 2014.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12004", "revid": "41255362", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12004", "title": "Godzilla (1954 film)", "text": "1954 Japanese monster film by Ishir\u014d Honda\n is a 1954 Japanese epic \"kaiju\" film directed and co-written by Ishir\u014d Honda, with special effects by Eiji Tsuburaya. Produced and distributed by Toho, it is the first film in the \"Godzilla\" franchise. The film stars Akira Takarada, Momoko K\u014dchi, Akihiko Hirata, Takashi Shimura, with Haruo Nakajima and Katsumi Tezuka as Godzilla. In the film, Japan's authorities deal with the sudden appearance of a giant monster, whose attacks trigger fears of nuclear holocaust in post-war Japan.\n\"Godzilla\" entered production after a Japanese-Indonesian co-production collapsed. Tsuburaya originally proposed a giant octopus before the filmmakers decided on a dinosaur-inspired creature. \"Godzilla\" pioneered a form of special effects called suitmation in which a stunt performer wearing a suit interacts with miniature sets. Principal photography ran 51 days, and special effects photography ran 71 days.\n\"Godzilla\" premiered in Nagoya on October 27, 1954, and received a wide release in Japan on November 3. It was met with mixed reviews upon release but was a box-office success, winning the Japanese Movie Association Award for Best Special Effects. The film earned \u00a5183 million in distributor rentals, making it the eighth-highest-grossing Japanese film of that year. In 1956, a heavily re-edited \"Americanized\" version, titled \"Godzilla, King of the Monsters!\", was released in the United States.\nThe film spawned a multimedia franchise that was recognized by \"Guinness World Records\" as the longest-running film franchise in history. The character Godzilla has since become an international popular culture icon. The film and Tsuburaya have been largely credited for establishing the template for \"tokusatsu\" media. The film received reappraisal in later years and has since been regarded as one of the best monster films ever made. The film was followed by the sequel \"Godzilla Raids Again\".\nPlot.\nIn 1954, after the Japanese freighter \"Eiko-maru\" is destroyed near Odo Island, another ship\u2014the \"Bingo-maru\"\u2014is sent to investigate, only to meet the same fate with few survivors. A fishing boat from Odo is also destroyed, with one survivor. Fishing catches mysteriously drop to zero, blamed by an elder on the ancient sea creature known as \"Godzilla\". Reporters arrive on Odo Island to further investigate. A villager tells one of the reporters that something in the sea is ruining the fishing. That evening, a storm strikes the island, destroying the reporters' helicopter, and Godzilla, briefly seen, destroys 17 homes, kills nine people, and kills 20 of the villagers' livestock.\nOdo residents travel to Tokyo to demand disaster relief. The villagers' and reporters' evidence describes damage consistent with something large crushing the village. The government sends paleontologist Kyohei Yamane to investigate the island, where giant radioactive footprints and a trilobite are discovered. The village alarm bell is rung, and Yamane and the villagers rush to see the monster, retreating after seeing it is a giant dinosaur. Yamane presents his findings in Tokyo, estimating that Godzilla is tall and has evolved from an ancient sea creature, becoming a terrestrial creature. He concludes that Godzilla has been disturbed by underwater hydrogen bomb testing. Debate ensues about notifying the public about the danger of the monster. Meanwhile, 17 ships are lost at sea.\nTen frigates are dispatched to attempt to kill the monster using depth charges. The mission disappoints Yamane, who wants Godzilla to be studied. When Godzilla survives the attack, officials appeal to Yamane for ideas on how to kill the monster. Still, Yamane tells them that Godzilla is unkillable, having survived H-bomb testing, and that it must be studied. Yamane's daughter, Emiko, decides to break off her arranged engagement to Yamane's colleague, Daisuke Serizawa, because of her love for Hideto Ogata, a salvage ship captain. When a reporter arrives and asks to interview Serizawa, Emiko escorts the reporter to Serizawa's home. After Serizawa refuses to divulge his current work to the reporter, he gives Emiko a demonstration of his recent project on the condition that she must keep it a secret. The demonstration horrifies her, and she leaves without mentioning the engagement. Shortly after she returns home, Godzilla surfaces from Tokyo Bay and attacks Shinagawa. After attacking a passing train, Godzilla returns to the ocean.\nAfter consulting international experts, the Japan Self-Defense Forces constructs a tall and 50,000 volt electrified fence along the coast and deploys forces to kill Godzilla. Dismayed that there is no plan to study Godzilla for its resistance to radiation, Yamane returns home, where Emiko and Ogata await, hoping to get his consent for them to wed. When Ogata disagrees with Yamane, arguing that Godzilla's threat outweighs any potential benefits from studying the monster, Yamane tells him to leave. Godzilla resurfaces and breaks through the fence to Tokyo with its atomic breath, unleashing more destruction across the city. Further attempts to kill the monster with tanks and fighter jets fail, and Godzilla returns to the ocean. The day after, hospitals and shelters are crowded with the maimed and the dead, with some survivors suffering from radiation sickness.\nDistraught by the devastation, Emiko tells Ogata about Serizawa's research, a weapon called the \"Oxygen Destroyer\", which disintegrates oxygen atoms and causes organisms to asphyxiate, then dissolve, leaving nothing behind. Emiko and Ogata go to Serizawa to convince him to use the Oxygen Destroyer. Still, he initially refuses, explaining that if he uses the device, the world's superpowers will force him to construct more Oxygen Destroyers as a superweapon. After watching a program displaying the nation's current tragedy, Serizawa finally accepts their pleas. As Serizawa burns his notes, Emiko breaks down crying.\nA navy ship takes Ogata and Serizawa to plant the device in Tokyo Bay. After finding Godzilla, Serizawa activates the device and cuts off his air supply, taking the secret of the Oxygen Destroyer to his grave. The Oxygen Destroyer successfully kills Godzilla and disintegrates its body; many mourn Serizawa's death. Yamane believes that if nuclear weapons testing continues, another Godzilla may rise in the future.\nCast.\nCast taken from \"Japan's Favorite Mon-Star\", except where cited otherwise.\nThemes.\nIn the film, Godzilla symbolizes nuclear holocaust from Japan's perspective and has since been culturally identified as a strong metaphor for nuclear weapons. Producer Tomoyuki Tanaka stated, \"The theme of the film, from the beginning, was the terror of the bomb. Mankind had created the bomb, and now nature was going to take revenge on mankind.\" Director Ishir\u014d Honda filmed Godzilla's Tokyo rampage to mirror the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and stated, \"If Godzilla had been a dinosaur or some other animal, he would have been killed by just one cannonball. But if he were equal to an atomic bomb, we wouldn't know what to do. So, I took the characteristics of an atomic bomb and applied them to Godzilla.\"\nOn March 1, 1954, just a few months before the film was made, the Japanese fishing vessel \"Daigo Fukury\u016b Maru\" (\"Lucky Dragon No. 5\") had been showered with radioactive fallout from the U.S. military's 15-megaton \"Castle Bravo\" hydrogen bomb test at nearby Bikini Atoll. The boat's catch was contaminated, spurring a panic in Japan about the safety of eating fish, and the crew was sickened, with one crew member eventually dying from radiation sickness. The event led to the emergence of a large and enduring anti-nuclear movement that gathered 30 million signatures on an anti-nuclear petition by August 1955 and eventually became institutionalized as the Japan Council against Atomic and Hydrogen Bombs. The film's opening scene of Godzilla destroying a Japanese vessel is a direct reference to these events and had a strong impact on Japanese viewers, with the recent event still fresh in the mind of the public.\nAcademics Anne Allison, Thomas Schnellb\u00e4cher, and Steve Ryfle have said that \"Godzilla\" contains political and cultural undertones that can be attributed to what the Japanese had experienced in World War II and that Japanese audiences were able to connect emotionally to the monster. They theorized that the viewers saw Godzilla as a victim and felt that the creature's backstory reminded them of their experiences in World War II. The academics have also claimed that as the atomic bomb testing that woke Godzilla was carried out by the United States, the film can in a way be seen to blame the United States for the problems and struggles that Japan experienced after World War II had ended. They also felt that the film could have served as a cultural coping method to help the people of Japan move on from the events of the war.\nBrian Merchant from \"Motherboard\" called the film \"a bleak, powerful metaphor for nuclear power that still endures today,\" and on its themes, he stated: \"It's an unflinchingly bleak, deceptively powerful film about coping with and taking responsibility for the incomprehensible, man-made tragedy. Specifically, nuclear tragedies. It's arguably the best window into post-war attitudes towards nuclear power we've got\u2014as seen from the perspective of its greatest victims.\" Terrence Rafferty from \"The New York Times\" said Godzilla was \"an obvious gigantic, unsubtle, grimly purposeful metaphor for the atomic bomb\" and felt the film was \"extraordinarily solemn, full of earnest discussions\".\nMark Jacobson from the website of \"New York\" magazine said that Godzilla \"transcends humanist prattle. Very few constructs have so perfectly embodied the overriding fears of a particular era. He is the symbol of a world gone wrong, a work of man that once created cannot be taken back or deleted. He rears up out of the sea as a creature of no particular belief system, apart from even the most elastic version of evolution and taxonomy, a reptilian id that lives inside the deepest recesses of the collective unconscious that cannot be reasoned with, a merciless undertaker who broaches no deals.\" Regarding the film, Jacobson stated, \"Honda's first Godzilla... is in line with these inwardly turned post-war films and perhaps the most brutally unforgiving of them. Shame-ridden self-flagellation was in order, and who better to supply the rubber-suited psychic punishment than the Rorschach-shaped big fella himself?\"\nTim Martin from \"The Daily Telegraph\" said that the original 1954 film was \"a far cry from its B-movie successors. It was a sober allegory of a film with ambitions as large as its thrice-normal budget, designed to shock and horrify an adult audience. Its roster of frightening images\u2014cities in flames, overstuffed hospitals, irradiated children\u2014would have been all too familiar to cinema-goers for whom memories of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were still less than a decade old, while its script posed deliberately inflammatory questions about the balance of postwar power and the development of nuclear energy.\" Martin also commented on how the film's themes were omitted in the American version by stating, \"Its thematic preoccupation with nuclear energy proved even less acceptable to the American distributors who, after buying the film, began an extensive reshoot and re-cut for Western markets.\"\nProduction.\nCrew.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPersonnel taken from The Criterion Collection.\nDevelopment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"[If] our hearts were not in it 100 percent it would not have worked. We wanted [the monster] to possess the terrifying characteristics of an atomic bomb. This was our approach, without any reservations.\"\n\u2013 Honda on his and the crew's vision for the film.\nIn 1954, Toho originally planned to produce , a Japanese-Indonesian co-production that would have starred Ry\u014d Ikebe as a former Japanese soldier who was stationed in the Dutch East Indies during the Japanese occupation of Indonesia, and Yoshiko Yamaguchi as his half-Indonesian love interest. However, anti-Japanese sentiment in Indonesia put political pressure on the government to deny visas for Japanese filmmakers. Another potential factor for the film's cancellation was because of then-ongoing disagreements between the Japanese and Indonesian governments over World War Two colonial reparations; an issue that would not be resolved until 1958. The film was to be co-produced with Perfini, filmed on location in Jakarta in color, a first for a major Toho production, and was to open markets for Japanese films in Southeast Asia.\nProducer Tomoyuki Tanaka flew to Jakarta to renegotiate with the Indonesian government but was unsuccessful. On the flight back to Japan, he conceived the idea for a giant monster film, inspired by the 1953 film \"The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms\" and the \"Daigo Fukury\u016b Maru\" incident, which happened in March 1954. The film's opening sequence is a direct reference to the incident. Tanaka felt the film had potential because nuclear fears were generating news and monster films were becoming popular because of the financial success of \"The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms\" and the 1952 re-release of \"King Kong\", the latter of which earned more money than previous releases.\nDuring his flight, Tanaka wrote an outline with the working title , and pitched it to executive producer Iwao Mori. Mori approved the project in mid\u2013April 1954 after special effects director Eiji Tsuburaya agreed to do the film's effects and confirmed that the film was financially feasible. Mori also felt the project was perfect as a vehicle for Tsuburaya and to test the storyboarding system that he instituted at the time. Mori also approved Tanaka's choice to have Ishir\u014d Honda direct the film and shortened the title of the production to \"Project G\" (G for Giant), as well as giving the production classified status and ordered Tanaka to minimize his attention on other films and mainly focus on \"Project G\".\nToho originally intended for Senkichi Taniguchi to direct the film, as he was originally attached to direct \"In the Shadow of Glory\". However, Taniguchi declined the assignment. Honda was not Toho's first choice for the film's director, but his wartime experience made him an ideal candidate for the film's anti-nuclear themes. Several other directors passed on the project, feeling the idea was \"stupid,\" but Honda accepted the assignment because of his interest in science and \"unusual things\" and stated, \"I had no problem taking it seriously.\" It was during the production of \"Godzilla\" that Honda worked with assistant director K\u014dji Kajita for the first time. Afterwards, Kajita would go on to collaborate with Honda as his chief assistant director for 17 films over the course of 10 years. Science fiction films lacked respect from film critics so Honda, Tanaka, and Tsuburaya agreed on depicting a monster attack as if it were a real event, with the serious tone of a documentary.\nWriting.\nTsuburaya submitted an outline of his own that was written three years before \"Godzilla\" and featured a giant octopus attacking ships in the Indian Ocean. However, Tanaka sought sci-fi and horror writer Shigeru Kayama to write the story based on Tanaka's ideas, who accepted the job on May 12, 1954. Kayama was initially hesitant, feeling that the subject matter was \"too sensitive\" and could easily be mocked under the wrong direction, but he found the idea of protesting nuclear weapons intriguing. According to Kayama's diaries, he had completed a 50-page treatment in 11 days. His treatment borrowed elements from films such as \"The Lost World\", \"King Kong\", \"The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms\", and from his own 1952 short story, \"Jira Monster\", which featured a reptilian creature with hind legs terrorizing primitive civilians and withstanding weaponry.\nIn Kayama's treatment, Dr. Yamane is depicted wearing dark shades, a cape, and living in a European-style house from which he emerged only at night. Godzilla was portrayed as more animal-like by coming ashore to feed on animals, with an ostensibly gorilla-like interest in females. Kayama's story also featured less destruction and borrowed a scene from \"The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms\" by having Godzilla attack a lighthouse. Kayama added his own critical stance on nuclear weapons by opening with a voice-over detailing and criticizing the 1952 and 1954 hydrogen bomb tests. This was followed by a montage of shots that included real footage of the \"Daigo Fukury\u016b Maru\" aftermath, its victims, and the paranoia that followed.\nTakeo Murata and Honda co-wrote the screenplay in three weeks and confined themselves in a Japanese inn in Tokyo's Shibuya ward. On writing the script, Murata stated, \"Director Honda and I...racked our brains to make Mr. Kayama's original treatment into a full, working vision.\" Murata said that Tsuburaya and Tanaka pitched their ideas as well. Tanaka requested that they do not spend too much money, but Tsuburaya encouraged them to \"do whatever it takes to make it work.\" Murata and Honda redeveloped key characters and elements by adding Emiko's love triangle. In Kayama's story, Serizawa was depicted as merely a colleague of Dr. Yamane's. Godzilla's full appearance was to be revealed during the Odo Island hurricane, but Honda and Murata opted to show parts of the creature as the film built up to his full reveal. Honda and Murata also introduced the characters Hagiwara and Dr. Tanabe in their draft, but the role of Shinkichi, who had a substantial role in Kayama's story, was cut down.\nHonda toned down much of Kayama's political criticism, especially the opening because he felt it was inappropriate to use the \"Daigo Fukury\u016b Maru\" incident and wanted to depict Godzilla as an invisible fear.\nA novel, written by Kayama, was published on October 25, 1954, by Iwaya Shoten as .\nCreature design.\nGodzilla was designed by Teiz\u014d Toshimitsu and Akira Watanabe under Eiji Tsuburaya's supervision. Early on, Tanaka contemplated having the monster be gorilla-like or whale-like in design because of the name \"Gojira\", a combination of the Japanese words for and , but he eventually settled on a dinosaur-like design. Kazuyoshi Abe was hired earlier to design Godzilla, but his ideas were later rejected since Godzilla looked too humanoid and mammalian, with a head shaped like a mushroom cloud; however, Abe was retained to help draw the film's storyboards.\nToshimitsu and Watanabe decided to base Godzilla's design on dinosaurs and, by using dinosaur books and magazines as a reference, combined elements of a Tyrannosaurus, Iguanodon and the dorsal fins of a Stegosaurus. Despite wanting to use stop motion animation, Tsuburaya reluctantly settled on suitmation. Toshimitsu sculpted three clay models on which the suit would be based. The first two were rejected, but the third was approved by Tsuburaya, Tanaka, and Honda.\nThe Godzilla suit was constructed by Kanju Yagi, Yasuei Yagi, and Eizo Kaimai, who used thin bamboo sticks and wire to build a frame for the interior of the suit and added metal mesh and cushioning over it to bolster its structure and finally applied coats of latex. Coats of molten rubber were additionally applied, followed by carved indentations and strips of latex glued onto the surface of the suit to create Godzilla's scaly hide. This first version of the suit weighed 100 kilograms (220 pounds). For close-ups, Toshimitsu created a smaller-scale, mechanical, hand-operated puppet that sprayed streams of mist from its mouth to act as Godzilla's atomic breath.\nHaruo Nakajima and Katsumi Tezuka were chosen to perform in the Godzilla suit because of their strength and endurance. At the first costume fitting, Nakajima fell down inside the suit since it had been created by using heavy latex and inflexible materials. This first version of the suit was cut into two and used for scenes requiring only partial shots of Godzilla or close-ups, with the lower half fitted with rope suspenders for Nakajima to wear. For full-body shots, a second identical suit was created, which was made lighter than the first suit, but Nakajima could still be inside for only three minutes before passing out. Nakajima lost 20 pounds during the production of the film. Nakajima would go on to portray Godzilla and other monsters until his retirement in 1972. Tezuka filmed scenes in the Godzilla suit, but his older body made him unable to fully commit to the physical demands required by the role. As a result, few of his scenes made it to the final cut, as very few scenes were considered usable. Tezuka filled in for Nakajima when he was unavailable or needed relief from the physically demanding role.\nName.\nGodzilla's name was also a source of consternation for the filmmakers. Because the monster had no name, the first draft of the film was not titled after the monster but rather titled \"G\", also known as \"Kaihatsu keikaku G\" (\"Development Plan G\"); the \"G\" stood for \"Giant.\" Nakajima confirmed that Toho held a contest to name the monster. The monster was eventually named \"Gojira\". A prevalent rumor suggested that \"Gojira\" was taken from the nickname of a hulking Toho employee. Tanaka became indirectly responsible for the rumor after having confirmed that the name \"Gojira\" was suggested to him by a colleague who knew a burly employee nicknamed as such, stating that no one took the name seriously but eventually all realized that it was a \"fitting name\" for the monster. Fumio Saito, a former member of Toho's literature department, further spurred the rumor, stating that due to the secrecy behind the production, the film couldn't be properly promoted in any way. So much so that he alleged that the \"real man behind the nickname \"Gojira\" complained to us.\"\nIn a 1998 BBC documentary on Godzilla, Kimi Honda, the widow of the director, dismissed the employee-name story as a tall tale and stated that she believed that Honda, Tanaka, and Tsuburaya gave \"considerable thought\" to the name of the monster, \"the backstage boys at Toho loved to joke around with tall stories, but I don't believe that one.\" In 2003, a Japanese television special claimed to have identified the anonymous hulking Toho employee as Shiro Amikura, a Toho contract actor from the 1950s. However, Nakajima noted that the identity of Amikura \"came out of the blue.\"\nFilm scholars Steve Ryfle and Ed Godziszewski noted inconsistencies in testimonies from those that verified the employee-name rumor, mostly citing faulty memory. They alluded to Kayama's diaries that showed he had already coined the name \"Gojira\" before the rumor ever surfaced and that the name was likely derived from Kayama's short story \"Jira Monster\". As for the English variation of the name, they surmised that it was conceived by Toho's international sales department for export (no one has claimed credit for it) and that the English name is a \"phonetic translation of the three monosyllabic katakana characters (Go-Dzi-La).\"\nSpecial effects.\nThe film's special effects were directed by Eiji Tsuburaya. Part of the reason why Mori approved the film was because he saw it as an opportunity for Toho to reclaim its status as Japan's leading studio in special effects filmmaking. After Tsuburaya launched Toho's special effects division in the late 1930s, he supervised the effects for war dramas financed by the Imperial Japanese Navy. Tsuburaya proved to be such an important figure that he was placed in charge of a factory that produced detailed miniatures used in educational training films on behalf of the Imperial Navy. While Tsuburaya was banned from Japan's film industry during the Occupation of Japan, he was hired back by Mori once the Occupation ended \u2014 albeit as a contractor, rather than an employee.\nFor the effects footage to sync with the live-action footage, Honda and Tsuburaya would develop plans early during development and briefly meet prior to the day's shoot. Kajita would shuttle Tsuburaya to Honda's set to observe how a scene was being shot and where the actors were being positioned. Kajita also ushered Honda to the effects stage to observe how Tsuburaya was shooting certain effects. Honda edited the live-action footage, and he left blank leaders for Tsuburaya to insert the effects footage. At times, Honda had to cut out certain effects footage. Tsuburaya disapproved of these decisions because Honda's cuts did not match the effects; however, Honda had the final say in those matters.\nTsuburaya originally wanted to use stop motion for the film's special effects but realized that it would have taken seven years to complete based on the current staff and infrastructure at Toho. Settling on suitmation and miniature effects, Tsuburaya and his crew scouted the locations that Godzilla was to destroy and was nearly arrested after a security guard overheard their plans for destruction but were released after they showed the police their Toho business cards. Kintaro Makino, the chief of miniature construction, was given blueprints by Akira Watanabe for the miniatures and assigned 30 to 40 workers from the carpentry department to build them, which took a month to build the scaled-down version of Ginza. Most of the miniatures were built at a 1:25 scale, but the Diet Building was scaled down to a 1:33 scale to look smaller than Godzilla. It proved to be too expensive to use stop-motion extensively throughout the picture, but the final film included a stop-motion scene of Godzilla's tail destroying the Nichigeki Theater Building.\nThe buildings' framework was made of thin wooden boards reinforced with a mixture of plaster and white chalk. Explosives were installed inside miniatures that were to be destroyed by Godzilla's atomic breath. Some were sprayed with gasoline to make them burn more easily; others included small cracks so they could crumble easily. Optical animation techniques were used for Godzilla's glowing dorsal fins by having hundreds of cells, which were drawn frame by frame. Haruo Nakajima perspired inside the suit so much that the Yagi brothers had to dry out the cotton lining every morning and sometimes reline the interior of the suit and repair damages.\nThe typhoon waves were created by stagehands who overturned barrels of water into a water tank where the miniature Odo Island shoreline was built. Multiple composition shots were used for the Odo Island scenes. Most of the Odo Island scenes were filmed near rice fields. Toho hired en masse part-time employees to work on the film's optical effects. Half of the 400 hired staff were mostly part-timers with little to no experience. An early version of Godzilla's full reveal was filmed that featured Godzilla, via hand-operated puppet, devouring a cow. Sadamasa Arikawa thought the scene was too gruesome and convinced Tsuburaya to refilm it. Optical effects were utilized for Godzilla's footprints on the beach by painting them onto glass and inserting them into an area of the live-action footage. Special effects photography lasted for 71 days.\nFilming.\nOn the first day of filming, Honda addressed a crew of 30 to read the script and to leave the project if they did not feel convinced since he wanted to work only with those who had confidence in him and the film. Most of the film was shot in the Toho lot. Honda's team also filmed on location in the Shima Peninsula in Mie Prefecture to film the Odo Island scenes, which used 50 Toho extras, and Honda's team established their base in the town of Toba. Local villagers were also used as extras for the Odo Island scenes. The dance ritual scene was filmed on location in Mie Prefecture, with local villagers performing as the dancers. The cast and crew commuted every morning by boat to Toba, Mie, and worked under harsh weather temperatures. Honda worked shirtless and so suffered a blistering sunburn on his back that left permanent scars.\nToho had negotiated with the Japan Self-Defense Forces (JSDF) to film scenes requiring the military and filmed target practices and drills for the film. Honda's team followed a convoy of JSDF vehicles for the convoy dispatch scene. Two thousand girls were used from an all-girls high school for the prayer-for-peace scene. The filmmakers had little co-operation from the JSDF and had to rely on World War II stock footage, provided by the Japanese military, for certain scenes. The stock footage was sourced from 16 mm prints. Honda's team spent 51 days shooting the film.\nMusic and sound effects.\nThe film's score was composed by Akira Ifukube. After meeting with Tomoyuki Tanaka, Eiji Tsuburaya, and Ishir\u014d Honda, Ifukube enthusiastically accepted the job. After learning that the main character was a monster, Ifukube said, \"I couldn't sit still when I heard that in this movie the main character was a reptile that would be rampaging through the city.\" Ifukube was not shown the final film and had only a week to compose his music. Within that time, he was shown only a model of Godzilla and the screenplay. Tsuburaya briefly showed Ifukube some footage but with the effects missing and Tsuburaya attempted to describe how the scene would unfold. Ifukube recalled, \"I was very confused. So I tried to make music that would remind you of something enormous.\" Ifukube used low-pitch brass and string instruments.\nIt was Honda's idea to make Godzilla roar. Shimonaga and Minawa were originally tasked with creating the roar, but Ifukube became involved after taking an interest in creating sound effects. Ifukube and Honda discussed what type of sounds were going to be used in certain scenes and other details concerning sounds. Minawa went to the zoo and recorded various animal roars and played them back at certain speeds. However, the sounds proved unsatisfactory and went unused. Ifukube borrowed a double bass from the Japan Art University's music department and created Godzilla's roar by loosening the strings and rubbing them with a leather glove. The sound was recorded and played at a reduced speed, which achieved the effect of the roar used in the film. The technique would be adopted by Toho as a standard method in creating monster roars in the following years.\nThere are conflicting reports as to how Godzilla's footsteps were created. One claim states that they were created with a knotted rope hitting a kettle drum that was recorded and processed through an echo box. Some Japanese texts claim that the footsteps were sourced from an explosion with the ending clipped off and processed through an electronic reverb unit. However, Ifukube told \"Cult Movies\" that the footsteps were created using a primitive amplifier that made a loud clap when struck. The optical recording equipment contained four audio tracks: one for principal dialogue, one for background chatter, ambient noises, tanks, planes, and one for the roars and footsteps. An independent audio track was used to prevent bleeding over other audio.\nThe music and sound effects of Godzilla's rampage were recorded live simultaneously. While Ifukube conducted the NHK Philharmonic orchestra, foley artists watched Godzilla's rampage projected on a screen and used tin, concrete debris, wood, and other equipment to simulate sounds that would sync with the footage. A new take would be needed if the foley artist had missed a cue. Many of Ifukube's themes and motifs associated with Godzilla were introduced in the film, such as the March, the Horror theme, and the Requiem. The \"Self Defense Force March\" had become synonymous with Godzilla that Ifukube later referred to it as \"Godzilla's theme.\" Ifukube considered his music for the film his finest film score.\nRelease.\nMarketing.\nDuring production, Mori devised promotional strategies to generate public interest such as a radio play, \nTheatrical.\n\"Godzilla\" was first released in Nagoya on October 27, 1954, and released nationwide on November 3, 1954. At the time of the film's release, it set a new opening day record for any Toho film by selling 33,000 tickets at Toho's cinemas in Tokyo and selling out at Nichigeki Theater. As a result, Toho's CEO personally called Honda to congratulate him. Honda's wife, Kimi, commented \"That sort of thing didn't usually happen.\" An 84-minute cut of the Japanese version was theatrically released in West Germany on April 10, 1956, as \"Godzilla\". That version removes the Japanese Diet argument, the acknowledgment of Godzilla as a \"child of the H-bomb,\" references to Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and an altered translation of the mother holding her children.\nFrom 1955 to the 1960s, \"Godzilla\" played in theaters catering to Japanese-Americans in predominantly Japanese neighborhoods in the United States. In the summer of 1982, an English-subtitled version was shown at film festivals and art house cinemas in New York, Chicago, and other U.S. cities, including The Film Center of the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, where it was screened in late August of that year. Later that year, the film was re-released theatrically in Japan on November 21, to commemorate Toho's 50th anniversary. Since its release, the 1954 film remained unavailable officially in the United States until 2004.\nTo coincide with the film's 50th anniversary, art-house distributor Rialto Pictures gave the film a traveling tour-style limited release, coast-to-coast, across the United States, on May 7, 2004. It ran uncut with English subtitles until December 19, 2004. The film never played on more than six screens at any given point during its limited release. The film played in roughly sixty theaters and cities across the United States during its &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7+1\u20442-month release. In October 2005, the British Film Institute theatrically released the Japanese version in the United Kingdom.\nOn April 18, 2014, Rialto re-released the film in the United States, coast-to-coast, using another limited-style traveling tour. That coincided with Godzilla's 60th anniversary but also celebrated the American \"Godzilla\" film, which was released that same year. To avoid confusion with the Hollywood feature, the Rialto release was subtitled \"The Japanese Original\". It was screened in 66 theaters in 64 cities from April 18 to October 31, 2014.\nFor its 67th anniversary, a 4K remaster of the film, along with other \"Godzilla\" films, was screened in Alamo Drafthouse Cinema locations on November 3, 2021.\nIn 2008, images surfaced online of posters for an alleged unofficial Filipino remake of the film titled \"Tokyo 1960\"; purportedly directed by Teodorico C. Santos and starring Tessie Quintana and Eddie del Mar. However, the supposed film's existence has not been verified by Toho or other official parties, and no videos or screenings have ever surfaced.\nAmerican version.\nAfter the film's success in Japan, Toho sold the American rights to Joseph E. Levine for $25,000. A heavily altered version of the film was released in the United States and worldwide as \"Godzilla, King of the Monsters!\" on April 27, 1956. This version trimmed the original down to 80 minutes and featured new footage with Canadian actor Raymond Burr interacting with body doubles mixed with Honda's footage to make it seem as if he were part of the original Japanese production. Many of the film's political themes were trimmed or removed completely. It was this version of the original \"Godzilla\" film that introduced audiences worldwide to the character and franchise and the only version to which critics and scholars had access until 2004 when the 1954 film was released in select theaters in North America. \"Godzilla, King of the Monsters!\" grossed $2 million during its theatrical run, more than what the 1954 film grossed in Japan.\nHonda was unaware that \"Godzilla\" had been re-edited until Toho released \"Godzilla, King of the Monsters!\" in Japan in May 1957 as \"Monster King Godzilla\". Toho converted the entire film from its original scope to a widescreen 2.35:1 scope, which resulted in an awkward crop for the entire film. Japanese subtitles were given to the Japanese actors since their original dialogue differed greatly from the original script and were dubbed in English. Since the release of the film, Toho has adopted the epithet \"King of the Monsters\" for Godzilla, which has since appeared in official marketing, advertisement, and promotional materials.\nHome media.\nJapan.\nIn 1985, the Japanese version of \"Godzilla\" was released on LaserDisc in Japan by Toho, followed by a VHS release in 1988. Toho released the film on DVD in 2001 and on Blu-ray in 2009. In 2008, Toho remastered the film in high-definition and premiered it on the Japanese Movie Speciality Channel, along with the rest of the Godzilla films that were also remastered in HD.\nIn March 2021, Toho premiered a 4K remaster of the film on the Nippon Classic Movie Channel, along with seven other Godzilla films also remastered in 4K. The 4K remaster, which uses two dupe negatives made in the 1970s and a fine-grain positive print (the best remaining elements), was downscaled to 2K for broadcast and released on 4K Blu-ray in October 2023.\nIn June 2025, a man from Osaka was arrested for selling 1,500 unauthorized DVDs of an AI-colorized version of \"Godzilla\". He had advertised the products as being \"legal\" when selling them on flea market sites between January and May 2025, profiting around \u00a51.7 million.\nInternational.\nThe American version was released on VHS and DVD by Simitar Entertainment in 1998 and Classic Media in 2002. In 2005, the British Film Institute released the Japanese version on DVD in the United Kingdom that includes the original mono track and several extra features, such as documentaries and commentary tracks by film historians Steve Ryfle, Ed Godziszewski, and Keith Aiken. The DVD also includes a documentary about the \"Daigo Fukury\u016b Maru\", a Japanese fishing boat that was caught in an American nuclear blast and partially inspired the creation of the film.\nIn 2006, Classic Media released the Japanese and American versions on a two-disc DVD in the United States and Canada. This release features trailers and audio commentaries for both films by Ryfle and Godziszewski (separate from the BFI commentaries), two 13-minute documentaries titled \"Godzilla Story Development\" and \"Making of the Godzilla Suit,\" and a 12-page essay booklet by Ryfle. This release also restores the original ending credits of the American film, which hitherto was thought to have been lost. Classic Media would re-issue the Japanese version on Blu-ray in 2009 and both cuts of the film on DVD in 2014; the latter was released to coincide with Legendary Pictures' \"Godzilla\" film.\nIn 2012, the Criterion Collection released a \"new high-definition digital restoration\" of \"Godzilla\" on Blu-ray and DVD. This release, which uses a 1983 print sourced from one of the dupe negatives, includes a remaster of the American version, \"Godzilla, King of the Monsters!\", as well as other special features such as interviews with Akira Ikufube, Japanese film critic Tadao Sato, actor Akira Takarada, Godzilla performer Haruo Nakajima, effects technicians Yoshio Irie and Eizo Kaimai and audio commentaries on both films by film historian David Kalat. Criterion would re-release the film on 4K Blu-ray on November 5, 2024.\nIn 2017, Janus Films and the Criterion Collection streamed both cuts of the film, as well as other Godzilla titles, on Starz and FilmStruck. In 2019, both cuts were included in the \"Godzilla: The Showa Era Films\" Blu-ray box set released by the Criterion Collection, which included all 15 films from the franchise's Sh\u014dwa era. In May 2020, the Japanese and American version became available on HBO Max upon its launch.\nReception.\nBox office.\nDuring its initial Japanese theatrical run, the film set an opening record with the highest first-day ticket sales in Tokyo, before it went on to sell 9.69 million tickets; it was the eighth best-attended film in Japan that year. The film earned \u00a5 (just under $510,000) in distributor rentals during its initial run, with total lifetime gross receipts of $. Adjusted for inflation, the film's original Japanese box office run in 1954 was equivalent to \u00a5 in 1998.\nDuring its 2004 limited theatrical release in North America, the film grossed $38,030 on its opening weekend and grossed $412,520 by the end of its limited run. For the 2014 limited re-release in North America, it grossed $10,903 after playing in one theater in New York and grossed $150,191 at the end of its run. In the United Kingdom, the film sold 3,643 tickets from limited releases in 2005\u20132006 and 2016\u20132017.\nCritical response in Japan.\nBefore the release of the film, skeptics predicted the film would flop. At the time of the film's release, Japanese reviews were mixed. Japanese critics accused the film of exploiting the widespread devastation that the country had suffered in World War II, as well as the \"Daigo Fukury\u016b Maru\" incident, which occurred a few months before filming began. Ishiro Honda lamented years later in the \"Tokyo Journal\", \"They called it grotesque junk and said it looked like something you'd spit up. I felt sorry for my crew because they had worked so hard!\"\nOthers said that depicting a fire-breathing organism was strange. Honda also believed that Japanese critics began to change their minds after the good reviews the film received in the United States: \"The first film critics to appreciate \"Godzilla\" were those in the U.S. When \"Godzilla\" was released there as \"Godzilla, King of the Monsters!\" in 1956, the critics said such things as, 'For the start, this film frankly depicts the horrors of the Atomic Bomb', and by these evaluations, the assessment began to impact critics in Japan and has changed their opinions over the years.\"\nAs time went on, the film gained more respect in its home country. In 1984, \"Kinema Junpo\" magazine listed \"Godzilla\" as one of the top 20 Japanese films of all time, and a survey of 370 Japanese film critics published in \"Nihon Eiga Besuto 150\" (\"Best 150 Japanese Films\"), had \"Godzilla\" ranked as the 27th best Japanese film ever made. The film was nominated for two Japanese Movie Association awards: one for best special effects and the other for best film. It won best special effects but lost best picture to Akira Kurosawa's \"Seven Samurai\". Kurosawa later listed the film as one of his 100 favorite films.\nNoriaki Yuasa, director of several \"Gamera\" films, criticized the film for its inaccurate depictions of post-war casualties, calling it \u201coutrageous.\u201d\nCritical response overseas.\n\"Godzilla\" has received positive reviews from Western critics. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 78 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 7.7/10. The website's consensus reads: \"More than straight monster-movie fare, \"Gojira\" offers potent, sobering postwar commentary.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 79 out of 100, based on 20 critics, indicating .\nOwen Gleiberman from \"Entertainment Weekly\" found the film more \"serious\" than the 1956 American version but sometimes seemed to drift towards the B movie tone of films like \"Them!\" Luke Y. Thompson from \"Dallas Observer\" defended the film's effects as products of their time and felt that viewers would be \"surprised by what they see.\" He stated, \"This ain't your standard goofy monster rampage.\" Peter Bradshaw from \"The Guardian\" awarded the film four stars out of five, praising the storytelling as \"muscular\" and the \"passion\" behind its nuclear themes, that the films fervor transcends it past retrospective and contemporary blockbusters. Slant Magazine's Budd Wilkins gave the movie a perfect rating, stating, \"Decades of sequels, tag-team monster mash-ups, and shitty Hollywood remakes have not blunted the sheer cinematographic force, let alone metaphorical heft, of Honda Ishir\u00f4\u2019s Godzilla. Rarely has the open wound of widespread devastation been transposed to celluloid with greater visceral impact. Put another way, Godzilla is the Germany Year Zero of monster movies.\"\nKeith Uhlich from \"Time Out\" awarded the film four stars out of five, praising the film's characters, themes, and Godzilla itself as relevant metaphor for the atomic age. Desson Thomson from the \"Washington Post\" called the film's effects \"pretty extraordinary\" and \"amazingly credible\" for their time, but felt the acting seemed melodramatic at times. Mick LaSalle from the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" called the film a \"classic,\" stating that the film transcends its own metaphors with its relevant social commentary.\nConversely, Roger Ebert from the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" was negative; giving the film one-and-a-half stars out of four, feeling that the original Japanese version is no different from the poor quality of the 1956 American version. Ebert criticized the effects for looking \"crude\" and found the effects of 1933's \"King Kong\" to be more convincing.\nLegacy.\nSince its release, \"Godzilla\" has been regarded as one of the best giant monster films ever made, and critic Allen Perkins called the film \"not just a classic monster movie, but also an important cinematic achievement.\" The film has appeared in several contemporary media outlets's lists ranking the best (science fiction, monster, or foreign) films ever made. In 2017, the Visual Effects Society added the 1954 film amongst their list of seventy most influential films in visual effects of all time.\nThe film spawned a multimedia franchise consisting of 38 films in total, video games, books, comics, toys, and other media. The \"Godzilla\" franchise has been recognized by \"Guinness World Records\" as being the longest-running film franchise in history. Since his debut, Godzilla became an international pop culture icon, inspiring countless rip-offs, imitations, parodies and tributes. The 1954 film and its special effects director Eiji Tsuburaya have been largely credited for establishing the template for \"tokusatsu\", a technique of practical special effects filmmaking that would become essential in Japan's film industry after the release of \"Godzilla\". Critic and scholar Ryusuke Hikawa said: \"Disney created the template for American animation. In the same way, (special-effects studio) Tsuburaya created the template for the Japanese movie business. It was their use of cheap but craftsman-like approaches to movie-making that made tokusatsu unique.\" Tsuburaya would later reuse footage of Godzilla from the film for the first episode of \"Kaiju Booska\" (1966\u20131967).\nSteven Spielberg cited \"Godzilla\" as an inspiration for \"Jurassic Park\" (1993), specifically the 1956 American localization \"Godzilla, King of the Monsters!\", which he grew up watching. Jason Notte of \"HuffPost\" credited \"Godzilla, King of the Monsters!\" for heralding foreign films to a wider Western audience, declaring it \"the most important foreign film in American history.\"\nAmerican films.\nIn 1998, TriStar Pictures released a reboot, titled \"Godzilla\", directed by Roland Emmerich. Emmerich wanted his \"Godzilla\" to have nothing to do with Toho's \"Godzilla\" but chose to retain key elements from the 1954 film, stating, \"We took part of [the original movie's] basic storyline, in that the creature becomes created by radiation and it becomes a big challenge. But that's all we took.\"\nIn 2014, Warner Bros. and Legendary Pictures released a reboot, also titled \"Godzilla\", directed by Gareth Edwards. Edwards stated that his film was inspired by the 1954 film, and attempted to retain some of its themes, stating, \"Godzilla is a metaphor for Hiroshima in the original movie. We tried to keep that, and there are a lot of themes from the '54 movie that we've kept.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12005", "revid": "1314080325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12005", "title": "The Return of Godzilla", "text": "1984 film by K\u014dji Hashimoto\n, is a 1984 Japanese \"kaiju\" film directed by Koji Hashimoto, with special effects by Teruyoshi Nakano. Distributed by Toho and produced under their subsidiary Toho Pictures, it is the 16th film in the \"Godzilla\" franchise, the last film produced in the Sh\u014dwa era, and the first film in the Heisei series.\n\"The Return of Godzilla\" stars Ken Tanaka, Yasuko Sawaguchi, Yosuke Natsuki, and Keiju Kobayashi, with Kenpachiro Satsuma as Godzilla. The film serves as both a sequel to the original 1954 film and a reboot of the franchise that ignores the events of every Sh\u014dwa era film aside from the original \"Godzilla\", placing itself in line with the darker tone and themes of the original film and returning Godzilla to his destructive, antagonistic roots. The film was released theatrically in Japan on December 15, 1984. Critics praised Godzilla's return, Koroku's score, themes, special effects and darker tone. The following year, a heavily-re-edited localized version, titled \"Godzilla 1985\", was released in the United States by New World Pictures; it features new footage, with Raymond Burr reprising his role from \"Godzilla, King of the Monsters!\" (1956), itself an American localization of \"Godzilla\" (1954).\nIn Japan, the film was followed by \"Godzilla vs. Biollante\" in 1989.\nPlot.\nIn 1984, the Japanese fishing vessel \"Yahata Maru\" is caught in strong currents off the shores of Daikoku Island. As the boat drifts into shore, the island begins to erupt, and a giant monster lifts itself out of the volcano. A few days later, reporter Goro Maki is sailing in the area and finds the vessel intact but deserted. As he explores the vessel, he finds all the crew dead except for Hiroshi Okumura, who has been badly wounded. Suddenly a giant \"Shockirus\" sea louse attacks him but he is saved by Okumura.\nIn Tokyo, Okumura realizes by looking at pictures that the monster he saw was a new Godzilla. Maki writes an article about the account, but the news of Godzilla's return is kept secret and his article is withheld. Maki visits Professor Hayashida, whose parents were lost in the 1954 Godzilla attack. Hayashida describes Godzilla as a living, invincible nuclear weapon able to cause mass destruction. At Hayashida's laboratory, Maki meets Okumura's sister, Naoko, and informs her that her brother is alive and at the police hospital.\nA Soviet submarine is destroyed in the Pacific. The Soviets believe the attack was perpetrated by the Americans, and a diplomatic crisis ensues, which threatens to escalate into nuclear war. The Japanese intervene and reveal that Godzilla was behind the attacks. The Japanese cabinet meets to discuss Japan's defense. A new weapon is revealed, the Super X, a specially-armored flying fortress that will defend the capital. The Japanese military is put on alert.\nGodzilla attacks the Mihama nuclear power plant in Shizuoka Prefecture. While feeding off the reactor, it is distracted by a flock of birds and leaves the facility. Hayashida believes that Godzilla was distracted instinctively by a homing signal from the birds. Hayashida, together with geologist Minami, propose to the Japanese Cabinet, that Godzilla could be lured back to Mount Mihara on \u014cshima Island by a similar signal, and a volcanic eruption could be started, capturing Godzilla.\nPrime Minister Mitamura meets with Soviet and American envoys and declares that nuclear weapons will not be used on Godzilla, even if Godzilla were to attack the Japanese mainland. Meanwhile, the Soviets have their own plans to counter the threat posed by Godzilla, and a Soviet control ship disguised as a freighter in Tokyo Harbor prepares to launch a nuclear missile from one of their orbiting satellites should Godzilla attack.\nGodzilla is sighted at dawn in Tokyo Bay heading towards Tokyo, causing mass evacuations. The JASDF attacks Godzilla but fails to stop its advance on the city. Godzilla soon emerges and makes short work of the JSDF stationed there. The battle causes damage to the Soviet ship and starts a missile launch countdown. The captain dies as he attempts to stop the missile from launching. Godzilla proceeds towards Shinjuku, wreaking havoc along the way. Godzilla is confronted by four laser-armed trucks and the Super X. Because Godzilla's heart is similar to a nuclear reactor, the cadmium shells that are fired into its mouth by the Super X seal and slow down its heart, knocking Godzilla unconscious.\nThe countdown ends and the Soviet missile is launched, but it is destroyed by an American counter-missile. Hayashida and Okumura are extracted from Tokyo via helicopter and taken to Mt. Mihara to set up the homing device before the two missiles collide above Tokyo. The destruction of the nuclear missile produces an electrical storm and an EMP, which revives Godzilla once more and temporarily disables the Super X.\nAn enraged Godzilla bears down on the Super X just as it manages to get airborne again. The Super X's weapons prove ineffective against the kaiju, resulting in even more destruction in the city as Godzilla chases it through several skyscrapers. Godzilla finally destroys the Super X by dropping a skyscraper on top of it. Godzilla continues its rampage until Hayashida uses the homing device to distract it. Godzilla leaves Tokyo and swims across Tokyo Bay, following the homing device to Mount Mihara. There, Godzilla follows the device and falls into the mouth of the volcano. Okumura activates detonators at the volcano, creating a controlled eruption that traps Godzilla inside.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Ken Tanaka as \nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe went back to the theme of nuclear weapons, since that was the theme of the original film. Japan has now learned three times what a nuclear disaster is, but at that time Japan had already had two. The problem was Japanese society was gradually forgetting about these disasters. They were forgetting how painful it had been. Everyone in Japan knew how scary nuclear weapons were when the original movie was made, but it wasn't like that by the 1980s. So in those meetings, we decided to remind all those people out there who had forgotten.\n \u2013Teruyoshi Nakano\nDevelopment.\nAfter the box office failure of \"Terror of Mechagodzilla\", Toho attempted to reinvigorate the franchise several times during the late 1970s and early 1980s. The first attempt was the announcement of a color remake of the original 1954 film entitled \"The Rebirth of Godzilla\" in 1977, but the project was shelved. A year later, it was announced that Toho would develop a film jointly with UPA studios entitled \"Godzilla vs. the Devil\", though this, along with UPA producer Henry G. Saperstein's proposed \"Godzilla vs. Gargantua\", also never materialized.\n\"Godzilla\" series creator Tomoyuki Tanaka took charge of reviving the franchise in 1979, Godzilla's 25th anniversary, intending to return the series to its dark, anti-nuclear roots in the wake of the Three Mile Island accident. Hoping to win back adult audiences alienated by the fantastical approach to \"Godzilla\" films taken during the 1970s, Tanaka was further encouraged in his vision by the contemporary success of adult-oriented horror and science fiction movies like \"King Kong\", \"Invasion of the Body Snatchers\", \"Alien\" and \"The Thing\". A draft story entitled \"Resurrection of Godzilla\" was submitted by Tanaka and Akira Murao in 1980, and had Godzilla pitted against a shape-shifting monster called Bagan in the backdrop of an illegal nuclear waste disposal site. In 1983, Murao and Hideichi Nagahara collaborated on a revised script for \"Resurrection of Godzilla\", however, the project was cancelled due to budgetary concerns. That same year, American director Steve Miner proposed directing a \"Godzilla\" film at his own expense. Toho approved of the project, and Miner hired Fred Dekker to write the screenplay and paleosculptor Steve Czerkas to redesign the monster. The project was however hampered by Miner's insistence on using prohibitively costly stop-motion animation and shooting the film in 3D, and was thus rejected by major American movie studios. Under pressure from a 10,000-member group of Japanese \"Godzilla\" fans calling themselves the \"Godzilla Resurrection Committee\", Tanaka decided to helm a Japanese film for \"strictly domestic consumption\" to be released jointly alongside Miner's movie.\nIn an effort to disavow Godzilla's increasingly heroic and anthropomorphic depiction in previous films, Tanaka insisted on making a direct sequel to the original 1954 movie. He hired screenwriter Shuichi Nagahara, who wrote a screenplay combining elements of the previously cancelled \"The Resurrection of Godzilla\" and Miner's still unproduced film, including an intensification of hostilities during the Cold War and a flying fortress which fires missiles into Godzilla's mouth. Koji Hashimoto was hired as director after Ishir\u014d Honda declined the offer, as he was assisting Akira Kurosawa with \"Kagemusha\" and \"Ran\", and felt that the franchise should have been discontinued after the death of Eiji Tsuburaya.\nComposer Akira Ifukube was offered to score the film but respectfully declined. At the time, it was rumored that Ifukube refused to participate in the film due to the changes made to Godzilla, stating, \"I do not write music for 80-meter monsters\". However, this quote was later clarified, by Ifukube's biographer Erik Homenick and \"Japanese Giants\" editor Ed Godziszewski, as a joke spread by fans which was later misinterpreted as fact. Ifukube declined to score the film due to his priorities, at the time, teaching composition at the Tokyo College of Music.\nSpecial effects.\nThe special effects were directed by Teruyoshi Nakano, who had directed the special effects of several previous \"Godzilla\" films. The decision was made by Tanaka to increase the apparent height of Godzilla from so that Godzilla would not be dwarfed by the contemporary skyline of Tokyo. This meant that the miniatures had to be built to a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204440th scale, and this contributed to an increase in the budget of the film to $6.25 million. Tanaka and Nakano supervised suit-maker Noboyuki Yasumaru in constructing a new Godzilla design, incorporating ears and four toes, features not seen since \"Godzilla Raids Again\". Nakano insisted on infusing elements into the design that suggested sadness, such as downward-slanting eyes and sloping shoulders.\nSuit construction took two months, and consisted of separately casting body-part molds with urethane on a pre-built, life-size statue of the final design. Yasumaru personally took charge of all phases of suit-building, unlike in previous productions wherein the different stages of suit-production were handled by different craftsmen. The final suit was constructed to accommodate stuntman Hiroshi Yamawaki, but he declined suddenly, and was replaced by veteran suit actor Kenpachiro Satsuma, who had portrayed Hedorah and Gigan in the Showa Era. Because the suit wasn't built to his measurements, Satsuma had difficulty performing, being able to last only ten minutes within it, and losing 12 pounds during filming. Hoping to avoid having Godzilla move in an overly human fashion, Nakano instructed Satsuma to base his actions on Noh, a traditional Japanese dance.\nTaking inspiration from the publicity surrounding the 40-foot tall King Kong model from Dino De Laurentiis's 1976 film of the same name, Toho spent a reported \u00a552,146 (approximately $475.00) on a 16-foot high robotic Godzilla (dubbed \"Cybot\") for use in close-up shots of the creature's head. The Cybot consisted of a hydraulically powered mechanical endoskeleton covered in urethane skin containing 3,000 computer operated parts which permitted it to tilt its head, and move its lips and arms. Unlike previous Godzilla suits, whose lower jaws consisted of wire-operated flaps, the Cybot's jaws were hinged like those of an actual animal, and slid back as they opened. A life-size, crane operated foot was also built for close-up shots of city destruction scenes. Part of the film was shot on location on Izu \u014cshima, where the climax of the story takes place.\nRelease.\nTheatrical.\n\"The Return of Godzilla\" was released on December 15, 1984, in Japan where it was distributed by Toho. The film sold 3.2 million tickets in Japan, earning \u00a5 in rentals at the Japanese box office. The film grossed a total of $ at the box office.\nHome video.\nIn May 2016, Kraken Releasing revealed plans to release the original Japanese version of \"The Return of Godzilla\" and its international English dub on DVD and Blu-ray in North America on September 13, 2016. However, it was also revealed that the Americanized version of the film, \"Godzilla 1985\" would not be featured in the release due to ongoing copyright issues concerning music cues that New World Pictures borrowed from \"Def-Con 4\" for use in \"Godzilla 1985\".\nAlternate English versions.\nExported English dub.\nShortly after the film's completion, Toho's foreign sales division, Toho International Co., Ltd, had the film dubbed into English by Matthew and Elizabeth Oram's company in Hong Kong. No cuts were made, though credits and other titles were accordingly rendered in English. The international English dub features the voice of news anchor and radio announcer John Culkin in the role of Goro Maki, and actor Barry Haigh as Prime Minister Mitamura. The English version fully dubs all dialogue into English, including that of the Soviet and American characters. The international English dub was released on VHS in the U.K. by Carlton Home Entertainment on July 24, 1998.\nIn 2016, the international English dub was included on the U.S. DVD and Blu-Ray releases from Kraken, though the audio mix was not the original monaural track that was originally heard on Toho's English language prints. The English dialogue was originally mixed with an alternate music and effects track that contained different music edits and sound effects from the Japanese theatrical version, most notably a distinct \"cry\" produced by Godzilla during the film's ending. The U.S. home video version instead uses the conventional music and effects track used for the regular Japanese version mixed in DTS 5.1 surround sound instead of mono.\n\"Godzilla 1985\".\nAfter the film's lackluster performance in the Japanese box office and the ultimate shelving of Steve Miner's \"Godzilla 3D\" project, Toho decided to distribute the film overseas in order to regain lost profits. New World Pictures acquired \"The Return of Godzilla\" for distribution in North America, and changed the title to \"Godzilla 1985\", bringing back Raymond Burr in order to commemorate the 30th anniversary of \"\".\nOriginally, New World reportedly planned to re-write the dialogue in order to turn the film into a tongue-in-cheek comedy starring Leslie Nielsen (\u00e0 la \"What's Up, Tiger Lily?\"), but this plan was reportedly scrapped because Raymond Burr expressed displeasure at the idea, taking the idea of Godzilla as a nuclear metaphor seriously. The only dialogue left over from that script was \"That's quite an urban renewal program they've got going on over there,\" said by Major McDonahue. All of Burr's scenes were filmed in one day to suit his schedule. He was paid US$50,000. The reverse shots, of the actors he was speaking to, were filmed the next day, and the American filming was completed in three days. One of the most controversial changes done on the film was having Soviet Colonel Kashirin deliberately launch the nuclear missile rather than die in attempting to prevent its launch. Director R. J. Kizer later attributed this to New World's management's conservative leanings.\nThe newly edited film also contained numerous product placements for Dr Pepper, which had twice used Godzilla in its commercials. Dr Pepper's marketing director at one point insisted that Raymond Burr drink Dr Pepper during a scene, and the suggestion was put to the actor by Kizer. Burr reportedly responded by \"[fixing] me with one of those withering glares and just said nothing.\"\nRoger Ebert and Vincent Canby gave the film negative reviews.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12006", "revid": "110322", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12006", "title": "Godzilla on Monster Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "12007", "revid": "2308770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12007", "title": "Johann Gottlieb Fichte", "text": "German philosopher (1762\u20131814)\nJohann Gottlieb Fichte (19 May 1762 \u2013 29 January 1814) was a German philosopher who became a founding figure of German idealism, which developed from the theoretical and ethical writings of Immanuel Kant. \nRecently, philosophers and scholars have begun to appreciate Fichte as an important philosopher in his own right due to his original insights into the nature of self-consciousness or self-awareness. Fichte was also the originator of \"thesis\u2013antithesis\u2013synthesis\", an idea that is often erroneously attributed to Hegel. \nLike Descartes and Kant before him, Fichte was motivated by the problem of subjectivity and consciousness. Fichte also wrote works of political philosophy; he has a reputation as one of the fathers of German nationalism.\nBiography.\nOrigins.\nFichte was born in Rammenau, Upper Lusatia, and baptized a Lutheran. The son of a ribbon weaver, Fichte was born into a pious family that had lived in the region for generations. Christian Fichte (1737\u20131812), Johann Gottlieb's father, married Maria Dorothea Fichte, n\u00e9e Schurich (1739\u20131813) somewhat above his class. It has been suggested that a certain impatience which Fichte himself displayed throughout his life was an inheritance from his mother.\nHe received a rudimentary education from his father. He showed remarkable ability from an early age, and it was owing to his reputation among the villagers that he gained the opportunity for a better education than he otherwise would have received. The story runs that the Freiherr von Miltitz, a country landowner, arrived too late to hear the local pastor preach. He was, however, informed that a lad in the neighborhood would be able to repeat the sermon almost \"verbatim\". As a result, the baron took Fichte into his protection and paid for his tuition.\nEarly schooling.\nFichte was placed in the family of Pastor Krebel at Niederau near Meissen, and there received a thorough grounding in the classics. From this time onward, Fichte saw little of his parents. In October 1774, he attended the celebrated foundation-school at Pforta near Naumburg. Freiherr von Miltitz continued to support him, but died in 1774. The Pforta school is associated with the names of Novalis, August Wilhelm Schlegel, Friedrich Schlegel, and Nietzsche. The spirit of the institution was semi-monastic and, while the education was excellent, it is doubtful whether there was enough social life and contact with the world for Fichte.\nTheological studies and private tutoring.\nIn 1780, Fichte began study at the University of Jena's Lutheran theology seminary. He was transferred a year later to study at the Leipzig University. Fichte seems to have supported himself during this period of poverty and struggle. Without the financial support by von Miltitz, Fichte had to end his studies without completing his degree.\nFrom 1784 to 1788, Fichte precariously supported himself as tutor for various Saxon families. In early 1788, he returned to Leipzig in the hope of finding a better employment, but eventually he had to settle for a less promising position with the family of an innkeeper in Z\u00fcrich. He lived in Z\u00fcrich for the next two years (1788\u20131790), where he met his future wife, Johanna Rahn, and Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi. He also became, in 1793, a member of the Freemasonry lodge \"Modestia cum Libertate\", with which Johann Wolfgang Goethe was also connected. In the spring of 1790, he became engaged to Johanna. Fichte began to study the works of Kant in the summer of 1790. This occurred initially because one of Fichte's students wanted to know about Kant's writings. They had a lasting effect on his life and thought. However, while Fichte was studying Kantian philosophy, the Rahn family suffered financial reverses. His impending marriage had to be postponed.\nKant.\nFrom Z\u00fcrich, Fichte returned to Leipzig in May 1790. In early 1791, he obtained a tutorship in Warsaw in the house of a Polish nobleman. The situation, however, quickly proved disagreeable and he was released. He then got a chance to see Kant in K\u00f6nigsberg. After a disappointing interview on 4 July of the same year, he shut himself in his lodgings and threw all his energies into the composition of an essay which would attract Kant's attention and interest. This essay, completed in five weeks, was the \"Versuch einer Critik \"[\"sic\"]\" aller Offenbarung\" [\"sic\"] (\"Attempt at a Critique of All Revelation\", 1792). In this book, according to Dieter Henrich, Fichte investigated the connections between divine revelation and Kant's critical philosophy. The first edition was published without Kant's or Fichte's knowledge and without Fichte's name or signed preface. It was thus believed by the public to be a new work by Kant.\nWhen Kant cleared the confusion and openly praised the work and author, Fichte's reputation skyrocketed. In a letter to Karl Leonhard Reinhold, Jens Baggesen wrote that it was \"...the most shocking and astonishing news... [since] nobody but Kant could have written this book. This amazing news of a third sun in the philosophical heavens has set me into such confusion.\" Kant waited seven years to make a public statement about the incident; after considerable external pressure he dissociated himself from Fichte. In his statement, he inscribed, \"May God protect us from our friends. From our enemies, we can try to protect ourselves.\"\nJena.\nIn October 1793, Fichte was married in Z\u00fcrich, where he remained the rest of the year. Stirred by the events and principles of the French Revolution, he wrote and anonymously published two pamphlets which led to him to be seen as a devoted defender of liberty of thought and action and an advocate of political changes. In December of the same year, he received an invitation to fill the position of extraordinary professor of philosophy at the University of Jena. He accepted and began his lectures in May 1794. With extraordinary zeal, he expounded his system of \"transcendental idealism\". His success was immediate. He excelled as a lecturer due to the earnestness and force of his personality. These lectures were later published under the title \"The Vocation of the Scholar\" (\"Einige Vorlesungen \u00fcber die Bestimmung des Gelehrten\"). He gave himself up to intense production, and a succession of works soon appeared.\nAtheism dispute.\nFichte was dismissed from the University of Jena in 1799 for atheism. He had been accused of this in 1798 after publishing the essay \"Ueber [\"sic\"] den Grund unsers [\"sic\"] Glaubens an eine g\u00f6ttliche Weltregierung\" (\"On the Ground of Our Belief in a Divine World-Governance\"), written in response to Friedrich Karl Forberg's essay \"Development of the Concept of Religion\", in his \"Philosophical Journal\". For Fichte, God should be conceived primarily in moral terms: \"The living and efficaciously acting moral order is itself God. We require no other God, nor can we grasp any other\" (\"On the Ground of Our Belief in a Divine World-Governance\"). Fichte's intemperate \"Appeal to the Public\" (\"Appellation an das Publikum\", 1799) provoked F. H. Jacobi to publish an open letter in which he equated philosophy in general and Fichte's transcendental philosophy in particular with nihilism.\nBerlin.\nSince all the German states except Prussia had joined in the cry against Fichte, he was forced to go to Berlin. There he associated himself with Friedrich and August Wilhelm Schlegel, Schleiermacher, Schelling, and Tieck. In April 1800, through the introduction of Hungarian writer Ignaz Aurelius Fessler, he was initiated into Freemasonry in the Lodge Pythagoras of the Blazing Star, where he was elected minor warden. At first Fichte was a warm admirer of Fessler, and was disposed to aid him in his proposed Masonic reform. But later he became Fessler's bitter opponent. Their controversy attracted much attention among Freemasons. Fichte presented two lectures on the philosophy of Masonry during the same period as part of his work on the development of various higher degrees for the lodge in Berlin. Johann Karl Christian Fischer, a high official of the Grand Orient, published those lectures in 1802/03 in two volumes under the title \"Philosophy of Freemasonry: Letters to Konstant\" (\"Philosophie der Maurerei. Briefe an Konstant\"), where \"Konstant\" referred to a fictitious non-Mason.\nIn November 1800, Fichte published \"The Closed Commercial State: A Philosophical Sketch as an Appendix to the Doctrine of Right and an Example of a Future Politics\" (\"Der geschlossene Handelsstaat. Ein philosophischer Entwurf als Anhang zur Rechtslehre und Probe einer k\u00fcnftig zu liefernden Politik\"), a philosophical statement of his property theory, a historical analysis of European economic relations, and a political proposal for reforming them. In 1805, he was appointed to a professorship at the University of Erlangen. The Battle of Jena-Auerstedt in 1806, in which Napoleon defeated the Prussian army, drove him to K\u00f6nigsberg for a time, but he returned to Berlin in 1807 and continued his literary activity.\nFichte wrote \"On Machiavelli, as an Author, and Passages from His Writings\" in June 1807. (\"\u00dcber Machiavell, als Schriftsteller, und Stellen aus seinen Schriften\" ). Karl Clausewitz wrote a Letter to Fichte (1809) about his book on Machiavelli.\nAfter the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire, when German southern principalities resigned as member states and became part of a French protectorship, Fichte delivered the famous \"Addresses to the German Nation\" (\"Reden an die deutsche Nation\", 1807-1808), which attempted to define the German Nation and guided the uprising against Napoleon. He became a professor at the new University of Berlin, founded in 1810. By the votes of his colleagues Fichte was unanimously elected its rector in the succeeding year. But, once more, his temperament led to friction, and he resigned in 1812. The campaign against Napoleon began, and the hospitals at Berlin were soon full of patients. Fichte's wife devoted herself to nursing and caught a virulent fever. Just as she was recovering, he became sick with typhus and died in 1814 at the age of 51.\nHis son, Immanuel Hermann Fichte (18 July 1796 \u2013 8 August 1879), also made contributions to philosophy.\nPhilosophical work.\nFichte's critics argued that his mimicry of Kant's difficult style produced works that were barely intelligible. On the other hand, Fichte acknowledged the difficulty, but argued that his works were clear and transparent to those who made the effort to think without preconceptions and prejudices.\nFichte did not endorse Kant's argument for the existence of \"things in themselves\", the supra-sensible reality beyond direct human perception. Fichte saw the rigorous and systematic separation of \"things in themselves\" and things \"as they appear to us\" (phenomena) as an invitation to skepticism. Rather than invite skepticism, Fichte made the radical suggestion that we should throw out the notion of a world-in-itself and accept that consciousness does not have a grounding. In fact, Fichte achieved fame for originating the argument that consciousness is not grounded in anything outside of itself. The phenomenal world as such, arises from consciousness, the activity of the I, and moral awareness.\nCentral theory.\nIn \"Foundations of Natural Right\" (1797), Fichte argued that self-consciousness is a social phenomenon. For Fichte, a necessary condition of every subject's self-awareness is the existence of other rational subjects. These others call or summon (\"fordern auf\") the subject or self out of its unconsciousness and into an awareness of itself as a free individual.\nFichte proceeds from the general principle that the I (\"das Ich\") must posit itself as an individual in order to posit (\"setzen\") itself at all, and that in order to posit itself as an individual, it must recognize itself to a calling or summons (\"Aufforderung\") by other free individual(s) \u2014 called to limit its own freedom out of respect for the freedom of the others. The same condition applies to the others in development. Mutual recognition (\"gegenseitig anerkennen\") of rational individuals is a condition necessary for the individual I. The argument for intersubjectivity is central to the conception of selfhood developed in the \"Foundations of the Science of Knowledge\" (\"Grundlage der gesamten [\"sic\"] Wissenschaftslehre\", 1794/1795).\nAccording to Fichte, consciousness of the self depends upon resistance or a check by something that is not self, yet is not immediately ascribable to a particular sensory perception. In his later 1796\u201399 lectures (his \"Nova methodo\"), Fichte incorporated this into his revised presentation of the foundations of his system, where the summons takes its place alongside original feeling, which takes the place of the earlier \"Anstoss\" (see below) as a limit on the absolute freedom and a condition for the positing of the I.\nThe I posits this situation for itself. To posit does not mean to 'create' the objects of consciousness. The principle in question simply states that the essence of an I lies in the assertion of self-identity; that is, consciousness presupposes self-consciousness. Such immediate self-identity cannot be understood as a psychological fact, or an act or accident of some previously existing substance or being. It is an action of the I, but one that is identical with the very existence of this same I. In Fichte's technical terminology, the original unity of self-consciousness is an action and the product of the same I, as a \"fact and/or act\" (\"Thathandlung\"; Modern German: \"Tathandlung\"), a unity that is presupposed by and contained within every fact and every act of empirical consciousness, although it never appears as such.\nThe I can posit itself only as limited. It cannot even posit its own limitations, in the sense of producing or creating these limits. The finite I cannot be the ground of its own passivity. Instead, for Fichte, if the I is to posit itself, it must simply discover itself to be limited, a discovery that Fichte characterizes as an \"impulse,\" \"repulse,\" or \"resistance\" (\"Anstoss\"; Modern German: \"Ansto\u00df\") to the free practical activity of the I. Such an original limitation of the I is, however, a limit for the I only insofar as the I posits it as a limit. The I does this, according to Fichte's analysis, by positing its own limitation, first, as only a feeling, then as a sensation, next as an intuition of a thing, and finally as a summons of another person.\nThe \"Anstoss\" thus provides the essential impetus that first posits in motion the entire complex train of activities that finally result in our conscious experience both of ourselves and others as empirical individuals and of the world around us. Although \"Anstoss\" plays a similar role as the thing in itself does in Kantian philosophy, unlike Kant, Fichte's \"Anstoss\" is not something foreign to the I. Instead, it denotes the original encounter of the I with its own finitude. Rather than claim that the not-I (\"das Nicht-Ich\") is the cause or ground of the \"Anstoss\", Fichte argues that not-I is posited by the I in order to explain to itself the \"Anstoss\" in order to become conscious of \"Anstoss\". The \"Wissenschaftslehre\" demonstrates that \"Anstoss\" must occur if self-consciousness is to come about but is unable to explain the actual occurrence of \"Anstoss\". There are limits to what can be expected from an a priori deduction of experience, and this, for Fichte, equally applies to Kant's transcendental philosophy. According to Fichte, transcendental philosophy can explain that the world must have space, time, and causality, but it can never explain why objects have the particular sensible properties they happen to have or why I am this determinate individual rather than another. This is something that the I simply has to discover at the same time that it discovers its own freedom, and indeed, is a condition for the latter.\nDieter Henrich (1966) proposed that Fichte was able to move beyond a \"reflective theory of consciousness\". According to Fichte, the self must already have some prior acquaintance with itself, independent of the act of reflection (\"no object comes to consciousness except under the condition that I am aware of myself, the conscious subject\"). This idea is what Henrich called Fichte's original insight.\nNationalism.\nBetween December 1807 and March 1808, Fichte gave a series of lectures concerning the \"German nation\" and its culture and language, projecting the kind of national education he hoped would raise it from the humiliation of its defeat at the hands of the French. Having been a supporter of Revolutionary France, Fichte became disenchanted by 1804 as Napoleon's armies advanced through Europe, occupying German territories, stripping them of their raw materials and subjugating them to foreign rule. He came to believe Germany would be responsible for carrying the virtues of the French Revolution into the future. Disappointed in the French, he turned to the German nation as the instrument of fulfilling it.\nThese lectures, entitled the \"Addresses to the German Nation\", coincided with a period of reform in the Prussian government under the chancellorship of Baron vom Stein. The \"Addresses\" display Fichte's interest during that period in language and culture as vehicles of human spiritual development. Fichte built upon earlier ideas of Johann Gottfried Herder and attempted to unite them with his approach. The aim of the German nation, according to Fichte, was to \"found an empire of spirit and reason, and to annihilate completely the crude physical force that rules of the world.\" Like Herder's German nationalism, Fichte's was cultural, and grounded in aesthetic, literary, and moral principles.\nThe nationalism propounded by Fichte in the \"Addresses\" would be used over a century later by the Nazi Party in Germany, which saw in Fichte a forerunner to its own nationalist ideology. As with Nietzsche, the association of Fichte with the Nazi regime came to color readings of Fichte in the post-war period. This reading of Fichte was often bolstered through reference to an unpublished letter from 1793, \"Contributions to the Correction of the Public's Judgment concerning the French Revolution\", in which Fichte expressed anti-Semitic sentiments, such as arguing against extending civil rights to Jews and calling them a \"state within a state\" that could \"undermine\" the German nation.&lt;ref name=\"Gesamtausgabe I/1 pp. 292\"&gt;\"Gesamtausgabe\", I/1, pp. 292\u2013293&lt;/ref&gt;\nHowever, attached to the letter is a footnote in which Fichte provides an impassioned plea for permitting Jews to practice their religion without hindrance. Furthermore, the final act of Fichte's academic career was to resign as rector of the University of Berlin in protest when his colleagues refused to punish the harassment of Jewish students. While recent scholarship has sought to dissociate Fichte's writings on nationalism with their adoption by the Nazi Party, the association continues to blight his legacy, although Fichte, as if to exclude all ground of doubt, clearly and distinctly prohibits, in his reworked version of \"The Science of Ethics as Based on the Science of Knowledge\" (see \u00a7 Final period in Berlin)\u00a0genocide and other crimes against humanity:\n If you say that it is your conscience's command to exterminate peoples for their sins, [...] we can confidently tell you that you are wrong; for such things can never be commanded against the free and moral force.\nEconomics.\nFichte's 1800 economic treatise \"The Closed Commercial State\" had a profound influence on the economic theories of German Romanticism. In it, Fichte argues the need for the strictest, purely guild-like regulation of industry.\nThe \"exemplary rational state\" (\"Vernunftstaat\"), Fichte argues, should not allow any of its \"subjects\" to engage in this or that production, failing to pass the preliminary test, not certifying government agents in their professional skills and agility. According to Vladimir Mikhailovich Shulyatikov, \"this kind of demand was typical of \"Mittelstund\", the German petty middle class, the class of artisans, hoping by creating artificial barriers to stop the victorious march of big capital and thus save themselves from inevitable death. The same demand was imposed on the state, as is evident from Fichte's treatise, by the German \"factory\" (\"Fabrike\"), more precisely, the manufacture of the early 19th century\".\nFichte opposed free trade and unrestrained capitalist industrial growth, stating: \"There is an endless war of all against all ... And this war is becoming more fierce, unjust, more dangerous in its consequences, the more the world's population grows, the more acquisitions the trading state makes, the more production and art (industry) develops and, together with thus, the number of circulating goods increases, and with them the needs become more and more diversified.\"\nThe only means that could save the modern world, which would destroy evil at the root, is, according to Fichte, to split the \"world state\" (the global market) into separate self-sufficient bodies. Each such body, each \"closed trading state\" will be able to regulate its internal economic relations. It will be able to both extract and process everything that is needed to meet the needs of its citizens. It will carry out the ideal organization of production. Fichte argued for government regulation of industrial growth, writing \"Only by limitation does a certain industry become the property of the class that deals with it\".\nWomen.\nFichte believed that \"active citizenship, civic freedom and even property rights should be withheld from women, whose calling was to subject themselves utterly to the authority of their fathers and husbands.\"\nFinal period in Berlin.\nFichte gave a wide range of public and private lectures in Berlin in the last decade of his life. These form some of his best-known work, and are the basis of a revived German-speaking scholarly interest in his work.\nThe lectures include two works from 1806. In \"The Characteristics of the Present Age\" (\"Die Grundz\u00fcge des gegenw\u00e4rtigen Zeitalters\"), Fichte outlines his theory of different historical and cultural epochs. His mystic work \"The Way Towards the Blessed Life\" (\"Die Anweisung zum seligen Leben oder auch die Religionslehre\") gave his fullest thoughts on religion. In 1807-1808 he gave a series of speeches in French-occupied Berlin, \"Addresses to the German Nation\".\nIn 1810, the new University of Berlin was established, designed along ideas put forward by Wilhelm von Humboldt. Fichte was made its rector and also the first Chair of Philosophy. This was in part because of educational themes in the \"Addresses\", and in part because of his earlier work at Jena University.\nFichte lectured on further versions of his \"Wissenschaftslehre\". Of these, he only published a brief work from 1810, \"The Science of Knowledge in its General Outline\" (\"Die Wissenschaftslehre, in ihrem allgemeinen Umrisse dargestellt\"; also translated as \"Outline of the Doctrine of Knowledge\"). His son published some of these thirty years after his death. Most only became public in the last decades of the twentieth century, in his collected works. This included reworked versions of the \"Doctrine of Science\" (\"Wissenschaftslehre\", 1810\u20131813), \"The Science of Rights\" (\"Das System der Rechtslehre\", 1812), and \"The Science of Ethics as Based on the Science of Knowledge\" (\"Das System der Sittenlehre nach den Principien der Wissenschaftslehre\", 1812; 1st ed. 1798).\nBibliography.\nCollected works in German.\nThe new standard edition of Fichte's works in German, which supersedes all previous editions, is the \"Gesamtausgabe\" (\"Collected Works\" or \"Complete Edition\", commonly abbreviated as \"GA\"), prepared by the Bavarian Academy of Sciences: \"Gesamtausgabe der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften\", 42 volumes, edited by Reinhard Lauth, Hans Gliwitzky, Erich Fuchs and Peter Schneider, Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1962\u20132012.\nIt is organized into four parts:\nFichte's works are quoted and cited from \"GA\", followed by a combination of Roman and Arabic numbers, indicating the series and volume, respectively, and the page number(s).\nAnother edition is \"Johann Gottlieb Fichtes s\u00e4mmtliche Werke\" (abbrev. \"SW\"), ed. I. H. Fichte. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1971.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12010", "revid": "14596827", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12010", "title": "Great Lakes", "text": "Group of lakes in North America\nThe Great Lakes, also called the Great Lakes of North America, are a series of large interconnected freshwater lakes spanning the Canada\u2013United States border. The five lakes are Superior, Michigan, Huron, Erie, and Ontario (though hydrologically, Michigan and Huron are a single body of water, joined at the Straits of Mackinac). The Great Lakes Waterway enables modern travel and shipping by water among the lakes. The lakes connect ultimately to the Atlantic Ocean via the Saint Lawrence River as their primary drainage outflow. The lakes are also connected to the Mississippi River basin through the Illinois Waterway.\nThe Great Lakes are the largest group of freshwater lakes on Earth by total area and the second-largest by total volume. They contain 21% of the world's surface fresh water by volume. The total surface is , and the total volume (measured at the low water datum) is , slightly less than the volume of Lake Baikal (, 22\u201323% of the world's surface fresh water). Because of their sea-like characteristics, such as rolling waves, sustained winds, strong currents, great depths, and distant horizons, the five Great Lakes have long been called inland seas. Depending on how it is measured, by surface area, either Lake Superior or Lake Michigan\u2013Huron is the second-largest lake in the world and the largest freshwater lake. Lake Michigan is the largest lake, by surface area, that is entirely within one country, the United States.\nThe Great Lakes began to form at the end of the Last Glacial Period around 14,000 years ago, as retreating ice sheets exposed the basins they had carved into the land, which then filled with meltwater. The lakes have been a major source for transportation, migration, trade, and fishing, serving as a habitat to many aquatic species in a region with much biodiversity. The surrounding region is called the Great Lakes region, which includes the Great Lakes megalopolis. Major cities within the region include, on the American side, from east to west, Buffalo, Cleveland, Detroit, Chicago, Milwaukee, and Duluth; and, on the Canadian side, Toronto, Mississauga and Hamilton.\nGeography.\nThough the five lakes lie in separate basins, they form a single, naturally interconnected body of fresh water, within the Great Lakes Basin. As a chain of lakes and rivers, they connect the east-central interior of North America to the Atlantic Ocean. From the interior to the outlet at the Saint Lawrence River, water flows from Superior to Huron and Michigan, southward to Erie, and finally northward to Lake Ontario. The lakes drain a large watershed via many rivers and contain approximately 35,000 islands. There are also several thousand smaller lakes, often called \"inland lakes\", within the basin.\nThe surface area of the five primary lakes combined is roughly equal to the size of the United Kingdom, while the surface area of the entire basin (the lakes and the land they drain) is about the size of the United Kingdom and France combined. Lake Michigan is the only one of the Great Lakes that is entirely within the United States; the others form a water boundary between the United States and Canada. The lakes are divided among the jurisdictions of the Canadian province of Ontario and the U.S. states of Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York. Both the province of Ontario and the state of Michigan include in their boundaries portions of four of the lakes. The province of Ontario does not border Lake Michigan, and the state of Michigan does not border Lake Ontario. New York and Wisconsin's jurisdictions extend into two lakes, and each of the remaining states into one of the lakes.\nBathymetry.\nAs the surfaces of Lakes Superior, Huron, Michigan, and Erie are all approximately the same elevation above sea level, while Lake Ontario is significantly lower, and because the Niagara Escarpment precludes all natural navigation, the four upper lakes are commonly called the \"upper great lakes\". This designation is not universal. Those living on the shore of Lake Superior often refer to all the other lakes as \"the lower lakes\", because they are farther south. Sailors of bulk freighters transferring cargoes from Lake Superior and northern Lake Michigan and Lake Huron to ports on Lake Erie or Ontario commonly refer to the latter as the lower lakes and Lakes Michigan, Huron, and Superior as the upper lakes. This corresponds to thinking of lakes Erie and Ontario as \"down south\" and the others as \"up north\". Vessels sailing north on Lake Michigan are considered \"upbound\" even though they are sailing toward its effluent current.\nLake Michigan\u2013Huron.\nLakes Huron and Michigan are sometimes considered a single lake, called Lake Michigan\u2013Huron, because they are one hydrological body of water connected by the Straits of Mackinac. The straits are wide and deep; the water levels rise and fall together and the flow between Michigan and Huron frequently reverses direction.\nIslands.\nDispersed throughout the Great Lakes are approximately 35,000 islands. The largest among them is Manitoulin Island in Lake Huron, the largest island in any inland body of water in the world. The second-largest island is Isle Royale in Lake Superior. Both of these islands are large enough to contain multiple lakes themselves\u2014for instance, Manitoulin Island's Lake Manitou is the world's largest lake on a freshwater island. Some of these lakes even have their own islands, like Treasure Island in Lake Mindemoya in Manitoulin Island.\nPeninsulas.\nThe Great Lakes have several peninsulas between them, most prominently the Upper Peninsula, the Lower Peninsula, and the Ontario Peninsula. Population centers on these peninsulas include Grand Rapids, Flint, and Detroit in Michigan along with London, Hamilton, Brantford, and Toronto in Ontario. Other significant peninsulas in the Great Lakes include the Sibley, Bayfield, Keweenaw, Door, Garden, Leelanau, Thumb, Bruce, and Niagara peninsulas.\nShipping connection to the ocean.\nAlthough the Saint Lawrence Seaway and Great Lakes Waterway make the Great Lakes accessible to ocean-going vessels, shifts in shipping to wider ocean-going container ships\u2014which do not fit through the locks on these routes\u2014have limited container shipping on the lakes. Most Great Lakes trade is of bulk material, and bulk freighters of Seawaymax-size or less can move throughout the entire lakes and out to the Atlantic. Larger ships are confined to working within the lakes. Only barges can access the Illinois Waterway system providing access to the Gulf of Mexico via the Mississippi River. Despite their vast size, large sections of the Great Lakes freeze over in winter, interrupting most shipping from January to March. Some icebreakers ply the lakes, keeping the shipping lanes open through other periods of ice on the lakes.\nThe Great Lakes are connected by the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal to the Gulf of Mexico via the Illinois River (from the Chicago River) and the Mississippi River. An alternate track is via the Illinois River (from Chicago), to the Mississippi, up the Ohio, and then through the Tennessee\u2013Tombigbee Waterway (a combination of a series of rivers and lakes and canals), to Mobile Bay and the Gulf of Mexico. Commercial tug-and-barge traffic on these waterways is heavy.\nPleasure boats can enter or exit the Great Lakes by way of the Erie Canal and Hudson River in New York. The Erie Canal connects to the Great Lakes at the east end of Lake Erie (at Buffalo, New York) and at the south side of Lake Ontario (at Oswego, New York).\nWater levels.\nThe lakes were originally fed by both precipitation and meltwater from glaciers which are no longer present. In modern times, only about 1% of volume per year is \"new\" water, originating from rivers, precipitation, and groundwater springs. In the post-glacial period, evaporation, and drainage have generally been balanced, making the levels of the lakes relatively constant.\nIntensive human population growth began in the region in the 20th century and continues today. At least two human water use activities have been identified as having the potential to affect the lakes' levels: diversion (the transfer of water to other watersheds) and consumption (substantially done today by the use of lake water to power and cool electric generation plants, resulting in evaporation). Outflows through the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal is more than balanced by artificial inflows via the Ogoki River and Long Lake/Kenogami River diversions. Fluctuation of the water levels in the lakes has been observed since records began in 1918. The water level of Lake Michigan\u2013Huron had remained fairly constant over the 20th century. Recent lake levels include record low levels in 2013 in Lakes Superior, Erie, and Michigan-Huron, followed by record high levels in 2020 in the same lakes. The water level in Lake Ontario has remained relatively constant in the same time period, hovering around the historical average level.\nAlthough \"true tides\u2014changes in water level caused by the gravitational forces of the sun and moon\u2014do occur in a semi-diurnal (twice daily) pattern\", such changes are quite small and generally obscured by other forces. The lake levels are affected primarily by changes in regional meteorology and climatology. The outflows from Lakes Superior and Ontario are regulated, while the outflows of Michigan-Huron and Erie are not regulated at all. Ontario is the most tightly regulated, with its outflow controlled by the Moses-Saunders Power Dam, which explains its consistent historical levels.\nIce cover.\nThe annual ice coverage on the Great Lakes varies greatly from year to year due to weather patterns and long-term climate trends. Ice typically begins forming in December and reaches its peak in February or early March. The extent of ice cover can vary from as little as 10% to over 90% depending on winter severity. For example, during the particularly cold winter of 2013\u20132014, ice coverage peaked at over 92% across the five lakes, while in milder years like 2023\u20132024, coverage remained below 20%. Long-term data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory (NOAA GLERL) indicate a general decline in maximum ice cover over the past few decades, aligning with broader patterns of warming in the region.\n From the Erie tribe, a shortened form of the Iroquoian word 'long tail'.\nNamed for the inhabitants of the area, the Wyandot (or \"Hurons\"), by the first French explorers . The Wyandot originally referred to the lake by the name , a word which has been variously translated as \"Freshwater Sea\", \"Lake of the Hurons\", or simply \"lake\". \n From the Ojibwe word \"great water\" or \"large lake\".\n From the Wyandot word \"lake of shining waters\".\n English translation of the French term \"upper lake\", referring to its position higher in elevation than (and therefore draining into) Lake Huron. The indigenous Ojibwe call it (from Ojibwe \"big, large, great\"; \"water, lake, sea\"). Popularized in French-influenced transliteration as \"Gitchigumi\" as in Gordon Lightfoot's 1976 story song \"The Wreck of the \"Edmund Fitzgerald\"\", or \"Gitchee Gumee\" as in Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's 1855 epic poem, \"The Song of Hiawatha\").\nStatistics.\nThe Great Lakes contain 21% of the world's surface fresh water: , or 6.0\u00d71015 U.S.\u00a0gallons, that is 6\u00a0quadrillion U.S. gallons, (2.3\u00d71016 liters). The lakes contain about 84% of the surface freshwater of North America; if the water were evenly distributed over the entire continent's land area, it would reach a depth of 5 feet (1.5 meters). This is enough water to cover the 48 contiguous U.S. states to a uniform depth of . Although the lakes contain a large percentage of the world's fresh water, the Great Lakes supply only a small portion of U.S. drinking water on a national basis.\nThe total surface area of the lakes is approximately \u2014nearly the same size as the United Kingdom, and larger than the U.S. states of New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Vermont, and New Hampshire combined.&lt;ref name=\"Taylor/Schechter/Wolfson\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The Great Lakes coast measures approximately . Canada borders approximately of coastline, while the remaining are bordered by the United States. Michigan has the longest shoreline of the United States, bordering roughly of lakes, followed by Wisconsin (), New York (), and Ohio (). Traversing the shoreline of all the lakes would cover a distance roughly equivalent to travelling half-way around the world at the equator.\nA notable modern phenomenon is the formation of ice volcanoes over the lakes during wintertime. Storm-generated waves carve the lakes' ice sheet and create conical mounds through the eruption of water and slush. The process is only well-documented in the Great Lakes, and has been credited with sparing the southern shorelines from worse rocky erosion.\nGeology.\nIt has been estimated that the foundational geology that created the conditions shaping the present day upper Great Lakes was laid from 1.1 to 1.2\u00a0billion years ago, when two previously fused tectonic plates split apart and created the Midcontinent Rift, which crossed the Great Lakes Tectonic Zone. A valley was formed providing a basin that eventually became modern day Lake Superior. When a second fault line, the Saint Lawrence rift, formed approximately 570\u00a0million years ago, the basis for Lakes Ontario and Erie was created, along with what would become the Saint Lawrence River.\nThe Great Lakes are estimated to have been formed at the end of the Last Glacial Period (the Wisconsin glaciation ended 10,000 to 12,000 years ago), when the Laurentide Ice Sheet receded. The retreat of the ice sheet left behind a large amount of meltwater (Lake Algonquin, Lake Chicago, Glacial Lake Iroquois, and Champlain Sea) that filled up the basins that the glaciers had carved, thus creating the Great Lakes as they are today. Because of the uneven nature of glacier erosion, some higher hills became Great Lakes islands. The Niagara Escarpment follows the contour of the Great Lakes between New York and Wisconsin. Land below the glaciers \"rebounded\" as it was uncovered. Since the glaciers covered some areas longer than others, this glacial rebound occurred at different rates.\nClimate.\nThe Great Lakes have a humid continental climate,\nK\u00f6ppen climate classification Dfa (in southern areas) and Dfb (in northern parts) with varying influences from air masses from other regions including dry, cold Arctic systems, mild Pacific air masses from the west, and warm, wet tropical systems from the south and the Gulf of Mexico. The lakes have a moderating effect on the climate; they can also increase precipitation totals and produce lake effect snowfall.\nLake effect.\nThe Great Lakes can have an effect on regional weather called \"lake-effect snow\", which is sometimes very localized. Even late in winter, the lakes often have no icepack in the middle. The prevailing winds from the west pick up the air and moisture from the lake surface, which is slightly warmer in relation to the cold surface winds above. As the slightly warmer, moist air passes over the colder land surface, the moisture often produces concentrated, heavy snowfall that sets up in bands or \"streamers\". This is similar to the effect of warmer air dropping snow as it passes over mountain ranges. During freezing weather with high winds, the \"snowbelts\" receive regular snowfall from this localized weather pattern, especially along the eastern shores of the lakes. Snowbelts are found in Wisconsin, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, New York, and Ontario. Related to the lake effect is the regular occurrence of fog, particularly along the shorelines of the lakes. This is most noticeable along Lake Superior's shores.\nThe lakes tend to moderate seasonal temperatures to some degree but not with as large an influence as do large oceans; they absorb heat and cool the air in summer, then slowly radiate that heat in autumn. They protect against frost during transitional weather and keep the summertime temperatures cooler than further inland. This effect can be very localized and overridden by offshore wind patterns. This temperature buffering produces areas known as \"fruit belts\", where fruit can be produced that is typically grown much farther south. For instance, western Michigan has apple orchards, and cherry orchards are cultivated adjacent to the lake shore as far north as the Grand Traverse Bay. Near Collingwood, Ontario, commercial fruit orchards, including a few wineries, exist near the shoreline of southern Nottawasaga Bay. The eastern shore of Lake Michigan and the southern shore of Lake Erie have many successful wineries because of the lakes' moderating effects, as do the large commercial fruit and wine growing areas of the Niagara Peninsula located between Lake Erie and Lake Ontario. A similar phenomenon allows wineries to flourish in the Finger Lakes region of New York, as well as in Prince Edward County, Ontario, on Lake Ontario's northeast shore.\nThe Great Lakes have been observed to help intensify storms, such as Hurricane Hazel in 1954, and the 2011 Goderich, Ontario tornado, which moved onshore as a tornadic waterspout. In 1996, a rare tropical or subtropical storm was observed forming in Lake Huron, dubbed the 1996 Lake Huron cyclone. Rather large severe thunderstorms covering wide areas are well known in the Great Lakes during mid-summer; these Mesoscale convective complexes or MCCs can cause damage to wide swaths of forest and shatter glass in city buildings. These storms mainly occur during the night, and the systems sometimes have small embedded tornadoes, but more often straight-line winds accompanied by intense lightning.\nEcology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistorically, the Great Lakes, in addition to their lake ecology, were surrounded by various forest ecoregions (except in a relatively small area of southeast Lake Michigan where savanna or prairie occasionally intruded). Logging, urbanization, and agriculture uses have changed that relationship. In the early 21st century, Lake Superior's shores are 91% forested, Lake Huron 68%, Lake Ontario 49%, Lake Michigan 41%, and Lake Erie, where logging and urbanization has been most extensive, 21%. Some of these forests are second or third growth (i.e. they have been logged before, changing their composition). At least 13 wildlife species are documented as becoming extinct since the arrival of Europeans, and many more are threatened or endangered. Meanwhile, exotic and invasive species have also been introduced.\nFauna.\nWhile the organisms living on the bottom of shallow waters are similar to those found in smaller lakes, the deep waters contain organisms found only in deep, cold lakes of the northern latitudes. These include the delicate opossum shrimp (order Mysida), the deepwater scud (a crustacean of the order Amphipoda), two types of copepods, and the deepwater sculpin (a spiny, large-headed fish).\nThe Great Lakes are an important source of fishing. Early European settlers were astounded by both the variety and quantity of fish; there were 150 different species in the Great Lakes. Throughout history, fish populations were the early indicator of the condition of the Lakes and have remained one of the key indicators even in the current era of sophisticated analyses and measuring instruments. According to the bi-national (U.S. and Canadian) resource book, \"The Great Lakes: An Environmental Atlas and Resource Book\": \"The largest Great Lakes fish harvests were recorded in 1889 and 1899 at some [147\u00a0million pounds].\"\nBy 1801, the New York Legislature found it necessary to pass regulations curtailing obstructions to the natural migrations of Atlantic salmon from Lake Erie into their spawning channels. In the early 19th century, the government of Upper Canada found it necessary to introduce similar legislation prohibiting the use of weirs and nets at the mouths of Lake Ontario's tributaries. Other protective legislation was passed, but enforcement remained difficult.\nOn both sides of the Canada\u2013United States border, the proliferation of dams and impoundments have multiplied, necessitating more regulatory efforts. Concerns by the mid-19th century included obstructions in the rivers which prevented salmon and lake sturgeon from reaching their spawning grounds. The Wisconsin Fisheries Commission noted a reduction of roughly 25% in general fish harvests by 1875. The states have removed dams from rivers where necessary.\nOverfishing has been cited as a possible reason for a decrease in population of various whitefish, important because of their culinary desirability and, hence, economic consequence. Moreover, between 1879 and 1899, reported whitefish harvests declined from some 24.3\u00a0million pounds (11\u00a0million\u00a0kg) to just over 9\u00a0million pounds (4\u00a0million\u00a0kg). By 1900, commercial fishermen on Lake Michigan were hauling in an average of 41\u00a0million pounds of fish annually. By 1938, Wisconsin's commercial fishing operations were motorized and mechanized, generating jobs for more than 2,000 workers, and hauling 14\u00a0million pounds per year. The population of giant freshwater mussels was eliminated as the mussels were harvested for use as buttons by early Great Lakes entrepreneurs.\n\"The Great Lakes: An Environmental Atlas and Resource Book\" (1972) notes: \"Only pockets remain of the once large commercial fishery.\" Water quality improvements realized during the 1970s and 1980s, combined with successful salmonid stocking programs, have enabled the growth of a large recreational fishery. The last commercial fisherman left Milwaukee in 2011 because of overfishing and anthropogenic changes to the biosphere.\nInvasive species.\nSince the 19th century, an estimated 160 new species have found their way into the Great Lakes ecosystem; many have become invasive; the overseas ship ballast and ship hull parasitism are causing severe economic and ecological impacts. According to the Inland Seas Education Association, on average a new species enters the Great Lakes every eight months. Introductions into the Great Lakes include the zebra mussel, which was first discovered in 1988, and quagga mussel in 1989. Since 2000, the invasive quagga mussel has smothered the bottom of Lake Michigan almost from shore to shore, and their numbers are estimated at 900\u00a0trillion. The mollusks are efficient filter feeders, competing with native mussels and reducing available food and spawning grounds for fish. In addition, the mussels may be a nuisance to industries by clogging pipes. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service estimated in 2007 that the economic impact of the zebra mussel could be about $5\u00a0billion over the next decade. The state of Michigan has had to develop legislation and regulations to help protect against these invasive species. Aquatic invasive species regulations in Michigan have been put in place to combat the influx of species.\nThe alewife first entered the system west of Lake Ontario via 19th-century canals. By the 1960s, the small silver fish had become a familiar nuisance to beach goers across Lakes Michigan, Huron, and Erie. Periodic mass die-offs result in vast numbers of the fish washing up on shore; estimates by various governments have placed the percentage of Lake Michigan's biomass which was made up of alewives in the early 1960s as high as 90%. In the late 1960s, the various state and federal governments began stocking several species of salmonids, including the native lake trout as well as non-native Chinook and coho salmon; by the 1980s, alewife populations had dropped drastically. The ruffe, a small percid fish from Eurasia, became the most abundant fish species in Lake Superior's Saint Louis River within five years of its detection in 1986. Its range, which has expanded to Lake Huron, poses a significant threat to the lower lake fishery. Five years after first being observed in the St. Clair River, the round goby can now be found in all of the Great Lakes. The goby is considered undesirable for several reasons: it preys upon bottom-feeding fish, overruns optimal habitat, spawns multiple times a season, and can survive poor water quality conditions.\nThe influx of parasitic sea lamprey populations after the development of the Erie Canal and the much later Welland Canal led to the two federal governments of the United States and Canada working on joint proposals to control it. By the mid-1950s, the lake trout populations of Lakes Michigan and Huron were reduced, with the lamprey deemed largely to blame. This led to the launch of the bi-national Great Lakes Fishery Commission.\nSeveral species of exotic water fleas have accidentally been introduced into the Great Lakes, such as the spiny waterflea, \"Bythotrephes longimanus\", and the fishhook waterflea, \"Cercopagis pengoi\", potentially having an effect on the zooplankton population. Several species of crayfish have also been introduced that may contend with native crayfish populations. More recently an electric fence has been set up across the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal in order to keep several species of invasive Asian carp out of the lakes. These fast-growing planktivorous fish have heavily colonized the Mississippi and Illinois river systems. Invasive species, particularly zebra and quagga mussels, may be at least partially responsible for the collapse of the deepwater demersal fish community in Lake Huron, as well as drastic unprecedented changes in the zooplankton community of the lake.\nMicrobiology.\nScientists understand that the micro-aquatic life of the lakes is abundant but know very little about some of the most plentiful microbes and their environmental effects in the Great Lakes. Although a drop of lake water may contain 1\u00a0million bacteria cells and 10\u00a0million viruses, only since 2012 has there been a long-term study of the lakes' micro-organisms. Between 2012 and 2019 more than 160 new species have been discovered.\nFlora.\nNative habitats and ecoregions in the Great Lakes region include:\nPlant lists include:\nLogging.\nLogging of the extensive forests in the Great Lakes region removed riparian and adjacent tree cover over rivers and streams, which provide shade, moderating water temperatures in fish spawning grounds. Removal of trees also destabilized the soil, with greater volumes washed into stream beds causing siltation of gravel beds, and more frequent flooding.\nRunning cut logs down the tributary rivers into the Great Lakes also dislocated sediments. In 1884, the New York Fish Commission determined that the dumping of sawmill waste (chips and sawdust) had impacted fish populations.\nPollution.\nThe first U.S. Clean Water Act, passed by a Congressional override after being vetoed by U.S. President Richard Nixon in 1972, was a key piece of legislation, along with the bi-national Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement signed by Canada and the U.S. A variety of steps taken to process industrial and municipal pollution discharges into the system greatly improved water quality by the 1980s, and Lake Erie in particular is significantly cleaner. Discharge of toxic substances has been sharply reduced. Federal and state regulations control substances like PCBs. The first of 43 \"Great Lakes Areas of Concern\" to be formally \"de-listed\" through successful cleanup was Ontario's Collingwood Harbour in 1994; Ontario's Severn Sound followed in 2003. Presque Isle Bay in Pennsylvania is formally listed as in recovery, as is Ontario's Spanish Harbour. Dozens of other Areas of Concern have received partial cleanups such as the Rouge River (Michigan) and Waukegan Harbor (Illinois).\nPhosphate detergents were historically a major source of nutrient to the Great Lakes algae blooms in particular in the warmer and shallower portions of the system such as Lake Erie, Saginaw Bay, Green Bay, and the southernmost portion of Lake Michigan. By the mid-1980s, most jurisdictions bordering the Great Lakes had controlled phosphate detergents. Blue-green algae, or cyanobacteria blooms, have been problematic on Lake Erie since 2011. \"Not enough is being done to stop fertilizer and phosphorus from getting into the lake and causing blooms,\" said Michael McKay, executive director of the Great Lakes Institute for Environmental Research (GLIER) at the University of Windsor. The largest Lake Erie bloom to date occurred in 2015, exceeding the severity index at 10.5 and in 2011 at a 10. In early August 2019, satellite images depicted a bloom stretching up to 1,300 square kilometers on Lake Erie, with the heaviest concentration near Toledo, Ohio. A large bloom does not necessarily mean the cyanobacteria ... will produce toxins\", said Michael McKay, of the University of Windsor. Water quality testing was underway in August 2019.\nMercury.\nUntil 1970, mercury was not listed as a harmful chemical, according to the United States Federal Water Quality Administration. In the 21st century, mercury has become more apparent in water tests. Mercury compounds have been used in paper mills to prevent slime from forming during their production, and chemical companies have used mercury to separate chlorine from brine solutions. Studies conducted by the Environmental Protection Agency have shown that when the mercury comes in contact with many of the bacteria and compounds in the fresh water, it forms the compound methyl mercury, which has a much greater impact on human health than elemental mercury due to a higher propensity for absorption. This form of mercury is not detrimental to a majority of fish types, but is very detrimental to people and other wildlife animals who consume the fish. Mercury has been known for health related problems such as birth defects in humans and animals, and the near extinction of eagles in the Great Lakes region.\nSewage.\nThe amount of raw sewage dumped into the waters was the primary focus of both the first Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement and federal laws passed in both countries during the 1970s. Implementation of secondary treatment of municipal sewage by major cities greatly reduced the routine discharge of untreated sewage during the 1970s and 1980s. The International Joint Commission in 2009 summarized the change: \"Since the early 1970s, the level of treatment to reduce pollution from waste water discharges to the Great Lakes has improved considerably. This is a result of significant expenditures to date on both infrastructure and technology, and robust regulatory systems that have proven to be, on the whole, quite effective.\" The commission reported that all urban sewage treatment systems on the U.S. side of the lakes had implemented secondary treatment, as had all on the Canadian side except for five small systems.\nThough contrary to federal laws in both countries, those treatment system upgrades have not yet eliminated combined sewer overflow events. This describes when older sewerage systems, which combine storm water with sewage into single sewers heading to the treatment plant, are temporarily overwhelmed by heavy rainstorms. Local sewage treatment authorities then must release untreated effluent, a mix of rainwater and sewage, into local water bodies. While enormous public investments such as the Deep Tunnel projects in Chicago and Milwaukee have greatly reduced the frequency and volume of these events, they have not been eliminated. The number of such overflow events in Ontario, for example, is flat according to the International Joint Commission. Reports about this issue on the U.S. side highlight five large municipal systems (those of Detroit, Cleveland, Buffalo, Milwaukee and Gary) as being the largest current periodic sources of untreated discharges into the Great Lakes.\nThe fish of the Great Lakes have anti-depressant drugs meant for humans in their brains, which has caused concerns. The number of American adults who take anti-depressant drugs rose from 7.7% of all American adults in 1999\u20132002 to 12.7% in 2011\u20132014. As the anti-depressant drugs pass out of human bodies and through sanitation systems into the Great Lakes, this has resulted in fish in the Great Lakes with twenty times the level of anti-depressants in their brains than what is in the water, leading to the fish being exceedingly happy and hence less risk-averse, to the extent of damaging the fish populations.\nPlastic.\nResearchers have found that more than of plastic end up in the Great Lakes each year. Plastics in the water break up into very small particles known as microplastics. Microplastics can also come from synthetic clothing washed down the drains. Plastic waste found in the lakes include single-use plastics, plastics used in packaging, takeout containers as well as pre-production pellets produced by plastics industry. High concentrations of microplastics were discovered in 100 percent of the fish that were studied by researchers from the Rochman Lab. About of fish is harvested each year from Great Lakes which has raised concerns on how this might affect human health. Microscopic pieces of plastic have also been found in drinking water coming from Great Lakes. It is estimated that nearly 40 million people in the region rely on drinking water from the Great Lakes.\nA number of self-operating floating devices called Seabin, were put in the Great Lakes to capture plastic trash as part of the Great Lakes Plastic Cleanup project. The project captured 74,000 pieces of trash using this technology between 2020 and 2021; however, it does not claim to catch up with of plastic that ends up in Great Lakes every year. The production, consumption, and throwing away of plastics seems to remain the core of Great Lakes trash problem.\nImpacts of climate change on algae.\nAlgae such as diatoms, along with other phytoplankton, are photosynthetic primary producers supporting the food web of the Great Lakes, and have been affected by global warming. The changes in the size or in the function of the primary producers may have a direct or an indirect impact on the food web. Photosynthesis carried out by diatoms constitutes about one fifth of the total photosynthesis. By taking CO2 out of the water to photosynthesize, diatoms help to stabilize the pH of the water, as CO2 would react with water to produce carbonic acid. \nDiatoms acquire inorganic carbon through passive diffusion of CO2 and , and use carbonic anhydrase mediated active transport to speed up this process. Large diatoms require more carbon uptake than smaller diatoms. There is a positive correlation between the surface area and the chlorophyll concentration of diatom cells.\nHistory.\nSeveral Native American populations (Paleo-indians) inhabited the region around 10,000 BC, after the end of the Wisconsin glaciation. The peoples of the Great Lakes traded from around 1000 AD, as copper nuggets have been extracted from the region and fashioned into ornaments and weapons in the mounds of Southern Ohio.\nThe Rush\u2013Bagot Treaty signed in 1818, after the War of 1812 and the later Treaty of Washington eventually led to a complete disarmament of naval vessels in the Great Lakes. Nonetheless, both nations maintained coast guard vessels in the Great Lakes.\nThe brigantine , which was commissioned by Ren\u00e9-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, was built at Cayuga Creek, near the southern end of the Niagara River, and became the first known sailing ship to travel the upper Great Lakes on August 7, 1679. During settlement, the Great Lakes and its rivers were the only practical means of moving people and freight. Barges from middle North America were able to reach the Atlantic Ocean from the Great Lakes when the Welland Canal opened in 1824 and the later Erie Canal opened in 1825. By 1848, with the opening of the Illinois and Michigan Canal at Chicago, direct access to the Mississippi River was possible from the lakes. With these two canals an all-inland water route was provided between New York City and New Orleans.\nThe main business of many of the passenger lines in the 19th century was transporting immigrants. Many of the larger cities owe their existence to their position on the lakes as a freight destination as well as for being a magnet for immigrants. After railroads and surface roads developed, the freight and passenger businesses dwindled and, except for ferries and a few foreign cruise ships, have now vanished. The immigration routes still have an effect today. Immigrants often formed their own communities, and some areas have a pronounced ethnicity, such as Dutch, German, Polish, Finnish, and many others. Since many immigrants settled for a time in New England before moving westward, many areas on the U.S. side of the Great Lakes also have a New England feel, especially in home styles and accent.\nSince general freight these days is transported by railroads and trucks, domestic ships mostly move bulk cargoes, such as iron ore, coal and limestone for the steel industry. The domestic bulk freight developed because of the nearby mines. It was more economical to transport the ingredients for steel to centralized plants rather than to make steel on the spot. Grain exports are also a major cargo on the lakes. In the 19th and early 20th centuries, iron and other ores such as copper were shipped south on (downbound ships), and supplies, food, and coal were shipped north (upbound). Because of the location of the coal fields in Pennsylvania and West Virginia, and the general northeast track of the Appalachian Mountains, railroads naturally developed shipping routes that went due north to ports such as Erie, Pennsylvania and Ashtabula, Ohio.\nBecause the lake maritime community largely developed independently, it has some distinctive vocabulary. Ships, no matter the size, are called \"boats\". When the sailing ships gave way to steamships, they were called \"steamboats\"\u2014the same term used on the Mississippi. The ships also have a distinctive design; ships that primarily trade on the lakes are known as lake freighters or \"lakers\". Foreign boats are known as \"salties\". One of the more common sights on the lakes, since about 1950, has been the , self-unloader. This is a laker with a conveyor belt system that can unload itself by swinging a crane over the side. Today, the Great Lakes fleet is much smaller in numbers than it once was because of the increased use of overland freight, and a few larger ships replacing many small ones.\nDuring World War II, the risk of submarine attacks against coastal training facilities motivated the United States Navy to operate two aircraft carriers on the Great Lakes, and . Both served as training ships to qualify naval aviators in carrier landing and takeoff. Lake Champlain briefly became the sixth Great Lake of the United States on March 6, 1998, when President Clinton signed Senate Bill 927. This bill, which reauthorized the National Sea Grant Program, contained a line declaring Lake Champlain to be a Great Lake. Not coincidentally, this status allows neighboring states to apply for additional federal research and education funds allocated to these national resources. Following a small uproar, the Senate voted to revoke the designation on March 24 (although New York and Vermont universities would continue to receive funds to monitor and study the lake).\nAlan B. McCullough has written that the fishing industry of the Great Lakes got its start \"on the American side of Lake Ontario in Chaumont Bay, near the Maumee River on Lake Erie, and on the Detroit River at about the time of the War of 1812\". Although the region was sparsely populated until the 1830s, so there was not much local demand and transporting fish was prohibitively costly, there were economic and infrastructure developments that were promising for the future of the fishing industry going into the 1830s. Particularly, the 1825 opening of the Erie Canal and the Welland Canal a few years later. The fishing industry expanded particularly in the waters associated with the fur trade that connect Lake Erie and Lake Huron. In fact, two major suppliers of fish in the 1830s were the fur trading companies Hudson's Bay Company and the American Fur Company.\nThe catch from these waters was sent to the growing market for salted fish in Detroit, where merchants involved in the fur trade had already gained some experience handling salted fish. One such merchant was John P. Clark, a shipbuilder and merchant who began selling fish in the area of Manitowoc, Wisconsin where whitefish was abundant. Another operation cropped up in Georgian Bay, Canadian waters plentiful with trout as well as whitefish. In 1831, Alexander MacGregor from Goderich, Ontario found whitefish and herring in abundant supply around the Fishing Islands. A contemporary account by Methodist missionary John Evans describes the fish as resembling a \"bright cloud moving rapidly through the water\".\nFrom 1844 through 1857, palace steamers carried passengers and cargo around the Great Lakes. In the first half of the 20th century large luxurious passenger steamers sailed the lakes in opulence. The Detroit and Cleveland Navigation Company had several vessels at the time and hired workers from all walks of life to help operate these vessels. Several ferries currently operate on the Great Lakes to carry passengers to various islands. As of 2007, four car ferry services cross the Great Lakes, two on Lake Michigan: a steamer from Ludington, Michigan, to Manitowoc, Wisconsin, and a high speed catamaran from Milwaukee to Muskegon, Michigan, one on Lake Erie: a boat from Kingsville, Ontario, or Leamington, Ontario, to Pelee Island, Ontario, then onto Sandusky, Ohio, and one on Lake Huron: the MS \"Chi-Cheemaun\" runs between Tobermory and South Baymouth, Manitoulin Island, operated by the Owen Sound Transportation Company. An international ferry across Lake Ontario from Rochester, New York, to Toronto ran during 2004 and 2005 but is no longer in operation.\nShipwrecks.\nThe large size of the Great Lakes increases the risk of water travel; storms and reefs are common threats. The lakes are prone to sudden and severe storms, in particular in the autumn, from late October until early December. Hundreds of ships have met their end on the lakes. The greatest concentration of shipwrecks lies near Thunder Bay (Michigan), beneath Lake Huron, near the point where eastbound and westbound shipping lanes converge. The Lake Superior shipwreck coast from Grand Marais, Michigan, to Whitefish Point became known as the \"Graveyard of the Great Lakes\". More vessels have been lost in the Whitefish Point area than any other part of Lake Superior. The Whitefish Point Underwater Preserve serves as an underwater museum to protect the many shipwrecks in this area.\nThe first ship to sink in Lake Michigan was \"Le Griffon\", also the first ship to sail the Great Lakes. Caught in a 1679 storm while trading furs between Green Bay and Michilimacinac, she was lost with all hands aboard. Its wreck may have been found in 2004, but a wreck subsequently discovered in a different location was also claimed in 2014 to be \"Le Griffon\". The largest and last major freighter wrecked on the lakes was the , which sank on November 10, 1975, just over offshore from Whitefish Point on Lake Superior. The largest loss of life in a shipwreck out on the lakes may have been that of , wrecked in 1860 with the loss of around 400 lives on Lake Michigan. In an incident at a Chicago dock in 1915, the rolled over while loading passengers, killing 844.\nIn 2007, the Great Lakes Shipwreck Historical Society announced that it had found the wreckage of \"Cyprus\", a long, century-old ore carrier. \"Cyprus\" sank during a Lake Superior storm on October 11, 1907, during its second voyage while hauling iron ore from Superior, Wisconsin, to Buffalo, New York. The entire crew of 23 drowned, except one, Charles Pitz, who floated on a life raft for almost seven hours. In 2008, deep sea divers in Lake Ontario found the wreck of the 1780 Royal Navy warship in what has been described as an \"archaeological miracle\". There are no plans to raise her as the site is being treated as a war grave. In 2010, \"L.R. Doty\" was found in Lake Michigan by an exploration diving team led by dive boat Captain Jitka Hanakova from her boat \"Molly V\". The ship sank in October 1898, probably attempting to rescue a small schooner, \"Olive Jeanette\", during a terrible storm.\nStill missing are the two last warships to sink in the Great Lakes, the French minesweepers \"Inkerman\" and \"Cerisoles\", which vanished in Lake Superior during a blizzard in 1918. 78 people died, making it the largest loss of life in Lake Superior and the greatest unexplained loss of life in the Great Lakes.\nThe Wisconsin Shipwreck Coast National Marine Sanctuary was established in 2021 in the waters of Lake Michigan off Wisconsin. It is the site of a large number of historically significant shipwrecks.\nEconomy.\nShipping.\nExcept when the water is frozen during winter, more than 100 lake freighters operate continuously on the Great Lakes, which remain a major water transport corridor for bulk goods. The Great Lakes Waterway connects all the lakes; the shorter Saint Lawrence Seaway connects the lakes to the Atlantic Ocean. Some lake freighters are too large to use the Seaway and operate only on the Waterway and lakes. In 2002, 162\u00a0million net tons of dry bulk cargo were moved on the Lakes. This was, in order of volume: iron ore, grain and potash. The iron ore and much of the stone and coal are used in the steel industry. There is also some shipping of liquid and containerized cargo. Major ports on the Great Lakes include Duluth-Superior, Chicago, Detroit, Cleveland, Twin Harbors, Hamilton and Thunder Bay.\nRecreation.\nTourism and recreation are major industries on the Great Lakes. A few small cruise ships operate on the Great Lakes including some sailing ships. Sport fishing, commercial fishing, and Native American fishing represent a U.S.$4\u00a0billion a year industry with salmon, whitefish, smelt, lake trout, bass and walleye being major catches. Many other water sports are practiced on the lakes such as yachting, sea kayaking, diving, kitesurfing, powerboating, and lake surfing. The Great Lakes Circle Tour is a designated scenic road system connecting all of the Great Lakes and the Saint Lawrence River. \nLegislation.\nIn 1872, a treaty gave access to the St. Lawrence River to the United States and access to Lake Michigan to the Dominion of Canada. The International Joint Commission was established in 1909 to help prevent and resolve disputes relating to the use and quality of boundary waters, and to advise Canada and the United States on questions related to water resources. Concerns over diversion of Lake water are of concern to both Americans and Canadians. Some water is diverted through the Chicago River to operate the Illinois Waterway, but the flow is limited by treaty. Possible schemes for bottled water plants and diversion to dry regions of the continent raise concerns. Under the U.S. \"Water Resources Development Act of 1986\", diversion of water from the Great Lakes Basin requires the approval of all eight Great Lakes governors through the Great Lakes Commission, which rarely occurs. International treaties regulate large diversions.\nIn 1998, the Canadian company Nova Group won approval from the Province of Ontario to withdraw of Lake Superior water annually to ship by tanker to Asian countries. Public outcry forced the company to abandon the plan before it began. Since that time, the eight Great Lakes Governors and the Premiers of Ontario and Quebec have negotiated the Great Lakes-Saint Lawrence River Basin Sustainable Water Resources Agreement and the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Water Resources Compact that would prevent most future diversion proposals and all long-distance ones. The agreements strengthen protection against abusive water withdrawal practices within the Great Lakes basin. On December 13, 2005, the Governors and Premiers signed these two agreements, the first of which is between all ten jurisdictions. It is somewhat more detailed and protective, though its legal strength has not yet been tested in court. The second, the Great Lakes Compact, has been approved by the state legislatures of all eight states that border the Great Lakes as well as the U.S. Congress, and was signed into law by President George W. Bush on October 3, 2008.\nThe Great Lakes Restoration Initiative, was funded at $475\u00a0million in the U.S. federal government's Fiscal Year 2011 budget, and $300\u00a0million in the Fiscal Year 2012 budget. Through the program a coalition of federal agencies is making grants to local and state entities for toxics cleanups, wetlands and coastline restoration projects, and invasive species-related projects. The Great Lakes Restoration Initiative Act of 2019 passed as Pub. L.\u00a0 on January 5, 2021, reauthorizing the program through Fiscal Year 2026.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12012", "revid": "45390579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12012", "title": "German", "text": "German(s) may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12013", "revid": "2051880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12013", "title": "Girth (graph theory)", "text": "Length of a shortest cycle contained in the graph\nIn graph theory, the girth of an undirected graph is the length of a shortest cycle contained in the graph. If the graph does not contain any cycles (that is, it is a forest), its girth is defined to be infinity.\nFor example, a 4-cycle (square) has girth 4. A grid has girth 4 as well, and a triangular mesh has girth 3. A graph with girth four or more is triangle-free.\nCages.\nA cubic graph (all vertices have degree three) of girth g that is as small as possible is known as a g-cage (or as a (3,\"g\")-cage). The Petersen graph is the unique 5-cage (it is the smallest cubic graph of girth 5), the Heawood graph is the unique 6-cage, the McGee graph is the unique 7-cage and the Tutte eight cage is the unique 8-cage. There may exist multiple cages for a given girth. For instance there are three nonisomorphic 10-cages, each with 70 vertices: the Balaban 10-cage, the Harries graph and the Harries\u2013Wong graph.\nGirth and graph coloring.\nFor any positive integers g and \u03c7, there exists a graph with girth at least g and chromatic number at least \u03c7; for instance, the Gr\u00f6tzsch graph is triangle-free and has chromatic number 4, and repeating the Mycielskian construction used to form the Gr\u00f6tzsch graph produces triangle-free graphs of arbitrarily large chromatic number. Paul Erd\u0151s was the first to prove the general result, using the probabilistic method. More precisely, he showed that a random graph on n vertices, formed by choosing independently whether to include each edge with probability \"n\"(1\u2013\"g\")/\"g\", has, with probability tending to 1 as n goes to infinity, at most cycles of length g or less, but has no independent set of size . Therefore, removing one vertex from each short cycle leaves a smaller graph with girth greater than g, in which each color class of a coloring must be small and which therefore requires at least k colors in any coloring.\nExplicit, though large, graphs with high girth and chromatic number can be constructed as certain Cayley graphs of linear groups over finite fields. These remarkable \"Ramanujan graphs\" also have large expansion coefficient.\nRelated concepts.\nThe odd girth and even girth of a graph are the lengths of a shortest odd cycle and shortest even cycle respectively. \nThe &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;circumference of a graph is the length of the \"longest\" (simple) cycle, rather than the shortest.\nThought of as the least length of a non-trivial cycle, the girth admits natural generalisations as the 1-systole or higher systoles in systolic geometry.\nGirth is the dual concept to edge connectivity, in the sense that the girth of a planar graph is the edge connectivity of its dual graph, and vice versa. These concepts are unified in matroid theory by the girth of a matroid, the size of the smallest dependent set in the matroid. For a graphic matroid, the matroid girth equals the girth of the underlying graph, while for a co-graphic matroid it equals the edge connectivity.\nComputation.\nThe girth of an undirected graph can be computed by running a breadth-first search from each node, with complexity formula_1 where formula_2 is the number of vertices of the graph and formula_3 is the number of edges. A practical optimization is to limit the depth of the BFS to a depth that depends on the length of the smallest cycle discovered so far. Better algorithms are known in the case where the girth is even and when the graph is planar. In terms of lower bounds, computing the girth of a graph is at least as hard as solving the triangle finding problem on the graph."}
{"id": "12015", "revid": "134766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12015", "title": "Gun safety", "text": "Study and practice of safe operation of firearms\nGun safety is the study and practice of managing risk when using, transporting, storing and disposing of firearms, airguns and ammunition in order to avoid injury, illness or death.\nGun safety includes the training of users, the design of firearms, as well as the formal and informal regulation of gun production, distribution, and usage. This includes mishaps like accidental discharge, negligent discharge, and firearm malfunctions, as well as secondary risks like hearing loss, lead poisoning from bullets, and pollution from other hazardous materials in propellants and cartridges.\nHistory.\nAccidental explosions of stored gunpowder date to the 13th century in Yangzhou, China. Early handheld muskets using matchlock or wheel lock mechanisms were limited by poor reliability and the risk of accidental discharge, which was improved somewhat by the introduction of the flintlock, though unintentional firing continued to be a serious drawback. Percussion caps, introduced in the 1820s, were more reliable, and by 1830 security pins had been designed to prevent accidental discharges.\nTrigger guards, grip safeties and integrated trigger safety represent further iterations on the various safeties built into modern firearms to prevent discharge from dropping, or without positive and deliberate manipulation of the trigger.\nAs mechanical reliability improved, human error became a more significant cause of harm. In 1902, the English politician and game shooting enthusiast Mark Hanbury Beaufoy wrote some much-quoted verses on gun safety, known as \"A Father's Advice\" or \"The Beaufoy Verses\" meant to instill safe practices in his son. Various similar sayings have since been popularized.\nThere were 47,000 unintentional firearm deaths worldwide in 2013.\nOverview.\nMost firearm safety relates to management of human factors. This includes training to mitigate unsafe handling, as well as restricting physical access to firearms by untrained or unfit persons (such as unsupervised children). Handling practices and doctrines necessarily vary between use cases with additional mechanical and procedural mitigations implemented as required.\nEnvironmental hazards such as lead exposure and noise pollution are managed via shooting range design, maintenance procedures, and the use of personal protective equipment (PPE).\nFirearm safety practices are built around the Swiss cheese model, such that potential harm caused by a malfunction or a lapse in handling is mitigated (or prevented entirely) by other safety practices. For instance, use of an unloading facility ensures that if a procedural error is made during unloading and a round remains chambered, the resulting discharge when the handler eases springs is captured by a safe backstop.\nTraining.\nA leading cause of accidents with firearms results from unsafe handling due to ignorance or negligence.\nRole-specific training varies in nature, although a few common principles underpin most doctrines including:\nWhere firearms must be carried loaded (such as by law enforcement and military personnel), training and periodic re-qualification is particularly important as a control against unintentional discharge. Emphasis is often placed on loading and unloading practices as well as mechanical considerations such as holster design, and integrated trigger safety catches.\nJeff Cooper, an influential figure in US firearms training, formalized and popularized \"Four Rules\" of safe firearm handling.\nOther lists of gun safety rules include as few as three basic safety rules or as many as ten rules including broader range safety and sporting etiquette rules. Such rulesets often include activity-specific best practice for niches including defensive use, hunting, and range or target shooting. Many organisations provide similar sets of rules.\nIn addition to basic safe handling practices, training includes identification and immediate actions to handle faults such as misfires and squib rounds that could lead to dangerous mishaps such as a barrel failure or breech explosion.\nStorage.\nProper storage prevents both damage and the unauthorized use or theft of firearms and ammunition.\nWhere a full cabinet is not practicable, locks may be used to prevent the firearm being loaded or discharged.\nGun cabinets.\nA gun safe or gun cabinet is commonly used to physically prevent access to firearms, magazines, and ammunition. Various standards like the British Standard BS 7558:1992 or the California DOJ criteria define minimum requirements to qualify a container as a firearm storage device.\nLocal laws may mandate or simply recommend use of a cabinet for storage, and may require that cabinets meet a particular standard. Some jurisdictions require that ammunition is stored separately to the firearm. Some jurisdictions may require that main components of the firearm such as the bolt, is stored separately to the firearm, effectively deactivating it.\nMany small safes sold as suitable for handguns have been found not to meet standards by independent researchers and professional hackers. Locking mechanism plays an important role in overall safety of the small safe.\nHandloaders must take special precautions for storing primers and powders.\nLocks.\nThere are several types of locks that serve to make it difficult to discharge a firearm. Locks are considered less effective than keeping firearms in a safe since locks typically do not prevent the removal or theft of the firearm, after which the handler can bypass the lock at their leisure. Some manufacturers, such as Taurus, build locks into the firearm itself.\nSome jurisidictions such as the US state of California require that locks be tested by a laboratory and receive approval for sale.\nTrigger lock.\nTrigger locks prevent trigger manipulation. Some trigger locks are integrated into the design of the firearm, requiring no external parts besides the key. External trigger locks usually involve two pieces locking together from either side behind the trigger. This physically prevents the trigger from being depressed to discharge the firearm. They may also form part of a larger mechanism which locks the entire action. Other more commercially common types of trigger locks do not go behind the trigger, but encompass the full area within the trigger guard, making the trigger inaccessible to users. Advanced models may also feature anti-tamper alarms. A common critique of trigger locks is the time taken to unlock them, limiting their usefulness in a self-defense scenario. One proposed solution to this is the use of biometric locks which can be removed by the owner near-instantaneously.\nThere is controversy surrounding manufacturing standards, usage, and legislation of trigger locks. Supporters argue that they protect children by preventing accidents, whilst critics note some models have been shown to be easily removed by children with very little force and common household tools. Additionally, many firearms can discharge when dropped without operating the trigger. Trigger locks are not designed for use on loaded firearms as the locking mechanism itself may foul or manipulate the trigger if pressure is exerted on the lock or during installation/removal; critics argue that this may make the firearm more dangerous by creating the illusion of safety. A former senior product manager at Master Lock was quoted as saying \"If it is a loaded gun, there isn't a lock out there that will keep it from being fired... If you put a trigger lock on any loaded gun, you are making the gun more dangerous.\"\nChamber &amp; cable locks.\nChamber locks aim to block ammunition from being chambered, since most firearms typically cannot be discharged unless the ammunition is in the correct position. They are used to prevent live ammunition from being loaded into a firearm by blocking the chamber with a dummy cartridge or a chamber plug. Another type is one in which a steel rod locked into the safety cartridge with a key. As long as the rod and safety cartridge are engaged, the dummy round cannot eject nor can live ammunition be loaded into the firearm. Chamber locks work with most firearm types including revolvers, pistols, rifles and shotguns. They are available in any caliber and length, and may include such features as unique keying, rapid removal.\nCable locks usually thread through the receiver via the ejection port and magazine well of repeating firearms. These locks physically obstruct the movements of the bolt, and also prevent a magazine from being inserted on magazine-fed firearms. preventing the cycling of the action.\nSmart gun.\nSmart guns featuring \"authorised user\" technology, are intended to prevent unauthorized use with built-in locks that are released by fingerprint recognition, RFID chips, magnetic rings, a microchip implant or other proximity devices.\nTheir reliability has been disputed and no models have been commercially marketed.\nShooting range management.\nShooting ranges augment physical design features with supervisory measures to ensure safe operation. In addition to generic gun safety rules, local rules or \"Range Standing Orders\" may be implemented to address specific features of a range.\nRanges will typically be operated under the command of a \"Range Conducting Officer\" (RCO or RO) or \"Range Safety Officer\" (RSO) who issues start and stop commands and checks that firearms are clear before being removed from the firing point, or before participants go forward to change targets. At competitions, the RCO may have a secondary responsibility of enforcing rules and fair play.\nSafety flags.\nSafety flags or breech flags are commonly mandated on shooting ranges to demonstrate that the firearm's bolt or action is open and no round is chambered. For firearms with magazines, the flag may also indicate that the magazine well is clear. Most competition rules mandate the usage of flags whenever a firearm is not directly in use.\nSafety lines or clear barrel indicators are mandated for air rifles and air pistols under ISSF rules. Safety lines typically consist of a nylon cord which shows the action is open and that no pellet is present in the breech or barrel.\nIn clay pigeon shooting, break-barrel shotguns are typically carried in a \"broken\" state to show that they cannot be fired. Semi-automatic shotguns are typically required to use a breech flag.\nSafety areas.\nIn practical shooting sports, a safety area or safety zone is a bay where competitors can handle unloaded firearms without the supervision of a Range Officer (RO). Safety areas are used in dynamic shooting sport disciplines such as IPSC, PPC 1500 and Steel Challenge, where the lack of a fixed firing point (where firearms would be unboxed in most target disciplines), necessitates provision of a safe location for firearms to be unboxed and holstered before a competitor starts a stage. They may be used to pack, unpack or holster a gun, cleaning or repair, dry firing and training with empty magazines.\nUnsafe users.\nImpaired users.\nFirearms should never be handled by persons who are under the influence of alcohol or any drugs which may affect their judgment. Gun safety teachers advocate zero tolerance of their use. In the United States, this recommendation is codified in many states' penal codes as a crime of \"carrying under the influence\", with penalties similar to DWI/DUI. Other sources of temporary impairment include exhaustion, dehydration, and emotional stress. These can affect reaction time, cognitive processing, sensory perception, and judgment.\nMany jurisdictions prohibit the possession of firearms by people deemed generally incapable of using them safely, such as the mentally ill or convicted felons.\nChildren.\nIn most jurisdictions, unsupervised access to firearms by children is prohibited by law. Conditions for supervised training and usage, and penalties for allowing a child to access firearms vary with jurisdiction.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the NRA's Eddie Eagle program is intended to teach children to avoid firearm accidents when they encounter guns that have not been securely stored.\nEddie Eagle has been criticised for casting responsibility onto children instead of placing the onus on the adult firearm owner to secure their firearm(s) and ammunition. Studies have cast doubt on the effectiveness of such programmes, whilst finding that Child Access Prevention (CAP) laws are more effective in reducing firearm injuries and deaths amongst children. In K-12 school shootings, more than 80% of shooters stole their guns from family members.\nEddie Eagle has been described as a \"Trojan Horse\" programme, designed as a way to deter lawmakers from passing CAP laws or mandating secure storage.\nUnsupervised access to firearms with ammunition is a major risk factor for youth suicide. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) advises that keeping an unsecured loaded gun in the home, especially a handgun, increases the risk of injury and death for young people.\nSecondary hazards.\nWhile a firearm's primary danger lies in the discharge of ammunition, there are other ways a firearm may pose hazards to the health of the handler and bystanders.\nNoise.\nWhen a firearm is discharged it emits a very loud noise, typically close to the handler's ears. This can cause temporary or permanent hearing damage such as tinnitus. Hearing protection such as earplugs, or earmuffs, or both, can reduce the risk of hearing damage. Some earmuffs or headphones made for shooting and similar loud situations use active noise control. Firearms may also have silencers which reduce the sound intensity from the barrel.\nHot gases and debris.\nFirearms emit hot gases, powder, and other debris when discharged. Some firearms, such as semi-automatic and fully automatic firearms, typically eject spent cartridge casings at high speed. Casings are also dangerously hot when ejected. Revolvers store spent casings in the chamber, but may emit a stream of hot gases and fine particulate debris laterally from the interface between the revolving chamber and the barrel.\nAny of these may hurt the handler or bystanders through burning or impact damage. Because eyes are particularly vulnerable to this type of damage, eye protection should be worn to reduce the risk of injury. Prescription lenses and various tints to suit different light conditions are available. Some eye protection products are rated to withstand impact from birdshot loads, which offers protection against irresponsible firearms use by other game bird shooters.\nCompressed air &amp; CO2.\nPre-charged pneumatic airguns use air cylinders with operating pressures in excess of . These are commonly refilled from diving cylinders, which are periodically recharged at a dive shop. Mishandling of pressure vessels can result in serious injury or death. Tanks and cylinders should be maintained and inspected in accordance with manufacturer's instructions, and only used by trained individuals.\nToxins and pollutants.\nIn recent years the toxic effects of ammunition and firearm cleaning agents have been highlighted.\nIndoor ranges require good ventilation to remove pollutants such as powder, smoke, and lead dust from the air around the shooters, and regular cleaning and maintenance to prevent buildup of contaminants.\nIndoor and outdoor ranges typically require extensive decontamination when they are decommissioned to remove all traces of lead, copper, and powder residues from the area.\nLead, copper and other metals will also be released when a firearm is cleaned. Highly aggressive solvents and other agents used to remove lead and powder fouling may also present a hazard to health. Installing good ventilation, washing hands after handling firearms, and cleaning the space where the firearm was handled lessens the risk of unnecessary exposure.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12018", "revid": "6917124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12018", "title": "Gun/Politics", "text": ""}
{"id": "12021", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12021", "title": "Go Down Moses", "text": "African-American spiritual song\n\"Go Down Moses\" is an African American spiritual that describes the Hebrew Exodus, specifically drawing from the Book of Exodus 5:1, in which God commands Moses to demand the release of the Israelites from bondage in Egypt. \"And the LORD spoke unto Moses, Go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Let my people go, that they may serve me\".\nAs is common in spirituals, the song refers to freedom, both the freedom of the Israelites, and that of runaway enslaved people. As a result of those messages, it was outlawed by many enslavers. \nThe opening verse, as published by the Jubilee Singers in 1872:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLyrically, the song refers to the liberation of the ancient Jewish people from Egyptian slavery. That story held a second meaning for enslaved African Americans, because they related their experiences under slavery to those of Moses and the Israelites who were enslaved by the pharaoh, and the idea that God would come to the aid of the persecuted resonated with them. \"Go Down Moses\" also makes reference to the Jordan River, commonly associated in spirituals with reaching freedom, because the act of running away often involved crossing one or more rivers.\nSince the Old Testament recognizes the Nile Valley as further south, and thus, lower than Jerusalem and the Promised Land, heading to Egypt means going \"down\" while going away from Egypt is \"up\". In the context of American slavery, that ancient sense of \"down\" converged with the concept of \"down the river\" (the Mississippi), where enslaved people's conditions were notoriously worse. Later verses also draw parallels between the Israelites' freedom from slavery and humanity's freedom won by Christ.\n\"Oh! Let My People Go\".\nAlthough usually thought of as a spiritual, the earliest written record of the song was as a rallying anthem for the Contrabands at Fort Monroe sometime before July 1862. White people who reported on the song presumed it was composed by them. It became the first spiritual known to be recorded in sheet music.\nWhile the Reverend Lewis Lockwood, the chaplain of the Contrabands, was visiting Fortress Monroe in 1861, he heard runaway enslaved people singing the song, transcribed what he heard, and eventually published it in the \"National Anti-Slavery Standard\". Soon after, sheet music was published titled \"Oh! Let My People Go: The Song of the Contrabands\", arranged by Horace Waters. Lockwood stated in the sheet music that the song was from Virginia, dating from about 1853.\nHowever, the song was not included in \"Slave Songs of the United States\", despite its being a very prominent spiritual among enslaved people. Furthermore, the original version of the song sung by enslaved people almost definitely sounded very different from what Lockwood transcribed by ear, especially following an arrangement by a person who had never heard the song as it was originally sung. The opening verse, as recorded by Lockwood, is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSarah Bradford's authorized biography of Harriet Tubman, \"Scenes in the Life of Harriet Tubman\" (1869), quotes Tubman as saying she used \"Go Down Moses\" as one of two code songs used with fugitive enslaved people to communicate when fleeing Maryland. Tubman began her underground railroad work in 1850 and continued until the beginning of the Civil War, so it is possible Tubman's use of the song predates the origin claimed by Lockwood. Some people even hypothesize that she herself may have written the spiritual. Others claim that Nat Turner, who led one of the most well-known slave revolts in history, either wrote or was the inspiration for the song.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12024", "revid": "50948656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12024", "title": "General relativity", "text": "Theory of gravitation as curved spacetime\nGeneral relativity, also known as the general theory of relativity, and as Einstein's theory of gravity, is the geometric theory of gravitation published by Albert Einstein in 1916 and is the accepted description of gravitation in modern physics. General relativity generalizes special relativity and refines Newton's law of universal gravitation, providing a unified description of gravity as a geometric property of space and time, or four-dimensional spacetime. In particular, the \"curvature of spacetime\" is directly related to the energy, momentum and stress of whatever is present, including matter and radiation. The relation is specified by the Einstein field equations, a system of second-order partial differential equations.\nNewton's law of universal gravitation, which describes gravity in classical mechanics, can be seen as a prediction of general relativity for the almost flat spacetime geometry around stationary mass distributions. Some predictions of general relativity, however, are beyond Newton's law of universal gravitation in classical physics. These predictions concern the passage of time, the geometry of space, the motion of bodies in free fall, and the propagation of light, and include gravitational time dilation, gravitational lensing, the gravitational redshift of light, the Shapiro time delay and singularities/black holes. So far, all tests of general relativity have been in agreement with the theory. The time-dependent solutions of general relativity enable us to extrapolate the history of the universe into the past and future, and have provided the modern framework for cosmology, thus leading to the discovery of the Big Bang and cosmic microwave background radiation. Despite the introduction of a number of alternative theories, general relativity continues to be the simplest theory consistent with experimental data.\nReconciliation of general relativity with the laws of quantum physics remains a problem, however, as no self-consistent theory of quantum gravity has been found. It is not yet known how gravity can be unified with the three non-gravitational interactions: strong, weak and electromagnetic.\nEinstein's theory has astrophysical implications, including the prediction of black holes\u2014regions of space in which space and time are distorted in such a way that nothing, not even light, can escape from them. Black holes are the end-state for massive stars. Microquasars and active galactic nuclei are believed to be stellar black holes and supermassive black holes. It also predicts gravitational lensing, where the bending of light results in distorted and multiple images of the same distant astronomical phenomenon. Other predictions include the existence of gravitational waves, which have been observed directly by the physics collaboration LIGO and other observatories. In addition, general relativity has provided the basis for cosmological models of an expanding universe.\nWidely acknowledged as a theory of extraordinary beauty, general relativity has often been described as the most beautiful of all existing physical theories.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nHenri Poincar\u00e9's 1905 theory of the dynamics of the electron was a relativistic theory which he applied to all forces, including gravity. While others thought that gravity was instantaneous or of electromagnetic origin, he suggested that relativity was \"something due to our methods of measurement\". In his theory, he showed that gravitational waves propagate at the speed of light. Soon afterwards, Einstein started thinking about how to incorporate gravity into his relativistic framework. In 1907, beginning with a simple thought experiment involving an observer in free fall (FFO), he embarked on what would be an eight-year search for a relativistic theory of gravity. After numerous detours and false starts, his work culminated in the presentation to the Prussian Academy of Science in November 1915 of what are known as the Einstein field equations, which form the core of Einstein's general theory of relativity. These equations specify how the geometry of space and time is influenced by whatever matter and radiation are present. A version of non-Euclidean geometry, called Riemannian geometry, enabled Einstein to develop general relativity by providing the key mathematical framework on which he fit his physical ideas of gravity. This idea was pointed out by mathematician Marcel Grossmann and published by Grossmann and Einstein in 1913.\nThe Einstein field equations are nonlinear and are considered difficult to solve. Einstein used approximation methods in working out initial predictions of the theory. But in 1916, the astrophysicist Karl Schwarzschild found the first non-trivial exact solution to the Einstein field equations, the Schwarzschild metric. This solution laid the groundwork for the description of the final stages of gravitational collapse, and the objects known today as black holes. In the same year, the first steps towards generalizing Schwarzschild's solution to electrically charged objects were taken, eventually resulting in the Reissner\u2013Nordstr\u00f6m solution, which is associated with electrically charged black holes. In 1917, Einstein applied his theory to the universe as a whole, initiating the field of relativistic cosmology. In line with contemporary thinking, he assumed a static universe, adding a new parameter to his original field equations\u2014the cosmological constant\u2014to match that observational presumption. By 1929, however, the work of Hubble and others had shown that the universe is expanding. This is readily described by the expanding cosmological solutions found by Friedmann in 1922, which do not require a cosmological constant. Lema\u00eetre used these solutions to formulate the earliest version of the Big Bang models, in which the universe has evolved from an extremely hot and dense earlier state. Einstein later declared the cosmological constant the biggest blunder of his life.\nDuring that period, general relativity remained something of a curiosity among physical theories. It was clearly superior to Newtonian gravity, being consistent with special relativity and accounting for several effects unexplained by the Newtonian theory. Einstein showed in 1915 how his theory explained the anomalous perihelion advance of the planet Mercury without any arbitrary parameters (\"fudge factors\"), and in 1919 an expedition led by Eddington confirmed general relativity's prediction for the deflection of starlight by the Sun during the total solar eclipse of 29 May 1919, instantly making Einstein famous. Yet the theory remained outside the mainstream of theoretical physics and astrophysics until developments between approximately 1960 and 1975 known as the golden age of general relativity. Physicists began to understand the concept of a black hole, and to identify quasars as one of these objects' astrophysical manifestations. Ever more precise solar system tests confirmed the theory's predictive power, and relativistic cosmology also became amenable to direct observational tests.\nGeneral relativity has acquired a reputation as a theory of extraordinary beauty. Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar has noted that at multiple levels, general relativity exhibits what Francis Bacon has termed a \"strangeness in the proportion\" (\"i.e.\" elements that excite wonderment and surprise). It juxtaposes fundamental concepts (space and time \"versus\" matter and motion) which had previously been considered as entirely independent. Chandrasekhar also noted that Einstein's only guides in his search for an exact theory were the principle of equivalence and his sense that a proper description of gravity should be geometrical at its basis, so that there was an \"element of revelation\" in the manner in which Einstein arrived at his theory. Other elements of beauty associated with the general theory of relativity are its simplicity and symmetry, the manner in which it incorporates invariance and unification, and its perfect logical consistency.\nIn the preface to \"\", Einstein said \"The present book is intended, as far as possible, to give an exact insight into the theory of Relativity to those readers who, from a general scientific and philosophical point of view, are interested in the theory, but who are not conversant with the mathematical apparatus of theoretical physics. The work presumes a standard of education corresponding to that of a university matriculation examination, and, despite the shortness of the book, a fair amount of patience and force of will on the part of the reader. The author has spared himself no pains in his endeavour to present the main ideas in the simplest and most intelligible form, and on the whole, in the sequence and connection in which they actually originated.\"\nFrom classical mechanics to general relativity.\nGeneral relativity can be understood by examining its similarities with and departures from classical physics. The first step is the realization that classical mechanics and Newton's law of gravity admit a geometric description. The combination of this description with the laws of special relativity results in a heuristic derivation of general relativity.\nGeometry of Newtonian gravity.\nAt the base of classical mechanics is the notion that a body's motion can be described as a combination of free (or inertial) motion, and deviations from this free motion. Such deviations are caused by external forces acting on a body in accordance with Newton's second law of motion, which states that the net force acting on a body is equal to that body's (inertial) mass multiplied by its acceleration. The preferred inertial motions are related to the geometry of space and time: in the standard reference frames of classical mechanics, objects in free motion move along straight lines at constant speed. In modern parlance, their paths are geodesics, straight world lines in curved spacetime.\nConversely, one might expect that inertial motions, once identified by observing the actual motions of bodies and making allowances for the external forces (such as electromagnetism or friction), can be used to define the geometry of space, as well as a time coordinate. However, there is an ambiguity once gravity comes into play. According to Newton's law of gravity, and independently verified by experiments such as that of E\u00f6tv\u00f6s and its successors (see \"E\u00f6tv\u00f6s experiment\"), there is a universality of free fall (also known as the weak equivalence principle, or the universal equality of inertial and passive-gravitational mass): the trajectory of a test body in free fall depends only on its position and initial speed, but not on any of its material properties. A simplified version of this is embodied in Einstein's elevator experiment, illustrated in the figure on the right: for an observer in an enclosed room, it is impossible to decide, by mapping the trajectory of bodies such as a dropped ball, whether the room is stationary in a gravitational field and the ball accelerating, or in free space aboard a rocket that is accelerating at a rate equal to that of the gravitational field versus the ball which upon release has nil acceleration.\nGiven the universality of free fall, there is no observable distinction between inertial motion and motion under the influence of the gravitational force. This suggests the definition of a new class of inertial motion, namely that of objects in free fall under the influence of gravity. This new class of preferred motions, too, defines a geometry of space and time\u2014in mathematical terms, it is the geodesic motion associated with a specific connection which depends on the gradient of the gravitational potential. Space, in this construction, still has the ordinary Euclidean geometry. However, space\"time\" as a whole is more complicated. As can be shown using simple thought experiments following the free-fall trajectories of different test particles, the result of transporting spacetime vectors that can denote a particle's velocity (time-like vectors) will vary with the particle's trajectory; mathematically speaking, the Newtonian connection is not integrable. From this, one can deduce that spacetime is curved. The resulting Newton\u2013Cartan theory is a geometric formulation of Newtonian gravity using only covariant concepts, i.e. a description which is valid in any desired coordinate system. In this geometric description, tidal effects\u2014the relative acceleration of bodies in free fall\u2014are related to the derivative of the connection, showing how the modified geometry is caused by the presence of mass.\nRelativistic generalization.\nAs intriguing as geometric Newtonian gravity may be, its basis, classical mechanics, is merely a limiting case of (special) relativistic mechanics. In the language of symmetry: where gravity can be neglected, physics is Lorentz invariant as in special relativity rather than Galilei invariant as in classical mechanics. (The defining symmetry of special relativity is the Poincar\u00e9 group, which includes translations, rotations, boosts and reflections.) The differences between the two become significant when dealing with speeds approaching the speed of light, and with high-energy phenomena.\nWith Lorentz symmetry, additional structures come into play. They are defined by the set of light cones (see image). The light-cones define a causal structure: for each event A, there is a set of events that can, in principle, either influence or be influenced by A via signals or interactions that do not need to travel faster than light (such as event B in the image), and a set of events for which such an influence is impossible (such as event C in the image). These sets are observer-independent. In conjunction with the world-lines of freely falling particles, the light-cones can be used to reconstruct the spacetime's semi-Riemannian metric, at least up to a positive scalar factor. In mathematical terms, this defines a conformal structure or conformal geometry.\nSpecial relativity is defined in the absence of gravity. For practical applications, it is a suitable model whenever gravity can be neglected. Bringing gravity into play, and assuming the universality of free fall motion, an analogous reasoning as in the previous section applies: there are no global inertial frames. Instead there are approximate inertial frames moving alongside freely falling particles. Translated into the language of spacetime: the straight time-like lines that define a gravity-free inertial frame are deformed to lines that are curved relative to each other, suggesting that the inclusion of gravity necessitates a change in spacetime geometry.\nA priori, it is not clear whether the new local frames in free fall coincide with the reference frames in which the laws of special relativity hold\u2014that theory is based on the propagation of light, and thus on electromagnetism, which could have a different set of preferred frames. But using different assumptions about the special-relativistic frames (such as their being earth-fixed, or in free fall), one can derive different predictions for the gravitational redshift, that is, the way in which the frequency of light shifts as the light propagates through a gravitational field (cf. below). The actual measurements show that free-falling frames are the ones in which light propagates as it does in special relativity. The generalization of this statement, namely that the laws of special relativity hold to good approximation in freely falling (and non-rotating) reference frames, is known as the Einstein equivalence principle, a crucial guiding principle for generalizing special-relativistic physics to include gravity.\nThe same experimental data shows that time as measured by clocks in a gravitational field\u2014proper time, to give the technical term\u2014does not follow the rules of special relativity. In the language of spacetime geometry, it is not measured by the Minkowski metric. As in the Newtonian case, this is suggestive of a more general geometry. At small scales, all reference frames that are in free fall are equivalent, and approximately Minkowskian. Consequently, we are dealing with a curved generalization of Minkowski space. The metric tensor that defines the geometry\u2014in particular, how lengths and angles are measured\u2014is not the Minkowski metric of special relativity, it is a generalization known as a semi- or pseudo-Riemannian metric. Furthermore, each Riemannian metric is naturally associated with one particular kind of connection, the Levi-Civita connection, and this is, in fact, the connection that satisfies the equivalence principle and makes space locally Minkowskian (that is, in suitable locally inertial coordinates, the metric is Minkowskian, and its first partial derivatives and the connection coefficients vanish).\nEinstein's equations.\nHaving formulated the relativistic, geometric version of the effects of gravity, the question of gravity's source remains. In Newtonian gravity, the source is mass. In special relativity, mass turns out to be part of a more general quantity called the stress\u2013energy tensor, which includes both energy and momentum densities as well as stress: pressure and shear. Using the equivalence principle, this tensor is readily generalized to curved spacetime. Drawing further upon the analogy with geometric Newtonian gravity, it is natural to assume that the field equation for gravity relates this tensor and the Ricci tensor, which describes a particular class of tidal effects: the change in volume for a small cloud of test particles that are initially at rest, and then fall freely. In special relativity, conservation of energy\u2013momentum corresponds to the statement that the stress\u2013energy tensor is divergence-free. This formula, too, is readily generalized to curved spacetime by replacing partial derivatives with their curved-manifold counterparts, covariant derivatives studied in differential geometry. With this additional condition\u2014the covariant divergence of the stress\u2013energy tensor, and hence of whatever is on the other side of the equation, is zero\u2014the simplest nontrivial set of equations are what are called Einstein's (field) equations:\nEinstein's field equations\nformula_1\nOn the left-hand side is the Einstein tensor, formula_2, which is symmetric and a specific divergence-free combination of the Ricci tensor formula_3 and the metric. In particular,\n formula_4\nis the curvature scalar. The Ricci tensor itself is related to the more general Riemann curvature tensor as\n formula_5\nOn the right-hand side, formula_6 is a constant and formula_7 is the stress\u2013energy tensor. All tensors are written in abstract index notation. Matching the theory's prediction to observational results for planetary orbits or, equivalently, assuring that the weak-gravity, low-speed limit is Newtonian mechanics, the proportionality constant formula_6 is found to be formula_9, where formula_10 is the Newtonian constant of gravitation and formula_11 the speed of light in vacuum. When there is no matter present, so that the stress\u2013energy tensor vanishes, the results are the vacuum Einstein equations,\n formula_12\nIn general relativity, the world line of a particle free from all external, non-gravitational force is a particular type of geodesic in curved spacetime. In other words, a freely moving or falling particle always moves along a geodesic.\nThe geodesic equation is:\n formula_13\nwhere formula_14 is a scalar parameter of motion (e.g. the proper time), and formula_15 are Christoffel symbols (sometimes called the affine connection coefficients or Levi-Civita connection coefficients) which is symmetric in the two lower indices. Greek indices may take the values: 0, 1, 2, 3 and the summation convention is used for repeated indices formula_16 and formula_17. The quantity on the left-hand-side of this equation is the acceleration of a particle, and so this equation is analogous to Newton's laws of motion which likewise provide formulae for the acceleration of a particle. This equation of motion employs the Einstein notation, meaning that repeated indices are summed (i.e. from zero to three). The Christoffel symbols are functions of the four spacetime coordinates, and so are independent of the velocity or acceleration or other characteristics of a test particle whose motion is described by the geodesic equation.\nTotal force in general relativity.\nIn general relativity, the effective gravitational potential energy of an object of mass \"m\" revolving around a massive central body \"M\" is given by\n formula_18\nA conservative total force can then be obtained as its negative gradient\n formula_19\nwhere \"L\" is the angular momentum. The first term represents the force of Newtonian gravity, which is described by the inverse-square law. The second term represents the centrifugal force in the circular motion. The third term represents the relativistic effect.\nAlternatives to general relativity.\nThere are alternatives to general relativity built upon the same premises, which include additional rules and/or constraints, leading to different field equations. Examples are Whitehead's theory, Brans\u2013Dicke theory, teleparallelism, \"f\"(\"R\") gravity and Einstein\u2013Cartan theory.\nDefinition and basic applications.\nThe derivation outlined in the previous section contains all the information needed to define general relativity, describe its key properties, and address a question of crucial importance in physics, namely how the theory can be used for model-building.\nDefinition and basic properties.\nGeneral relativity is a metric theory of gravitation. At its core are Einstein's equations, which describe the relation between the geometry of a four-dimensional pseudo-Riemannian manifold representing spacetime, and the distribution of energy, momentum and stress contained in that spacetime. Phenomena that in classical mechanics are ascribed to the action of the force of gravity (such as free-fall, orbital motion, and spacecraft trajectories), correspond to inertial motion within a curved geometry of spacetime in general relativity; there is no gravitational force deflecting objects from their natural, straight paths. Instead, gravity corresponds to changes in the properties of space and time, which in turn changes the straightest-possible paths that objects will naturally follow. The curvature is, in turn, caused by the stress\u2013energy of matter. Paraphrasing the relativist John Archibald Wheeler, spacetime tells matter how to move; matter tells spacetime how to curve.\nWhile general relativity replaces the scalar gravitational potential of classical physics by a symmetric rank-two tensor, the latter reduces to the former in certain limiting cases. For weak gravitational fields and low speed relative to the speed of light, the theory's predictions converge on those of Newton's law of universal gravitation.\nAs it is constructed using tensors, general relativity exhibits general covariance: its laws\u2014and further laws formulated within the general relativistic framework\u2014take on the same form in all coordinate systems. Furthermore, the theory does not contain any invariant geometric background structures, i.e. it is background-independent. It thus satisfies a more stringent general principle of relativity, namely that the laws of physics are the same for all observers. Locally, as expressed in the equivalence principle, spacetime is Minkowskian, and the laws of physics exhibit local Lorentz invariance.\nModel-building.\nThe core concept of general-relativistic model-building is that of a solution of Einstein's equations. Given both Einstein's equations and suitable equations for the properties of matter, such a solution consists of a specific semi-Riemannian manifold (usually defined by giving the metric in specific coordinates), and specific matter fields defined on that manifold. Matter and geometry must satisfy Einstein's equations, so in particular, the matter's stress\u2013energy tensor must be divergence-free. The matter must, of course, also satisfy whatever additional equations were imposed on its properties. In short, such a solution is a model universe that satisfies the laws of general relativity, and possibly additional laws governing whatever matter might be present.\nEinstein's equations are nonlinear partial differential equations and, as such, difficult to solve exactly. Nevertheless, a number of exact solutions are known, although only a few have direct physical applications. The best-known exact solutions, and also those most interesting from a physics point of view, are the Schwarzschild solution, the Reissner\u2013Nordstr\u00f6m solution and the Kerr metric, each corresponding to a certain type of black hole in an otherwise empty universe, and the Friedmann\u2013Lema\u00eetre\u2013Robertson\u2013Walker and de Sitter universes, each describing an expanding cosmos. Exact solutions of great theoretical interest include the G\u00f6del universe (which opens up the intriguing possibility of time travel in curved spacetimes), the Taub\u2013NUT solution (a model universe that is homogeneous, but anisotropic), and anti-de Sitter space (which has recently come to prominence in the context of what is called the Maldacena conjecture).\nGiven the difficulty of finding exact solutions, Einstein's field equations are also solved frequently by numerical integration on a computer, or by considering small perturbations of exact solutions. In the field of numerical relativity, powerful computers are employed to simulate the geometry of spacetime and to solve Einstein's equations for interesting situations such as two colliding black holes. In principle, such methods may be applied to any system, given sufficient computer resources, and may address fundamental questions such as naked singularities. Approximate solutions may also be found by perturbation theories such as linearized gravity and its generalization, the post-Newtonian expansion, both of which were developed by Einstein. The latter provides a systematic approach to solving for the geometry of a spacetime that contains a distribution of matter that moves slowly compared with the speed of light. The expansion involves a series of terms; the first terms represent Newtonian gravity, whereas the later terms represent ever smaller corrections to Newton's theory due to general relativity. An extension of this expansion is the parametrized post-Newtonian (PPN) formalism, which allows quantitative comparisons between the predictions of general relativity and alternative theories.\nConsequences of Einstein's theory.\nGeneral relativity has a number of physical consequences. Some follow directly from the theory's axioms, whereas others have become clear only in the course of many years of research that followed Einstein's initial publication.\nGravitational time dilation and frequency shift.\nAssuming that the equivalence principle holds, gravity influences the passage of time. Light sent down into a gravity well is blueshifted, whereas light sent in the opposite direction (i.e., climbing out of the gravity well) is redshifted; collectively, these two effects are known as the gravitational frequency shift. More generally, processes close to a massive body run more slowly when compared with processes taking place farther away; this effect is known as gravitational time dilation.\nGravitational redshift has been measured in the laboratory and using astronomical observations. Gravitational time dilation in the Earth's gravitational field has been measured numerous times using atomic clocks, while ongoing validation is provided as a side effect of the operation of the Global Positioning System (GPS). Tests in stronger gravitational fields are provided by the observation of binary pulsars. All results are in agreement with general relativity. However, at the existing level of accuracy, these observations cannot distinguish between general relativity and other theories in which the equivalence principle is valid.\nLight deflection and gravitational time delay.\nGeneral relativity predicts that the path of light will follow the curvature of spacetime as it passes near a massive object. This effect was initially confirmed by observing the light of stars or distant quasars being deflected as it passes the Sun.\nThis and related predictions follow from the fact that light follows what is called a light-like or null geodesic\u2014a generalization of the straight lines along which light travels in classical physics. Such geodesics are the generalization of the invariance of lightspeed in special relativity. As one examines suitable model spacetimes (either the exterior Schwarzschild solution or, for more than a single mass, the post-Newtonian expansion), several effects of gravity on light propagation emerge. Although the bending of light can also be derived by extending the universality of free fall to light, the angle of deflection resulting from such calculations is only half the value given by general relativity.\nClosely related to light deflection is the Shapiro time delay, the phenomenon that light signals take longer to move through a gravitational field than they would in the absence of that field. There have been numerous successful tests of this prediction. In the parameterized post-Newtonian formalism (PPN), measurements of both the deflection of light and the gravitational time delay determine a parameter called \"\u03b3\", which encodes the influence of gravity on the geometry of space.\nGravitational waves.\nPredicted in 1916 by Albert Einstein, there are gravitational waves: ripples in the metric of spacetime that propagate at the speed of light. These are one of several analogies between weak-field gravity and electromagnetism in that, they are analogous to electromagnetic waves. On 11 February 2016, the Advanced LIGO team announced that they had directly detected gravitational waves from a pair of black holes merging.\nThe simplest type of such a wave can be visualized by its action on a ring of freely floating particles. A sine wave propagating through such a ring towards the reader distorts the ring in a characteristic, rhythmic fashion (animated image to the right). Since Einstein's equations are non-linear, arbitrarily strong gravitational waves do not obey linear superposition, making their description difficult. However, linear approximations of gravitational waves are sufficiently accurate to describe the exceedingly weak waves that are expected to arrive here on Earth from far-off cosmic events, which typically result in relative distances increasing and decreasing by or less. Data analysis methods routinely make use of the fact that these linearized waves can be Fourier decomposed.\nSome exact solutions describe gravitational waves without any approximation, e.g., a wave train traveling through empty space or Gowdy universes, varieties of an expanding cosmos filled with gravitational waves. But for gravitational waves produced in astrophysically relevant situations, such as the merger of two black holes, numerical methods are the only way to construct appropriate models.\nOrbital effects and the relativity of direction.\nGeneral relativity differs from classical mechanics in a number of predictions concerning orbiting bodies. It predicts an overall rotation (precession) of planetary orbits, as well as orbital decay caused by the emission of gravitational waves and effects related to the relativity of direction.\nPrecession of apsides.\nIn general relativity, the apsides of any orbit (the point of the orbiting body's closest approach to the system's center of mass) will precess; the orbit is not an ellipse, but akin to an ellipse that rotates on its focus, resulting in a rose curve-like shape (see image). Einstein first derived this result by using an approximate metric representing the Newtonian limit and treating the orbiting body as a test particle. For him, the fact that his theory gave a straightforward explanation of Mercury's anomalous perihelion shift, discovered earlier by Urbain Le Verrier in 1859, was important evidence that he had at last identified the correct form of the gravitational field equations.\nThe effect can also be derived by using either the exact Schwarzschild metric (describing spacetime around a spherical mass) or the much more general post-Newtonian formalism. It is due to the influence of gravity on the geometry of space and to the contribution of self-energy to a body's gravity (encoded in the nonlinearity of Einstein's equations). Relativistic precession has been observed for all planets that allow for accurate precession measurements (Mercury, Venus, and Earth), as well as in binary pulsar systems, where it is larger by five orders of magnitude.\nIn general relativity the perihelion shift formula_20, expressed in radians per revolution, is approximately given by:\n formula_21\nwhere:\nOrbital decay.\nAccording to general relativity, a binary system will emit gravitational waves, thereby losing energy. Due to this loss, the distance between the two orbiting bodies decreases, and so does their orbital period. Within the Solar System or for ordinary double stars, the effect is too small to be observable. This is not the case for a close binary pulsar, a system of two orbiting neutron stars, one of which is a pulsar: from the pulsar, observers on Earth receive a regular series of radio pulses that can serve as a highly accurate clock, which allows precise measurements of the orbital period. Because neutron stars are immensely compact, significant amounts of energy are emitted in the form of gravitational radiation.\nThe first observation of a decrease in orbital period due to the emission of gravitational waves was made by Hulse and Taylor, using the binary pulsar PSR1913+16 they had discovered in 1974. This was the first detection of gravitational waves, albeit indirect, for which they were awarded the 1993 Nobel Prize in physics. Since then, several other binary pulsars have been found, in particular the double pulsar PSR J0737\u22123039, where both stars are pulsars and which was last reported to also be in agreement with general relativity in 2021 after 16 years of observations.\nGeodetic precession and frame-dragging.\nSeveral relativistic effects are directly related to the relativity of direction. One is geodetic precession: the axis direction of a gyroscope in free fall in curved spacetime will change when compared, for instance, with the direction of light received from distant stars\u2014even though such a gyroscope represents the way of keeping a direction as stable as possible (\"parallel transport\"). For the Moon\u2013Earth system, this effect has been measured with the help of lunar laser ranging. More recently, it has been measured for test masses aboard the satellite Gravity Probe B to a precision of better than 0.3%.\nNear a rotating mass, there are gravitomagnetic or frame-dragging effects. A distant observer will determine that objects close to the mass get \"dragged around\". This is most extreme for rotating black holes where, for any object entering a zone known as the ergosphere, rotation is inevitable. Such effects can again be tested through their influence on the orientation of gyroscopes in free fall. Somewhat controversial tests have been performed using the LAGEOS satellites, confirming the relativistic prediction. Also the Mars Global Surveyor probe around Mars has been used.\nAstrophysical applications.\nGravitational lensing.\nThe deflection of light by gravity is responsible for a new class of astronomical phenomena. If a massive object is situated between the astronomer and a distant target object with appropriate mass and relative distances, the astronomer will see multiple distorted images of the target. Such effects are known as gravitational lensing. Depending on the configuration, scale, and mass distribution, there can be two or more images, a bright ring known as an Einstein ring, or partial rings called arcs.\nThe earliest example was discovered in 1979; since then, more than a hundred gravitational lenses have been observed. Even if the multiple images are too close to each other to be resolved, the effect can still be measured, e.g., as an overall brightening of the target object; a number of such \"microlensing events\" have been observed.\nGravitational lensing has developed into a tool of observational astronomy. It is used to detect the presence and distribution of dark matter, provide a \"natural telescope\" for observing distant galaxies, and to obtain an independent estimate of the Hubble constant. Statistical evaluations of lensing data provide valuable insight into the structural evolution of galaxies.\nGravitational-wave astronomy.\nObservations of binary pulsars provide strong indirect evidence for the existence of gravitational waves (see Orbital decay, above). Detection of these waves is a major goal of contemporary relativity-related research. Several land-based gravitational wave detectors are in operation, for example the interferometric detectors GEO 600, LIGO (two detectors), TAMA 300 and VIRGO. Various pulsar timing arrays are using millisecond pulsars to detect gravitational waves in the 10\u22129 to 10\u22126 hertz frequency range, which originate from binary supermassive blackholes. A European space-based detector, eLISA / NGO, is under development, with a precursor mission (LISA Pathfinder) having launched in December 2015.\nObservations of gravitational waves promise to complement observations in the electromagnetic spectrum. They are expected to yield information about black holes and other dense objects such as neutron stars and white dwarfs, about certain kinds of supernova implosions, and about processes in the very early universe, including the signature of certain types of hypothetical cosmic string. In February 2016, the Advanced LIGO team announced that they had detected gravitational waves from a black hole merger.\nBlack holes and other compact objects.\nWhenever the ratio of an object's mass to its radius becomes sufficiently large, general relativity predicts the formation of a black hole, a region of space from which nothing, not even light, can escape. In the accepted models of stellar evolution, neutron stars of around 1.4 solar masses, and stellar black holes with a few to a few dozen solar masses, are thought to be the final state for the evolution of massive stars. Usually a galaxy has one supermassive black hole with a few million to a few billion solar masses in its center, and its presence is thought to have played an important role in the formation of the galaxy and larger cosmic structures.\nAstronomically, the most important property of compact objects is that they provide a supremely efficient mechanism for converting gravitational energy into electromagnetic radiation. Accretion, the falling of dust or gaseous matter onto stellar or supermassive black holes, is thought to be responsible for some spectacularly luminous astronomical objects, especially diverse kinds of active galactic nuclei on galactic scales and stellar-size objects such as microquasars. In particular, accretion can lead to relativistic jets, focused beams of highly energetic particles that are being flung into space at almost light speed.\nGeneral relativity plays a central role in modelling all these phenomena, and observations provide strong evidence for the existence of black holes with the properties predicted by the theory.\nBlack holes are also sought-after targets in the search for gravitational waves (cf. section , above). Merging black hole binaries should lead to some of the strongest gravitational wave signals reaching detectors on Earth, and the phase directly before the merger (\"chirp\") could be used as a \"standard candle\" to deduce the distance to the merger events\u2013and hence serve as a probe of cosmic expansion at large distances. The gravitational waves produced as a stellar black hole plunges into a supermassive one should provide direct information about the supermassive black hole's geometry.\nCosmology.\nThe existing models of cosmology are based on Einstein's field equations, which include the cosmological constant formula_26 since it has important influence on the large-scale dynamics of the cosmos,\nformula_27\nwhere \"formula_28\" is the spacetime metric. Isotropic and homogeneous solutions of these enhanced equations, the Friedmann\u2013Lema\u00eetre\u2013Robertson\u2013Walker solutions, allow physicists to model a universe that has evolved over the past 14\u00a0billion\u00a0years from a hot, early Big Bang phase. Once a small number of parameters (for example the universe's mean matter density) have been fixed by astronomical observation, further observational data can be used to put the models to the test. Predictions, all successful, include the initial abundance of chemical elements formed in a period of primordial nucleosynthesis, the large-scale structure of the universe, and the existence and properties of a \"thermal echo\" from the early cosmos, the cosmic background radiation.\nAstronomical observations of the cosmological expansion rate allow the total amount of matter in the universe to be estimated, although the nature of that matter remains mysterious in part. About 90% of all matter appears to be dark matter, which has mass (or, equivalently, gravitational influence), but does not interact electromagnetically and, hence, cannot be observed directly. There is no generally accepted description of this new kind of matter, within the framework of known particle physics or otherwise. Observational evidence from redshift surveys of distant supernovae and measurements of the cosmic background radiation also show that the evolution of the universe is significantly influenced by a cosmological constant resulting in an acceleration of cosmic expansion or, equivalently, by a form of energy with an unusual equation of state, known as dark energy, the nature of which remains unclear.\nAn inflationary phase, an additional phase of strongly accelerated expansion at cosmic times of around 10\u221233 seconds, was hypothesized in 1980 to account for several puzzling observations that were unexplained by classical cosmological models, such as the nearly perfect homogeneity of the cosmic background radiation. Recent measurements of the cosmic background radiation have resulted in the first evidence for this scenario. However, there are a bewildering variety of possible inflationary scenarios, which cannot be restricted by existing observations. An even larger question is the physics of the earliest universe, prior to the inflationary phase and close to where the classical models predict the big bang singularity. An authoritative answer would require a complete theory of quantum gravity, which has not yet been developed (cf. the section on quantum gravity, below).\nExotic solutions: time travel, warp drives.\nKurt G\u00f6del showed that solutions to Einstein's equations exist that contain closed timelike curves (CTCs), which allow for loops in time. The solutions require extreme physical conditions unlikely ever to occur in practice, and it remains an open question whether further laws of physics will eliminate them completely. Since then, other\u2014similarly impractical\u2014GR solutions containing CTCs have been found, such as the Tipler cylinder and traversable wormholes. Stephen Hawking introduced chronology protection conjecture, which is an assumption beyond those of standard general relativity to prevent time travel.\nSome exact solutions in general relativity such as Alcubierre drive offer examples of warp drive but these solutions require exotic matter distribution, and generally suffer from semiclassical instability.\nAdvanced concepts.\nAsymptotic symmetries.\nThe spacetime symmetry group for special relativity is the Poincar\u00e9 group, which is a ten-dimensional group of three Lorentz boosts, three rotations, and four spacetime translations. It is logical to ask what symmetries, if any, might apply in General Relativity. A tractable case might be to consider the symmetries of spacetime as seen by observers located far away from all sources of the gravitational field. The naive expectation for asymptotically flat spacetime symmetries might be simply to extend and reproduce the symmetries of flat spacetime of special relativity, \"viz.\", the Poincar\u00e9 group.\nIn 1962 Hermann Bondi, M. G. van der Burg, A. W. Metzner and Rainer K. Sachs addressed this asymptotic symmetry problem in order to investigate the flow of energy at infinity due to propagating gravitational waves. Their first step was to decide on some physically sensible boundary conditions to place on the gravitational field at light-like infinity to characterize what it means to say a metric is asymptotically flat, making no \"a priori\" assumptions about the nature of the asymptotic symmetry group\u2014not even the assumption that such a group exists. Then after designing what they considered to be the most sensible boundary conditions, they investigated the nature of the resulting asymptotic symmetry transformations that leave invariant the form of the boundary conditions appropriate for asymptotically flat gravitational fields. What they found was that the asymptotic symmetry transformations actually do form a group and the structure of this group does not depend on the particular gravitational field that happens to be present. This means that, as expected, one can separate the kinematics of spacetime from the dynamics of the gravitational field at least at spatial infinity. The puzzling surprise in 1962 was their discovery of a rich infinite-dimensional group (the so-called BMS group) as the asymptotic symmetry group, instead of the finite-dimensional Poincar\u00e9 group, which is a subgroup of the BMS group. Not only are the Lorentz transformations asymptotic symmetry transformations, there are also additional transformations that are not Lorentz transformations but are asymptotic symmetry transformations. In fact, they found an additional infinity of transformation generators known as \"supertranslations\". This implies the conclusion that General Relativity (GR) does \"not\" reduce to special relativity in the case of weak fields at long distances. It turns out that the BMS symmetry, suitably modified, could be seen as a restatement of the universal soft graviton theorem in quantum field theory (QFT), which relates universal infrared (soft) QFT with GR asymptotic spacetime symmetries.\nCausal structure and global geometry.\nIn general relativity, no material body can catch up with or overtake a light pulse. No influence from an event \"A\" can reach any other location \"X\" before light sent out at \"A\" to \"X\". In consequence, an exploration of all light worldlines (null geodesics) yields key information about the spacetime's causal structure. This structure can be displayed using Penrose\u2013Carter diagrams in which infinitely large regions of space and infinite time intervals are shrunk (\"compactified\") so as to fit onto a finite map, while light still travels along diagonals as in standard spacetime diagrams.\nAware of the importance of causal structure, Roger Penrose and others developed what is known as global geometry. In global geometry, the object of study is not one particular solution (or family of solutions) to Einstein's equations. Rather, relations that hold true for all geodesics, such as the Raychaudhuri equation, and additional non-specific assumptions about the nature of matter (usually in the form of energy conditions) are used to derive general results.\nHorizons.\nUsing global geometry, some spacetimes can be shown to contain boundaries called horizons, which demarcate one region from the rest of spacetime. The best-known examples are black holes: if mass is compressed into a sufficiently compact region of space (as specified in the hoop conjecture, the relevant length scale is the Schwarzschild radius), no light from inside can escape to the outside. Since no object can overtake a light pulse, all interior matter is imprisoned as well. Passage from the exterior to the interior is still possible, showing that the boundary, the black hole's \"horizon\", is not a physical barrier.\nEarly studies of black holes relied on explicit solutions of Einstein's equations, notably the spherically symmetric Schwarzschild solution (used to describe a static black hole) and the axisymmetric Kerr solution (used to describe a rotating, stationary black hole, and introducing interesting features such as the ergosphere). Using global geometry, later studies have revealed more general properties of black holes. With time they become rather simple objects characterized by eleven parameters specifying: electric charge, mass\u2013energy, linear momentum, angular momentum, and location at a specified time. This is stated by the black hole uniqueness theorem: \"black holes have no hair\", that is, no distinguishing marks like the hairstyles of humans. Irrespective of the complexity of a gravitating object collapsing to form a black hole, the object that results (having emitted gravitational waves) is very simple.\nEven more remarkably, there is a general set of laws known as black hole mechanics, which is analogous to the laws of thermodynamics. For instance, by the second law of black hole mechanics, the area of the event horizon of a general black hole will never decrease with time, analogous to the entropy of a thermodynamic system. This limits the energy that can be extracted by classical means from a rotating black hole (e.g. by the Penrose process). There is strong evidence that the laws of black hole mechanics are, in fact, a subset of the laws of thermodynamics, and that the black hole area is proportional to its entropy. This leads to a modification of the original laws of black hole mechanics: for instance, as the second law of black hole mechanics becomes part of the second law of thermodynamics, it is possible for the black hole area to decrease as long as other processes ensure that entropy increases overall. As thermodynamical objects with nonzero temperature, black holes should emit thermal radiation. Semiclassical calculations indicate that indeed they do, with the surface gravity playing the role of temperature in Planck's law. This radiation is known as Hawking radiation (cf. the quantum theory section, below).\nThere are many other types of horizons. In an expanding universe, an observer may find that some regions of the past cannot be observed (\"particle horizon\"), and some regions of the future cannot be influenced (event horizon). Even in flat Minkowski space, when described by an accelerated observer (Rindler space), there will be horizons associated with a semiclassical radiation known as Unruh radiation.\nSingularities.\nAnother general feature of general relativity is the appearance of spacetime boundaries known as singularities. Spacetime can be explored by following up on timelike and lightlike geodesics\u2014all possible ways that light and particles in free fall can travel. But some solutions of Einstein's equations have \"ragged edges\"\u2014regions known as spacetime singularities, where the paths of light and falling particles come to an abrupt end, and geometry becomes ill-defined. In the more interesting cases, these are \"curvature singularities\", where geometrical quantities characterizing spacetime curvature, such as the Ricci scalar, take on infinite values. Well-known examples of spacetimes with future singularities\u2014where worldlines end\u2014are the Schwarzschild solution, which describes a singularity inside an eternal static black hole, or the Kerr solution with its ring-shaped singularity inside an eternal rotating black hole. The Friedmann\u2013Lema\u00eetre\u2013Robertson\u2013Walker solutions and other spacetimes describing universes have past singularities on which worldlines begin, namely Big Bang singularities, and some have future singularities (Big Crunch) as well.\nGiven that these examples are all highly symmetric\u2014and thus simplified\u2014it is tempting to conclude that the occurrence of singularities is an artifact of idealization. The famous singularity theorems, proved using the methods of global geometry, say otherwise: singularities are a generic feature of general relativity, and unavoidable once the collapse of an object with realistic matter properties has proceeded beyond a certain stage and also at the beginning of a wide class of expanding universes. However, the theorems say little about the properties of singularities, and much of current research is devoted to characterizing these entities' generic structure (hypothesized e.g. by the BKL conjecture). The cosmic censorship hypothesis states that all realistic future singularities (no perfect symmetries, matter with realistic properties) are safely hidden away behind a horizon, and thus invisible to all distant observers. While no formal proof yet exists, numerical simulations offer supporting evidence of its validity.\nEvolution equations.\nEach solution of Einstein's equation encompasses the whole history of a universe\u2014it is not just some snapshot of how things are, but a whole, possibly matter-filled, spacetime. It describes the state of matter and geometry everywhere and at every moment in that particular universe. Due to its general covariance, Einstein's theory is not sufficient by itself to determine the time evolution of the metric tensor. It must be combined with a coordinate condition, which is analogous to gauge fixing in other field theories.\nTo understand Einstein's equations as partial differential equations, it is helpful to formulate them in a way that describes the evolution of the universe over time. This is done in \"3+1\" formulations, where spacetime is split into three space dimensions and one time dimension. The best-known example is the ADM formalism. These decompositions show that the spacetime evolution equations of general relativity are well-behaved: solutions always exist, and are uniquely defined, once suitable initial conditions have been specified. Such formulations of Einstein's field equations are the basis of numerical relativity.\nGlobal and quasi-local quantities.\nThe notion of evolution equations is intimately tied in with another aspect of general relativistic physics. In Einstein's theory, it turns out to be impossible to find a general definition for a seemingly simple property such as a system's total mass (or energy). The main reason is that the gravitational field\u2014like any physical field\u2014must be ascribed a certain energy, but that it proves to be fundamentally impossible to localize that energy.\nNevertheless, there are possibilities to define a system's total mass, either using a hypothetical \"infinitely distant observer\" (ADM mass) or suitable symmetries (Komar mass). If one excludes from the system's total mass the energy being carried away to infinity by gravitational waves, the result is the Bondi mass at null infinity. Just as in classical physics, it can be shown that these masses are positive. Corresponding global definitions exist for momentum and angular momentum. There have also been a number of attempts to define \"quasi-local\" quantities, such as the mass of an isolated system formulated using only quantities defined within a finite region of space containing that system. The hope is to obtain a quantity useful for general statements about isolated systems, such as a more precise formulation of the hoop conjecture.\nRelationship with quantum theory.\nIf general relativity were considered to be one of the two pillars of modern physics, then quantum theory, the basis of understanding matter from elementary particles to solid-state physics, would be the other. However, how to reconcile quantum theory with general relativity is still an open question.\nQuantum field theory in curved spacetime.\nOrdinary quantum field theories, which form the basis of modern elementary particle physics, are defined in flat Minkowski space, which is an excellent approximation when it comes to describing the behavior of microscopic particles in weak gravitational fields like those found on Earth. In order to describe situations in which gravity is strong enough to influence (quantum) matter, yet not strong enough to require quantization itself, physicists have formulated quantum field theories in curved spacetime. These theories rely on general relativity to describe a curved background spacetime, and define a generalized quantum field theory to describe the behavior of quantum matter within that spacetime. Using this formalism, it can be shown that black holes emit a blackbody spectrum of particles known as Hawking radiation leading to the possibility that they evaporate over time. As briefly mentioned above, this radiation plays an important role for the thermodynamics of black holes.\nQuantum gravity.\nThe demand for consistency between a quantum description of matter and a geometric description of spacetime, as well as the appearance of singularities (where curvature length scales become microscopic), indicate the need for a full theory of quantum gravity: for an adequate description of the interior of black holes, and of the very early universe, a theory is required in which gravity and the associated geometry of spacetime are described in the language of quantum physics. Despite major efforts, no complete and consistent theory of quantum gravity is currently known, even though a number of candidates exist.\nAttempts to generalize ordinary quantum field theories, used in elementary particle physics to describe fundamental interactions, so as to include gravity have led to serious problems. Some have argued that at low energies, this approach proves successful, in that it results in an acceptable effective (quantum) field theory of gravity. At very high energies, however, the perturbative results are badly divergent and lead to models devoid of predictive power (\"perturbative non-renormalizability\").\nOne attempt to overcome these limitations is string theory, a quantum theory not of point particles, but of minute one-dimensional extended objects. The theory promises to be a unified description of all particles and interactions, including gravity; the price to pay is unusual features such as six extra dimensions of space in addition to the usual three. In what is called the second superstring revolution, it was conjectured that both string theory and a unification of general relativity and supersymmetry known as supergravity form part of a hypothesized eleven-dimensional model known as M-theory, which would constitute a uniquely defined and consistent theory of quantum gravity.\nAnother approach starts with the canonical quantization procedures of quantum theory. Using the initial-value-formulation of general relativity (cf. evolution equations above), the result is the Wheeler\u2013deWitt equation (an analogue of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation) which turns out to be ill-defined without a proper ultraviolet (lattice) cutoff. However, with the introduction of what are now known as Ashtekar variables, this leads to a model known as loop quantum gravity. Space is represented by a web-like structure called a spin network, evolving over time in discrete steps.\nDepending on which features of general relativity and quantum theory are accepted unchanged, and on what level changes are introduced, there are numerous other attempts to arrive at a viable theory of quantum gravity, some examples being the lattice theory of gravity based on the Feynman Path Integral approach and Regge calculus, dynamical triangulations, causal sets, twistor models or the path integral based models of quantum cosmology.\nAll candidate theories still have major formal and conceptual problems to overcome. They also face the common problem that, as yet, there is no way to put quantum gravity predictions to experimental tests (and thus to decide between the candidates where their predictions vary), although there is hope for this to change as future data from cosmological observations and particle physics experiments becomes available.\nCurrent status.\nGeneral relativity has emerged as a highly successful model of gravitation and cosmology, which has so far unambiguously fitted observational and experimental data. However, there are strong theoretical reasons to consider the theory to be incomplete. The problem of quantum gravity and the question of the reality of spacetime singularities remain open. Observational data that is taken as evidence for dark energy and dark matter could also indicate the need to consider alternatives or modifications of general relativity.\nEven taken as is, general relativity provides many possibilities for further exploration. Mathematical relativists seek to understand the nature of singularities and the fundamental properties of Einstein's equations, while numerical relativists run increasingly powerful computer simulations, such as those describing merging black holes. In February 2016, it was announced that gravitational waves were directly detected by the Advanced LIGO team on 14 September 2015. A century after its introduction, general relativity remains a highly active area of research.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12025", "revid": "44351654", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12025", "title": "Genealogy", "text": "Study of individual descent and bloodline\nGenealogy (from grc \" \"\" ()\"\u00a0'the making of a pedigree') is the study of families, family history, and the tracing of their lineages. Genealogists use oral interviews, historical records, genetic analysis, and other records to obtain information about a family and to demonstrate kinship and pedigrees of its members. The results are often displayed in charts or written as narratives. The field of family history is broader than genealogy, and covers not just lineage but also family and community history and biography.\nThe record of genealogical work may be presented as a \"genealogy\", a \"family history\", or a \"family tree\". In the narrow sense, a \"genealogy\" or a \"family tree\" traces the descendants of one person, whereas a \"family history\" traces the ancestors of one person, but the terms are often used interchangeably. A family history may include additional biographical information, family traditions, and the like.\nThe pursuit of family history and origins tends to be shaped by several motives, including the desire to carve out a place for one's family in the larger historical picture, a sense of responsibility to preserve the past for future generations, and self-satisfaction in accurate storytelling. Genealogy research is also performed for scholarly or forensic purposes, or to trace legal next of kin to inherit under intestacy laws.\nOverview.\nAmateur genealogists typically pursue their own ancestry and that of their spouses. Professional genealogists may also conduct research for others, publish books on genealogical methods, teach, or produce their own databases. They may work for companies that provide software or produce materials of use to other professionals and to amateurs. Both try to understand not just where and when people lived but also their lifestyles, biographies, and motivations. This often requires\u2014or leads to\u2014knowledge of antiquated laws, old political boundaries, migration trends, and historical socioeconomic or religious conditions.\nGenealogists sometimes specialize in a particular group, e.g., a Scottish clan; a particular surname, such as in a one-name study; a small community, e.g., a single village or parish, such as in a one-place study; or a particular, often famous, person. Bloodlines of Salem is an example of a specialized family-history group. It welcomes members who can prove descent from a participant of the Salem Witch Trials or who simply choose to support the group.\nGenealogists and family historians often join family history societies, where novices can learn from more experienced researchers. Such societies generally serve a specific geographical area. Their members may also index records to make them more accessible or engage in advocacy and other efforts to preserve public records and cemeteries. Some schools engage students in such projects as a means to reinforce lessons regarding immigration and history. Other benefits include family medical histories for families with serious medical conditions that are hereditary.\nThe terms \"genealogy\" and \"family history\" are often used synonymously, but some entities offer a slight difference in definition. The Society of Genealogists, while also using the terms interchangeably, describes genealogy as the \"establishment of a pedigree by extracting evidence, from valid sources, of how one generation is connected to the next\" and family history as \"a biographical study of a genealogically proven family and of the community and country in which they lived\".\nMotivation.\nIndividuals conduct genealogical research for a number of reasons.\nPersonal or medical interest.\nPrivate individuals research genealogy out of curiosity about their heritage. This curiosity can be particularly strong among those whose family histories were lost or unknown due to, for example, adoption or separation from family through divorce, death, or other situations. In addition to simply wanting to know more about who they are and where they came from, individuals may research their genealogy to learn about any hereditary diseases in their family history.\nThere is a growing interest in family history in the media as a result of advertising and television shows sponsored by large genealogy companies, such as Ancestry.com. This, coupled with easier access to online records and the affordability of DNA tests, has both inspired curiosity and allowed those who are curious to easily start investigating their ancestry.\nCommunity or religious obligation.\nIn communitarian societies, one's identity is defined as much by one's kin network as by individual achievement, and the question \"Who are you?\" would be answered by a description of father, mother, and tribe. New Zealand M\u0101ori, for example, learn whakapapa (genealogies) to discover who they are.\nFamily history plays a part in the practice of some religious belief systems. For example, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) has a doctrine of baptism for the dead, which necessitates that members of that faith engage in family history research.\nIn East Asian countries that were historically shaped by Confucianism, many people follow a practice of ancestor worship as well as genealogical record-keeping. Ancestors' names are inscribed on tablets and placed in shrines, where rituals are performed. Genealogies are also recorded in genealogy books. This practice is rooted in the belief that respect for one's family is a foundation for a healthy society.\nEstablishing identity.\nRoyal families, both historically and in modern times, keep records of their genealogies in order to establish their right to rule and determine who will be the next sovereign. For centuries in various cultures, one's genealogy has been a source of political and social status.\nSome countries and indigenous tribes allow individuals to obtain citizenship based on their genealogy. In Ireland and in Greece, for example, an individual can become a citizen if one of their grandparents was born in that country, regardless of their own or their parents' birthplace. In societies such as Australia or the United States, by the 20th century, there was growing pride in the pioneers and nation-builders. Establishing descent from these was, and is, important to lineage societies, such as the Daughters of the American Revolution and The General Society of Mayflower Descendants. Modern family history explores new sources of status, such as celebrating the resilience of families that survived generations of poverty or slavery, or the success of families in integrating across racial or national boundaries. Some family histories even emphasize links to celebrity criminals, such as the bushranger Ned Kelly in Australia.\nLegal and forensic research.\nLawyers involved in probate cases do genealogy to locate heirs of property.\nDetectives may perform genealogical research using DNA evidence to identify victims of homicides or perpetrators of crimes.\nScholarly research.\nHistorians and geneticists may carry out genealogical research to gain a greater understanding of specific topics in their respective fields, and some may employ professional genealogists in connection with specific aspects of their research. They also publish their research in peer-reviewed journals.\nThe introduction of postgraduate courses in genealogy in recent years has given genealogy more of an academic focus, with the emergence of peer-reviewed journals in this area. Scholarly genealogy is beginning to emerge as a discipline in its own right, with an increasing number of individuals who have obtained genealogical qualifications carrying out research on a diverse range of topics related to genealogy, both within academic institutions and independently.\nDiscrimination and persecution.\nIn the US, the \"one-drop rule\" asserted that any person with even one ancestor of black ancestry (\"one drop\" of \"black blood\") was considered black. It was codified into the law of some States (e.g. the Racial Integrity Act of 1924) to reinforce racial segregation.\nGenealogy was also used in Nazi Germany to determine whether a person was considered a \"Jew\" or a \"Mischling\" (Mischling Test), and whether a person was considered as \"Aryan\" (Ahnenpass).\nHistory.\nPre-modern genealogy.\nHereditary emperors, kings and chiefs in several areas have long claimed descent from gods (thus establishing divine legitimacy). Court genealogists have preserved or invented appropriate genealogical pretensions - for example in Japan,\nPolynesia,\nand the Indo-European world from Scandinavia through ancient Greece to India.\nHistorically, in Western societies, genealogy focused on the kinship and descent of rulers and nobles, often arguing or demonstrating the legitimacy of claims to wealth and power. Genealogy often overlapped with heraldry, which reflected the ancestry of noble houses in their coats of arms. Modern scholars regard many claimed noble ancestries as fabrications, such as the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle's tracing of the ancestry of several English kings to the god Woden. With the coming of Christianity to northern Europe, Anglo-Saxon royal genealogies extended the kings' lines of ancestry from Woden back to reach the line of Biblical patriarchs: Noah\nand Adam. (This extension offered the side-benefit of connecting pretentious rulers with the prestigious genealogy of Jesus.)\nModern historians and genealogists may regard manufactured pseudo-genealogies with a degree of scepticism. However, the desire to find ancestral links with prominent figures from a legendary or distant past has persisted. In the United States, for example, it does no harm to establish one's links to ancestors who boarded the \"Mayflower\". And the popularity of the genealogical hypothesis of \"The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail\" (1982) demonstrates popular interest in ancient bloodlines, however dubious.\nSome family trees have been maintained for considerable periods. The family tree of Confucius has been maintained for over 2,500 years and is listed in the Guinness Book of World Records as the largest extant family tree. The fifth edition of the Confucius Genealogy was printed in 2009 by the Confucius Genealogy Compilation Committee (CGCC).\nModern times.\nIn modern times, genealogy has become more widespread, with commoners as well as nobility researching and maintaining their family trees. Genealogy received a boost in the late 1970s with the television broadcast of \"\" by Alex Haley. His account of his family's descent from the African tribesman Kunta Kinte inspired many others to study their own lines.\nWith the advent of the Internet, the number of resources readily accessible to genealogists has vastly increased, fostering an explosion of interest in the topic. Genealogy on the internet became increasingly popular starting in the early 2000s. The Internet has become a major source not only of data for genealogists but also of education and communication.\nBy country.\nIndia.\nIn India, there are two broad types of traditional genealogists: those who work in places where the Ganges river flows and those who work in other locations. Each caste grouping in the Indian subcontinent has different kinds of genealogists, who have a set of inter-generational patrons, called \"jajmans\". Usually, a traditional genealogist would visit their jajman\u2019s house and record information in the presence of the patron family and other witnesses in their \"pothis\" (record-books), passed on from one to another. All the vital details about a particular family are recorded in the pothi, such as births, deaths, marriages, divisions in the family, and donations made for religious purposes. \nTraditional genealogists played a role in the 1857 rebellion, as they spread word door-to-door. Due to this, many genealogists were killed by the British and other migrated to different parts of India away from their hometown. However, traditional genealogy in India is a dying practice due to urbanization, migration abroad, the impact of the Internet, modern technology, and monetary and economic concerns.\nThere are more than twenty-five places of pilgrimage across India where genealogical records on the families of visiting pilgrims are kept by pandas (Hindu priests). Some notable places where traditional genealogy records are kept include Hindu genealogy registers at Haridwar (Uttarakhand), Varanasi and Allahabad (Uttar Pradesh), Kurukshetra (Haryana), Trimbakeshwar (Maharashtra), and Chintpurni (Himachal Pradesh). In February 2025, the National Archives of India announced it was planning on creating a publicly-accessible database of genealogical records sourced from pothis kept in the collection of \"pandas\" (priests) from Gaya, Kashi, Prayagraj, Kedarnath, Ujjain, Badrinath, and other places of pilgrimage where familial genealogical records are kept and maintained.\nUnited States.\nGenealogical research in the United States was first systematized in the early 19th century, especially by John Farmer (1789\u20131838). Before Farmer's efforts, tracing one's genealogy was seen as an attempt by the American colonists to secure a measure of social standing, an aim that was counter to the new republic's egalitarian, future-oriented ideals (as outlined in the Constitution). As Fourth of July celebrations commemorating the Founding Fathers and the heroes of the Revolutionary War became increasingly popular, however, the pursuit of \"antiquarianism\", which focused on local history, became acceptable as a way to honor the achievements of early Americans. Farmer capitalized on the acceptability of antiquarianism to frame genealogy within the early republic's ideological framework of pride in one's American ancestors. He corresponded with other antiquarians in New England, where antiquarianism and genealogy were well established, and became a coordinator, booster, and contributor to the growing movement. In the 1820s, he and fellow antiquarians began to produce genealogical and antiquarian tracts in earnest, slowly gaining a devoted audience among the American people. Though Farmer died in 1838, his efforts led to the founding in 1845 of the New England Historic Genealogical Society (NEHGS), one of New England's oldest and most prominent organizations dedicated to the preservation of public records. NEHGS publishes the \"New England Historical and Genealogical Register.\"\nThe Genealogical Society of Utah, founded in 1894, later became the Family History Department of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The department's research facility, the Family History Library, which Utah.com claims as \"the largest genealogical library in the world\", was established to assist in tracing family lineages for special religious ceremonies which Latter-day Saints believe will seal family units together for eternity. Latter-day Saints believe that this fulfilled a biblical prophecy stating that the prophet Elijah would return to \"turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers.\" There is a network of church-operated Family History Centers all over the United States and around the world, where volunteers assist the public with tracing their ancestors. Brigham Young University offers bachelor's degree, minor, and concentration programs in Family History and is the only school in North America to offer this.\nThe American Society of Genealogists is the scholarly honorary society of the U.S. genealogical field. Founded by John Insley Coddington, Arthur Adams, and Meredith B. Colket Jr., in December 1940, its membership is limited to 50 living fellows. ASG has semi-annually published \"The Genealogist\", a scholarly journal of genealogical research, since 1980. Fellows of the American Society of Genealogists, who bear the post-nominal acronym \"FASG\", have written some of the most notable genealogical materials of the last half-century.\nSome of the most notable scholarly American genealogical journals include \"The American Genealogist\", \"National Genealogical Society Quarterly\", \"The New England Historical and Genealogical Register\", \"The New York Genealogical and Biographical Record\", and \"The Genealogist\".\nResearch process.\nGenealogical research is a complex process that uses historical records and sometimes genetic analysis to demonstrate kinship. Reliable conclusions are based on the quality of sources (ideally, original records), the information within those sources, (ideally, primary or firsthand information), and the evidence that can be drawn (directly or indirectly), from that information. In many instances, genealogists must skillfully assemble indirect or circumstantial evidence to build a case for identity and kinship. All evidence and conclusions, together with the documentation that supports them, is then assembled to create a cohesive genealogy or family history.\nGenealogists begin their research by collecting family documents and stories. This creates a foundation for documentary research, which involves examining and evaluating historical records for evidence about ancestors and other relatives, their kinship ties, and the events that occurred in their lives. As a rule, genealogists begin with the present and work backwards in time. Historical, social, and family context is essential to achieving correct identification of individuals and relationships. Source citation is also important when conducting genealogical research. To keep track of collected material, family group sheets and pedigree charts are used. Formerly handwritten, these can now be generated by genealogical software.\nGenetic analysis.\nBecause a person's DNA contains information that has been passed down relatively unchanged from early ancestors, analysis of DNA is sometimes used for genealogical research. Three DNA types are of particular interest. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is contained in the mitochondria of the egg cell and is passed down from a mother to all of her children, both male and female; however, only females pass it on to their children. Y-DNA is present only in males and is passed down from a father to his sons (direct male line) with only minor mutations occurring over time. Autosomal DNA (atDNA), is found in the 22 non-sex chromosomes (autosomes) and is inherited from both parents; thus, it can uncover relatives from any branch of the family. A genealogical DNA test allows two individuals to find the probability that they are, or are not, related within an estimated number of generations. Individual genetic test results are collected in databases to match people descended from a relatively recent common ancestor. See, for example, the Molecular Genealogy Research Project. Some tests are limited to either the patrilineal or the matrilineal line.\nCollaboration.\nMost genealogy software programs can export information about persons and their relationships in a standardized format called a GEDCOM. In that format, it can be shared with other genealogists, added to databases, or converted into family web sites. Social networking service (SNS) websites allow genealogists to share data and build their family trees online. Members can upload their family trees and contact other family historians to fill in gaps in their research. In addition to the (SNS) websites, there are other resources that encourage genealogists to connect and share information, such as rootsweb.ancestry.com and rsl.rootsweb.ancestry.com.\nVolunteerism.\nVolunteer efforts figure prominently in genealogy. These range from the extremely informal to the highly organized.\nOn the informal side are the many popular and useful message boards such as Rootschat and mailing lists on particular surnames, regions, and other topics. These forums can be used to try to find relatives, request record lookups, obtain research advice, and much more. Many genealogists participate in loosely organized projects, both online and off. These collaborations take numerous forms. Some projects prepare name indexes for records, such as probate cases, and publish the indexes, either online or off. These indexes can be used as finding aids to locate original records. Other projects transcribe or abstract records. Offering record lookups for particular geographic areas is another common service. Volunteers do record lookups or take photos in their home areas for researchers who are unable to travel.\nThose looking for a structured volunteer environment can join one of thousands of genealogical societies worldwide. Most societies have a unique area of focus, such as a particular surname, ethnicity, geographic area, or descendancy from participants in a given historical event. Genealogical societies are almost exclusively staffed by volunteers and may offer a broad range of services, including maintaining libraries for members' use, publishing newsletters, providing research assistance to the public, offering classes or seminars, and organizing record preservation or transcription projects.\nSoftware.\nGenealogy software is used to collect, store, sort, and display genealogical data. At a minimum, genealogy software accommodates basic information about individuals, including births, marriages, and deaths. Many programs allow for additional biographical information, including occupation, residence, and notes, and most also offer a method for keeping track of the sources for each piece of evidence.\nMost programs can generate basic kinship charts and reports, allow for the import of digital photographs and the export of data in the GEDCOM format (short for GEnealogical Data COMmunication) so that data can be shared with those using other genealogy software. More advanced features include the ability to restrict the information that is shared, usually by removing information about living people out of privacy concerns; the import of sound files; the generation of family history books, web pages and other publications; the ability to handle same-sex marriages and children born out of wedlock; searching the Internet for data; and the provision of research guidance. Programs may be geared toward a specific religion, with fields relevant to that religion, or to specific nationalities or ethnic groups, with source types relevant for those groups. Online resources involve complex programming and large data bases, such as censuses.\nRecords and documentation.\nGenealogists use a wide variety of records in their research. To effectively conduct genealogical research, it is important to understand how the records were created, what information is included in them, and how and where to access them.\nList of record types.\nRecords that are used in genealogy research include:\nTo keep track of their citizens, governments began keeping records of persons who were neither royalty nor nobility. In England and Germany, for example, such record keeping started with parish registers in the 16th century. As more of the population was recorded, there were sufficient records to follow a family. Major life events, such as births, marriages, and deaths, were often documented with a license, permit, or report. Genealogists locate these records in local, regional or national offices or archives and extract information about family relationships and recreate timelines of persons' lives.\nIn China, India and other Asian countries, genealogy books are used to record the names, occupations, and other information about family members, with some books dating back hundreds or even thousands of years. In the eastern Indian state of Bihar, there is a written tradition of genealogical records among Maithil Brahmins and Karna Kayasthas called \"Panjis\", dating to the 12th century CE. Even today these records are consulted prior to marriages.\nIn Ireland, genealogical records were recorded by professional families of \"senchaidh\" (historians) until as late as the mid-17th century. Perhaps the most outstanding example of this genre is Leabhar na nGenealach/The Great Book of Irish Genealogies, by Dubhaltach MacFhirbhisigh (d. 1671), published in 2004.\nFamilySearch collections.\nThe LDS Church has engaged in large-scale microfilming of records of genealogical value. Its Family History Library in Salt Lake City, Utah, houses over 2 million microfiche and microfilms of genealogically relevant material, which are also available for on-site research at over 4,500 Family History Centers worldwide.\nFamilySearch's website includes many resources for genealogists: a FamilyTree database, historical records, digitized family history books, resources and indexing for African American genealogy such as slave and bank records, and a Family History Research Wiki containing research guidance articles.\nIndexing ancestral information.\nIndexing is the process of transcribing parish records, city vital records, and other reports, to a digital database for searching. Volunteers and professionals participate in the indexing process. Since 2006, the microfilm in the FamilySearch granite mountain vault is in the process of being digitally scanned, available online, and eventually indexed.\nFor example, after the 72-year legal limit for releasing personal information for the United States Census was reached in 2012, genealogical groups cooperated to index the 132 million residents registered in the 1940 United States census.\nBetween 2006 and 2012, the FamilySearch indexing effort produced more than 1 billion searchable records.\nIn 2022, FamilySearch and Ancestry partnered to use Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology to help the process of indexing more records. The process first began with the public release of the 1950 United States Census. The index of the census would at first be created by an AI trained on handwriting in old documents and then reviewed by thousands of volunteers using FamilySearch.\nRecord loss and preservation.\nSometimes genealogical records are destroyed, whether accidentally or on purpose. In order to do thorough research, genealogists keep track of which records have been destroyed so they know when information they need may be missing. Of particular note for North American genealogy is the 1890 United States census, which was destroyed in a fire in 1921. Although fragments survive, most of the 1890 census no longer exists. Those looking for genealogical information for families that lived in the United States in 1890 must rely on other information to fill that gap.\nWar is another cause of record destruction. During World War II, many European records were destroyed. Communists in China during the Cultural Revolution and in Korea during the Korean War destroyed genealogy books kept by families.\nOften records are destroyed due to accident or neglect. Since genealogical records are often kept on paper and stacked in high-density storage, they are prone to fire, mold, insect damage, and eventual disintegration. Sometimes records of genealogical value are deliberately destroyed by governments or organizations because the records are considered to be unimportant or a privacy risk. Because of this, genealogists often organize efforts to preserve records that are at risk of destruction. FamilySearch has an ongoing program that assesses what useful genealogical records have the most risk of being destroyed, and sends volunteers to digitize such records. In 2017, the government of Sierra Leone asked FamilySearch for help preserving their rapidly deteriorating vital records. FamilySearch has begun digitizing the records and making them available online. The Federation of Genealogical Societies also organized an effort to preserve and digitize United States War of 1812 pension records. In 2010, they began raising funds, which were contribute by genealogists around the United States and matched by Ancestry.com. Their goal was achieved and the process of digitization was able to begin. The digitized records are available for free online.\nTypes of information.\nGenealogists who seek to reconstruct the lives of each ancestor consider all historical information to be \"genealogical\" information. Traditionally, the basic information needed to ensure correct identification of each person are place names, occupations, family names, first names, and dates. However, modern genealogists greatly expand this list, recognizing the need to place this information in its historical context in order to properly evaluate genealogical evidence and distinguish between same-name individuals. A great deal of information is available for British ancestry with growing resources for other ethnic groups.\nFamily names.\nFamily names are simultaneously one of the most important pieces of genealogical information, and a source of significant confusion for researchers.\nIn many cultures, the name of a person refers to the family to which they belong. This is called the \"family name\", \"surname\", or \"last name\". Patronymics are names that identify an individual based on the father's name. For example, Marga Olafsdottir is Marga, daughter of Olaf, and Olaf Thorsson is Olaf, son of Thor. Many cultures used patronymics before surnames were adopted or came into use. The Dutch in New York, for example, used the patronymic system of names until 1687 when the advent of English rule mandated surname usage. In Iceland, patronymics are used by a majority of the population. In Denmark and Norway patronymics and farm names were generally in use through the 19th century and beyond, though surnames began to come into fashion toward the end of the 19th century in some parts of the country. Not until 1856 in Denmark and 1923 in Norway were there laws requiring surnames.\nThe transmission of names across generations, marriages and other relationships, and immigration may cause difficulty in genealogical research. For instance, women in many cultures have routinely used their spouse's surnames. When a woman remarried, she may have changed her name and the names of her children; only her name; or changed no names. Her birth name (maiden name) may be reflected in her children's middle names; her own middle name; or dropped entirely. Children may sometimes assume stepparent, foster parent, or adoptive parent names. Because official records may reflect many kinds of surname change, without explaining the underlying reason for the change, the correct identification of a person recorded identified with more than one name is challenging. Immigrants to America often Americanized their names.\nSurname data may be found in trade directories, census returns, birth, death, and marriage records.\nGiven names.\nGenealogical data regarding given names (first names) is subject to many of the same problems as are family names and place names. Additionally, the use of nicknames is very common. For example, Beth, Lizzie or Betty are all common for Elizabeth, and Jack, John and Jonathan may be interchanged.\nMiddle names provide additional information. Middle names may be inherited, follow naming customs, or be treated as part of the family name. For instance, in some Latin cultures, both the mother's family name and the father's family name are used by the children.\nHistorically, naming traditions existed in some places and cultures. Even in areas that tended to use naming conventions, however, they were by no means universal. Families may have used them some of the time, among some of their children, or not at all. A pattern might also be broken to name a newborn after a recently deceased sibling, aunt or uncle.\nAn example of a naming tradition from England, Scotland and Ireland:\nAnother example is in some areas of Germany, where siblings were given the same first name, often of a favourite saint or local nobility, but different second names by which they were known (\"Rufname\"). If a child died, the next child of the same gender that was born may have been given the same name. It is not uncommon that a list of a particular couple's children will show one or two names repeated.\nPersonal names have periods of popularity, so it is not uncommon to find many similarly named people in a generation, and even similarly named families; e.g., \"William and Mary and their children David, Mary, and John\".\nMany names may be identified strongly with a particular gender; e.g., William for boys, and Mary for girls. Others may be ambiguous, e.g., Lee, or have only slightly variant spellings based on gender, e.g., Frances (usually female) and Francis (usually male).\nPlace names.\nWhile the locations of ancestors' residences and life events are core elements of the genealogist's quest, they can often be confusing. Place names may be subject to variant spellings by partially literate scribes. Locations may have identical or very similar names. For example, the village name Brockton occurs six times in the border area between the English counties of Shropshire and Staffordshire. Shifts in political borders must also be understood. Parish, county, and national borders have frequently been modified. Old records may contain references to farms and villages that have ceased to exist. When working with older records from Poland, where borders and place names have changed frequently in past centuries, a source with maps and sample records such as \"A Translation Guide to 19th-Century Polish-Language Civil-Registration Documents\" can be invaluable.\nAvailable sources may include vital records (civil or church registration), censuses, and tax assessments. Oral tradition is also an important source, although it must be used with caution. When no source information is available for a location, circumstantial evidence may provide a probable answer based on a person's or a family's place of residence at the time of the event.\nMaps and gazetteers are important sources for understanding the places researched. They show the relationship of an area to neighboring communities and may be of help in understanding migration patterns. Family tree mapping using online mapping tools such as Google Earth (particularly when used with Historical Map overlays such as those from the David Rumsey Historical Map Collection) assist in the process of understanding the significance of geographical locations.\nThe study of the relationship between persons and their places of residence is also known as Residential Genealogy.\nDates.\nIt is wise to exercise extreme caution with dates. Dates are more difficult to recall years after an event, and are more easily mistranscribed than other types of genealogical data. Therefore, one should determine whether the date was recorded at the time of the event or at a later date. Dates of birth in vital records or civil registrations and in church records at baptism are generally accurate because they were usually recorded near the time of the event. Family Bibles are often a source for dates, but can be written from memory long after the event. When the same ink and handwriting is used for all entries, the dates were probably written at the same time and therefore will be less reliable since the earlier dates were probably recorded well after the event. The publication date of the Bible also provides a clue about when the dates were recorded since they could not have been recorded at any earlier date.\nPeople sometimes reduce their age on marriage, and those under \"full age\" may increase their age in order to marry or to join the armed forces. Census returns are notoriously unreliable for ages or for assuming an approximate death date. Ages over 15 in the 1841 census in the UK are rounded down to the next lower multiple of five years.\nAlthough baptismal dates are often used to approximate birth dates, some families waited years before baptizing children, and adult baptisms are the norm in some religions. Both birth and marriage dates may have been adjusted to cover for pre-wedding pregnancies.\nCalendar changes must also be considered. In 1752, England and her American colonies changed from the Julian to the Gregorian calendar. In the same year, the date the new year began was changed. Prior to 1752 it was 25 March; this was changed to 1 January. Many other European countries had already made the calendar changes before England had, sometimes centuries earlier. By 1751 there was an 11-day discrepancy between the date in England and the date in other European countries.\nFor further detail on the changes involved in moving from the Julian to the Gregorian calendar, see: Gregorian calendar.\nThe French Republican Calendar or French Revolutionary Calendar was a calendar proposed during the French Revolution, and used by the French government for about 12 years from late 1793 to 1805, and for 18 days in 1871 in Paris. Dates in official records at this time use the revolutionary calendar and need \"translating\" into the Gregorian calendar for calculating ages etc. There are various websites which do this.\nOccupations.\nOccupational information may be important to understanding an ancestor's life and for distinguishing two people with the same name. A person's occupation may have been related to his or her social status, political interest, and migration pattern. Since skilled trades are often passed from father to son, occupation may also be indirect evidence of a family relationship.\nIt is important to remember that a person may change occupations, and that titles change over time as well. Some workers no longer fit for their primary trade often took less prestigious jobs later in life, while others moved upwards in prestige. Many unskilled ancestors had a variety of jobs depending on the season and local trade requirements. Census returns may contain some embellishment; e.g., from labourer to mason, or from journeyman to master craftsman. Names for old or unfamiliar local occupations may cause confusion if poorly legible. For example, an ostler (a keeper of horses) and a hostler (an innkeeper) could easily be confused for one another. Likewise, descriptions of such occupations may also be problematic. The perplexing description \"ironer of rabbit burrows\" may turn out to describe an ironer (profession) in the Bristol district named Rabbit Burrows. Several trades have regionally preferred terms. For example, \"shoemaker\" and \"cordwainer\" have the same meaning. Finally, many apparently obscure jobs are part of a larger trade community, such as watchmaking, framework knitting or gunmaking.\nOccupational data may be reported in occupational licences, tax assessments, membership records of professional organizations, trade directories, census returns, and vital records (civil registration). Occupational dictionaries are available to explain many obscure and archaic trades.\nReliability of sources.\nInformation found in historical or genealogical sources can be unreliable and it is good practice to evaluate all sources with a critical eye. Factors influencing the reliability of genealogical information include: the knowledge of the informant (or writer); the bias and mental state of the informant (or writer); the passage of time and the potential for copying and compiling errors.\nThe quality of census data has been of special interest to historians, who have investigated reliability issues.\nKnowledge of the informant.\nThe informant is the individual who provided the recorded information. Genealogists must carefully consider who provided the information and what they knew. In many cases the informant is identified in the record itself. For example, a death certificate usually has two informants: a physician who provides information about the time and cause of death and a family member who provides the birth date, names of parents, etc.\nWhen the informant is not identified, one can sometimes deduce information about the identity of the person by careful examination of the source. One should first consider who was alive (and nearby) when the record was created. When the informant is also the person recording the information, the handwriting can be compared to other handwriting samples.\nWhen a source does not provide clues about the informant, genealogists should treat the source with caution. These sources can be useful if they can be compared with independent sources. For example, a census record by itself cannot be given much weight because the informant is unknown. However, when censuses for several years concur on a piece of information that would not likely be guessed by a neighbor, it is likely that the information in these censuses was provided by a family member or other informed person. On the other hand, information in a single census cannot be confirmed by information in an undocumented compiled genealogy since the genealogy may have used the census record as its source and might therefore be dependent on the same misinformed individual.\nMotivation of the informant.\nEven individuals who had knowledge of the fact, sometimes intentionally or unintentionally provided false or misleading information. A person may have lied in order to obtain a government benefit (such as a military pension), avoid taxation, or cover up an embarrassing situation (such as the existence of a non-marital child). A person with a distressed state of mind may not be able to accurately recall information. Many genealogical records were recorded at the time of a loved one's death, and so genealogists should consider the effect that grief may have had on the informant of these records.\nThe effect of time.\nThe passage of time often affects a person's ability to recall information. Therefore, as a general rule, data recorded soon after the event are usually more reliable than data recorded many years later. However, some types of data are more difficult to recall after many years than others. One type especially prone to recollection errors is dates. Also the ability to recall is affected by the significance that the event had to the individual. These values may have been affected by cultural or individual preferences.\nCopying and compiling errors.\nGenealogists must consider the effects that copying and compiling errors may have had on the information in a source. For this reason, sources are generally categorized in two categories: original and derivative. An original source is one that is not based on another source. A derivative source is information taken from another source. This distinction is important because each time a source is copied, information about the record may be lost and errors may result from the copyist misreading, mistyping, or miswriting the information. Genealogists should consider the number of times information has been copied and the types of derivation a piece of information has undergone. The types of derivatives include: photocopies, transcriptions, abstracts, translations, extractions, and compilations.\nIn addition to copying errors, compiled sources (such as published genealogies and online pedigree databases) are susceptible to misidentification errors and incorrect conclusions based on circumstantial evidence. Identity errors usually occur when two or more individuals are assumed to be the same person. Circumstantial or indirect evidence does not explicitly answer a genealogical question, but either may be used with other sources to answer the question, suggest a probable answer, or eliminate certain possibilities. Compilers sometimes draw hasty conclusions from circumstantial evidence without sufficiently examining all available sources, without properly understanding the evidence, and without appropriately indicating the level of uncertainty.\nPrimary and secondary sources.\nIn genealogical research, information can be obtained from primary or secondary sources. Primary sources are records that were made at the time of the event, for example a death certificate would be a primary source for a person's death date and place. Secondary sources are records that are made days, weeks, months, or even years after an event.\nStandards and ethics.\nOrganizations that educate and certify genealogists have established standards and ethical guidelines they instruct genealogists to follow.\nResearch standards.\nGenealogy research requires analyzing documents and drawing conclusions based on the evidence provided in the available documents. Genealogists need standards to determine whether or not their evaluation of the evidence is accurate. In the past, genealogists in the United States borrowed terms from judicial law to examine evidence found in documents and how they relate to the researcher's conclusions. However, the differences between the two disciplines created a need for genealogists to develop their own standards. In 2000, the Board for Certification of Genealogists published their first manual of standards. The Genealogical Proof Standard created by the Board for Certification of Genealogists is widely distributed in seminars, workshops, and educational materials for genealogists in the United States. Other genealogical organizations around the world have created similar standards they invite genealogists to follow. Such standards provide guidelines for genealogists to evaluate their own research as well as the research of others.\nStandards for genealogical research include:\nEthical guidelines.\nGenealogists often handle sensitive information and share and publish such information. Because of this, there is a need for ethical standards and boundaries for when information is too sensitive to be published. Historically, some genealogists have fabricated information or have otherwise been untrustworthy. Genealogical organizations around the world have outlined ethical standards as an attempt to eliminate such problems. Ethical standards adopted by various genealogical organizations include:\nIn 2015, a committee presented standards for genetic genealogy at the Salt Lake Institute of Genealogy. The standards emphasize that genealogists and testing companies should respect the privacy of clients and recognize the limits of DNA tests. It also discusses how genealogists should thoroughly document conclusions made using DNA evidence. In 2019, the Board for the Certification of Genealogists officially updated their standards and code of ethics to include standards for genetic genealogy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral\nBritish Isles\nChina\nContinental Europe\nNorth America"}
{"id": "12027", "revid": "49652783", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12027", "title": "Gabon", "text": "Country in Central Africa\nGabon ( ; ), officially the Gabonese Republic (), is a country on the Atlantic coast of Central Africa, on the equator, bordered by Equatorial Guinea to the northwest, Cameroon to the north, the Republic of the Congo to the east and south, and the Gulf of Guinea to the west. It has an area of and a population of million people. There are coastal plains, mountains (the Cristal Mountains and the Chaillu Massif in the centre), and a savanna in the east. Libreville is the country's capital and largest city.\nGabon's original inhabitants were the Bambenga. In the 14th century, Bantu migrants also began settling in the area. The Kingdom of Orungu was established around 1700. France colonised the region in the late 19th century. Since its independence from France in 1960, Gabon has had four presidents. In the 1990s, it introduced a multi-party system and a democratic constitution that aimed for a more transparent electoral process and reformed some governmental institutions. Despite this, the Gabonese Democratic Party (PDG) remained the dominant party until its removal from power during the 2023 Gabonese coup d'\u00e9tat.\nGabon is a developing country, ranking 108th in the Human Development Index. It is one of the wealthiest countries in Africa in terms of per capita income; however, large parts of the population are very poor. Omar Bongo came to office in 1967 and created a dynasty, which stabilized its power through a client network, .\nThe official language of Gabon is French, and Bantu ethnic groups constitute around 95% of the country's population. Christianity is the nation's predominant religion, practised by about 80% of the population. With petroleum and foreign private investment, it has the fourth highest HDI (after Mauritius, Seychelles, and South Africa) and the fifth highest GDP per capita (PPP) (after Seychelles, Mauritius, Equatorial Guinea, and Botswana) of any Sub-Saharan African nation. Gabon's nominal GDP per capita is $10,149 in 2023 according to OPEC.\nEtymology.\nThe country\u2019s name derives from the Portuguese word \"gabao\" (also spelled \"Gab\u00e3o\"), meaning \"hooded cloak\". Portuguese navigators in the 1470s applied the term to the Komo (Como) River estuary, whose outline they thought resembled a cloak; the usage later extended to the surrounding region and, eventually, the modern state.\nHistory.\nPre-colonisation.\nBambenga in the area were largely replaced and absorbed by Bantu tribes as they migrated. By the 18th century, a Myeni-speaking kingdom known as the Kingdom of Orungu formed as a trading centre with the ability to purchase and sell slaves, and fell with the demise of the slave trade in the 1870s.\nFrench rule and independence.\nExplorer Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza led his first mission to the Gabon-Congo area in 1875. He founded the town of Franceville and was later colonial governor. Some Bantu groups lived in the area when France officially occupied it in 1885.\nIn 1910, Gabon became a territory of French Equatorial Africa, a federation that survived until 1958. In World War II, the Allies invaded Gabon to overthrow the pro-Vichy France colonial administration. On 28 November 1958, Gabon became an autonomous republic within the French Community, and on 17 August 1960, it became fully independent.\nM'ba rule.\nThe first president of Gabon, elected in 1961, was L\u00e9on M'ba, with Omar Bongo Ondimba as his vice president. After M'ba acceded to power, the press was suppressed, political demonstrations suppressed, freedom of expression curtailed, other political parties gradually excluded from power, and the Constitution changed along French lines to vest power in the Presidency, a post that M'ba assumed himself. When M'ba dissolved the National Assembly in January 1964 to institute one-party rule, an army coup sought to oust him from power and restore parliamentary democracy. French paratroopers flew in within 24 hours to restore M'ba to power. After days of fighting, the coup ended, and the opposition was imprisoned, with protests and riots ensuing.\nBongo rule and PDG.\nWhen M'Ba died in 1967, Bongo replaced him as president. In March 1968, Bongo declared Gabon a one-party state by dissolving BDG and establishing a new party \u2013 the Parti D\u00e9mocratique Gabonais (PDG). He invited all Gabonese, regardless of previous political affiliation, to participate. Bongo sought to forge a single national movement in support of the government's development policies, using PDG as a tool to submerge the regional and tribal rivalries that had divided Gabonese politics in the past. Bongo was elected president in February 1975; in April 1975, the position of vice president was abolished and replaced by the position of prime minister, who had no right to automatic succession. Bongo was re-elected President in December 1979 and November 1986 two 7-year terms.\nIn 1990, economic discontent and a desire for political liberalization provoked demonstrations and strikes by students and workers. In response to grievances by workers, Bongo negotiated with them on a sector-by-sector basis, making wage concessions. He promised to open up PDG and organize a national political conference in March\u2013April 1990 to discuss Gabon's future political system. PDG and 74 political organizations attended the conference. Participants were essentially divided into 2 \"loose\" coalitions, the ruling PDG and its allies, and the United Front of Opposition Associations and Parties, consisting of the breakaway Morena Fundamental and the Gabonese Progress Party.\nTransitional government and RSDG.\nThe April 1990 conference approved political reforms, including the creation of a national Senate, decentralization of the budgetary process, freedom of assembly and press, and cancellation of an exit visa requirement. In an attempt to guide the political system's transformation to multiparty democracy, Bongo resigned as PDG chairman and created a transitional government headed by a new Prime Minister, Casimir Oye-Mba. The Gabonese Social Democratic Grouping (RSDG), as the resulting government was called, was smaller than the previous government and included representatives from some opposition parties in its cabinet. RSDG drafted a provisional constitution in May 1990 that provided a basic bill of rights and an independent judiciary and retained \"strong\" executive powers for the president. After further review by a constitutional committee and the National Assembly, this document came into force in March 1991.\nOpposition to PDG continued after the April 1990 conference, and in September 1990, two coup d'\u00e9tat attempts were uncovered and aborted. With demonstrations after the death of an opposition leader, the first multiparty National Assembly elections in almost 30 years took place in September\u2013October 1990, with PDG garnering a majority.\nIn 1991, the Parliament of Gabon adopted a new constitution, and the country switched to multiparty elections.\nBongo's re-election and rule.\nFollowing President Omar Bongo's re-election in December 1993 with 51% of the vote, opposition candidates refused to validate the election results. Civil disturbances and violent repression led to an agreement between the government and opposition factions to work toward a political settlement. These talks led to the Paris Accords in November 1994, under which some opposition figures were included in a government of national unity. This arrangement broke down, and the 1996 and 1997 legislative and municipal elections provided the background for renewed partisan politics. PDG won in the legislative election, and some cities, including Libreville, elected opposition mayors during the 1997 local election.\nBoycott of elections and crisis.\nFacing a divided opposition, President Omar Bongo coasted to re-election in December 1998. While some of Bongo's opponents rejected the outcome as fraudulent, some international observers characterized the results as representative, \"despite many perceived irregularities\". Legislative elections held in 2001\u20132002 were boycotted by several smaller opposition parties and were criticized for their administrative weaknesses, producing a National Assembly dominated by PDG and allied independents. In November 2005, President Omar Bongo was elected for his sixth term. He won re-election, and opponents claim that the balloting process was marred by irregularities. There were some instances of violence following the announcement of his win. National Assembly elections were held in December 2006. Some seats contested because of voting irregularities were overturned by the Constitutional Court, and the subsequent run-off elections in 2007 yielded a PDG-controlled National Assembly.\nDeath of Bongo and succession.\nFollowing the death of President Omar Bongo on 8 June 2009 due to cardiac arrest at a Spanish hospital in Barcelona, Gabon entered a period of political transition. Per the amended constitution, Rose Francine Rogomb\u00e9, the President of the Senate, assumed the role of Interim President on 10 June 2009. The subsequent presidential elections, held on 30 August 2009, marked a historic moment as they were the first in Gabon's history not to feature Omar Bongo as a candidate. With a crowded field of 18 contenders, including Omar Bongo's son and ruling party leader, Ali Bongo, the elections were closely watched both domestically and internationally.\nAfter a rigorous three-week review by the Constitutional Court, Ali Bongo was officially declared the winner, leading to his inauguration on 16 October 2009. However, the announcement of his victory was met with scepticism by some opposition candidates, sparking sporadic protests across the country. Nowhere was this discontent more pronounced than in Port-Gentil, where allegations of electoral fraud resulted in violent demonstrations. The unrest claimed four lives and led to significant property damage, including attacks on the French Consulate and a local prison. Subsequently, security forces were deployed, and a curfew remained in effect for over three months.\nIn June 2010, a partial legislative by-election was held, marking the emergence of the Union Nationale (UN) coalition, primarily comprising defectors from the ruling PDG party following Omar Bongo's death. The contest for the five available seats saw both the PDG and UN claiming victory, underscoring the political tensions that persisted in the aftermath of the presidential transition.\nThe political landscape was further disrupted in January 2019 when a group of soldiers attempted a coup against President Ali Bongo. Despite initial unrest, the coup ultimately failed, but it highlighted the ongoing challenges facing Gabon's political stability.\nAgainst this backdrop of political volatility, Gabon achieved significant milestones on the international stage. In June 2021, it became the first country to receive payments for reducing emissions resulting from deforestation and forest degradation. Additionally, in June 2022, Gabon, along with Togo, joined the Commonwealth of Nations, signalling its commitment to multilateral engagement and cooperation.\n2023 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nIn August 2023, following the announcement that Ali Bongo had won a third term in the general election, military officers announced that they had taken power in a coup d'\u00e9tat and cancelled the election results. They also dissolved state institutions, including the Judiciary, Parliament and the constitutional assembly. On 31 August 2023, army officers who seized power, ending the Bongo family's 55-year hold on power, named Gen Brice Oligui Nguema as the country's transitional leader. On 4 September 2023, General Nguema was sworn in as interim president of Gabon.\nAs a consequence of the coup, on the 18 September, 2023, Gabon was partially suspended from the Commonwealth of Nations. The partial suspension excluded Gabon from the Councils of the Commonwealth, and the organization's meetings and events, such as the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. This was done as a potential preamble to a full suspension from the Commonwealth, unless \"acceptable progress is not made within two years\". Gabon was restored to a position of full membership within the Commonwealth on 15 July 2025, with the organization stating that the Presidential election held on 12 April 2025 \u201clargely reflected the will of the people who voted and that it was conducted in a credible, transparent and inclusive manner\".\nIn November 2024, a referendum on a new constitution was approved, reforming the country's government. In April 2025, Brice Oligui Nguema won presidential election with more than 90% of the vote, becoming the 4th President of Gabon.\nPolitics.\nThe presidential republic form of government is stated under the 1961 constitution (revised in 1975, rewritten in 1991, and revised in 2003). The president is elected by universal suffrage for a seven-year term; a 2003 constitutional amendment removed presidential term limits. The president can appoint and dismiss the prime minister, the cabinet, and judges of the independent Supreme Court. The president has other powers, such as the authority to dissolve the National Assembly, declare a state of siege, delay legislation, and conduct referendums. Gabon has a bicameral legislature with a National Assembly and Senate. The National Assembly has 120 deputies who are popularly elected for a five-year term. The Senate is composed of 102 members who are elected by municipal councils and regional assemblies and serve for six years. The Senate was created in the 1990\u20131991 constitutional revision and was not brought into being until after the 1997 local elections. The President of the Senate is next in succession to the President.\nIn 1990, the government made changes to Gabon's political system. A transitional constitution was drafted in May 1990 as an outgrowth of the national political conference in March\u2013April and later revised by a constitutional committee. Among its provisions were a Western-style bill of rights, the creation of a National Council of Democracy to oversee the guarantee of those rights, a governmental advisory board on economic and social issues, and an independent judiciary. After approval by the National Assembly, the PDG Central Committee, and the President, the Assembly unanimously adopted the constitution in March 1991. Multiparty legislative elections were held in 1990\u20131991 when opposition parties had not been declared formally legal. In January 1991, the Assembly passed by unanimous vote a law governing the legalization of opposition parties.\nAfter President Omar Bongo was re-elected in 1993, in a disputed election where only 51% of votes were cast, social and political disturbances led to the 1994 Paris Conference and Accords. These provided a framework for the next elections. Local and legislative elections were delayed until 1996\u20131997. In 1997, constitutional amendments put forward years earlier were adopted to create the Senate and the position of Vice President and to extend the President's term to seven years.\nIn October 2009, President Ali Bongo Ondimba began efforts to streamline the government. To reduce corruption and government bloat, he eliminated 17 minister-level positions, abolished the Vice Presidency and reorganized the portfolios of some ministries, bureaus and directorates. In November 2009, Bongo announced a new vision for the modernization of Gabon, called \"Gabon Emergent\". This program contains three pillars: Green Gabon, Service Gabon, and Industrial Gabon. The goals of Gabon Emergent are to diversify the economy so that Gabon becomes less reliant on petroleum, to eliminate corruption, and to modernize the workforce. Under this program, exports of raw timber have been banned, a government-wide census was held, the work day was changed to eliminate a long midday break, and a national oil company was created.\nOn 25 January 2011, opposition leader Andr\u00e9 Mba Obame claimed the presidency, saying the country should be run by someone the people wanted. He selected 19 ministers for his government, and the entire group, along with hundreds of others, spent the night at the United Nations headquarters. On January 26, the government dissolved Mba Obame's party. AU chairman Jean Ping said that Mba Obame's action \"hurts the integrity of legitimate institutions and also endangers the peace, the security and the stability of Gabon.\" Interior Minister Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Ndongou accused Mba Obame and his supporters of treason. The UN Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon, said that he recognized Ondimba as the only official Gabonese president.\nThe 2016 presidential election was disputed, with \"very close\" official results reported. Protests broke out in the capital and met repression, which culminated in the alleged bombing of the opposition party headquarters by the presidential guard. Between 50 and 100 citizens were killed by security forces, and 1,000 were arrested. International observers criticized irregularities, including unnaturally high turnout reported for some districts. The country's supreme court threw out some suspect precincts, and the ballots have been destroyed. The election was declared in favour of the incumbent Ondimba. The European Parliament issued two resolutions denouncing the unclear results of the election and calling for an investigation into the human rights violations.\nA few days after the controversial presidential election in August 2023, a group of military officials declared a military coup and that they had overthrown the government and deposed Ali Bongo Ondimba. The announcement came hours after Bongo was officially re-elected for a third term. General Brice Oligui Nguema was appointed as the transitional leader. This event marked the eighth instance of military intervention in the region since 2020, raising concerns about democratic stability.\nForeign relations.\nSince independence, Gabon has followed a nonaligned policy, advocating dialogue in international affairs and recognizing each side of divided countries. In intra-African affairs, it espouses development by evolution rather than revolution and favours regulated private enterprise as the system most likely to promote rapid economic growth. It involved itself in mediation efforts in Chad, the Central African Republic, Angola, the Republic of the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (D.R.C.), and Burundi. In December 1999, through the mediation efforts of President Bongo, a peace accord was signed in the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville) between the government and most leaders of an armed rebellion. President Bongo was involved in the continuing D.R.C. peace process and played a role in mediating the crisis in Ivory Coast.\nGabon is a member of the United Nations (UN) and some of its specialized and related agencies, and of the World Bank; the IMF; the African Union (AU); the Central African Customs Union/Central African Economic and Monetary Community (UDEAC/CEMAC); EU/ACP association under the Lom\u00e9 Convention; the Communaut\u00e9 Financi\u00e8re Africaine (CFA); the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC); the Nonaligned Movement; and the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS/CEEAC). In 1995, Gabon withdrew from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), rejoining in 2016. Gabon was elected to a non-permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council from January 2010 through December 2011 and held the rotating presidency in March 2010. In 2022, Gabon joined the Commonwealth of Nations. In 2024, ruling junta leader Brice Oligui Nguema assured American and French leaders that Gabon would be an ally of the West moving forward, as a part of his broader plan to solve the ongoing debt crisis. On 31 August 2023, Gabon was suspended from the African Union following a coup d'etat. On May 1, 2025, Gabon was re-instated after Brice Oligui Nguema was elected.\nMilitary.\nIt has a professional military of about 5,000 personnel, divided into army, navy, air force, gendarmerie, and police force. A 1,800-member guard provides security for the president.\nAdministrative divisions.\nIt is divided into 9 provinces, which are subdivided into 50 departments. The president appoints the provincial governors, the prefects, and the subprefects.\nThe provinces are (capitals in parentheses):\nGeography.\nGabon is located on the Atlantic coast of central Africa on the equator, between latitudes 3\u00b0N and 4\u00b0S, and longitudes 8\u00b0 and 15\u00b0E. Gabon has an equatorial climate with a system of rainforests, with 89.3% of its land area forested.\nThere are coastal plains (ranging between from the ocean's shore), the mountains (the Cristal Mountains to the northeast of Libreville, the Chaillu Massif in the centre), and the savanna in the east. The coastal plains form a section of the World Wildlife Fund's Atlantic Equatorial coastal forests ecoregion and contain patches of Central African mangroves including on the Muni River estuary on the border with Equatorial Guinea.\nGeologically, Gabon is primarily Archaean and Palaeoproterozoic igneous and metamorphic basement rock, belonging to the stable continental crust of the Congo Craton. Some formations are more than 2 billion years old. Some rock units are overlain by marine carbonate, lacustrine and continental sedimentary rocks, and unconsolidated sediments and soils that formed in the last 2.5 million years of the Quaternary. The rifting apart of the supercontinent Pangaea created rift basins that filled with sediments and formed the hydrocarbons. There are Oklo reactor zones, a natural nuclear fission reactor on Earth which was active 2 billion years ago. The site was discovered during uranium mining in the 1970s to supply the French nuclear power industry.\nIts largest river is the Ogoou\u00e9, which is long. It has three karst areas where there are hundreds of caves located in the dolomite and limestone rocks. A National Geographic Expedition visited some caves in the summer of 2008 to document them.\nGabon is highly vulnerable to climate change due to its dense coastal population, economic hubs along the shore, and dependence on rain-fed agriculture. Rising sea levels threaten to erode the coastline and contaminate freshwater sources with saltwater. The country is already experiencing more frequent and severe extreme weather events, such as floods, droughts, and storms, which damage infrastructure, displace communities, and disrupt food security and livelihoods. To adapt, Gabon prioritises protecting its coastal areas, as well as its fishing, agriculture, and forestry industries. Its vast forests act as a net carbon sink. It is recognized as a global leader in climate action and is widely considered the most carbon-positive country in the world, due to its strong conservation efforts.\nIn 2002, President Omar Bongo Ondimba designated roughly 10% of the nation's territory to be part of its national park system (with 13 parks in total). The National Agency for National Parks manages Gabon's national park system. Gabon had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 9.07/10, ranking it 9th globally out of 172 countries.\nWildlife.\nGabon has a large number of protected animal and plant species. The country's biodiversity is one of the most varied on the planet.\nGabon is home of 604 species of birds, 98 species of amphibians, between 95 and 160 species of reptiles and 198 different species of mammals. In Gabon there are rare species, such as the Gabon pangolin and the grey-necked rockfowl, or endemics, such as the Gabon guenon.\nThe country is one of the most varied and important fauna reserves in Africa: it is an important refuge for chimpanzees (whose number, in 2003, was estimated between 27,000 and 64,000) and gorillas (28,000-42,000 estimated in 1983). The \"Gorilla and Chimpanzee Study Station\" inside the Lop\u00e9 National Park is dedicated to their study.\nIt is also home to more than half the population of African forest elephants, mostly in Mink\u00e9b\u00e9 National Park. Gabon's national symbol is the black panther.\nMore than 10,000 species of plants and 400 species of trees form the flora of Gabon. Gabon's rainforest is considered the densest and most virgin in Africa. However, the country's enormous population growth is causing heavy deforestation that threatens this valuable ecosystem. Likewise, poaching endangers wildlife. Gabon's national flower is \"Delonix Regia\".\nEconomy.\nOil revenue constitutes roughly 46% of the government's budget, 43% of the gross domestic product (GDP), and 81% of exports. Oil production declined from its higher point of 370,000 barrels per day in 1997. Some estimates suggest that Gabonese oil will be expended by 2025. Planning is beginning for an after-oil scenario. The rich Grondin Oil Field was discovered in 1971 in water depths offshore in an anticline salt structural trap in Batanga sandstones of Maastrichtian age, but about 60% of its estimated reserves had been extracted by 1978.\nAs of 2023, Gabon produced about 200,000 barrels a day (bpd) of crude oil. Gabon\u2019s economy remains heavily dependent on oil and other natural resources, leaving it exposed to global market shifts and climate-related risks.\n\"Overspending\" on the Trans-Gabon Railway, the CFA franc devaluation of 1994, and periods of lower oil prices caused debt problems.\nSuccessive International Monetary Fund (IMF) missions have criticized the Gabonaise government for overspending on off-budget items (in good years and bad), over-borrowing from the central bank, and slipping on the schedule for privatization and administrative reform. In September 2005, Gabon successfully concluded a 15-month Stand-By Arrangement with the IMF. A three-year Stand-By Arrangement with the IMF was approved in May 2007. Due to the 2008 financial crisis and social developments surrounding the death of President Omar Bongo and the elections, Gabon was unable to meet its economic goals under the Stand-By Arrangement in 2009.\nGabon's oil revenues have given it a per capita GDP of $8,600. A \"skewed income distribution\" and \"poor social indicators\" are \"evident\". The richest 20% of the population earn over 90% of the income while about a third of the Gabonese population lives in poverty.\nThe economy is dependent on extraction. Before the discovery of oil, logging was the \"pillar\" of the Gabonese economy. Then, logging and manganese mining are the \"next-most-important\" income generators. Some explorations suggest the presence of the world's largest unexploited iron ore deposit. For some who live in rural areas without access to employment opportunities in extractive industries, remittances from family members in urban areas or subsistence activities provide income.\nForeign and local observers have lamented the lack of diversity in the Gabonese economy. Factors that have \"limited the development of new industries\" were listed as follows:\nFurther investment in the agricultural or tourism sectors is \"complicated by poor infrastructure\". Some processing and service sectors are \"largely dominated by a few prominent local investors\".\nAt the World Bank and IMF's insistence, the government embarked in the 1990s on a program of privatization of its state-owned companies and administrative reform, including reducing public sector employment and salary growth. The government has voiced a commitment to work toward an economic transformation of the country.\nEnergy.\nGabon's energy comes from two main sources: solid biofuels and waste (accounting for 75%), and fossil fuels, particularly oil. Just under half (48%) of Gabon's share of power generation comes from renewables. Nearly two-thirds of the population of Gabon has access to electricity. However, rural electrification remains limited - only 15% of rural areas had electricity as of 2014. The country aims to provide electricity to 85% of rural areas by 2025 and universal access to electricity by 2035. Most of Gabon's rural population is dependent on biomass fuels for cooking and heating, such as wood and charcoal.\nIn 2023, the country accounted for just over 0.04% of global greenhouse gas emissions (24.7 million tonnes). Gabon has pledged to stay carbon neutral beyond 2050 and, with adequate support, aims to maintain net carbon removals of 100 million tons CO2 equivalent per year beyond that date. It also seeks to expand its renewable energy sector.\nDemographics.\nGabon has a population of approximately million. Historical and environmental factors caused its population to decline between 1900 and 1940. It has one of the lowest population densities of any country in Africa, and the fourth highest Human Development Index in Sub-Saharan Africa.\nEthnic groups.\nGabon has at least 40 ethnic groups, including Fang, My\u00e8n\u00e8, Punu-\u00c9chira, Nzebi-Adouma, Teke-Mbete, M\u00e8mb\u00e8, Kota, Ak\u00e9l\u00e9. There are indigenous Pygmy peoples: the Bongo, and Baka. The latter speak the only non-Bantu language in Gabon. More than 10,000 native French live in Gabon, including an estimated 2,000 dual nationals.\nSome ethnicities are spread throughout Gabon, leading to contact, interaction among the groups, and intermarriage.\nNon-Africans include more than 12,000 French people.\nLanguages.\nFrench is the sole official language. It is estimated that 80% of the population can speak French and that 30% of Libreville residents are native speakers of the language.\nNationally, a majority of the Gabonese people speak indigenous languages according to their ethnic group; this proportion is lower than in most other Sub-Saharan African countries. The 2013 census found that 63.7% of Gabon's population could speak a Gabonese language, broken down by 86.3% in rural areas and 60.5% in urban areas, speaking at least one national language.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReligions practised in Gabon include Christianity (Roman Catholicism and Protestantism), Islam, and traditional indigenous religious beliefs. Some people practise elements of both Christianity and indigenous religious beliefs. Approximately 79% of the population (53% Catholic) practise one of the denominations of Christianity; 10% practise Islam (mainly Sunni); the remainder practise other religions.\nHealth.\nA private hospital was established in 1913 in Lambar\u00e9n\u00e9 by Albert Schweitzer. By 1985, there were 28 hospitals, 87 medical centres, and 312 infirmaries and dispensaries. As of 2004[ [update]], there were an estimated 29 physicians per 100,000 people, and \"approximately 90% of the population had access to health care services\".\nIn 2000, 70% of the population had access to \"safe drinking water\" and 21% had \"adequate sanitation\". A government health program treats such diseases as leprosy, sleeping sickness, malaria, filariasis, intestinal worms, and tuberculosis. Rates for immunization of children under the age of 1 were 97% for tuberculosis and 65% for polio. Immunization rates for DPT and measles were 37% and 56%, respectively. Gabon has a domestic supply of pharmaceuticals from a factory in Libreville.\nThe total fertility rate has decreased from 5.8 in 1960 to 4.2 children per mother during childbearing years in 2000. 10% of all births were \"low birth weight\". The maternal mortality rate was 520 per 100,000 live births as of 1998. In 2005, the infant mortality rate was 55.35 per 1,000 live births, and life expectancy was 55.02 years. As of 2002, the overall mortality rate was estimated at 17.6 per 1,000 inhabitants.\nThe HIV/AIDS prevalence is estimated to be 5.2% of the adult population (ages 15\u201349). As of 2009[ [update]], approximately 46,000 people were living with HIV/AIDS. There were an estimated 2,400 deaths from AIDS in 2009 \u2013 down from 3,000 deaths in 2003.\nIn the 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI), Gabon ranks 78th out of 127 countries with sufficient data. Gabon's GHI score is 17.4, which indicates a moderate level of hunger.\nEducation.\nIts education system is regulated by two ministries: the Ministry of Education, in charge of pre-kindergarten through the last high school grade, and the Ministry of Higher Education and Innovative Technologies, in charge of universities, higher education, and professional schools.\nEducation is compulsory for children ages 6 to 16 under the Education Act. Some children in Gabon start their school lives by attending nurseries or \"Cr\u00e8che\", then kindergarten, known as \"Jardins d'enfants\". At age 6, they are enrolled in primary school, \"\u00c9cole Primaire\", which is made up of 6 grades. The next level is \"\u00c9cole Secondaire\", which is made up of 7 grades. The planned graduation age is 19 years. Those who graduate can apply for admission to institutions of higher learning, including engineering schools or business schools. As of 2012, the literacy rate of a population ages 15 and above was 82%.\nThe government has used oil revenue for school construction, paying teachers' salaries, and promoting education, including in rural areas. Maintenance of school structures and teachers' salaries has been declining. In 2002, the gross primary enrollment rate was 132%, and in 2000, the net primary enrollment rate was 78%. Gross and net enrollment ratios are based on the number of students formally registered in primary school. As of 2001, 69% of children who started primary school were \"likely\" to reach grade 5. Problems in the education system include \"poor management and planning, lack of oversight, poorly qualified teachers\", and \"overcrowded classrooms\". There are various universities in Gabon which are being chartered, licensed or accredited by the appropriate Gabonese higher education-related organization.\nCulture.\nGabon's cultural heritage, rooted in an oral tradition for much of its history, began to flourish with the spread of literacy in the 21st century. Rich in folklore and mythology, the country is home to a tapestry of traditions that have been preserved and passed down through generations. Custodians of these traditions, known as \"raconteurs,\" work to ensure their continuity, nurturing practices like the mvett among the Fangs and the Ingwala among the Nzebis.\nCentral to Gabonese culture are its iconic masks, each imbued with unique significance and craftsmanship. Among these are the renowned n'goltang masks of the Fang people and the intricate reliquary figures of the Kota. These masks hold crucial roles in various ceremonies, including those marking significant life events such as marriage, birth, and funerals. Crafted by traditionalists using rare local woods and other precious materials, these masks serve as artistic expressions and vessels of cultural heritage.\nMusic.\nIt has an array of folk styles. Imported rock and hip hop from the US and UK are in Gabon, as are rumba, makossa and soukous. Some folk instruments include the obala, the ngombi, the balafon and drums.\nMedia.\nRadio-Diffusion T\u00e9l\u00e9vision Gabonaise (RTG) is Gabon's national state-owned broadcaster. Its output is primarily in French, and the group airs regular news bulletins in indigenous languages. Colour television using the SECAM standard was introduced in 1975, following French cooperation that financed a colour TV studio in Gabon by that year.\nIn 2004, the government operated 2 radio stations, and another 7 were privately owned. There were 2 government television stations and 4 privately owned. In 2003, there were an estimated 488 radios and 308 television sets for every 1,000 people. About 11.5 of every 1,000 people were cable subscribers. In 2003, there were 22.4 personal computers for every 1,000 people, and 26 of every 1,000 people had access to the Internet. The national press service is the Gabonese Press Agency, which publishes a daily paper, \"Gabon-Matin\" (circulation 18,000 as of 2002).\n\"L'Union\" in Libreville, the government-controlled daily newspaper, had an average daily circulation of 40,000 in 2002. The weekly \"Gabon d'Aujourd'hui\" is published by the Ministry of Communications. There are about 9 privately owned periodicals which are either independent or affiliated with political parties. These are published in certain numbers that have been delayed by financial constraints. The constitution of Gabon provides for free speech and a free press, and the government supports these rights. Some periodicals actively criticize the government, and foreign publications are available.\nCuisine.\nGabonese cuisine is influenced by French cuisine, and staple foods are available.\nSports.\nThe Gabon national football team has represented the nation since 1962. The Under-23 football team won the 2011 CAF U-23 Championship and qualified for the 2012 London Olympics. Gabon were joint hosts, along with Equatorial Guinea, of the 2012 Africa Cup of Nations, and the sole hosts of the competition's 2017 tournament.\nThe Gabon national basketball team, nicknamed \"Les Panth\u00e8res\", finished 8th at the AfroBasket 2015.\nGabon has competed at most Summer Olympics since 1972. Anthony Obame won a silver medal in taekwondo at the 2012 Olympics held in London.\nGabon has recreational fishing and is considered the \"best place in the world\" to catch Atlantic tarpon.\nSince 2006, Gabon has hosted La Tropicale Amissa Bongo, a professional week-long bicycle race which includes both European and African teams.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nhttps://www.state.gov/reports/2021-report-on-international-religious-freedom/gabon/\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12028", "revid": "1509627", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12028", "title": "History of Gabon", "text": " \nPresent-day Gabon was first inhabited by rainforest hunter-gatherers (often called Pygmy peoples), attested as early as c. 43,000 BC; archaeology confirms occupations from the Late Pleistocene to the Neolithic along the coast and in the Ogoou\u00e9. By c. 400\u2013300 BC, Bantu-speaking farming and ironworking communities settled in the middle Ogoou\u00e9, initiating an expansion that subsequently structured settlement across the region.\nFrom 1472, Atlantic contact reshaped coastal exchange. Myene-speaking polities on the Gabon littoral, including the Mpongwe in the Estuary and the Orungu and Nkomi farther south, acted as brokers linking river routes to European shipping. Trade focused on ivory, copper, salt, raffia cloth, and, by the late 1700s, captives; in 1788 about 500 people were embarked annually at \" Gabon and Cape Lopez \", far fewer than the major outlets farther south. Domestic slavery predated overseas commerce and expanded with it, concentrating wealth and authority in lineages and chiefly houses. Coastal lifeways combined salt making, oyster harvesting at Mayumba, and diversified agriculture, while political organization ranged from clan-based councils among the Mpongwe to royal offices among the Orungu and Nkomi.\nIn 1862\u20131887, France expanded its control including the interior of the state, and took full sovereignty. In 1910 Gabon became part of French Equatorial Africa and in 1960, Gabon became independent.\nAt the time of Gabon's independence, two principal political parties existed: the Gabonese Democratic Bloc (BDG), led by L\u00e9on M'Ba, and the Gabonese Democratic and Social Union (UDSG), led by Jean-Hilaire Aubame. In the first post-independence election, held under a parliamentary system, neither party was able to win a majority; the leaders subsequently agreed against a two-party system and ran with a single list of candidates. In the February 1961 election, held under the new presidential system, M'Ba became president and Aubame became foreign minister. The single-party solution disintegrated in 1963, and there was a single-day bloodless coup in 1964. In March 1967, Leon M'Ba and Omar Bongo were elected president and vice president. M'Ba died later that year. Bongo declared Gabon a one-party state, dissolved the BDG and established the Gabonese Democratic Party (PDG). Sweeping political reforms in 1990 led to a new constitution, and the PDG garnered a large majority in the country's first multi-party elections in 30 years. Despite discontent from opposition parties, Bongo remained president until his death in 2009.\nEarly history.\nArchaeology.\nLate Stone Age, Neolithic, and Early/Late Iron Age sequences are documented in the Lope\u2013Okanda\u2013Ogooue region and on the coast.\nPrecontact period.\nRainforest hunter-gatherers (often called Pygmy groups, including the Babongo, Baka, and Bakoya) are the earliest known inhabitants of the area, their presence has been attested since the Upper Pleistocene (roughly 43,000-13,000 BC). Archaeology in the Ogooue valley shows Late Stone Age sites long before farming, and genetics points to deep splits between foragers and farmers. Bantu-speaking communities appear by the Early Iron Age, at least the 3rd\u20132nd centuries BC, and expand through the first millennium AD.\nThe Bantu expansion is found in the middle Ogooue valley, where Late Stone Age occupations were replaced by Early Iron Age communities around 2400\u20132300 BP (c. 400\u2013300 BC), notably at Lalara and Otoumbi. Paleoenvironmental studies identify a late Holocene episode of rainforest fragmentation around 2500\u20132000 BP (c. 550\u201350 BC) across Central Africa, including Gabon, which created savanna\u2013forest mosaics conducive to such settlements. This timing and geography are consistent with broader models of Bantu expansion that emphasize movement along habitat corridors and slower spread through dense rainforest.\nEarly Iron Age metallurgy in Gabon is documented by smelting furnaces and slag at sites such as Oveng (Estuaire Province), confirming local iron production and its role in the west-Central African spread of Bantu speakers. Prior to coastal contact, lineage-based communities and flexible chiefly authority embedded in riverine exchange networks structured social and political life in equatorial Africa, a framework widely applied to precolonial Gabon, especially along the Ogooue corridor.\nPrecolonial period.\nPortuguese navigators reached the Gabon estuary in 1472 and applied the name \"Gabon\" from the Portuguese \"gab\u00e3o\", a hooded cloak likened to the shape of the Komo River estuary. The Portuguese settled on S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9, Pr\u00edncipe and Fernando P\u00f3, and were regular visitors to the coast.\nAlong the southern littoral, exchange fell within the orbit of the Kingdom of Loango, whose Vili merchants controlled access to ports and markets and set tolls and prices; raffia cloth functioned as currency and a source of power. Trade moved through African brokers and canoe routes linking lagoons, estuaries and inland paths; ivory, copper, salt, and raffia cloth circulated long before the Atlantic slave trade, which was later integrated into these circuits.\nDuring the 17th and 18th centuries, Dutch, English and French competition eroded any early Portuguese advantage; Loango, the Kakongo and Ngoyo remained autonomous polities, and Europeans depended on African middlemen for supplies and captives drawn from interior zones such as the Mayombe. Farther north toward the estuary, with the Myene-speaking groups, intermediaries linked the Ogoou\u00e9 river routes and the lagoon chain to European shipping without sustained European territorial control.\nTribes and societies in the precolonial period.\nCoastal Myene-speaking groups\u2014Mpongwe in the Gabon Estuary, Orungu around Cape Lopez, and at Fernan Vaz\u2014developed as middleman polities tied to Atlantic trade from the 16th to the mid-19th century, with the slave trade peaking c. late 18th\u2013early 19th century and declining after French settlement in 1843; Orungu and retained more centralized structures, while the Mpongwe shifted toward dispersed clan-based authority. The later 19th-century arrival of Fang groups on the coast further disrupted this balance.\nThese coastal brokers organized a commercial \"domain\" extending inland through allied or subordinate peoples: Adyumba (Mpongwe near Lake Azingo), Galoa, Enenga, Eshira, and Okande, with nearer neighbors such as Seke and Akele supplying forest products and more distant communities supplying captives. Profits concentrated on ivory and high-prestige imports, while firearms, powder, and ironware were routed inland.\nSocial classification combined status by birth with wealth from commerce. Among the Mpongwe, categories distinguished free-born lineages, foreigners admitted to reside, and slaves (including house-born), with marriage rules channeling women upward socially but restricting movement downward. In economic terms, the key index of rank was control of dependants\u2014slaves and wives\u2014who provided plantation labor, portage, and domestic production. Female status varied by age, order of marriage, and husband\u2019s wealth; a women\u2019s society (nzembe) provided solidarity and protection and is associated with Eshira influence.\nPolitically, the Mpongwe of the Estuary evolved from an 18th-century kingdom into a multipolar system of clans. Each clan was led by an aga with senior notables, and councils of elders exercised collective decision-making with religious and judicial roles. By contrast, the Orungu and the Nkomi maintained royal offices (ompolo) chosen by councils of elders, within a hierarchical structure from families to lineages to clans to the tribe. A coastal vs. interior division mapped onto \"sea\" clans controlling maritime trade and \"land\" clans managing hinterland affairs; at Cape Lopez the Abulia/Alombe were sea clans and the Apandji a land clan, while at Fernan Vaz an interior abunj\u00e9 group is noted. Notable Orungu rulers in the late 18th to mid-19th century concentrated power at Sangatanga and pursued warfare to secure commercial advantages, notably under Renwombi-Mpolo and then Rogomb\u00e9-Mpolo/Pass-all, with an apogee around 1810\u20131850. Contemporary Nkomi rulers fought the Orungu and developed Anyambie as a parallel coastal hub.\nSlavery and domestic servitude.\nDomestic slavery predated the Atlantic trade among coastal groups and eased its implantation; the export trade in turn broadened and intensified the reasons for enslavement, including warfare, debts and judicial sanctions. Observers in the early 19th century reported a very large extension of domestic slavery in the Estuary.\nHousehold slaves generally lived and worked permanently on agricultural \"habitations\" located away from villages, produced staple foods, transported provisions to the coast, and carried merchandise toward the interior. Along the coast, slaves also functioned as a recognized unit of account: fines and bridewealth were stipulated in slaves, even when payment was made in equivalent commodities such as ivory, ebony or redwood. A spatial gradient is noted for the region: the farther from the coast, the fewer domestic slaves were found and the more frequent were convoys of slaves destined for export.\nSocial rank correlated with control over dependants\u2014slaves and wives\u2014which indexed wealth and political standing among coastal brokers. Funerary practices could include the sacrifice of slaves to accompany notable men in death, a custom attested by contemporary testimonies. Social order was also maintained through ritualized fear and coercion, including exemplary executions.\nOverall, preexisting domestic slavery facilitated the Atlantic trade, and the trade fed back by multiplying motives for enslavement and tightening dependence in the coastal economy.\nOverall, coastal acculturation to Atlantic trade was deepest among the Mpongwe and more limited among Orungu and Nkomi, shaping divergent capacities to absorb the post-1830 transition from slave exports to other commodities.\nCoastal lifeways (17th\u201319th centuries).\nSalt-making formed a notable littoral industry\u2014especially from north of the Kwilu to Chilongo (Republic of Congo) and around the lagoons\u2014using clay or termite-mound stoves to evaporate seawater, with output packed in cylindrical baskets for inland trade; local salt was often preferred to imported varieties. At Mayumba, seasonal oyster harvesting from the Banya lagoon floor supplemented livelihoods, while coastal agriculture included maize and cassava (both introduced by the 17th century), groundnuts, bananas, sweet potatoes, yams and sugar cane; palms supplied wine and oil.\nSouthern coast and the Loango trading sphere (16th\u201319th centuries).\nFrom Cape Lopez down to the mouth of the Congo River, navigation and exchange were shaped by a chain of lagoons and bays, notably Fernan Vaz/, Sett\u00e9 Cama, Iguela/Ngove east of Cape St. Catherine, the Banya lagoon at Mayumba, and Cayo at Pointe-Noire (Republic of the Congo). The coastal surf and bars forced most ships to anchor offshore, while the mangrove-backed littoral north of Mayumba contrasted with higher, drier shores farther south.\nSeventeenth-century accounts place the effective northern reach of Loango\u2019s authority around Ngove/Ngobe at Cape St. Catherine. The Ngobe generally sent ivory to Mayumba and Loangiri (Republic of the Congo) rather than trade directly with Europeans. In the Sett\u00e9 district, ivory and redwood moved largely through Mayumba, where Loango\u2019s representative levied an approximate 10% tax on redwood. Mayumba sat at the north end of the roughly 50-mile Banya lagoon; oysters collected in the dry season provided key subsistence, while ivory was the principal export. Tradition held that Mayumba had submitted to Loango after a Chilongo (Republic of the Congo) conquest.\nIn the 18th century Sett\u00e9 supplied redwood and ivory, while Mayumba remained a regional outlet for these products. Canoe links allowed communication from Sett\u00e9 to the Ogoou\u00e9 to the north and to Mayumba to the south, reinforcing Mayumba\u2019s redistributive role.\nAt Cape Lopez, Dutch reports describe a ruler at Olibatta, a few miles inland, presiding over a town of roughly 200 houses and acting independently of the Maloango\u2014evidence of plural authority north of Loango.\nNineteenth-century testimonies indicate steady flows between Mayumba and the interior: salt, firearms and cloth ascended the Ogoou\u00e9, Passa and Alima toward Kuyu and Likuala (Republic of the Congo) in exchange for ivory and captives. The Adouma canoe specialists on the middle\u2013upper Ogoou\u00e9 went no farther upstream than the Nkoni, beyond this, European goods declined in value because communities traded westward to Mayumba.\nSlave trade (17th\u2013mid-19th centuries).\nIn 1788, the English trader Norris estimated only about 500 captives sold annually at \"Gabon and Cape Lopez\" , versus roughly 13,500 combined for Loango Bay (Republic of Congo), Malemba (Republic of Congo) and Cabinda (Angola), underscoring the smaller scale of the Gabon outlets. Main suppliers north of the Nyanga River were the Punu and Vunu, mediating between coastal Nkomi, Ngobe, Lumbu, Vili of Mayumba and interior Nzabi, Tshogo, Sangu and Pove; salt was essential, with European goods increasingly important.\nBy the 1830s\u20131840s, suppression patrols reshaped tactics. Most captives taken south of Fernan Vaz or at Sett\u00e9 Cama were marched to Mayumba, then a town of about 1,000, where seven or eight barracoons typically held 500\u2013600 people awaiting embarkation.\nFrench colonial period.\nIn 1838 and 1841, France established a protectorate over the coastal regions of Gabon by treaties with Gabonese coastal chiefs.\nAmerican missionaries from New England established a mission at the mouth of the Komo River in 1842. In 1849, the French authorities captured an illegal slave ship and freed the captives on board. The captives were released near the mission station, where they founded a settlement which was called Libreville (French for \"free town\")\nFrench explorers penetrated Gabon's dense jungles between 1862 and 1887. The most famous, Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza, used Gabonese bearers and guides in his search for the headwaters of the Congo River. France occupied Gabon in 1885, but did not administer it until 1903. Gabon's first political party, the Jeunesse Gabonais, was founded around 1922.\nIn 1910 Gabon became one of the four territories of French Equatorial Africa. On 15 July 1960 France agreed to Gabon becoming fully independent. On 17 August 1960 Gabon became an independent country.\nIndependence.\nAt the time of Gabon's independence in 1960, two principal political parties existed: the Gabonese Democratic Bloc (BDG), led by L\u00e9on M'Ba, and the Gabonese Democratic and Social Union (UDSG), led by Jean-Hilaire Aubame. In the first post-independence election, held under a parliamentary system, neither party was able to win a majority. The BDG obtained support from three of the four independent legislative deputies, and M'Ba was named Prime Minister. Soon after concluding that Gabon had an insufficient number of people for a two-party system, the two party leaders agreed on a single list of candidates. In the February 1961 election, held under the new presidential system, M'Ba became president and Aubame became foreign minister.\nThis one-party system appeared to work until February 1963, when the larger BDG element forced the UDSG members to choose between a merger of the parties or resignation. The UDSG cabinet ministers resigned, and M'Ba called an election for February 1964 and a reduced number of National Assembly deputies (from 67 to 47). The UDSG failed to muster a list of candidates able to meet the requirements of the electoral decrees. When the BDG appeared likely to win the election by default, the Gabonese military toppled M'Ba in a bloodless coup on 18 February 1964. French troops re-established his government the next day. Elections were held in April 1964 with many opposition participants. BDG-supported candidates won 31 seats and the opposition 16. Late in 1966, the constitution was revised to provide for automatic succession of the vice president should the president die in office. In March 1967, Leon M'Ba and Omar Bongo (then known as Albert Bongo) were elected President and Vice President, with the BDG winning all 47 seats in the National Assembly. M'Ba died later that year, and Omar Bongo became president.\nIn March 1968 Bongo declared Gabon a one-party state by dissolving the BDG and establishing a new party: the Gabonese Democratic Party \"(Parti D\u00e9mocratique Gabonais)\" (PDG). He invited all Gabonese, regardless of previous political affiliation, to participate. Bongo was elected President in February 1973; in April 1975, the office of vice president was abolished and replaced by the office of prime minister, who had no right to automatic succession. Bongo was re-elected president in December 1979 and November 1986 to 7-year terms. Using the PDG as a tool to submerge the regional and tribal rivalries that divided Gabonese politics in the past, Bongo sought to forge a single national movement in support of the government's development policies.\nEconomic discontent and a desire for political liberalization provoked violent demonstrations and strikes by students and workers in early 1990. In response to worker grievances, Bongo negotiated on a sector-by-sector basis, making significant wage concessions. In addition, he promised to open up the PDG and to organize a national political conference in March\u2013April 1990 to discuss Gabon's future political system. The PDG and 74 political organizations attended the conference. Participants essentially divided into two loose coalitions, the ruling PDG and its allies, and the United Front of Opposition Associations and Parties, consisting of the breakaway Morena Fundamental and the Gabonese Progress Party.\nThe April 1990 conference approved sweeping political reforms, including creation of a national Senate, decentralization of the budgetary process, freedom of assembly and press, and cancellation of the exit visa requirement. In an attempt to guide the political system's transformation to multiparty democracy, Bongo resigned as PDG chairman and created a transitional government headed by a new Prime Minister, Casimir Oy\u00e9-Mba. The Gabonese Social Democratic Grouping (RSDG), as the resulting government was called, was smaller than the previous government and included representatives from several opposition parties in its cabinet. The RSDG drafted a provisional constitution in May 1990 that provided a basic bill of rights and an independent judiciary but retained strong executive powers for the president. After further review by a constitutional committee and the National Assembly, this document came into force in March 1991. Under the 1991 constitution, in the event of the president's death, the Prime Minister, the National Assembly president, and the defence minister were to share power until a new election could be held.\nOpposition to the PDG continued, however, and in September 1990, two coup d'\u00e9tat attempts were uncovered and aborted. Despite anti-government demonstrations after the untimely death of an opposition leader, the first multiparty National Assembly elections in almost 30 years took place in September\u2013October 1990, with the PDG garnering a large majority.\nFollowing President Bongo's re-election in December 1993 with 51% of the vote, opposition candidates refused to validate the election results. Serious civil disturbances led to an agreement between the government and opposition factions to work toward a political settlement. These talks led to the Paris Accords in November 1994, under which several opposition figures were included in a government of national unity, and constitutional reforms were approved in a referendum in 1995. This arrangement soon broke down, however, and the 1996 and 1997 legislative and municipal elections provided the background for renewed partisan politics. The PDG won a landslide victory in the legislative election, but several major cities, including Libreville, elected opposition mayors during the 1997 local election.\nModern times.\nPresident Bongo coasted to easy re-elections in December 1998 and November 2005, with large majorities of the vote against a divided opposition. While Bongo's major opponents rejected the outcome as fraudulent, some international observers characterized the results as representative despite any perceived irregularities. Legislative elections held in 2001\u20132002, which were boycotted by a number of smaller opposition parties and were widely criticized for their administrative weaknesses, produced a National Assembly almost completely dominated by the PDG and allied independents.\nOmar Bongo died at a Spanish hospital on 8 June 2009.\nHis son Ali Bongo Ondimba was elected president in the August 2009 presidential election. He was re-elected in August 2016, in elections marred by numerous irregularities, arrests, human rights violations and post-election violence.\nOn 24 October 2018, Ali Bongo Ondimbao was hospitalized in Riyadh for an undisclosed illness. On 29 November 2018 Bongo was transferred to a military hospital in Rabat to continue recovery. On 9 December 2018 it was reported by Gabon's Vice President Moussavou that Bongo suffered a stroke in Riyadh and has since left the hospital in Rabat and is currently recovering at a private residence in Rabat. Since 24 October 2018 Bongo has not been seen in public and due to lack of evidence that he is either alive or dead many have speculated if he is truly alive or not. On 1 January 2019 Bongo gave his first public address via a video posted to social media since falling ill in October 2018 putting to rest any rumours he was dead.\nOn 7 January 2019, soldiers in Gabon launched an unsuccessful coup d\u2019etat attempt.\nOn May 11, 2021, a Commonwealth delegation visited Gabon as Ali Bongo visited London to meet with the secretary general of the organization, which brings together 54 English-speaking countries. President Bongo expressed Gabon's willingness to join the Commonwealth. In June 2022, Gabon joined the Commonwealth as its 55th member.\nIn August 2023, following the announcement that Ali Bongo had won a third term in the general election, military officers announced that they had taken power in a coup d'\u00e9tat and cancelled the election results. They also dissolved state institutions including the Judiciary, Parliament and the constitutional assembly. On 31 August 2023, army officers who seized power, ending the Bongo family's 55-year hold on power, named Gen Brice Oligui Nguema as the country's transitional leader. On 4 September 2023, General Nguema was sworn in as interim president of Gabon. In April 2025, Brice Oligui Nguema won presidential election with more than 90% of the vote, becoming the 4th President of Gabon.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12029", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12029", "title": "Geography of Gabon", "text": " \nGabon is a country in Central Africa, lying along the Atlantic Ocean, just south of the Bight of Biafra.\n* Total: 267,668 km\u00b2\n**\"country rank in the world:\" 76th/77th\n* Land: 257,670 km\u00b2\n* Water: 10,000 km\u00b2\n* Australia comparative: approximately larger than Victoria\n* Canada comparative: approximately the size of Newfoundland and Labrador\n* United Kingdom comparative: approximately larger than the United Kingdom\n* United States comparative: slightly smaller than Colorado\n* EU comparative: approximately smaller than Italy\nArea and borders.\nGabon has a total of 3,261\u00a0km of international boundaries. It borders Equatorial Guinea (335\u00a0km) and Cameroon (349\u00a0km) to the north and the Republic of the Congo (2,567\u00a0km) to the east and south. Gabon lies on the equator.\n* Territorial sea: \n* Contiguous zone: \n* Exclusive economic zone: \nTerrain.\nNarrow coastal plain with patches of Central African mangroves; hilly interior; savanna in east and south. A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 420\u00a0km2 of tidal flats in Gabon, making it the 50th ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.\nEnvironment.\nInternational agreements:\nParty to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling\nClimate.\nThe equatorial location of Gabon means that it has a tropical monsoon climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Am\") and a tropical savanna climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Aw\"), with the temperature being hot year-round and humid, although the Benguela Current can moderate temperatures.\nClimate change.\nGabon is highly vulnerable to climate change due to its dense coastal population, economic hubs along the shore, and dependence on rain-fed agriculture. Rising sea levels threaten to erode the coastline and contaminate freshwater sources with saltwater. The country is already experiencing more frequent and severe extreme weather events, such as floods, droughts, and storms, which damage infrastructure, displace communities, and disrupt food security and livelihoods.\nTo adapt, Gabon prioritises protecting its coastal areas, as well as its fishing, agriculture, and forestry industries. Gabon's vast forests act as a net carbon sink. It is recognized as a global leader in climate action and is widely considered the most carbon-positive country in the world, due to its strong conservation efforts. However, Gabon\u2019s economy remains heavily dependent on oil and other natural resources, leaving it exposed to global market shifts and climate-related risks. In 2023, the country accounted for just over 0.04% of global greenhouse gas emissions (24.7 million tonnes). Gabon has pledged to stay carbon neutral beyond 2050 and, with adequate support, aims to maintain net carbon removals of 100 million tons CO2 equivalent per year beyond that date. It also seeks to expand its renewable energy sector.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12030", "revid": "50801929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12030", "title": "Demographics of Gabon", "text": "The Demographics of Gabon is the makeup of the population of Gabon. As of 2020, Gabon has a population of 2,225,287. Gabon's population is relatively young with 35.5% of its population under 15 years of age and only 4.3% of its population over 65 years old. Gabon has a nearly even split between males and females with 0.99 males for every female in the population. In the age range of 15\u201365, the ratio is exactly 1 male to 1 female. The life expectancy of Gabon is lower than the world average. Gabon's population's life expectancy at birth is 53.11 years while the world average is 67.2 years as of 2010. Ethnically, the biggest group in Gabon are the Fang people with over 500,000 people, or about a third of Gabon's population, belonging to this ethnic group. The biggest religion in Gabon is Christianity, with between 55 and 75% of the population of Gabon being Christian.\nPopulation.\nAccording to the total population was in , compared to only 469,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 35.5%, 60.2% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 4.3% was 65 years or older\nStructure of the population (DHS 2012; males 19,318, females 20,636, total 39,955):\nVital statistics.\nRegistration of vital events is in Gabon not complete. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates. Population estimates account for under numeration in population censuses.\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nFertility data as of 2012 (DHS Program):\nEthnic groups.\nBroad ethnic groups in Gabon are:\n2012 Census.\nSource:\nLanguage and religion.\nReligions include Roman Catholic 43.5%, Protestant and other Christian 36%, Muslim 10%, animist 3.3%, other 6%, and none 1.2% (2020 figures).\nLanguages include French (official since colonial rule), Fang, Myene, the Teke group, Punu, and Njebi.\nAccording to research conducted in 2011 at the University of Western Cape:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It has been noted that French is increasingly be-coming the mother tongue and the initial language of the younger generations in urban Gabon (Pambou, 1998:147; Ndinga-Koumba-Binza, 2005a:72 &amp; 2005b:141; Idiata, 2008:85; cf. Blanchon, 1994). In fact, studies by Ntong Amvame (1984), Bouch\u00e9 (1998), Mbondzi (1998), Ompoussa (1998), Itembo (1999) and Mouloungui Nguimbyt (2002) have shown that pupils of various ages and grades at schools learn French more efficiently than any other Gabonese language. Idiata (2008:200 &amp; 2009:126) has also noted that some pupils do not speak any of the Gabonese native languages at all. One of the reasons for this phenomenon (i.e. French being the mother tongue of younger generations) is cross-ethnic marriages.\nIn fact, many couples of mixed ethnicity prefer French rather than Gabonese native languages as the code for better communication within the family. Children from a family of this kind have no choice but to acquire French as their first language. The children learn the language at home from the parents before they even get to school, therefore lessening the chances of learning any of the Gabonese native languages.\nThis urbanisation is also to be considered as a cause for French being the initial language of Gabonese younger generations. In fact, \u201cin certain urban contexts there is a large degree of learning by contact at an early age\u201d (Lafage, 1993:216).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "12031", "revid": "1286505983", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12031", "title": "Politics of Gabon", "text": " \nThe politics of Gabon takes place in a framework of a republic whereby the president of Gabon is head of state and in effect, also the head of government, since he appoints the prime minister and his cabinet. The government is divided into three branches: the executive headed by the prime minister (although previously held by the president), the legislative which is formed by the two chambers of parliament, and the judicial branch. The judicial branch is technically independent and equal to the two other branches, although in practice, since the president appoints its judges, it is beholden to the same president. Since independence, the party system has been dominated by the conservative Gabonese Democratic Party.\n In March 1991, a new constitution was adopted. Among its provisions are a Western-style bill of rights, the creation of the National Council of Democracy that also oversees the guarantee of those rights and a governmental advisory board which deals with economic and social issues. Multi-party legislative elections were held in 1990-91 even though opposition parties were not declared formally legal.\nPolitical developments.\nUnder the 1961 constitution (revised in 1975 and rewritten in 1991), Gabon became a republic with a presidential form of government. The National Assembly of Gabon has 120 deputies elected for five years. The president is elected by universal suffrage for a seven-year term. The president appoints the prime minister, the cabinet, and judges of the independent Supreme court. The government 1990 made major changes in the political system. A transitional constitution was drafted in May as an outgrowth of a national political conference in March\u2013April and later revised by a constitutional committee. Among its provisions were a Western-style bill of rights; creation of a National Council of Democracy, which oversees the guarantee of those rights; a governmental advisory board on economic and social issues; and an independent judiciary. After approval by the National Assembly, the PDG Central Committee, and the president, the Assembly unanimously adopted the constitution in March 1991. Multi-party legislative elections were held in 1990-91, although opposition parties were not declared formally legal.\nAfter a peaceful transition, the elections produced the first representative, multi-party, National Assembly. In January 1991, the Assembly passed by unanimous vote a law governing the legalization of opposition parties. The president was re-elected in a disputed election in 1993 with 51% of the votes cast. Social and political disturbances led to the 1994 Paris Conference and Accords, which provided a framework for the next elections. Local and legislative elections were delayed until 1996\u20131997. In 1997, constitutional amendments were adopted to create an appointed Senate, the position of Vice President, and to extend the president's term to seven years. Facing a divided opposition, President Omar Bongo was re-elected in December 1998, with 66% of the votes cast. Although the main opposition parties claimed the elections had been manipulated, there was none of the civil disturbance that followed the 1993 election. The president retains strong powers, such as the authority to dissolve the National Assembly, declare a state of siege, delay legislation, conduct referendums, and appoint and dismiss the prime minister and cabinet members. For administrative purposes, Gabon is divided into nine provinces, which are further divided into 36 prefectures and eight separate subprefectures. The president appoints the provincial governors, the prefects, and the subprefects.\nPolitical conditions.\nAt the time of Gabon's independence in 1960, two principal political parties existed: the Bloc Democratique Gabonais (BDG), led by Leon M'Ba, and the Union D\u00e9mocratique et Sociale Gabonaise (UDSG), led by Jean-Hilaire Aubame. In the first post-independence election, held under a parliamentary system, neither party was able to win a majority. The BDG obtained support from three of the four independent legislative deputies, and M'Ba was named prime minister. Soon after concluding that Gabon had an insufficient number of people for a two-party system, the two party leaders agreed on a single list of candidates. In the February 1961 election, held under the new presidential system, M'Ba became president and Aubame foreign minister.\nThis coalition appeared to work until February 1963, when the larger BDG forced the UDSG members to choose between a merger of the parties or resignation. The UDSG cabinet ministers resigned, and M'Ba called an election for February 1964 and a reduced number of National Assembly deputies (from 67 to 47). The UDSG failed to muster a list of candidates able to meet the requirements of the electoral decrees. When the BDG appeared likely to win the election by default, the Gabonese military toppled M'Ba in a bloodless coup on February 18, 1964. French troops re-established his government the next day. Elections were held in April with many opposition participants. BDG-supported candidates won 31 seats and the opposition 16. Late in 1966, the constitution was revised to provide for automatic succession of the vice president should the president die in office. In March 1967, Leon M'Ba and Omar Bongo (then Albert Bongo) were elected president and vice president. M'Ba died later that year, and Omar Bongo became president.\nIn March 1968, Bongo declared Gabon a one-party state by dissolving the BDG and establishing a new party\u2014the Gabonese Democratic Party. He invited all Gabonese, regardless of previous political affiliation, to participate. Bongo was elected president in February 1975 and re-elected in December 1979 and November 1986 to seven-year terms. In April 1975, the office of vice president was abolished and replaced by the office of prime minister, who had no right to automatic succession. Under the 1991 constitution, in the event of the president's death, the prime minister, the National Assembly president, and the defence minister share power until a new election is held. Using the PDG as a tool to submerge the regional and tribal rivalries that have divided Gabonese politics in the past, Bongo sought to forge a single national movement in support of the government's development policies.\nOpposition to the PDG continued, however, and in September 1990, two coup attempts were uncovered and aborted. Economic discontent and a desire for political liberalization provoked violent demonstrations and strikes by students and workers in early 1990. In response to grievances by workers, Bongo negotiated with them on a sector-by-sector basis, making significant wage concessions. In addition, he promised to open up the PDG and organize a national political conference in March\u2013April 1990 to discuss Gabon's future political system. The PDG and 74 political organizations attended the conference. Participants essentially divided into two loose coalitions, the ruling PDG and its allies and the United Front of Opposition Associations and Parties, consisting of the breakaway Morena Fundamental and the Gabonese Progress Party.\nThe April conference approved sweeping political reforms, including the creation of a national senate, decentralization of the budgetary process, freedom of assembly and press, and cancellation of the exit visa requirement. In an attempt to guide the political system's transformation into a multi-party democracy, Bongo resigned as PDG chairman and created a transitional government headed by a new Prime Minister, Casimir Oye-Mba. The Gabonese Social Democratic Grouping (RSDG), as the resulting government was called, was smaller than the previous government and included representatives from several opposition parties in its cabinet. The RSDG drafted a provisional constitution that provided a basic bill of rights and an independent judiciary but retained strong executive powers for the president. After further review by a constitutional committee and the National Assembly, this document came into force in March 1991.\nDespite further anti-government demonstrations after the untimely death of an opposition leader, the first multi-party National Assembly elections in almost 30 years took place in September\u2013October 1990, with the PDG garnering a large majority. Following President Bongo's re-election in December 1993 with 51% of the vote, opposition candidates refused to validate the election results. Serious civil disturbances, which were heavily repressed by the presidential guard, led to an agreement between the government and opposition factions to work toward a political settlement. These talks led to the Paris Accords in November 1994, in which several opposition figures were included in a government of national unity. This arrangement soon broke down, and the 1996 and 1997 legislative and municipal elections provided the background for renewed partisan politics. The PDG won a landslide victory in the legislative election, but several major cities, including Libreville, elected opposition mayors during the 1997 local election. President Bongo coasted to an easy re-election in December 1998 with 66% of the vote against a divided opposition. While Bongo's major opponents rejected the outcome as fraudulent, international observers characterized the result as representative, even if the election suffered from serious administrative problems. There was no serious civil disorder or protests following the election, in contrast to the 1993 election.\nPresident Omar Ali Bongo narrowly beat rival Jean Ping in the official results of the presidential election in 2016. With results showing a trend of success for Ping, the final province's results were released after significant delays, showing a remarkable 99.5% support for President Bongo in Haut-Ogooue. This was conveniently just enough to push Ali Bongo into first place. An EU Election Observation Mission present in the country declared that observers had incurred problems accessing the process of vote counting. The right to demonstrate or express oneself was described by the mission as 'restrictive'. The electoral regulations benefitted President Bongo, according to the Mission's report.\nOn 31 August 2023, army officers who seized power, ending the Bongo family's 55-year hold on power, named Gen Brice Oligui Nguema as the country's transitional leader. On 4 September 2023, General Nguema was sworn in as interim president of Gabon. The October 2024 Gabon constitutional referendum is the next development.\nExecutive branch.\nThe president is elected by popular vote for a seven-year term. He appoints the prime minister. The Council of Ministers is appointed by the prime minister in consultation with the president.\nPresident El Hadj Omar Bongo Ondimba, in power since 1967 and the longest-serving African head of state, was re-elected to another seven-year term according to poll results returned from elections held on November 27, 2005. According to figures provided by Gabon's Interior Ministry, this was achieved with 79.1% of the votes cast. In 2003, the President amended the Constitution of Gabon to remove any restrictions on the number of terms a president is allowed to serve. The president retains strong powers, such as the authority to dissolve the National Assembly, declare a state of siege, delay legislation, conduct referendums, and appoint and dismiss the prime minister and cabinet members.\nLegislative branch.\nThe Parliament (\"Parlement\") has two chambers. The National Assembly (\"Assembl\u00e9e Nationale\") has 120 members, 111 members elected for a five-year term in single-seat constituencies and nine members appointed by a head of state - the president. The Senate (\"S\u00e9nat\") has 91 members, elected for a six-year term in single-seat constituencies by local and departmental councillors.\nJudicial branch.\nGabon's Supreme Court or \"Cour Supreme\" consists of three chambers - Judicial, Administrative, and Accounts; Constitutional Court; Courts of Appeal; Court of State Security; County Courts\nAdministrative divisions.\nThere are nine provincial administrations. These are headquartered in Estuaire, Haut-Ogooue, Moyen-Ogooue, Ngounie, Nyanga, Ogoou\u00e9-Ivindo, Ogoou\u00e9-Lolo, Ogooue-Maritime and Woleu-Ntem.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12032", "revid": "51053025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12032", "title": "Economy of Gabon", "text": "The economy of Gabon is characterized by strong links with France, large foreign investments, dependence on skilled foreign labor, and decline of agriculture. Gabon on paper enjoys a per capita income four times that of most nations of Africa, but its reliance on resource extraction industry fail to release much of the population from extreme poverty, as much of 30% of the population lives under the poverty threshold (Many Foreign Guest Workers). Gabon has a free market economy, while other sources claim that Gabon has a mixed economic system with a heavy reliance on oil, combined with relatively weak centralized economic planning and government regulation.\nResources.\nThe country is rich in natural resources such as timber, manganese and oil. The country is the fifth largest oil producing nation in Africa, which has helped drive its strong growth in the later 20th century.\nThe oil sector now accounts for 50% of GDP and 80% of exports. Although there have been recent offshore finds, oil production is now declining from its peak of in 1997, and periods of low oil prices have had a negative impact on government revenues and the economy. In 2012 there were six active oil rigs in Gabon.\nAs of 2023, Gabon produces about 200,000 barrels a day (bpd) of crude oil.\nThe government has plans to diversify its economy away from its dwindling oil reserves. The government announced in 2012 that it would reassess exactly how much iron ore the Belinga site contains before awarding the concession to a mining company, most likely to be China's CMEC, which temporarily secured the rights to the ore in 2007.\nAround 80% of Gabonese live in cities. The capital city, Libreville is home to 59% of the total population. The remainder of the country is still sparsely populated, as those areas remain densely forested.\nStatistics.\nGDP - composition by sector:\n&lt;br&gt;\"agriculture:\"\n5.7%\n&lt;br&gt;\"industry:\"\n53,53%\n&lt;br&gt;\"services:\"\n37% (2008 est.)\nPopulation below poverty line:\nNA%\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\n&lt;br&gt;\"lowest 10%:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"highest 10%:\"\nNA%\nInflation rate (consumer prices):\n5% (2008 est.)\nLabour force:\n592,000 (2008 est.)\nLabour force - by occupation:\nagriculture 60%, services and government 25%, industry and commerce 15% (2000 est.)\nUnemployment rate:\n21% (2006 est.)\nBudget:\n&lt;br&gt;\"revenues:\"\n$4.46 billion\n&lt;br&gt;\"expenditures:\"\n$2.75 billion (2008 est.)\nIndustries:\nfood and beverage; textile; lumbering and plywood; cement; petroleum extraction and refining; manganese, uranium, and gold mining; chemical production; ship repair\nIndustrial production growth rate:\n1.5% (2008)\nOil - production\n (2007 est.)\nOil - consumption\n (2007 est.)\nOil - exports\n (2005 est.)\nOil - imports\n (2005 est.)\nOil - proven reserves\n (1 January 2008 est.)\nNatural gas - production\n100 million cu m (2006 est.)\nNatural gas - consumption\n100 million cu m (2006 est.)\nNatural gas - exports\n0 cu m (2007 est.)\nNatural gas - imports\n0 cu m (2007 est.)\nNatural gas - proven reserves\n28.32 billion cu m (1 January 2008 est.)\nElectricity - production:\n1.671 TWh (2006 est.)\nElectricity - production by source:\n&lt;br&gt;\"fossil fuel:\"\n27.8%\n&lt;br&gt;\"hydro:\"\n72.2%\n&lt;br&gt;\"nuclear:\"\n0%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\n0% (1998)\nElectricity - consumption:\n1.365 GWh (2006 est.)\nElectricity - exports:\n0 kWh (2006 est.)\nElectricity - imports:\n0 kWh (1998)\nAgriculture - products:\ncocoa, coffee, sugar, palm oil, rubber; cattle; okoume (a tropical hardwood); fish\nCurrent account - balance\n$591 million (2010 est.)\nCurrency:\n1 Communaut\u00e9 financi\u00e8re africaine franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes\nExchange rates:\nCommunaut\u00e9 financi\u00e8re africaine francs (CFAF) per US$1 \u2013 507.71 (2010), 472.19 (2009), 447.81 (2008), 481.83 (2007), 522.89 (2006), 647.25 (January 2000), 615.70 (1999), 589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995)\n&lt;br&gt;\"note:\"\nsince 1 January 1999, the CFAF is pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 CFA francs per euro\nStatistics table.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132017.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12033", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12033", "title": "Telecommunications in Gabon", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Gabon include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nRadio and television.\nRadio stations:\nRadios:\n208,000 (1997).\nTelevision stations:\nTelevision sets:\n63,000 (1997).\nThere are two main broadcasters in Gabon. The state broadcaster, Radiodiffusion T\u00e9l\u00e9vision Gabonaise (RTG), operates two main networks - a national network in French and a provincial network in French and vernacular languages. There is also a special programme on RTG's FM frequencies.\nPerhaps the most important station in Gabon and one that many shortwave radio listeners are familiar with is the privately owned Afrique Numero Un (Africa Number One) which operates on FM in the capital, Libreville, area and also broadcasts via shortwave. Afrique Numero Un also has relay stations in mostly French-speaking African countries.\nRadio France Internationale (RFI) has relay stations throughout Gabon. Other privately owned stations also operate in Gabon, though concentrated mostly in the Libreville area.\nLike many former French colonies, Gabon uses the SECAM-K television standard. Two television channels, 4 and 8, are found in the Libreville area. All other channels and repeaters relay channel 4.\nThe constitution and law provide for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights, although the government has suspended newspapers and television stations for disrupting public order or libel.\nTelephones.\nCalling code: +241\nInternational call prefix: 00\nMain lines:\nMobile cellular:\nTelephone system: adequate system of cable, microwave radio relay, tropospheric scatter, radiotelephone communication stations, and a domestic satellite system with 12 earth stations; a growing mobile-cellular network with multiple providers is making telephone service more widely available with mobile-cellular teledensity exceeding 100 per 100 persons.\nSatellite earth stations: 3 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) (2011).\nCommunications cables: South Atlantic 3/West Africa Submarine Cable (SAT-3/WASC) fiber-optic cable system provides connectivity to Europe and Asia; Africa Coast to Europe (ACE), cable system connecting countries along the west coast of Africa to each other and to Portugal and France.\nInternet.\nTop-level domain: .ga\nInternet users: \nFixed broadband:\nIn 2013, http:// with the World Bank to develop the Central African Backbone. Over 1200\u00a0km of fiber optic is deployed around the country. In 2017, over 20 cities and villages are serviced by this new network operated by Axione (Bouygues French company). 70% of the gabonese population can access mobile broadband services.\n5,147 subscriptions, 160th in the world; 0.3% of the population, 154th in the world (2012).\nWireless broadband:\nIntroducing 3G/4G licences in 2014\nUnknown (2012).\nInternet hosts: \nIPv4: 169,472 addresses allocated, less than 0.05% of the world total, 105.4 addresses per 1000 people (2012).\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs):\nSolsi Gabon, TLDC offer a WiMax network all over Libreville and Port-Gentil.\nICTS IN SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AWARDS 2015.\nThrough his leadership of the Gabonese Republic, President Ali Bongo Ondimba has led his nation to receive much international recognition for its commitment to progress in the field of ICT in the Central and Francophone Africa region as well as on the African continent.\nPresident Ali Bongo Ondimba has stressed the necessity of establishing infrastructure, access to ICTs, as well as ameliorating broadband connections in both the public and private sectors, especially within households. President Ondimba has affirmed his position on the importance of ICTs in the development of Gabon, stating during the 2011 Broadband Leadership Summit at ITU Telecom World in Geneva that he promised to make high-speed Internet access an irrevocable right for all Gabonese citizens.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without appropriate legal authority.\nThe constitution and law provide for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights. Libel can be either a criminal offense or a civil matter. Editors and authors of libelous material may be jailed for two to six months and fined 500,000 to five million CFA francs ($1,008 to $10,080). Penalties for libel, disrupting public order, and other offenses also include a one- to three-month publishing suspension for a first offense and a three- to six-month suspension for repeat offenses.\nAlthough the constitution and law prohibit arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, the government does not always respect these prohibitions in practice. As part of criminal investigations, police request and easily obtain search warrants from judges, sometimes after the fact. Authorities reportedly monitor private telephone conversations, personal mail, and the movement of citizens.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12034", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12034", "title": "Transport in Gabon", "text": "Transportation of Gabon \nModes of transport in Gabon include rail, road, water and air. The one rail link, the Trans-Gabon Railway, connects the port of Owendo with the inland town of Franceville. While most of the country is connected by roads, not all areas are accessible. Much of the road network remains unpaved, and it primarily revolves around seven \"national routes\" labeled N1 through N7. The largest seaports are Port-Gentil and the newer Owendo, and 1,600\u00a0km of inland waterways are navigable. There are three international airports, eight other paved airports, and over 40 with unpaved runways. Nearly 300\u00a0km of pipelines carry petroleum products, mainly crude oil.\nRail transport.\nUntil the 1970s, Gabon had no permanent railroads, though temporary Decauville rail tracks were in use in the logging industry as early as 1913 (Gray and Ngolet, 1999, pp.102). \nIn 2003, the railway began the process of installing a satellite based telecommunications system. As of 2004, Gabon State Railways totalled 814\u00a0km of standard-gauge track.\n\"total:\" 814\u00a0km (Gabon State Railways or OCTRA)\"standard gauge:\" 814\u00a0km 1.435-m gauge; single track (1994)\n2006.\nhttp://\nRoad transport.\n\"total:\"\n7,670\u00a0km\n\"paved:\"\n629\u00a0km (including 30\u00a0km of expressways)\n\"unpaved:\"\n7,041\u00a0km (1996 est.)\nRoads in Gabon link most areas of the country, and many of the main roads are of a reasonable standard. However, remoter areas along the coast and in the east are often not connected to the road network. Major roads are denoted national routes and numbered, with a prefix \"N\" (sometimes \"RN\"):\nWater transport.\nMerchant marine.\nAs of 2002, there was one merchant marine vessel, with a gross tonnage of 2,419/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT).\nWaterways.\nGabon has 1,600\u00a0km of perennially navigable waterways, including 310\u00a0km on the Ogoou\u00e9 River.\nAir transport.\nThere are three international airports: Libreville, Port-Gentil, and Franceville. \nAirports - with paved runways.\n\"total:\"\n11\n\"over 3,047 m:\"\n1\n\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\"\n1\n\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n8\n\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n1 (1999 est.)\nAirports - with unpaved runways.\n\"total:\"\n45\n\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n9\n\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n16\n\"under 914 m:\"\n25 (1999 est.)\nPipelines.\nCrude oil 270\u00a0km; petroleum products 14\u00a0km\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12035", "revid": "44522647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12035", "title": "Armed Forces of Gabon", "text": "The Armed Forces of Gabon (), officially the Gabonese Defense and Security Forces (), is the national professional military of Gabon, divided into the Army, Air Force, Navy, and a National Gendarmerie, consisting of about 5,000 personnel. The armed forces includes a well-trained, well-equipped 1,800-member guard that provides security for the President of Gabon. Although the President of Gabon has authority over all of the armed forces, the Ministry of National Defense administers it. \nOrganizational structure.\nArmy.\nThe Gabonese Army () is the land component of the armed forces, specializing in infantry and mechanized reconnaissance. It was created on December 6, 1960, by decree of president L\u00e9on M'ba from non-commissioned officers who served in the French colonial army, mainly the 2nd company of the 21st BIMA. Following independence, Gabon signed defense agreements with France, mainly on technical assistance and training. Until June 1964, the title of Chief of Staff of the Gabonese Armed Forces was held by a senior French Army officer. In 1962 a detachment of the Auxiliary Women of the Gabonese Armed Forces (AFFAG), commanded by Lieutenant Ba Oumar at the military camp of Owendo, was created. President M'ba promoted the initiative following a visit to Tel Aviv, Israel, where he met female staff in its Defense Forces.\nNavy.\nThe Gabonese Navy () is the official maritime branch of the armed forces. It was created in December 1960 as part of the army, and only became an independent entity in 1983. The navy's core purpose is to monitor the country's coastal waters, including 800\u00a0km of coastline.\nOther security forces.\nNational Gendarmerie.\nThe National Gendarmerie of Gabon (\"Gendarmerie nationale gabonaise\") is the national police force of Gabon responsible for law enforcement in the country. It was formed on March 10, 1960, when Gabon, formerly French Equatorial Africa, gained its independence from France. It originated from Libreville Gendarmerie Detachment 1929, which was commanded by Governor General of French Equatorial Africa, F\u00e9lix Eboue. The main tasks of the gendarmerie are to defend the country's borders, ensure public safety, and to enforce actions taken by judicial and government authorities. The National Gendarmerie is under the direct command of the President of Gabon.\nRepublican Guard.\nThe Gendarmerie is also in charge of the Republican Guard (). It is viewed as the most powerful and sophisticated of the security forces. It is primarily tasked with protecting the president and ensures regime stability.\nEquipment.\nRetired aircraft.\nPrevious aircraft operated were the CM.170 Magister, Embraer EMB 110, Fokker F28, A\u00e9rospatiale N 262, Reims C.337, and the Alouette II helicopter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12036", "revid": "50759343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12036", "title": "Foreign relations of Gabon", "text": " \nGabon has followed a non-aligned policy, advocating dialogue in international affairs and recognizing both parts of divided countries. Since 1973, the number of countries establishing diplomatic relations with Gabon has doubled. In inter-African affairs, Gabon espouses development by evolution rather than revolution and favors regulated free enterprise as the system most likely to promote rapid economic growth. Concerned about stability in Central Africa and the potential for intervention, Gabon has been directly involved with mediation efforts in Chad, Central African Republic, Republic of Congo, Angola, and former Zaire. In December 1999, through the mediation efforts of President Bongo, a peace accord was signed in the Republic of Congo between the government and most leaders of an armed rebellion. President Bongo has remained involved in the continuing Congolese peace process. Gabon has been a strong proponent of regional stability, and Gabonese armed forces played an important role in the UN Peacekeeping Mission to the Central African Republic (MINURCA).\nGabon is a member of the UN and some of its specialized and related agencies, including the World Bank; Organisation of African Unity (OAU); Central African Customs Union (UDEAC/CEMAC); EC association under Lom\u00e9 Convention; Communaute Financiere Africaine (CFA); Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC); Non-Aligned Movement; Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC).\nGabon is also a member of the International Criminal Court with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the US-military (as covered under Article 98).\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Gabon maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
