{"id": "18049", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18049", "title": "Livy", "text": "Roman historian (59 BC \u2013 AD 17)\nTitus Livius (; 59 BC \u2013 AD 17), known in English as Livy ( ), was a Roman historian. He wrote a monumental history of Rome and the Roman people, titled , covering the period from the earliest legends of Rome before the traditional founding in 753 BC through the reign of Augustus in Livy's own lifetime. He was on good terms with members of the Julio-Claudian dynasty and was a friend of Augustus. Livy encouraged Augustus\u2019s young grandnephew, the future emperor Claudius, to take up the writing of history.\nLife.\nLivy was born in Patavium in northern Italy, now modern Padua, probably in 59 BC. At the time of his birth, his home city of Patavium was the second wealthiest on the Italian peninsula, and the largest in the province of Cisalpine Gaul (northern Italy). Cisalpine Gaul was merged into Italy proper during his lifetime and its inhabitants were given Roman citizenship by Julius Caesar. In his works, Livy often expressed his deep affection and pride for Patavium, and the city was well known for its conservative values in morality and politics.\nLivy's teenage years were during the 40s\u00a0BC, a period of civil wars throughout the Roman world. The governor of Cisalpine Gaul at the time, Asinius Pollio, tried to sway Patavium into supporting Marcus Antonius (Mark Antony), the leader of one of the warring factions during Caesar's civil war (49\u201345\u00a0BC). The wealthy citizens of Patavium refused to contribute money and arms to Asinius Pollio, and went into hiding. Pollio then attempted to bribe the slaves of those wealthy citizens to expose the whereabouts of their masters; his bribery did not work, and the citizens instead pledged their allegiance to the Senate. It is therefore likely that the Roman civil wars prevented Livy from pursuing a higher education in Rome or going on a tour of Greece, which was common for adolescent males of the nobility at the time. Many years later, Asinius Pollio derisively commented on Livy's \"patavinity\", saying that Livy's Latin showed certain \"provincialisms\" frowned on at Rome. Pollio's dig may have been the result of bad feelings he harboured toward the city of Patavium from his experiences there during the civil wars.\nLivy probably went to Rome in the 30s BC, and it is likely that he spent a large amount of time in the city after this, although it may not have been his primary home. During his time in Rome, he was never a senator nor held a government position. His writings contain elementary mistakes on military matters, indicating that he probably never served in the Roman army. However, he was educated in philosophy and rhetoric. It seems that Livy had the financial resources and means to live an independent life, though the origin of that wealth is unknown. He devoted a large part of his life to his writings, which he was able to do because of his financial freedom.\nLivy was known to give recitations to small audiences, but he was not heard of to engage in declamation, then a common pastime. He was familiar with the emperor Augustus and the imperial family. Augustus was considered by later Romans to have been the greatest Roman emperor, benefiting Livy's reputation long after his death. Suetonius described how Livy encouraged the future emperor Claudius, who was born in 10 BC, to write historiographical works during his childhood.\nLivy's most famous work was his history of Rome. In it he narrates a complete history of the city of Rome, from its foundation to the death of Augustus. Because he was writing under the reign of Augustus, Livy's history emphasizes the great triumphs of Rome. He wrote his history with embellished accounts of Roman heroism in order to promote the new type of government implemented by Augustus when he became emperor. In the preface to his history Livy wrote that he did not care whether his personal fame remained in darkness, as long as his work helped to \"preserve the memory of the deeds of the world\u2019s preeminent nation.\" Because Livy was mostly writing about events that had occurred hundreds of years earlier, the historical value of his work was questionable, although many Romans came to believe his account to be true.\nLivy was married and had at least one daughter and one son. He also produced other works, including an essay in the form of a letter to his son, and numerous dialogues, most likely modelled on similar works by Cicero. One of his sons wrote a book on geography and a daughter married Lucius Magius, a rhetorician.\nTitus Livius died at his home city of Patavium in AD 17. The tombstone of Livy and his wife might have been found in Padua.\nWorks.\nLivy's only surviving work is commonly known as \"History of Rome\" (or ). Together with Polybius it is considered one of the main accounts of the Second Punic War.\nWhen he began this work he was already past his youth, probably 33; presumably, events in his life prior to that time had led to his intense activity as a historian. He continued working on it until he left Rome for Padua in his old age, probably in the reign of Tiberius after the death of Augustus. Seneca the Younger says he was an orator and philosopher and had written some historical treatises in those fields.\n\"History of Rome\" also served as the driving force behind the \"northern theory\" regarding the Etruscans' origins. This is because in the book Livy states, \"The Greeks also call them the 'Tyrrhene' and the 'Adriatic\u00a0... The Alpine tribes are undoubtedly of the same kind, especially the Raetii, who had through the nature of their country become so uncivilized that they retained no trace of their original condition except their language, and even this was not free from corruption\". Thus, many scholars, like Karl Otfried M\u00fcller, utilized this statement as evidence that the Etruscans or the Tyrrhenians migrated from the north and were descendants of an Alpine tribe known as the Raeti.\nReception.\nImperial era.\nLivy's \"History of Rome\" was in high demand from the time it was published and remained so during the early years of the empire. Pliny the Younger reported that Livy's celebrity was so widespread, a man from C\u00e1diz travelled to Rome and back for the sole purpose of meeting him. Livy's work was a source for the later works of Aurelius Victor, Cassiodorus, Eutropius, Festus, Florus, Granius Licinianus and Orosius. Julius Obsequens used Livy, or a source with access to Livy, to compose his \"De Prodigiis\", an account of supernatural events in Rome from the consulship of Scipio and Laelius to that of Paulus Fabius and Quintus Aelius.\nLivy wrote during the reign of Augustus, who came to power after a civil war with generals and consuls claiming to be defending the Roman Republic, such as Pompey. Patavium had been pro-Pompey. To clarify his status, the victor of the civil war, Octavian Caesar, had wanted to take the title \"Romulus\" (the first king of Rome) but in the end accepted the senate proposal of \"Augustus\". Rather than abolishing the republic, he adapted it and its institutions to imperial rule.\nThe historian Tacitus, writing about a century after Livy's time, described the Emperor Augustus as his friend. Describing the trial of Cremutius Cordus, Tacitus represents him as defending himself face-to-face with the frowning Tiberius as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am said to have praised Brutus and Cassius, whose careers many have described and no one mentioned without eulogy. Titus Livius, pre-eminently famous for eloquence and truthfulness, extolled Cn. Pompeius in such a panegyric that Augustus called him Pompeianus, and yet this was no obstacle to their friendship.\nLivy's reasons for returning to Padua after the death of Augustus (if he did) are unclear, but the circumstances of Tiberius's reign certainly allow for speculation.\nLater.\nDuring the Middle Ages, due to the length of the work, the literate class was already reading summaries rather than the work itself, which was tedious to copy, expensive, and required a lot of storage space. It must have been during this period, if not before, that manuscripts began to be lost without replacement. The Renaissance was a time of intense revival; the population discovered that Livy's work was being lost and large amounts of money changed hands in the rush to collect Livian manuscripts. The poet Beccadelli sold a country home for funding to purchase one manuscript copied by Poggio. Petrarch and Pope Nicholas V launched a search for the now missing books. Laurentius Valla published an amended text initiating the field of Livy scholarship. Dante speaks highly of him in his poetry, and Francis I of France commissioned extensive artwork treating Livian themes; Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli's work on republics, the \"Discourses on Livy\", is presented as a commentary on the \"History of Rome\". Respect for Livy rose to lofty heights. Walter Scott reports in \"Waverley\" (1814) as an historical fact that a Scotsman involved in the first Jacobite uprising of 1715 was recaptured (and executed) because, having escaped, he yet lingered near the place of his captivity in \"the hope of recovering his favourite \"Titus Livius\"\".\nDates.\nThe authority supplying information from which possible vital data on Livy can be deduced is Eusebius of Caesarea, a bishop of the early Christian Church. One of his works was a summary of world history in ancient Greek, termed the \"Chronikon,\" dating from the early 4th century AD. This work was lost except for fragments (mainly excerpts), but not before it had been translated in whole and in part by various authors such as St. Jerome. The entire work survives in two separate manuscripts, Armenian and Greek (Christesen and Martirosova-Torlone 2006). St. Jerome wrote in Latin. Fragments in Syriac exist.\nEusebius' work consists of two books: the \"Chronographia\", a summary of history in annalist form, and the \"Chronikoi Kanones\", tables of years and events. St. Jerome translated the tables into Latin as the \"Chronicon\", probably adding some information of his own from unknown sources. Livy's dates appear in \"Jerome's Chronicon.\"\nThe main problem with the information given in the manuscripts is that, between them, they often give different dates for the same events or different events, do not include the same material entirely, and reformat what they do include. A date may be in \"Ab Urbe Condita\" or in Olympiads or in some other form, such as age. These variations may have occurred through scribal error or scribal license. Some material has been inserted under the aegis of Eusebius.\nThe topic of manuscript variants is a large and specialized one, on which authors of works on Livy seldom care to linger. As a result, standard information in a standard rendition is used, which gives the impression of a standard set of dates for Livy. There are no such dates. A typical presumption is of a birth in the 2nd year of the 180th Olympiad and a death in the first year of the 199th Olympiad, which are coded 180.2 and 199.1 respectively. All sources use the same first Olympiad, 776/775\u2013773/772 BC by the modern calendar. By a complex formula (made so by the 0 reference point not falling on the border of an Olympiad), these codes correspond to 59 BC for the birth, 17 AD for the death. In another manuscript the birth is in 180.4, or 57 BC.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCultural references.\nActor Denis Carey portrayed Livy in the mini-series \"I, Claudius\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18051", "revid": "42829838", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18051", "title": "Labour Day", "text": "Annual holiday to celebrate the achievements of workers\nLabour Day is an official public holiday in many countries. The actual date of the holiday can vary, as the map illustrates. For instance, in North America, it is celebrated on the first Monday in September. In other parts of the world, it is often celebrated on the first Monday in May. It is an annual day of celebration of the labour movement and the institution of achievements. It has its origins in the labour union movement, specifically the eight-hour day movement, which advocated eight hours for work, eight hours for recreation, and eight hours for rest.\nIn most countries, Labour Day is synonymous with, or linked with, International Workers' Day, which happens on 1 May, although celebrated on the first Monday in September in North America. It was originally chosen to commemorate the 1886 general strike which culminated in the Haymarket affair. In most countries Labour Day is celebrated either on the first Monday in September or on 1 May as indicated in global map. Labour Day is a public / statutory holiday as indicated.\nInternational Workers' Day.\nFor many countries, \"Labour Day\" is synonymous with, or linked with, International Workers' Day, which occurs on 1 May. International Workers' Day commemorates the 1886 Haymarket affair in Chicago, when there was a general strike for the eight-hour workday.\nSome countries have a holiday at or around this date, but it is not a Labour Day celebration. Others celebrate Labour Day on the first Monday after 1 May.\nOther dates.\nAustralia.\nLabour Day is a public holiday in Australia on dates which vary between states and territories. In some states the date commemorates the Eight Hours Day march (see below). It is the first Monday in October in the Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales and South Australia. In Victoria and Tasmania, it is the second Monday in March (though the latter calls it the Eight Hours Day). In Western Australia, Labour Day is the first Monday in March. In Queensland and the Northern Territory, Labour Day occurs on the first Monday in May (though the latter calls it May Day). It is on the fourth Monday of March in the territory of Christmas Island.\nVictoria.\nThe first march for an eight-hour day by the labour movement occurred in Melbourne on 21 April 1856. On this day, stonemasons and building workers on building sites around Melbourne stopped work and marched from the University of Melbourne to Parliament House to achieve an eight-hour day. Their direct action protest was a success, and they are noted as being among the first organised workers in the world to achieve an eight-hour day, with no loss of pay.\nQueensland.\nLabour Day was first celebrated with a public holiday in Queensland in 1865 as Eight Hours Celebration Day. It occurred on 1 March (Saint David's Day) and celebrated the winning of an eight-hour work day by Brisbane workers in 1858. The date was moved to May Day around 1896, in solidarity with the attack on United States workers on the first May Day parade in the Haymarket affair. In 1901, the holiday was moved to the first Monday in May, to ensure a long weekend.\nBangladesh.\nBangladesh Garment Sramik Sanghati, an organisation working for the welfare of garment workers, has requested that 24 April be declared Labour Safety Day in Bangladesh, in memory of the victims of the 2013 Rana Plaza collapse. However, Bangladesh does observe May Day on 1 May.\nThe Bahamas.\nLabour Day is a national holiday in The Bahamas, celebrated on the first Friday in June in order to create a long weekend for workers. The traditional date of Labour Day in The Bahamas, however, is 7 June, in commemoration of a significant workers' strike that began on that day in 1942. Labour Day is meant to honour and celebrate workers and the importance of their contributions to the nation and society. In the capital city, Nassau, thousands of people come to watch a parade through the streets, which begins at mid-morning. Bands in colourful uniforms, traditional African Junkanoo performers, and members of various labour unions and political parties are all part of the procession, which ends up at the Southern Recreation Grounds, where government officials make speeches for the occasion.\nCanada.\nLabour Day () has been marked as a statutory public holiday in Canada on the first Monday in September since 1894. Its origins can be traced back to numerous local demonstrations and celebrations in earlier decades. Such events assumed political significance when a labour demonstration in Toronto in April 1872, in support of striking printers, led directly to the enactment of the Trade Union Act, a law that confirmed the legality of unions. On 22 July 1882, a labour celebration in Toronto attracted the attention of American labour leader Peter J. McGuire, who organised a similar parade in New York City on 5 September that year. Labour parades were held in several Canadian cities that day as well.\nUnions associated with the Knights of Labor and the American Federation of Labor in both Canada and the United States subsequently promoted parades and festivals on the first Monday in September. In Canada, local celebrations took place in Hamilton, Oshawa, Montreal, St. Catharines, Halifax, Ottawa, Vancouver and London during these years. Montreal declared a civic holiday in 1889. In Nova Scotia, coal miners had been holding picnics and parades since 1880 to celebrate the anniversary of their union, the Provincial Workmen's Association, first organised in 1879.\nIn addition, in 1889, the Royal Commission on the Relations of Labour and Capital in Canada, chaired by James Sherrard Armstrong (1886\u201388) and Augustus Toplady Freed (1888\u201389), recommended recognition of an official \"labour day\" by the federal government. In March and April 1894, unions lobbied Parliament to recognise Labour Day as a public holiday. Legislation was introduced in May by prime minister Sir John Thompson and received royal assent in July 1894.\nChina.\n1 May is a statutory holiday in the People's Republic of China. It was a three-day holiday until 2008, but was only one day after 2008. However, the actual time off is often longer than the time off in the regulations, and the extra time off is usually supplemented by another two weekends, but since the extra time is not under an official holiday, the extra days must be \"made up\" by working on the preceding or following weekend. For example, in 2013, 1 May fell on Wednesday. Most workplaces, including all government offices, took 29 April (Monday) to 1 May (Wednesday) as days off. As the first two days were not statutory holidays, they had to be \"made up\" by working the preceding weekend (27 and 28 April).\nHong Kong S.A.R..\nLabour Day, observed 1 May, has been considered a public holiday in Hong Kong since 1999.\nIndia.\nThe first Labour Day was celebrated in India on 1 May 1923, in Chennai (then known as Madras), organised by the Labour Kisan Party of Hindustan.\nJamaica.\nLabour Day in Jamaica has a rich history tied to the struggles of the working class and the country's shift away from colonial traditions. Originally, 24 May was observed as Empire Day, celebrating Queen Victoria's birthday. In British history, she was credited with granting enslaved people in the colonies their freedom. Empire Day was widely observed across the Commonwealth, including Jamaica, but as the country moved toward independence, there was growing sentiment to replace it with something more reflective of Jamaica's own labour struggles.\nPremier Norman Manley led this change in 1960 by introducing a bill to abolish Empire Day and replace it with Labour Day to commemorate the 1938 labour strikes. These strikes were a turning point in Jamaican history, as grossly underpaid workers across the island organized in protest. By 23 May 1938, public sector and transport workers in Kingston had joined the movement, halting activity in the capital. The unrest led to 46 deaths, 429 injuries, and numerous arrests, marking a major push for labour rights in the country. Manley's proposal to commemorate these events gained unanimous support in Parliament, officially establishing Labour Day on 23 May.\nIn the 1960s, Labour Day celebrations were heavily tied to politics, with the two major trade unions\u2014the Bustamante Industrial Trade Union (JLP) and the National Workers Union (PNP)\u2014leading marches and rallies in Kingston. However, these events often turned violent. In 1962, a politically motivated clash during a Labour Day march resulted in the death of a woman and injuries to several police officers, who resorted to using tear gas to control the crowd. Additional conflicts in 1966 led authorities to ban Labour Day marches in Kingston, marking a shift in how the holiday was observed.\nIt was Prime Minister Michael Manley who redefined Labour Day in 1972 with the theme \u201cPut Work into Labour Day.\u201d Rather than focusing on rallies and marches, Manley encouraged Jamaicans to actively participate in community projects. His vision emphasized the role of labour in nation-building, inspiring voluntary efforts across the island. The first national project focused on beautifying the Palisadoes Road, with Manley himself participating in tree planting. The response was overwhelming, with 600 projects completed that year, cementing Labour Day as a day of national pride and community service.\nHowever, this momentum slowed under Prime Minister Edward Seaga in 1980, when large-scale Labour Day activities were halted, leading to an eight-year absence of organized projects. It was not until 1989, when Michael Manley returned to office, that Labour Day was fully revived. The Jamaican government began introducing themes to guide national activities, ensuring that community development remained central to the celebrations. Since then, Labour Day has continued as a tradition that blends historical remembrance with civic responsibility.\nJapan.\nA public holiday in Japan, Labour Day is officially conflated with Thanksgiving on 23 November, as Labor Thanksgiving Day.\nKazakhstan.\nLabour Day, a public holiday in Kazakhstan, is celebrated on the last Sunday in September. The holiday was officially established in late 2013. In 1995, the government of Kazakhstan replaced International Workers' Day with Kazakhstan People's Unity Day. Kazakh president Nursultan Nazarbayev also instituted a special medal that is awarded to veterans of labour on the occasion of the holiday. Labour Day it is widely celebrated across the country with official speeches, award ceremonies, cultural events, etc. It is a non-working holiday for most citizens of Kazakhstan because it always falls on a weekend.\nKenya.\nA public holiday in Kenya, Labour Day is commemorated monthly. This celebration is usually marked with song and dance as Kenyans gather at designated locations to celebrate and listen to speeches from the leadership of the country. Francis Atwoli, Secretary General of the Central Organization of Trade Unions (COTU) has been vocal in spearheading the celebrations in the country while advocating for favourable working conditions for the Kenyan people.\nMacau S.A.R..\nIn Macau, 1 May is a public holiday and is officially known as (Portuguese for 'Workers' Day').\nMalaysia.\nOn 1 May, people in Malaysia take the time to remember the economic and social accomplishments of the labour movement.\nAlso known as May Day, this public holiday is sometimes celebrated with groups organising parades, rallies or both, to promote and protect workers' rights.\nNew Zealand.\nLabour Day () is a public holiday in New Zealand and is held on the fourth Monday in October. Its origins are traced back to the eight-hour working day movement that arose in the newly founded Wellington colony in 1840, primarily because of carpenter Samuel Duncan Parnell's refusal to work more than eight hours a day. That year, Parnell reportedly told a prospective employer: \"There are twenty-four hours per day given us; eight of these should be for work, eight for sleep, and the remaining eight for recreation\".\nThe first Labour Day in New Zealand was celebrated on 28 October 1890, which marked the first anniversary of the Maritime Council, an organisation of transport and mining unions. Several thousand trade union members and supporters attended parades in the main city centres. Government employees were given the day off to attend, and many businesses closed for at least part of the day. Initially, the day was variously called Labour Day or Labour Demonstration Day.\nIn 1899, the government legislated that the day be a public holiday through the Labour Day Act of 1899. The day was set as the second Wednesday in October and first celebrated the following year, in 1900. In 1910, the holiday was moved to the fourth Monday in October.\nPakistan.\nLabour Day, or \"Youm-e-Mazdoor\", is observed in Pakistan on 1 May as a public holiday to recognize the contributions and rights of workers. Officially declared a holiday in 1972 under Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, it was part of the country's first labor policy, which also introduced welfare initiatives for workers. The day is marked by rallies, seminars, and demonstrations organized by trade unions to highlight labor issues such as fair wages and safe working conditions. Government offices, banks, and many businesses remain closed in observance.\nPoland.\nLabour Day is a public holiday in Poland, celebrated on 1 May. Together with Polish National Flag Day on 2 May and Constitution Day on 3 May \u2013 the latter also being a public holiday, coinciding with the Catholic holiday of The Most Holy Virgin Mary, Queen of Poland \u2013 it typically forms a long May weekend, referred to as \"maj\u00f3wka\", widely regarded as the informal start of the spring outdoor leisure season, marked with picnics, barbecues, local events and travel.\nPhilippines.\nIn the Philippines, Labor Day is a public holiday commemorated nationwide on 1 May. Initially observed in 1903 through a protest by the Uni\u00f3n Obrera Democr\u00e1tica Filipina in Manila during the American colonial era, it was officially recognised as a holiday in 1908, with the first official commemoration taking place in 1913.\nSwitzerland.\nIn Switzerland, Labour Day on 1 May is not a federal holiday across the entire country, but several of the Swiss cantons have made it one of their cantonal holidays. In the Canton of Fribourg, it is traditional for children to go singing at people's doors in exchange for sweets and money.\nTaiwan.\nLabour Day, observed 1 May, in Taiwan, is an official holiday, though not everybody gets a day off. Public servants, teachers and students do not have this day off.\nTajikistan.\nLabour Day was celebrated on 1 May in the Soviet Union, and the tradition lives on in Tajikistan as International Labour Day Although Labour Day is a working day, folk festivals, performances and fairs organised throughout the country create a holiday atmosphere.\nTrinidad and Tobago.\nIn Trinidad and Tobago, Labour Day is celebrated every 19 June. This public holiday was proposed in 1973 to be commemorated on the anniversary of the labour riots led by Tubal Uriah Butler in 1937, part of the British West Indian labour unrest of 1934\u20131939.\nTurkey.\nIn Turkey, \"Labour and Solidarity Day\" () became an official holiday in 2009. Prior to that, the day had been observed by workers and unions but had been banned for many years after the 1980 military coup. The turning point came in 2009, when the Turkish government, led by Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan, officially recognized 1 May as a public holiday again. Demonstrations at Taksim Square carries historical significance due to the Taksim Square Massacre on 1 May 1977.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, Labor Day is a federal holiday and public holiday observed on the first Monday of September. It is customarily viewed as the end of the summer vacation season. Many schools open for the year on the day after Labor Day. https:// can be traced back to 1872.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18053", "revid": "1558654", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18053", "title": "Bodyline", "text": "Cricket bowling technique\nBodyline, also known as fast leg theory bowling, was a cricketing tactic devised by the English cricket team for their 1932\u201333 Ashes tour of Australia. It was designed to combat the extraordinary batting skill of Australia's leading batsman, Don Bradman. A bodyline delivery was one in which the cricket ball was bowled at pace, aimed at the body of the batsman in the expectation that when he defended himself with his bat, a resulting deflection could be caught by one of several fielders deliberately placed nearby on the leg side.\nAt the time, no helmets or other upper-body protective gear was worn, and critics of the tactic considered it intimidating, and physically threatening in a game traditionally supposed to uphold conventions of sportsmanship. The England team's use of the tactic was perceived by some, both in Australia and England, as overly aggressive or even unfair. It caused a controversy that rose to such a level that it threatened diplomatic relations between the two countries before the situation was calmed.\nAlthough no serious injuries arose from any short-pitched deliveries while a leg theory field was set, the tactic led to considerable ill feeling between the two teams, particularly when Australian batsmen were struck, inflaming spectators. After the introduction of helmets, short-pitched fast bowling, sometimes exceeding , continues to be permitted in cricket, even when aimed at the batsman, and is considered to be a legitimate bowling tactic when used sparingly. Over time, several Laws of Cricket were changed to render the bodyline tactic less effective\u2014and increase player safety\u2014such as a legside field restriction, concussion breaks and inspections.\nDefinition and etymology.\nBodyline is a tactic devised for and primarily used in the Ashes series between England and Australia in 1932\u201333. The tactic involved bowling at the leg stump or just outside it, but pitching the ball short so that, on bouncing, it reared up threateningly at the body of a batsman standing in an orthodox batting position. A ring of fielders ranged on the leg side would catch any defensive deflection from the bat. The batsman's options were to evade the ball through ducking or moving aside, allow the ball to strike his body, or attempt to play the ball with his bat. The last course carried additional risks, as defensive shots brought few runs and could carry far enough to be caught by fielders on the leg side, and pull and hook shots could be caught near the boundary of the field where two men were usually placed for such a shot.\nBodyline bowling is intended to be intimidatory, and it was primarily designed as an attempt to curb the unusually prolific scoring of Don Bradman, although other Australian batsmen such as Bill Woodfull, Bill Ponsford, and Alan Kippax were also targeted.\nSeveral terms were used to describe this style of bowling before the name 'bodyline' was used. Among the first to use it was the writer and former Australian Test cricketer Jack Worrall in the match between the English team and an Australian XI. When 'bodyline' was first used in full, he referred to \"half-pitched slingers on the body line\" and first used it in print after the first Test. Other writers used a similar phrase around this time, but the first use of 'bodyline' in print seems to have been by the journalist Hugh Buggy in the Melbourne \"Herald\", in his report on the first day's play of the first Test.\nGenesis.\nLeg theory bowling.\nIn the 19th century, most cricketers considered it unsportsmanlike to bowl the ball at the leg stump or for batsmen to hit on the leg side. But by the early years of the 20th century, some bowlers, usually slow or medium-paced, used leg theory as a tactic; the ball was aimed outside the line of leg stump and the fielders placed on that side of the field, the object being to test the batsman's patience and force a rash stroke. Two English left-arm bowlers, George Hirst in 1903\u201304 and Frank Foster in 1911\u201312, bowled leg theory to packed leg side fields in Test matches in Australia; Warwick Armstrong also used it regularly for Australia. In the years immediately before the First World War, several bowlers used leg theory in English county cricket. Amongst these was the South African Basil Melle, who utilised leg theory bowling playing for Oxford University during the 1913 season, in which he took 55 wickets and in The University Match dominated the Cambridge University batsmen.\nWhen cricket resumed after the war, few bowlers maintained the tactic, which was unpopular with spectators owing to its negativity. Fred Root, the Worcestershire bowler, used it regularly and with considerable success in county cricket. Root later defended the use of leg theory\u2014and bodyline\u2014observing that when bowlers bowled outside off stump, the batsmen always had the option to let the ball pass them without playing a shot, so they could scarcely complain.\nSome fast bowlers experimented with leg theory prior to 1932, sometimes accompanying the tactic with short-pitched bowling. In 1925, Australian Jack Scott first bowled a form of what would later have been called bodyline in a state match for New South Wales; his captain Herbie Collins disliked it and would not let him use it again. Other Australian captains were less particular, including Vic Richardson, who asked the South Australian bowler Lance Gun to use it in 1925, and later let Scott use it when he moved to South Australia. Scott repeated the tactics against the MCC in 1928\u201329. In 1927, in a Test trial match, \"Nobby\" Clark bowled short to a leg-trap (a cluster of fielders placed close on the leg side). He was representing England in a side captained by Douglas Jardine. In 1928\u201329, Harry Alexander bowled fast leg theory at an England team, and Harold Larwood briefly used a similar tactic on that same tour in two Test matches. Freddie Calthorpe, the England captain, criticised Learie Constantine's use of short-pitched bowling to a leg side field in a Test match in 1930; one such ball struck Andy Sandham, but Constantine only reverted to more conventional tactics after a complaint from the England team.\nDon Bradman.\nThe Australian cricket team toured England in 1930. Australia won the five-Test series 2\u20131, and Bradman scored 974 runs at a batting average of 139.14, an aggregate record that still stands to this day. By the time of the next Ashes series of 1932\u201333, Bradman's average hovered around 100, approximately twice that of all other world-class batsmen. The English cricket authorities felt that specific tactics would be required to curtail Bradman from being even more successful on his own Australian pitches; some believed that Bradman was at his most vulnerable against leg-spin bowling as Walter Robins and Ian Peebles had supposedly caused him problems; consequently two leg-spinners were included in the English touring party of 1932\u201333.\nGradually, the idea developed that Bradman was possibly vulnerable to pace bowling. In the final Test of the 1930 Ashes series, while he was batting, the pitch became briefly difficult following rain. Bradman was observed to be uncomfortable facing deliveries which bounced higher than usual at a faster pace, being seen to consistently step back out of the line of the ball. Former England player and Surrey captain Percy Fender was one who noticed this, and the incident was much discussed by cricketers. Given that Bradman scored 232, it was not initially thought that a way to curb his prodigious scoring had been found. When Douglas Jardine later saw film footage of the Oval incident and noticed Bradman's discomfort, according to his daughter he shouted, \"I've got it! He's yellow!\" The theory of Bradman's vulnerability developed further when Fender received correspondence from Australia in 1932, describing how Australian batsmen were increasingly moving across the stumps towards the off side to play the ball on the on side. Fender showed these letters to his Surrey team-mate Jardine when it became clear that Jardine was to captain the English team in Australia during the 1932\u201333 tour, and he also discussed Bradman's discomfort at the Oval. It was also known in England that Bradman was dismissed for a four-ball duck by fast bowler Eddie Gilbert, and had looked very uncomfortable. Bradman had also appeared uncomfortable against the pace of Sandy Bell in his innings of 299 not out at the Adelaide Oval in South Africa's tour of Australia earlier in 1932, when the desperate bowler decided to bowl short to him, and fellow South African Herbie Taylor, according to Jack Fingleton, may have mentioned this to English cricketers in 1932. Fender felt Bradman might be vulnerable to fast, short-pitched deliveries on the line of leg stump. Jardine felt that Bradman was nervous about standing his ground against intimidatory bowling, citing instances in 1930 when he shuffled about, contrary to orthodox batting technique.\nDouglas Jardine.\nJardine's first experience against Australia came when he scored an unbeaten 96 to secure a draw against the 1921 Australian touring side for Oxford University. The tourists were criticised in the press for not allowing Jardine to reach his hundred, but had tried to help him with some easy bowling. There has been speculation that this incident helped develop Jardine's antipathy towards Australians, although Jardine's biographer Christopher Douglas denies this. Jardine's attitude towards Australia hardened after he toured the country in 1928\u201329. When he scored three consecutive hundreds in the early games, he was frequently jeered by the crowd for slow play; the Australian spectators took an increasing dislike to him, mainly for his superior attitude and bearing, his awkward fielding, and particularly his choice of headwear\u2014a Harlequin cap that was given to successful Oxford cricketers. Although Jardine may simply have worn the cap out of superstition, it conveyed a negative impression to the spectators; his general demeanour drew one comment of \"Where's the butler to carry the bat for you?\" By this stage Jardine had developed an intense dislike for Australian crowds. During his third century at the start of the tour, during a period of abuse from the spectators, he observed to Hunter Hendry that \"All Australians are uneducated, and an unruly mob\". After the innings, when teammate Patsy Hendren remarked that the Australian crowds did not like Jardine, he replied \"It's fucking mutual\". During the tour, Jardine fielded next to the crowd on the boundary. There, he was roundly abused and mocked for his awkward fielding, particularly when chasing the ball. On one occasion, he spat towards the crowd while fielding on the boundary as he changed position for the final time.\nJardine was appointed captain of England for the 1931 season, replacing Percy Chapman who had led the team in 1930. He defeated New Zealand in his first series, but opinion was divided as to how effective he had been. The following season, he led England again and was appointed to lead the team to tour Australia for the 1932\u201333 Ashes series. A meeting was arranged between Jardine, Nottinghamshire captain Arthur Carr and his two fast bowlers Harold Larwood and Bill Voce at London's Piccadilly Hotel to discuss a plan to combat Bradman. Jardine asked Larwood and Voce if they could bowl on leg stump and make the ball rise into the body of the batsman. The bowlers agreed they could, and that it might prove effective. Jardine also visited Frank Foster to discuss his field-placing in Australia in 1911\u201312.\nLarwood and Voce practised the plan over the remainder of the 1932 season with varying but increasing success and several injuries to batsmen. Ken Farnes experimented with short-pitched, leg-theory bowling but was not selected for the tour. Bill Bowes also used short-pitched bowling, notably against Jack Hobbs.\nAshes series of 1932\u201333.\nEarly development on tour.\nThe England team which toured Australia in 1932\u201333 contained four fast bowlers and a few medium pacers; such a heavy concentration on pace was unusual at the time, and drew comment from the Australian press and players, including Bradman. On the journey, Jardine instructed his team on how to approach the tour and discussed tactics with several players, including Larwood; at this stage, he seems to have settled on leg theory, if not full bodyline, as his main tactic. Some players later reported that he told them to hate the Australians in order to defeat them, while instructing them to refer to Bradman as \"the little bastard.\" Upon arrival, Jardine quickly alienated the press and crowds through his manner and approach.\nIn the early matches, although there were instances of the English bowlers pitching the ball short and causing problems with their pace, full bodyline tactics were not used. There had been little unusual about the English bowling except the number of fast bowlers. Larwood and Voce were given a light workload in the early matches by Jardine. The English tactics changed in a game against an Australian XI team at Melbourne in mid-November, when full bodyline tactics were deployed for the first time. Jardine had left himself out of the English side, which was led instead by Bob Wyatt who later wrote that the team experimented with a diluted form of bodyline bowling. He reported to Jardine that Bradman, who was playing for the opposition, seemed uncomfortable against the bowling tactics of Larwood, Voce and Bowes. The crowd, press and Australian players were shocked by what they experienced and believed that the bowlers were targeting the batsmen's heads. Bradman adopted unorthodox tactics\u2014ducking, weaving and moving around the crease\u2014which did not meet with universal approval from Australians and he scored just 36 and 13 in the match.\nThe tactic continued to be used in the next game by Voce (Larwood and Bowes did not play in this game), against New South Wales, for whom Jack Fingleton made a century and received several blows in the process. Bradman again failed twice, and had scored just 103 runs in six innings against the touring team; many Australian fans were now worried by Bradman's form. Meanwhile, Jardine wrote to tell Fender that his information about the Australian batting technique was correct and that it meant he was having to move more and more fielders onto the leg side: \"if this goes on I shall have to move the whole bloody lot to the leg side.\"\nThe Australian press were shocked and criticised the hostility of Larwood in particular. Some former Australian players joined the criticism, saying the tactics were ethically wrong. But at this stage, not everyone was opposed, and the Australian Board of Control believed the English team had bowled fairly. On the other hand, Jardine increasingly came into disagreement with tour manager Warner over bodyline as the tour progressed. Warner hated bodyline but would not speak out against it. He was accused of hypocrisy for not taking a stand on either side, particularly after expressing sentiments at the start of the tour that cricket \"has become a synonym for all that is true and honest. To say 'that is not cricket' implies something underhand, something not in keeping with the best ideals\u00a0...\u00a0all who love it as players, as officials or spectators must be careful lest anything they do should do it harm.\"\nFirst two Test matches.\nBradman missed the first Test at Sydney, worn out by constant cricket and the ongoing argument with the Board of Control. Jardine later wrote that the real reason was that the batsman had suffered a nervous breakdown. The English bowlers used bodyline intermittently in the first match, to the crowd's vocal displeasure, and the Australians lost the game by ten wickets. Larwood was particularly successful, returning match figures of ten wickets for 124 runs. One of the English bowlers, Gubby Allen, refused to bowl with fielders on the leg side, clashing with Jardine over these tactics. The only Australian batsman to make an impact was Stan McCabe, who hooked and pulled everything aimed at his upper body, to score 187 not out in four hours from 233 deliveries. Behind the scenes, administrators began to express concerns to each other. Yet the English tactics still did not earn universal disapproval; former Australian captain Monty Noble praised the English bowling.\nMeanwhile, Woodfull was being encouraged to retaliate to the short-pitched English attack, not least by members of his own side such as Vic Richardson, or to include pace bowlers such as Eddie Gilbert or Laurie Nash to match the aggression of the opposition. But Woodfull refused to consider doing so. He had to wait until minutes before the game before he was confirmed as captain by the selectors.\nFor the second Test, Bradman returned to the team after his newspaper employers released him from his contract. England continued to use bodyline and Bradman was dismissed by his first ball in the first innings. In the second innings, against the full bodyline attack, he scored an unbeaten century which helped Australia to win the match and level the series at one match each. Critics began to believe bodyline was not quite the threat that had been perceived and Bradman's reputation, which had suffered slightly with his earlier failures, was restored. However, the pitch was slightly slower than others in the series, and Larwood was suffering from problems with his boots which reduced his effectiveness.\nThird Test match.\nThe controversy reached its peak during the Third Test at Adelaide. On the second day, a Saturday, before a crowd of 50,962 spectators, Australia bowled out England who had batted through the first day. In the third over of the Australian innings, Larwood bowled to Woodfull. The fifth ball narrowly missed Woodfull's head and the final ball, delivered short on the line of middle stump, struck Woodfull over the heart. The batsman dropped his bat and staggered away holding his chest, bent over in pain. The England players surrounded Woodfull to offer sympathy but the crowd began to protest noisily. Jardine called to Larwood: \"Well bowled, Harold!\" Although the comment was aimed at unnerving Bradman, who was also batting at the time, Woodfull was appalled. Play resumed after a brief delay, once it was certain the Australian captain was fit to carry on and, since Larwood's over had ended, Woodfull did not have to face the bowling of Allen in the next over. However, when Larwood was ready to bowl at Woodfull again, play was halted once more when the fielders were moved into bodyline positions, causing the crowd to protest and call abuse at the England team. Subsequently, Jardine claimed that Larwood requested a field change, Larwood said that Jardine had done so. Many commentators condemned the alteration of the field as unsporting, and the angry spectators became extremely volatile. Jardine, although writing that Woodfull could have retired hurt if he was unfit, later expressed his regret at making the field change at that moment. The fury of the crowd was such that a riot might have occurred had another incident taken place and several writers suggested that the anger of the spectators was the culmination of feelings built up over the two months that bodyline had developed.\nDuring the over, another rising Larwood delivery knocked the bat out of Woodfull's hands. He batted for 89 minutes, being hit a few more times before Allen bowled him for 22. Later in the day, Pelham Warner, one of the England managers, visited the Australian dressing room. He expressed sympathy to Woodfull but was surprised by the Australian's response. According to Warner, Woodfull replied, \"I don't want to see you, Mr Warner. There are two teams out there. One is trying to play cricket and the other is not.\" Fingleton wrote that Woodfull had added, \"This game is too good to be spoilt. It is time some people got out of it.\" Woodfull was usually dignified and quietly spoken, making his reaction surprising to Warner and others present. Warner was so shaken that he was found in tears later that day in his hotel room.\nThere was no play on the following day, Sunday being a rest day, but on Monday morning, the exchange between Warner and Woodfull was reported in several Australian newspapers. The players and officials were horrified that a sensitive private exchange had been reported to the press. Leaks to the press were practically unknown in 1933. David Frith notes that discretion and respect were highly prized and such a leak was \"regarded as a moral offence of the first order.\" Woodfull made it clear that he severely disapproved of the leak, and later wrote that he \"always expected cricketers to do the right thing by their team-mates.\" As the only full-time journalist in the Australian team, suspicion immediately fell on Fingleton, although as soon as the story was published, he told Woodfull he was not responsible. Warner offered Larwood a reward of one pound if he could dismiss Fingleton in the second innings; Larwood obliged by bowling him for a duck. Fingleton later claimed that Sydney Sun reporter Claude Corbett had received the information from Bradman; for the rest of their lives, Fingleton and Bradman made claim and counter-claim that the other man was responsible for the leak.\nThe following day, as Australia faced a large deficit on the first innings, Bert Oldfield played a long innings in support of Bill Ponsford, who scored 85. In the course of the innings, the English bowlers used bodyline against him, and he faced several short-pitched deliveries but took several fours from Larwood to move to 41. Having just conceded a four, Larwood bowled fractionally shorter and slightly slower. Oldfield attempted to hook but lost sight of the ball and edged it onto his temple; the ball fractured his skull. Oldfield staggered away and fell to his knees and play stopped as Woodfull came onto the pitch and the angry crowd jeered and shouted, once more reaching the point where a riot seemed likely. Several English players thought about arming themselves with stumps should the crowd come onto the field. The ball which injured Oldfield was bowled to a conventional, non-bodyline field; Larwood immediately apologised but Oldfield said that it was his own fault before he was helped back to the dressing room and play continued. Jardine later secretly sent a telegram of sympathy to Oldfield's wife and arranged for presents to be given to his young daughters.\nThe cable exchange.\nAt the end of the fourth day's play of the third Test match, the Australian Board of Control sent a cable to the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC), cricket's ruling body and the club that selected the England team, in London:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNot all Australians, including the press and players, believed that the cable should have been sent, particularly immediately following a heavy defeat. The suggestion of unsportsmanlike behaviour was deeply resented by the MCC, and was one of the worst accusations that could have been levelled at the team at the time. Additionally, members of the MCC believed that the Australians had over-reacted to the English bowling. The MCC took some time to draft a reply:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;MCC to Australian Board of Control, January 23, 1933: &lt;br&gt;\nWe, Marylebone Cricket Club, deplore your cable. We deprecate your opinion that there has been unsportsmanlike play. We have fullest confidence in captain, team and managers, and are convinced they would do nothing to infringe either the Laws of Cricket or the spirit of the game. We have no evidence that our confidence is misplaced. Much as we regret accidents to Woodfull and Oldfield, we understand that in neither case was the bowler to blame. If the Australian Board of Control wish to propose a new law or rule it shall receive our careful consideration in due course. We hope the situation is not now as serious as your cable would seem to indicate, but if it is such as to jeopardise the good relations between English and Australian cricketers, and you would consider it desirable to cancel remainder of programme, we would consent with great reluctance.\nAt this point, the remainder of the series was under threat. Jardine was shaken by the events and by the hostile reactions to his team. Stories appeared in the press, possibly leaked by the disenchanted Nawab of Pataudi, about fights and arguments between the England players. Jardine offered to stop using bodyline if the team did not support him, but after a private meeting (not attended by Jardine or either of the team managers) the players released a statement fully supporting the captain and his tactics. Even so, Jardine would not have played in the fourth Test without the withdrawal of the \"unsportsmanlike\" accusation.\nThe Australian Board met to draft a reply cable, which was sent on 30 January, indicating that they wished the series to continue and offering to postpone consideration of the fairness of bodyline bowling until after the series. The MCC's reply, on 2 February, suggested that continuing the series would be impossible unless the accusation of unsporting behaviour was withdrawn.\nThe situation escalated into a diplomatic incident. Figures high up in both the British and Australian government saw bodyline as potentially fracturing an international relationship that needed to remain strong. The Governor of South Australia, Alexander Hore-Ruthven, who was in England at the time, expressed his concern to British Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs James Henry Thomas that this would cause a significant impact on trade between the nations. The standoff was settled when the Australian prime minister, Joseph Lyons, met with members of the Australian Board and outlined to them the severe economic hardships that could be caused in Australia if the British public boycotted Australian trade. Following considerable discussion and debate in the English and Australian press, the Australian Board sent a cable to the MCC which, while maintaining its opposition to bodyline bowling, stated \"We do not regard the sportsmanship of your team as being in question\". Even so, correspondence between the Australian Board and the MCC continued for almost a year.\nThe end of the series.\nVoce missed the fourth Test of the series, being replaced by a leg spinner, Tommy Mitchell. Larwood continued to use bodyline, but he was the only bowler in the team using the tactic; even so, he used it less frequently than usual and seemed less effective in high temperatures and humidity. England won the game by eight wickets, thanks in part to an innings of 83 by Eddie Paynter who had been admitted to hospital with tonsillitis but left in order to bat when England were struggling in their innings. Voce returned for the final Test, but neither he nor Allen were fully fit, and despite the use of bodyline tactics, Australia scored 435 at a rapid pace, aided by several dropped catches. Australia included a fast bowler for this final game, Harry Alexander who bowled some short deliveries but was not allowed to use many fielders on the leg side by his captain, Woodfull. England built a lead of 19 but their tactics in Australia's second innings were disrupted when Larwood left the field with an injured foot; Hedley Verity, a spinner, claimed five wickets to bowl Australia out; England won by eight wickets and won the series by four Tests to one.\nIn England.\nBodyline continued to be bowled occasionally in the 1933 English season\u2014most notably by Nottinghamshire, who had Carr, Voce and Larwood in their team. Jardine himself had to face bodyline bowling in a Test match. The West Indian cricket team toured England in 1933, and, in the second Test at Old Trafford, Jackie Grant, their captain, decided to try bodyline. He had a couple of fast bowlers, Manny Martindale and Learie Constantine. Facing bodyline tactics for the first time, England first suffered, falling to 134 for 4, with Wally Hammond being hit on the chin, though he recovered to continue his innings. Then Jardine himself faced Martindale and Constantine. Jardine never flinched. With Les Ames finding himself in difficulties, Jardine said, \"You get yourself down this end, Les. I'll take care of this bloody nonsense.\" He played right back to the bouncers, standing on tiptoe, and played them with a dead bat, sometimes playing the ball one handed for more control. While the Old Trafford pitch was not as suited to bodyline as the hard Australian wickets, Martindale did take 5 for 73, but Constantine only took 1 for 55. Jardine himself made 127, his only Test century. In the West Indian second innings, Clark bowled bodyline back to the West Indians, taking 2 for 64. The match in the end was drawn but played a large part in turning English opinion against bodyline. \"The Times\" used the word bodyline, without using inverted commas or using the qualification \"so-called\", for the first time. \"Wisden\" also said that \"most of those watching it for the first time must have come to the conclusion that, while strictly within the law, it was not nice.\"\nIn 1934, Bill Woodfull led Australia back to England on a tour that had been under a cloud after the tempestuous cricket diplomacy of the previous bodyline series. Jardine had retired from International cricket in early 1934 after captaining a fraught tour of India and under England's new captain, Bob Wyatt, agreements were put in place so that bodyline would not be used. However, there were occasions when the Australians felt that their hosts had crossed the mark with tactics resembling bodyline.\nIn a match between the Australians and Nottinghamshire, Voce, one of the bodyline practitioners of 1932\u201333, employed the strategy with the wicket-keeper standing to the leg side and took 8/66. In the second innings, Voce repeated the tactic late in the day, in fading light against Woodfull and Bill Brown. Of his 12 balls, 11 were no lower than head height. Woodfull told the Nottinghamshire administrators that, if Voce's leg-side bowling was repeated, his men would leave the field and return to London. He further said that Australia would not return to the country in the future. The following day, Voce was absent, ostensibly due to a leg injury. Already angered by the absence of Larwood, the Nottinghamshire faithful heckled the Australians all day. Australia had previously and privately complained that some pacemen had strayed past the agreement in the Tests.\nChanges to the laws of cricket.\nAs a direct consequence of the 1932\u201333 tour, the MCC introduced a new rule to the Laws of Cricket for the 1935 English cricket season. Originally, the MCC hoped that captains would ensure that the game was played in the correct spirit, and passed a resolution that bodyline bowling would breach this spirit. When this proved to be insufficient, the MCC passed a law that \"direct attack\" bowling was unfair and became the responsibility of the umpires to identify and stop. In 1957, the laws were altered to prevent more than two fielders standing behind square on the leg side; the intention was to prevent negative bowling tactics whereby off spinners and slow inswing bowlers aimed at the leg stump of batsmen with fielders concentrated on the leg side. However, an indirect effect was to make bodyline fields impossible to implement.\nLater law changes, under the heading of \"Intimidatory Short Pitched Bowling\", also restricted the number of \"bouncers\" which might be bowled in an over. Nevertheless, the tactic of intimidating the batsman is still used to an extent that would have been shocking in 1933, although it is less dangerous now because today's players wear helmets and generally far more protective gear. The West Indies teams of the 1980s, who regularly fielded a bowling attack comprising some of the best fast bowlers in cricket history, were perhaps the most feared exponents.\nReaction.\nThe English players and management were consistent in referring to their tactic as \"fast leg theory\", considering it to be a variant of the established and unobjectionable leg theory tactic. The inflammatory term \"bodyline\" was coined and perpetuated by the Australian press (see above). English writers used the term \"fast leg theory\". The terminology reflected differences in understanding, as neither the English public nor the Board of the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC)\u2014the governing body of English cricket\u2014could understand why the Australians were complaining about what they perceived as a commonly used tactic. Some concluded that the Australian cricket authorities and public were sore losers. Of the four fast bowlers in the tour party, Gubby Allen was a voice of dissent in the English camp, refusing to bowl short on the leg side, and writing several letters home to England critical of Jardine, although he did not express this in public in Australia. A number of other players, while maintaining a united front in public, also deplored bodyline in private. The amateurs Bob Wyatt (the vice-captain), Freddie Brown and the Nawab of Pataudi opposed it, as did Wally Hammond and Les Ames among the professionals.\nDuring the season, Woodfull's physical courage, stoic and dignified leadership won him many admirers. He flatly refused to employ retaliatory tactics and did not publicly complain even though he and his men were repeatedly hit. Jardine however insisted his tactic was not designed to cause injury and that he was leading his team in a sportsmanlike and gentlemanly manner, arguing that it was up to the Australian batsmen to play their way out of trouble. It was subsequently revealed that several of the players had private reservations, but they did not express them publicly at the time.\nLegacy.\nFollowing the 1932\u201333 series, several authors, including many of the players involved, released books expressing various points of view about bodyline. Many argued that it was a scourge on cricket and must be stamped out, while some did not see what all the fuss was about. The series has been described as the most controversial period in Australian cricket history, and it was voted the most important Australian moment by a panel of Australian cricket identities. The MCC asked Harold Larwood to sign an apology to them for his bowling in Australia, making his selection for England again conditional upon it. Larwood was furious at the notion, pointing out that he had been following orders from his captain, and that was where any blame should lie. Larwood refused, never played for England again, and became vilified in his own country. Douglas Jardine always defended his tactics and in the book he wrote about the tour, \"In Quest of the Ashes\", described allegations that the England bowlers directed their attack with the intention of causing physical harm as stupid and patently untruthful. The immediate effect of the law change which banned bodyline in 1935 was to make commentators and spectators sensitive to the use of short-pitched bowling; bouncers became exceedingly rare and bowlers who delivered them were practically ostracised. This attitude ended after the Second World War, and among the first teams to make extensive use of short-pitched bowling was the Australian team captained by Bradman between 1946 and 1948. Other teams soon followed.\nOutside the sport, there were significant consequences for Anglo-Australian relations, which remained strained until the outbreak of World War II made cooperation paramount. Business between the two countries was adversely affected as citizens of each country avoided goods manufactured in the other. Australian commerce also suffered in British colonies in Asia: the \"North China Daily News\" published a pro-bodyline editorial, denouncing Australians as sore losers. An Australian journalist reported that several business deals in Hong Kong and Shanghai were lost by Australians because of local reactions. English immigrants in Australia found themselves shunned and persecuted by locals, and Australian visitors to England were treated similarly. In 1934\u201335 a statue of Prince Albert in Sydney was vandalised, with an ear being knocked off and the word \"BODYLINE\" painted on it. Both before and after World War II, numerous satirical cartoons and comedy skits were written, mostly in Australia, based on events of the bodyline tour. Generally, they poked fun at the English.\nIn 1984, Australia's Network 10 produced a television mini-series titled \"Bodyline\", dramatising the events of the 1932\u201333 English tour of Australia. It starred Gary Sweet as Don Bradman, Hugo Weaving as Douglas Jardine, Jim Holt as Harold Larwood, Rhys McConnochie as Pelham Warner, and Frank Thring as Jardine's mentor Lord Harris. The series took some liberties with historical accuracy for the sake of drama, including a depiction of angry Australian fans burning a British flag at the Adelaide Oval, an event which was never documented. Larwood, having emigrated to Australia in 1950, was largely welcomed with open arms, although received several threatening and obscene phone calls after the series aired. The series was widely and strongly attacked by the surviving players for its inaccuracy and sensationalism.\nTo this day, the bodyline tour remains one of the most significant events in the history of cricket, and it is still strong in the consciousness of many cricket followers. In a poll of cricket journalists, commentators, and players in 2004, the bodyline tour was ranked the most important event in cricket history.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18054", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18054", "title": "Lodur", "text": ""}
{"id": "18055", "revid": "102482088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18055", "title": "Latona", "text": ""}
{"id": "18056", "revid": "42895809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18056", "title": "Laws of infernal dynamics", "text": "Adage about the cursedness of the universe\nThe laws of infernal dynamics are an adage about the cursedness of the universe. Attributed to science fiction author David Gerrold, the laws are as follows:\nThe laws are a parody on the first and second of Newton's laws of motion in the spirit of Murphy's law. Newton's first law of motion has here been split into two parts, the first two laws. Newton's third law of motion is left unparodied, though a separate adage states that \"for every action, there is an equal and opposite criticism.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18057", "revid": "46590974", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18057", "title": "Louise Erdrich", "text": "American author (born 1954)\nKaren Louise Erdrich ( ; born June 7, 1954) is an American author of novels, short stories, poetry, and children's books featuring Native American characters and settings. She is an enrolled citizen of the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians of North Dakota, a federally recognized Ojibwe people.\nErdrich is widely acclaimed as one of the most significant writers of the second wave of the Native American Renaissance. She has written 28 books in all, including fiction, non-fiction, poetry, and children's books. In 2009, her novel \"The Plague of Doves\" was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction and received an Anisfield-Wolf Book Award. In November 2012, she received the National Book Award for Fiction for her novel \"The Round House\". She is a 2013 recipient of the Alex Awards. She was awarded the Library of Congress Prize for American Fiction at the National Book Festival in September 2015. In 2021, she was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction for her novel \"The Night Watchman\".\nShe was married to author Michael Dorris and the two collaborated on a number of works. The couple separated in 1995 and then divorced in 1996; Dorris would also take his own life in 1997 as allegations that he sexually abused at least three of the daughters whom he raised with Erdrich were under investigation.\nShe is also the owner of Birchbark Books, a small independent bookstore in Minneapolis that focuses on Native American literature and the Native community in the Twin Cities.\nPersonal life.\nErdrich was born on June 7, 1954, in Little Falls, Minnesota. She was the oldest of seven children born to Ralph Erdrich, a German-American, and Rita (n\u00e9e Gourneau), an Ojibwe woman of French descent. Both parents taught at a boarding school in Wahpeton, North Dakota, set up by the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Erdrich's maternal grandfather, Patrick Gourneau, served as tribal chairman for the federally recognized tribe of Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians for many years. Though not raised in a reservation, she often visited relatives there. She was raised \"with all the accepted truths\" of Catholicism.\nWhile Erdrich was a child, her father paid her a nickel for every story she wrote. Her sister Heidi became a poet and also lives in Minnesota; she publishes under the name Heid E. Erdrich. Their sister Lise Erdrich has written children's books and collections of fiction and essays.\nErdrich attended Dartmouth College from 1972 to 1976. She was a part of the first class of women admitted to the college and earned a B.A. in English. During her first year, Erdrich met Michael Dorris, an anthropologist, writer, and then-director of the new Native American Studies program. While attending Dorris's class, she began to look into her own ancestry, which inspired her to draw from it for her literary work, such as poems, short stories, and novels. During that time, she worked as a lifeguard, waitress, researcher for films, and as an editor for the Boston Indian Council newspaper \"The Circle.\"\nIn 1978, Erdrich enrolled in a Master of Arts program at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland. She earned the Master of Arts in the Writing Seminars in 1979. Erdrich later published some of the poems and stories she wrote while in the M.A. program. She returned to Dartmouth as a writer-in-residence.\nAfter graduating from Dartmouth, Erdrich remained in contact with Dorris. He attended one of her poetry readings, became impressed with her work, and developed an interest in working with her. Although Erdrich and Dorris were on two different sides of the world, Erdrich in Boston and Dorris in New Zealand for field research, the two began to collaborate on short stories.\nThe pair's literary partnership led them to a romantic relationship. They married in 1981, and raised three children whom Dorris had adopted as a single parent (Reynold Abel, Madeline, and Sava) and three biological children together (Persia, Pallas, and Aza Marion). Reynold Abel suffered from fetal alcohol syndrome and in 1991, at age 23, he was killed when he was hit by a car. In 1995, their son Sava accused Dorris of committing child abuse; in 1997, after Dorris's death, his adopted daughter Madeline claimed that Dorris had sexually abused her and Erdrich had neglected to stop the abuse.\nDorris and Erdrich separated in 1995, and would divorce in 1996. Dorris, who was accused of sexually abusing two of the biological daughters he had with Erdrich, died by suicide in 1997. In his will, he omitted Erdrich and his adopted children Sava and Madeline; Madeline accused Dorris of sexually abusing her as well.\nIn 2001, at age 47, Erdrich gave birth to a daughter, Azure, whose Native American father Erdrich declines to identify publicly. She discusses her pregnancy with Azure, and Azure's father, in her 2003 nonfiction book, \"Books and Islands in Ojibwe Country\". She uses the name \"Tobasonakwut\" to refer to him. He is described as a traditional healer and teacher, who is eighteen years Erdrich's senior and a married man. In a number of publications, Tobasonakwut Kinew, who died in 2012, is referred to as Erdrich's partner and the father of Azure.\nWhen asked in an interview if writing is a lonely life for her, Erdrich replied, \"Strangely, I think it is. I am surrounded by an abundance of family and friends and yet I am alone with the writing. And that is perfect.\" Erdrich lives in Minneapolis.\nWork.\nIn 1979, she wrote \"The World's Greatest Fisherman\", a short story about June Kashpaw, a divorced Ojibwe woman whose death by hypothermia brought her relatives home to a fictional North Dakota reservation for her funeral. She wrote this while \"barricaded in the kitchen.\" At her husband's urging, she submitted it to the Nelson Algren Short Fiction competition in 1982 for which it won the $5,000 prize, and eventually it became the first chapter of her debut novel, \"Love Medicine\", published by Holt, Rinehart, and Winston in 1984.\n\"When I found out about the prize I was living on a farm in New Hampshire near the college I'd attended,\" Erdrich told an interviewer. \"I was nearly broke and driving a car with bald tires. My mother knitted my sweaters, and all else I bought at thrift stores ... The recognition dazzled me. Later, I became friends with Studs Terkel and Kay Boyle, the judges, toward whom I carry a lifelong gratitude. This prize made an immense difference in my life.\"\n\"Love Medicine\" won the 1984 National Book Critics Circle Award. It is the only debut novel ever to receive that honor. Erdrich later turned \"Love Medicine\" into a tetralogy that includes \"The Beet Queen\" (1986), \"Tracks\" (1988), and \"The Bingo Palace\" (1994). It has also been featured on the National Advanced Placement Test for Literature.\nIn the early years of their marriage, Erdrich and Michael Dorris often collaborated on their work, saying they plotted the books together, \"talk about them before any writing is done, and then we share almost every day, whatever it is we've written\" but \"the person whose name is on the books is the one who's done most of the primary writing.\" They got started with \"domestic, romantic stuff\" published under the shared pen name of \"Milou North\" (Michael + Louise + where they live).\nDuring the publication of \"Love Medicine\", Erdrich produced her first collection of poems, \"Jacklight\" (1984), which highlights the struggles between Native and non-Native cultures, as well as celebrating family, ties of kinship, autobiographical meditations, monologues, and love poetry. She incorporates elements of Ojibwe myths and legends. Erdrich continues to write poems, which have been included in her collections.\nErdrich is best known as a novelist, and has published a dozen award-winning and best-selling novels. She followed \"Love Medicine\" with \"The Beet Queen\" (1986), which continued her technique of using multiple narrators and expanded the fictional reservation universe of \"Love Medicine\" to include the nearby town of Argus, North Dakota. The action of the novel takes place mostly before World War II. Leslie Marmon Silko accused Erdrich's \"The Beet Queen\" of being more concerned with postmodern technique than with the political struggles of Native peoples.\n\"Tracks\" (1988) goes back to the early 20th century at the formation of the reservation. It introduces the trickster figure of Nanapush, who owes a clear debt to Ojibwe figure Nanabozho. There are many studies of the trickster figure in Erdrich's novels. \"Tracks\" shows early clashes between traditional ways and the Roman Catholic Church. \"The Bingo Palace\" (1994), set in the 1980s, describes the effects of a casino and a factory on the reservation community. \"Tales of Burning Love\" (1997) finishes the story of Sister Leopolda, a recurring character from all the previous books, and introduces a new set of European-American people into the reservation universe.\n\"The Antelope Wife\" (1998), Erdrich's first novel after her divorce from Dorris, was the first of her novels to be set outside the continuity of the previous books. Erdrich heavily revised the book in 2009 and published the revision as \"The Antelope Woman\" in 2016.\nShe subsequently returned to the reservation and nearby towns. She has published five novels since 1998 dealing with events in that fictional area. Among these are \"The Last Report on the Miracles at Little No Horse\" (2001) and \"The Master Butchers Singing Club\" (2003). Both novels have geographic and character connections with \"The Beet Queen\". In 2009, Erdrich was a Pulitzer Prize finalist for \"The Plague of Doves\" and a National Book Award finalist for \"The Last Report on the Miracles at Little No Horse\". \"The Plague of Doves\" focuses on the historical lynching of four Native people wrongly accused of murdering a White family, and the effect of this injustice on the following generations. Her Pulitzer Prize\u2013winning novel \"The Night Watchman\" (2020) concerns a campaign to defeat the 'termination bill' (introduced by Senator Arthur Vivian Watkins), and Erdrich acknowledged her sources and its inspiration being her maternal grandfather's life. Her most recent novel, \"The Sentence\", tells the fictional story of a haunting at Erdrich's Minneapolis bookstore, set against the backdrop of the COVID-19 pandemic, George Floyd's murder, and the resulting protests.\nShe also writes for younger audiences; she has a children's picture book \"Grandmother's Pigeon,\" and her children's book \"The Birchbark House\", was a National Book Award finalist. She continued the series with \"The Game of Silence\", winner of the Scott O'Dell Award for Historical Fiction, \"The Porcupine Year\", \"Chickadee\", and \"Makoons\".\nNonfiction and teaching.\nIn addition to fiction and poetry, Erdrich has published nonfiction. \"The Blue Jay's Dance\" (1995) is about her pregnancy and the birth of her third child. \"Books and Islands in Ojibwe Country\" (2003) traces her travels in northern Minnesota and Ontario's lakes following the birth of her youngest daughter.\nInfluence and style.\nHer heritage from both parents is influential in her life and prominent in her work. Although many of Erdrich's works explore her Native American heritage, her novel \"The Master Butchers Singing Club\" (2003) featured the European, specifically German, side of her ancestry. The novel includes stories of a World War I veteran of the German Army and is set in a small North Dakota town. The novel was a finalist for the National Book Award. \nErdrich's interwoven series of novels have drawn comparisons with William Faulkner's Yoknapatawpha novels. Like Faulkner's, Erdrich's successive novels created multiple narratives in the same fictional area and combined the tapestry of local history with current themes and modern consciousness.\nBirchbark Books.\nErdrich's bookstore hosts literary readings and other events. Her new works are read here, and events celebrate the works and careers of other writers as well, particularly local Native writers. Erdrich and her staff consider Birchbark Books to be a \"teaching bookstore\". In addition to books, the store sells Native American art and traditional medicines, and Native American jewelry. Wiigwaas Press, a small nonprofit publisher founded by Erdrich and her sister, is affiliated with the store.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18058", "revid": "47223990", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18058", "title": "Latin literature", "text": " \nLatin literature includes the essays, histories, poems, plays, and other writings written in the Latin language. The beginning of formal Latin literature dates to 240 BC, when the first stage play in Latin was performed in Rome. Latin literature flourished for the next six centuries. The classical era of Latin literature can be roughly divided into several periods: early Latin literature, the golden age, the imperial period and Late Antiquity.\nLatin was the language of the ancient Romans as well as being the \"lingua franca\" of Western and Central Europe throughout the Middle Ages. Latin literature features the work of Roman authors, such as Cicero, Virgil, Ovid and Horace, but also includes the work of European writers after the fall of the Empire, from religious writers like Aquinas (1225\u20131274) to secular writers like Francis Bacon (1561\u20131626), Baruch Spinoza (1632\u20131677), and Isaac Newton (1642\u20131727).\nHistory.\nEarly Latin literature.\nAlthough literature in Latin followed a continual development over several centuries, the beginnings of formal Latin literature started with the regular performance of comedies and tragedies in Rome in 240 BC, one year after the conclusion of the First Punic War. These initial comedies and tragedies were adapted from Greek drama by Livius Andronicus, a Greek prisoner of war who had been brought to Rome as a slave in 272 BC. Andronicus translated Homer's \"Odyssey\" into Latin using a traditional Latin verse form called Saturnian meter. In 235 BC, Gnaeus Naevius, a Roman citizen, continued this tradition of producing dramas that were reworkings of Greek originals, or \"fabula palliata\", and he expanded on this by producing a new type of drama, \"fabula praetexta\", or tragedies based on Roman myths and history, starting in 222 BC. Later in life, Naevius composed an epic poem in Saturnian meter on the first Punic War, in which he had fought.\nOther epic poets followed Naevius. Quintus Ennius wrote an historical epic, the \"Annals\" (soon after 200 BC), describing Roman history from the founding of Rome to his own time. He adopted the Greek dactylic hexameter, which became the standard verse form for Roman epics. He became well known for his tragic dramas. Successors in this field include Marcus Pacuvius and Lucius Accius. These three writers rarely used episodes from Roman history, but they wrote Latin versions of tragic themes that the Greeks had already written about. Even when they copied the Greeks, their translations were not straightforward replicas of the original Greek works. Only fragments of their plays have survived.\nConsiderably more is known about early Latin comedy, as 26 Early Latin comedies are extant \u2013 20 of which were written by Plautus; the remaining six were written by Terence. These men modeled their comedies on Greek plays known as New Comedy, but treated the plots and wording of the originals freely. Plautus scattered songs throughout his plays and added to the humor with puns and wisecracks, as well as comic actions by the actors. Terence's plays were more austere in tone, dealing with domestic situations. His works provided the chief inspiration for French and English comedies of the 17th century AD.\nThe prose of the period is best known through \"On Agriculture\" (160 BC) by Cato the Elder. Cato wrote the first Latin history of Rome and of other Italian cities. He was the first Roman statesman to put his political speeches in writing as a means of influencing public opinion.\nEarly Latin literature ended with Gaius Lucilius, who created a new kind of poetry in his 30 books of \"Satires\" (2nd century BC). He wrote in an easy, conversational tone about books, food, friends, and current events.\nThe golden age.\nTraditionally, the height of Latin literature has been assigned to the period from 81 BC to AD 17, although recent scholarship has questioned the assumptions that privileged the works of this period over both earlier and later works. This period is usually said to have begun with the first known speech of Cicero and ended with the death of Ovid.\nThe age of Cicero.\nCicero has traditionally been considered the master of Latin prose. The writing he produced from about 80 BC until his death in 43 BC exceeds that of any Latin author whose work survives in terms of quantity and variety of genre and subject matter, as well as possessing unsurpassed stylistic excellence. Cicero's many works can be divided into four groups: (1) letters, (2) rhetorical treatises, (3) philosophical works, and (4) orations. His letters provide detailed information about an important period in Roman history and offer a vivid picture of the public and private life among the Roman governing class. Cicero's works on oratory are our most valuable Latin sources for ancient theories on education and rhetoric. His philosophical works were the basis of moral philosophy during the Middle Ages. His speeches inspired many European political leaders and the founders of the United States.\nJulius Caesar and Sallust were significant historical writers of Cicero's time. Caesar wrote commentaries on the Gallic and civil wars in a straightforward style to justify his actions as a general. He wrote descriptions of people and their motives.\nThe birth of lyric poetry in Latin occurred during the same period. The lyrics of Catullus, whom the writer Aulus Gellius called \"the most elegant of poets\", are noted for their emotional intensity. Contemporary with Catullus, Lucretius expounded the Epicurean philosophy in a long poem, \"De rerum natura\".\nOne of the most prolific writers of the period was Marcus Terentius Varro. Referred to as \"the most learned of the Romans\" by Quintillian, he wrote about a remarkable variety of subjects, from religion to poetry, but only his writings on agriculture and the Latin language are extant in their complete form.\nThe Augustan age.\nThe emperor Augustus took a personal interest in the literary works produced during his years of power from 27 BC to AD 14. This period is sometimes called the Augustan Age of Latin Literature. Virgil published his pastoral \"Eclogues\", the \"Georgics\", and the \"Aeneid\", an epic poem describing the events that led to the creation of Rome. Virgil told how the Trojan hero Aeneas became the ancestor of the Roman people. Virgil provided divine justification for Roman rule over the world. Although Virgil died before he could put the finishing touches on his poem, it was soon regarded as the greatest work of Latin literature.\nVirgil's friend Horace wrote \"Epodes\", \"Odes\", \"Satires\", and \"Epistles\". The perfection of the \"Odes\" in content, form, and style has charmed readers for hundreds of years. The \"Satires\" and \"Epistles\" discuss ethical and literary problems in an urbane, witty manner. Horace's \"Art of Poetry\", probably published as a separate work, greatly influenced later poetic theories. It stated the basic rules of classical writing as the Romans understood and used them. After Virgil died, Horace was Rome's leading poet.\nThe Latin elegy reached its highest development in the works of Tibullus, Propertius, and Ovid. Most of this poetry is concerned with love. Ovid wrote the \"Fasti\", which describes Roman festivals and their legendary origins. Ovid's greatest work, the \"Metamorphoses\", weaves various myths into a fast-paced, fascinating story. Ovid was a witty writer who excelled in creating lively and passionate characters. The \"Metamorphoses\" was the best-known source of Greek and Roman mythology throughout the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. It inspired many poets, painters, and composers.\nOne of the few female poets of ancient Rome whose work has survived is Sulpicia.\nIn prose, Livy produced a history of the Roman people in 142 books. Only 35 survived, but they are a major source of information on Rome.\nThe imperial period.\nFrom the death of Augustus in AD 14 until about 200, Roman authors emphasized style and tried new and startling ways of expression. During the reign of Nero from 54 to 68, the Stoic philosopher Seneca wrote a number of dialogues and letters on such moral themes as mercy and generosity. In his \"Natural Questions\", Seneca analyzed earthquakes, floods, and storms. Seneca's tragedies greatly influenced the growth of tragic drama in Europe. His nephew Lucan wrote the \"Pharsalia\" (about 60), an epic poem describing the civil war between Caesar and Pompey. The \"Satyricon\" (about 60) by Petronius was the first picaresque Latin novel. Only fragments of the complete work survive. It describes the adventures of various low-class characters in absurd, extravagant, and dangerous situations, often in the world of petty crime.\nEpic poems included the \"Argonautica\" of Gaius Valerius Flaccus, following the story of Jason and the Argonauts in their quest for the Golden Fleece, the \"Thebaid\" of Statius, following the conflict of Oedipus's sons and the Seven Against Thebes, and the \"Punica\" of Silius Italicus, following the Second Punic War and the invasions of Hannibal into Italy. At the hands of Martial, the epigram achieved the stinging quality still associated with it. Juvenal satirized vice.\nThe historian Tacitus painted an unforgettably dark picture of the early empire in his \"Histories\" and \"Annals\", both written in the early 2nd century. His contemporary Suetonius wrote biographies of the 12 Roman rulers from Julius Caesar through Domitian. The letters of Pliny the Younger described Roman life of the period. Quintilian composed the most complete work on ancient education that we possess. Important works from the 2nd century include the \"Attic Nights\" of Aulus Gellius, a collection of anecdotes and reports of literary discussions among his friends; and the letters of the orator Marcus Cornelius Fronto to Marcus Aurelius. The most famous work of the period was \"Metamorphoses\", also called \"The Golden Ass\", by Apuleius. This novel concerns a young man who is accidentally changed into a donkey. The story is filled with tales of love and witchcraft.\nLatin in the Middle Ages, Renaissance, and Early Modernity.\nPagan Latin literature showed a final burst of vitality from the late 3rd century till the 5th centuries \u2013 Ammianus Marcellinus in history, Quintus Aurelius Symmachus in oratory, and Ausonius and Rutilius Claudius Namatianus in poetry. The \"Mosella\" by Ausonius demonstrated a modernism of feeling that indicates the end of classical literature as such.\nWriters who laid the foundations of Christian Latin literature during the 4th century and 5th century included the church fathers Augustine of Hippo, Jerome, and Ambrose, and the first great Christian poet, Prudentius. Some Latin writing by Christian women also survives: the prison diary of the martyr Perpetua of Carthage, and an account of a Christian pilgrimage by the pilgrim Egeria.\nDuring the Early Middle Ages, there was a noted literary activity in the Carolingian Empire, mostly in modern-day France, characterized as the Carolingian Renaissance, and some 80 Latin-language writers from this period have been covered in the \"Clavis Scriptorum Latinorum Medii Aevi\" published by Brepols. The High Middle Ages would be characterized by a renewal of Latin literature through the translation of the Toledo School of works from Islamic Spain, both original and translations from previous Greek texts, and with Scholasticism Latin would find a new philosophical expression.\nDuring the Renaissance there was a return to the Latin of classical times, called for this reason Neo-Latin. This purified language continued to be used as the \"lingua franca\" among the learned throughout Europe, with the great works of Descartes, Francis Bacon, and Baruch Spinoza all being composed in Latin. Among the last important books written primarily in Latin prose were the works of Swedenborg (d. 1772), Linnaeus (d. 1778), Euler (d. 1783), Gauss (d. 1855), and Isaac Newton (d. 1727), and Latin remains a necessary skill for modern readers of great early modern works of linguistics, literature, and philosophy.\nGreat Britain and Ireland.\nThe \"Handlist of the Latin Writers of Great Britain and Ireland before 1540\", published by Brepols, contains the names of some 2,000 Latin-language writers originating from modern-day England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales, covering a period from the 5th century to the 16th.\nSeveral of the leading pre-modern English poets wrote in Latin as well as English. Milton's 1645 Poems are one example, but there were also Thomas Campion, George Herbert and Milton's colleague Andrew Marvell. Some indeed wrote chiefly in Latin and were valued for the elegance and Classicism of their style. Examples of these were Anthony Alsop and Vincent Bourne, who were noted for the ingenious way that they adapted their verse to describing details of life in the 18th century while never departing from the purity of Latin diction. One of the last to be noted for the quality of his Latin verse well into the 19th century was Walter Savage Landor.\nCharacteristics.\nMuch Latin writing reflects the Romans' interest in rhetoric, the art of speaking and persuading. Public speaking had great importance for educated Romans because most of them wanted successful political careers. When Rome was a republic, effective speaking often determined who would be elected or what bills would pass. After Rome became an empire, the ability to impress and persuade people by the spoken word lost much of its importance. But training in rhetoric continued to flourish and to affect styles of writing. A large part of rhetoric consists of the ability to present a familiar idea in a striking new manner that attracts attention. Latin authors became masters of this art of variety.\nLanguage and form.\nLatin is a highly inflected language, with many grammatical forms for various words. As a result, it can be used with a pithiness and brevity unknown in English. It lends itself to elaboration, because its tight syntax holds even the longest and most complex sentence together as a logical unit. Latin can be used with conciseness, as in the works of Sallust and Tacitus. Or it can have wide, sweeping phrases, as in the works of Livy and the speeches of Cicero.\nLatin lacks the poetic vocabulary of Greek. Some earlier Roman poets tried to make up for this deficiency by creating new compound words, as the Greeks had done; nevertheless, Roman writers seldom invented words. Except in epic poetry, they tended to use familiar vocabulary, giving it poetic value by combinations of words and by rich sound effects. Rome's leading poets had great technical skill in the choice and arrangement of language. They had an intimate knowledge of the Greek poets, whose themes appear in almost all Roman literature.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18059", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18059", "title": "Linguistic", "text": ""}
{"id": "18060", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18060", "title": "Leonard Bloomfield", "text": "American linguist (1887\u20131949)\nLeonard Bloomfield (April 1, 1887 \u2013 April 18, 1949) was an American linguist who led the development of structural linguistics in the United States during the 1930s and the 1940s. He is considered to be the father of American distributionalism. His influential textbook \"Language\", published in 1933, presented a comprehensive description of American structural linguistics. He made significant contributions to Indo-European historical linguistics, the description of Austronesian languages, and description of languages of the Algonquian family.\nBloomfield's approach to linguistics was characterized by its emphasis on the scientific basis of linguistics and emphasis on formal procedures for the analysis of linguistic data. The influence of Bloomfieldian structural linguistics declined in the late 1950s and 1960s as the theory of generative grammar developed by Noam Chomsky came to predominate.\nEarly life and education.\nBloomfield was born in Chicago, Illinois, on April 1, 1887, to Jewish parents (Sigmund Bloomfield and Carola Buber Bloomfield). His father immigrated to the United States as a child in 1868; the original family name \"Blumenfeld\" was changed to Bloomfield after their arrival. In 1896 his family moved to Elkhart Lake, Wisconsin, where he attended elementary school, but returned to Chicago for secondary school. His uncle Maurice Bloomfield was a prominent linguist at Johns Hopkins University, and his aunt Fannie Bloomfield Zeisler was a well-known concert pianist.\nBloomfield attended Harvard College from 1903 to 1906, graduating with the A.B. degree. He subsequently began graduate work at the University of Wisconsin, taking courses in German and Germanic philology, in addition to courses in other Indo-European languages. A meeting with Indo-Europeanist Eduard Prokosch, a faculty member at the University of Wisconsin, convinced Bloomfield to pursue a career in linguistics. In 1908 Bloomfield moved to the University of Chicago, where he took courses in German and Indo-European philology with Frances A. Wood and Carl Darling Buck. His doctoral dissertation in Germanic historical linguistics, \"A semasiologic differentiation in Germanic secondary ablaut\", was supervised by Wood, and he graduated in 1909.\nHe undertook further studies at the University of Leipzig and the University of G\u00f6ttingen in 1913 and 1914 with leading Indo-Europeanists August Leskien, Karl Brugmann, as well as Hermann Oldenberg, a specialist in Vedic Sanskrit. Bloomfield also studied at G\u00f6ttingen with Sanskrit specialist Jacob Wackernagel, and considered both Wackernagel and the Sanskrit grammatical tradition of rigorous grammatical analysis associated with P\u0101\u1e47ini as important influences on both his historical and descriptive work. Further training in Europe was a condition for promotion at the University of Illinois from Instructor to the rank of assistant professor.\nCareer.\nBloomfield was instructor in German at the University of Cincinnati, 1909\u20131910; Instructor in German at the University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign, 1910\u20131913; promoted to assistant professor of Comparative Philology and German, also University of Illinois, 1913\u20131921; Professor of German and Linguistics at the Ohio State University, 1921\u20131927; Professor of Germanic Philology at the University of Chicago, 1927\u20131940; Sterling Professor of Linguistics at Yale University, 1940\u20131949. During the summer of 1925 Bloomfield worked as Assistant Ethnologist with the Geological Survey of Canada in the Canadian Department of Mines, undertaking linguistic field work on Plains Cree; this position was arranged by Edward Sapir, who was then Chief of the Division of Anthropology, Victoria Museum, Geological Survey of Canada, Canadian Department of Mines. In May 1946, he suffered a debilitating stroke, which ended his career.\nBloomfield was one of the founding members of the Linguistic Society of America. In 1924, along with George M. Bolling (Ohio State University) and Edgar Sturtevant (Yale University) he formed a committee to organize the creation of the Society, and drafted the call for the Society's foundation. He contributed the lead article to the inaugural issue of the Society's journal \"Language\", and was President of the Society in 1935. He taught in the Society's summer Linguistic Institute in 1938\u20131941, with the 1938\u20131940 Institutes being held in Ann Arbor, Michigan, and the 1941 Institute in Chapel Hill, North Carolina. Bloomfield was also a member of the American Philosophical Society.\nIndo-European linguistics.\nBloomfield's earliest work was in historical Germanic studies, beginning with his dissertation, and continuing with a number of papers on Indo-European and Germanic phonology and morphology. His post-doctoral studies in Germany further strengthened his expertise in the Neogrammarian tradition, which still dominated Indo-European historical studies. Bloomfield throughout his career, but particularly during his early career, emphasized the Neogrammarian principle of regular sound change as a foundational concept in historical linguistics.\nBloomfield's work in Indo-European beyond his dissertation was limited to an article on palatal consonants in Sanskrit and one article on the Sanskrit grammatical tradition associated with P\u0101\u1e47ini, in addition to a number of book reviews. Bloomfield made extensive use of Indo-European materials to explain historical and comparative principles in both of his textbooks, \"An introduction to language\" (1914), and his seminal \"Language\" (1933). In his textbooks he selected Indo-European examples that supported the key Neogrammarian hypothesis of the regularity of sound change, and emphasized a sequence of steps essential to success in comparative work: (a) appropriate data in the form of texts which must be studied intensively and analysed; (b) application of the comparative method; (c) reconstruction of proto-forms. He further emphasized the importance of dialect studies where appropriate, and noted the significance of sociological factors such as prestige, and the impact of meaning. In addition to regular linguistic change, Bloomfield also allowed for borrowing and analogy.\nIt is argued that Bloomfield's Indo-European work had two broad implications: \"He stated clearly the theoretical bases for Indo-European linguistics\" and \"he established the study of Indo-European languages firmly within general linguistics.\"\nSanskrit studies.\nAs part of his training with leading Indo-Europeanists in Germany in 1913 and 1914 Bloomfield studied the Sanskrit grammatical tradition originating with P\u0101\u1e47ini, who lived in northwestern India during the fifth or fourth century BC. P\u0101\u1e47ini's grammar is characterized by its extreme thoroughness and explicitness in accounting for Sanskrit linguistic forms, and by its complex context-sensitive, rule-based generative structure. Bloomfield noted that \"P\u0101\u1e47ini gives the formation of every inflected, compounded, or derived word, with an exact statement of the sound-variations (including accent) and of the meaning\". In a letter to Algonquianist Truman Michelson, Bloomfield noted \"My models are P\u0101\u1e47ini and the kind of work done in Indo-European by my teacher, Professor Wackernagel of Basle.\"\nP\u0101\u1e47ini's systematic approach to analysis includes components for: (a) forming grammatical rules, (b) an inventory of sounds, (c) a list of verbal roots organized into sublists, and (d) a list of classes of morphs. Bloomfield's approach to key linguistic ideas in his textbook \"Language\" reflect the influence of P\u0101\u1e47ini in his treatment of basic concepts such as \"linguistic form\", \"free form\", and others. Similarly, P\u0101\u1e47ini is the source for Bloomfield's use of the terms \"exocentric\" and \"endocentric\" used to describe compound words. Concepts from P\u0101\u1e47ini are found in \"Eastern Ojibwa\", published posthumously in 1958, in particular his use of the concept of a morphological zero, a morpheme that has no overt realization. P\u0101\u1e47ini's influence is also present in Bloomfield's approach to determining parts of speech (Bloomfield uses the term \"form-classes\") in both \"Eastern Ojibwa\" and in the later \"Menomini language\", published posthumously in 1962.\nAustronesian linguistics.\nWhile at the University of Illinois Bloomfield undertook research on Tagalog, an Austronesian language spoken in the Philippines. He carried out linguistic field work with Alfredo Viola Santiago, who was an engineering student at the university from 1914 to 1917. The results were published as \"Tagalog texts with grammatical analysis\", which includes a series of texts dictated by Santiago in addition to an extensive grammatical description and analysis of every word in the texts. Bloomfield's work on Tagalog, from the beginning of field research to publication, took no more than two years. His study of Tagalog has been described as \"the best treatment of any Austronesian language\u00a0... The result is a description of Tagalog which has never been surpassed for completeness, accuracy, and wealth of exemplification.\"\nBloomfield's only other publication on an Austronesian language was an article on the syntax of Ilocano, based upon research undertaken with a native speaker of Ilocano who was a student at Yale University. This article has been described as a \"tour de force, for it covers in less than seven pages the entire taxonomic syntax of Ilocano\".\nAlgonquian linguistics.\nBloomfield's work on Algonquian languages had both descriptive and comparative components. He published extensively on four Algonquian languages: Fox, Cree, Menominee, and Ojibwe, publishing grammars, lexicons, and text collections. Bloomfield used the materials collected in his descriptive work to undertake comparative studies leading to the reconstruction of Proto-Algonquian, with an early study reconstructing the sound system of Proto-Algonquian, and a subsequent more extensive paper refining his phonological analysis and adding extensive historical information on general features of Algonquian grammar.\nBloomfield undertook field research on Cree, Menominee, and Ojibwe, and analysed the material in previously published Fox text collections. His first Algonquian research, beginning around 1919, involved study of text collections in the Fox language that had been published by William Jones and Truman Michelson. Working through the texts in these collections, Bloomfield excerpted grammatical information to create a grammatical sketch of Fox. A lexicon of Fox based on his excerpted material was published posthumously.\nBloomfield undertook field research on Menominee in the summers of 1920 and 1921, with further brief field research in September 1939 and intermittent visits from Menominee speakers in Chicago in the late 1930s, in addition to correspondence with speakers during the same period. Material collected by Morris Swadesh in 1937 and 1938, often in response to specific queries from Bloomfield, supplemented his information. Significant publications include a collection of texts, a grammar and a lexicon (both published posthumously), in addition to a theoretically significant article on Menomini phonological alternations.\nBloomfield undertook field research in 1925 among Plains Cree speakers in Saskatchewan at the Sweet Grass reserve, and also at the Star Blanket reserve, resulting in two volumes of texts and a posthumous lexicon. He also undertook brief field work on Swampy Cree at The Pas, Manitoba. Bloomfield's work on Swampy Cree provided data to support the predictive power of the hypothesis of exceptionless phonological change.\nBloomfield's initial research on Ojibwe was through study of texts collected by William Jones, in addition to nineteenth century grammars and dictionaries. During the 1938 Linguistic Society of America Linguistic Institute held at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, Michigan, he taught a field methods class with Andrew Medler, a speaker of the Ottawa dialect who was born in Saginaw, Michigan, but spent most of his life on Walpole Island, Ontario. The resulting grammatical description, transcribed sentences, texts, and lexicon were published posthumously in a single volume. In 1941 Bloomfield worked with Ottawa dialect speaker Angeline Williams at the 1941 Linguistic Institute held at the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, resulting in a posthumously published volume of texts.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18062", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18062", "title": "Leather", "text": "Durable and flexible material created by tanning animal skins\nLeather is a strong, flexible and durable material obtained from the tanning, or chemical treatment, of animal skins and hides to prevent decay. The most common leathers come from cattle, sheep, goats, equine animals, buffalo, pigs and hogs, ostriches, and aquatic animals such as seals and alligators.\nLeather can be used to make a variety of items, including clothing, footwear, handbags, furniture, tools and sports equipment, and lasts for decades. Leather making has been practiced for more than 7,000 years and the leading producers of leather today are China and India.\nCritics of tanneries claim that they engage in unsustainable practices that pose health hazards to the people and the environment near them.\nProduction processes.\nThe leather manufacturing process is divided into three fundamental subprocesses: preparatory stages, tanning, and crusting. A further subprocess, finishing, can be added into the leather process sequence, but not all leathers receive finishing.\nThe preparatory stages are when the hide is prepared for tanning. Preparatory stages may include soaking, hair removal, liming, deliming, bating, bleaching, and pickling.\nTanning is a process that stabilizes the proteins, particularly collagen, of the raw hide to increase the thermal, chemical and microbiological stability of the hides and skins, making it suitable for a wide variety of end applications. The principal difference between raw and tanned hides is that raw hides dry out to form a hard, inflexible material that, when rewetted, will putrefy, while tanned material dries to a flexible form that does not become putrid when rewetted.\nMany tanning methods and materials exist. The typical process sees tanners load the hides into a drum and immerse them in a tank that contains the tanning \"liquor\". The hides soak while the drum slowly rotates about its axis, and the tanning liquor slowly penetrates through the full thickness of the hide. Once the process achieves even penetration, workers slowly raise the liquor's pH in a process called basification, which fixes the tanning material to the leather. The more tanning material fixed, the higher the leather's hydrothermal stability and shrinkage temperature resistance.\nCrusting is a process that thins and lubricates leather. It often includes a coloring operation. Chemicals added during crusting must be fixed in place. Crusting culminates with a drying and softening operation, and may include splitting, shaving, dyeing, whitening or other methods.\nFor some leathers, tanners apply a surface coating, called \"finishing\". Finishing operations can include oiling, brushing, buffing, coating, polishing, embossing, glazing, or tumbling, among others.\nLeather can be oiled to improve its water resistance. This currying process after tanning supplements the natural oils remaining in the leather itself, which can be washed out through repeated exposure to water. Frequent oiling of leather, with mink oil, neatsfoot oil, or a similar material keeps it supple and improves its lifespan dramatically.\nTanning methods.\nTanning processes largely differ in which chemicals are used in the tanning liquor. Some common types include:\nGrades.\nIn general, leather is produced in the following grades:\nThe term \"genuine leather\" does not describe a specific grade. The term often indicates split leather that has been extensively processed, and some sources describe it as synonymous with bicast leather, or made from multiple splits glued together and coated. In some countries, when it is the description on a product label the term means nothing more than \"contains leather\"; depending on jurisdiction, regulations limit the term's use in product labelling.\nAnimals used.\nToday, most leather is made of cattle (cow) hides, which constitute about 65% of all leather produced. Other animals that are used include sheep (about 13%), goats (about 11%), and pigs (about 10%). Obtaining accurate figures from around the world is difficult, especially for areas where the skin may be eaten. There are significant regional differences in leather production: e.g. goat leather was historically called \"Turkey\" or \"Morocco\" due to its association with the Middle East, while pig skin had historically been used the most in Germany. Other animals mentioned below only constitute a fraction of a percent of total leather production.\nHorse hides are used to make particularly durable leathers. Shell cordovan is a horse leather made not from the outer skin but from an under layer, found only in equine species, called the shell. It is prized for its mirror-like finish and anti-creasing properties.\nLamb and deerskin are used for soft leather in more expensive apparel. Deerskin is widely used in work gloves and indoor shoes.\nReptilian skins, such as alligator, crocodile, and snake, are noted for their distinct patterns that reflect the scales of their species. This has led to hunting and farming of these species in part for their skins. The Argentine black and white tegu is one of the most exploited reptile species in the world in the leather trade. However, it is not endangered and while monitored, trade is legal in most South American countries.\nKangaroo leather is used to make items that must be strong and flexible. It is the material most commonly used in bullwhips. Some motorcyclists favor kangaroo leather for motorcycle leathers because of its light weight and abrasion resistance. Kangaroo leather is also used for falconry jesses, soccer footwear, (e.g. Adidas Copa Mundial) and boxing speed bags.\nAlthough originally raised for their feathers in the 19th century, ostriches are now more popular for both meat and leather. Ostrich leather has a characteristic \"goose bump\" look because of the large follicles where the feathers grew. Different processes produce different finishes for many applications, including upholstery, footwear, automotive products, accessories, and clothing.\nIn Thailand, stingray leather is used in wallets and belts. Stingray leather is tough and durable. The leather is often dyed black and covered with tiny round bumps in the natural pattern of the back ridge of an animal. These bumps are then usually dyed white to highlight the decoration. Stingray rawhide is also used as grips on Chinese swords, Scottish basket hilted swords, and Japanese katanas. Stingray leather is also used for high abrasion areas in motorcycle racing leathers (especially in gloves, where its high abrasion resistance helps prevent wear through in the event of an accident).\nFor a given thickness, fish leather is typically much stronger due to its criss-crossed fibers.\nEnvironmental impact.\nLeather produces some environmental impact, most notably due to:\nCarbon footprint.\nEstimates of the carbon footprint of bovine leather range from 65 to 150\u00a0kg of CO2 equivalent per square meter of production.\nWater footprint.\nOne ton of hide or skin generally produces 20 to 80 m3 of waste water, including chromium levels of 100\u2013400\u00a0mg/L, sulfide levels of\n200\u2013800\u00a0mg/L, high levels of fat and other solid wastes, and notable pathogen contamination. Producers often add pesticides to protect hides during transport. With solid wastes representing up to 70% of the wet weight of the original hides, the tanning process represents a considerable strain on water treatment installations.\nDisposal.\nLeather biodegrades slowly\u2014taking 25 to 40 years to decompose. However, vinyl and petrochemical-derived materials take 500 or more years to decompose.\nChemical waste disposal.\nTanning is especially polluting in countries where environmental regulations are lax, such as in India, the world's third-largest producer and exporter of leather. To give an example of an efficient pollution prevention system, chromium loads per produced tonne are generally abated from 8\u00a0kg to 1.5\u00a0kg. VOC emissions are typically reduced from 30\u00a0kg/t to 2\u00a0kg/t in a properly managed facility. A review of the total pollution load decrease achievable according to the United Nations Industrial Development Organization posts precise data on the abatement achievable through industrially proven low-waste advanced methods, while noting, \"even though the chrome pollution load can be decreased by 94% on introducing advanced technologies, the minimum residual load 0.15 kg/t raw hide can still cause difficulties when using landfills and composting sludge from wastewater treatment on account of the regulations currently in force in some countries.\"\nIn Kanpur, the self-proclaimed \"Leather City of World\"\u2014with 10,000 tanneries as of 2011 and a city of three million on the banks of the Ganges\u2014pollution levels were so high, that despite an industry crisis, the pollution control board decided to shut down 49 high-polluting tanneries out of 404 in July 2009. In 2003 for instance, the main tanneries' effluent disposal unit was dumping 22 tonnes of chromium-laden solid waste per day in the open.\nIn the Hazaribagh neighborhood of Dhaka in Bangladesh, chemicals from tanneries end up in Dhaka's main river. Besides the environmental damage, the health of both local factory workers and the end consumer is also negatively affected. After approximately 15 years of ignoring high court rulings, the government shut down more than 100 tanneries the weekend of 8 April 2017 in the neighborhood.\nThe higher cost associated with the treatment of effluents than to untreated effluent discharging leads to illegal dumping to save on costs. For instance, in Croatia in 2001, proper pollution abatement cost US$70\u2013100 per ton of raw hides processed against $43/t for irresponsible behavior. In November 2009, one of Uganda's main leather making companies was caught directly dumping waste water into a wetland adjacent to Lake Victoria.\nRole of enzymes.\nEnzymes like proteases, lipases, and amylases have an important role in the soaking, dehairing, degreasing, and bating operations of leather manufacturing. Proteases are the most commonly used enzymes in leather production. The enzyme must not damage or dissolve collagen or keratin, but should hydrolyze casein, elastin, albumin, globulin-like proteins, and nonstructural proteins that are not essential for leather making. This process is called bating.\nLipases are used in the degreasing operation to hydrolyze fat particles embedded in the skin.\nAmylases are used to soften skin, to bring out the grain, and to impart strength and flexibility to the skin. These enzymes are rarely used.\nPreservation and conditioning.\nThe natural fibers of leather break down with the passage of time. Acidic leathers are particularly vulnerable to red rot, which causes powdering of the surface and a change in consistency. Damage from red rot is aggravated by high temperatures and relative humidities. Although it is chemically irreversible, treatments can add handling strength and prevent disintegration of red rotted leather.\nExposure to long periods of low relative humidities (below 40%) can cause leather to become desiccated, irreversibly changing the fibrous structure of the leather. Chemical damage can also occur from exposure to environmental factors, including ultraviolet light, ozone, acid from sulfurous and nitrous pollutants in the air, or through a chemical action following any treatment with tallow or oil compounds. Both oxidation and chemical damage occur faster at higher temperatures.\nThere are few methods to maintain and clean leather goods properly such as using damp cloth and avoid using a wet cloth or soaking the leather in water. Various treatments are available such as conditioners. Saddle soap is used for cleaning, conditioning, and softening leather. Leather shoes are widely conditioned with shoe polish.\nIn modern culture.\nDue to its high resistance to abrasion and wind, leather found a use in rugged occupations. The enduring image of a cowboy in leather chaps gave way to the leather-jacketed and leather-helmeted aviator. When motorcycles were invented, some riders took to wearing heavy leather jackets to protect from road rash and wind blast; some also wear chaps or full leather pants to protect the lower body.\nLeather's flexibility allows it to be formed and shaped into balls and protective gear. Subsequently, many sports use equipment made with leather, such as baseball gloves and the ball used in cricket and gridiron football.\nLeather fetishism is the name popularly used to describe a fetishistic attraction to people wearing leather, or in certain cases, to the garments themselves.\nMany rock groups (particularly heavy metal and punk groups in the 1970s and 80s) are well known for wearing leather clothing. Extreme metal bands (especially black metal bands) and Goth rock groups have extensive black leather clothing. Leather has become less common in the punk community over the last three decades, as there is opposition to the use of leather from punks who support animal rights.\nMany cars and trucks come with optional or standard leather or \"leather faced\" seating.\nReligious sensitivities.\nIn countries with significant populations of individuals observing religions which place restrictions on material choices, vendors typically clarify the source of leather in their products. Such labeling helps facilitate religious observance, so, for example, a Muslim will not accidentally purchase pigskin or a Hindu can avoid cattleskin. Such taboos increase the demand for religiously neutral leathers such as ostrich and deer.\nJudaism forbids the comfort of wearing leather shoes on Yom Kippur, Tisha B'Av, and during mourning. Also, see Leather in Judaism, Teffilin and Torah Scroll.\nJainism prohibits the use of leather, since it is obtained by killing animals.\nAlternatives.\nMany forms of artificial leather have been developed, usually involving polyurethane or vinyl coatings applied to a cloth backing. Many names and brands for such artificial leathers exist, including \"pleather\", a portmanteau of \"plastic leather\", and the brand name Naugahyde.\nAnother alternative is cultured leather which is lab-grown using cell-culture methods, mushroom-based materials and gelatin-based textile made by upcycling meat industry waste. Leather made of fungi or mushroom-based materials are completely biodegradable.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18065", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18065", "title": "Long Parliament", "text": "English Parliament from 1640 to 1660\nThe Long Parliament was an English Parliament which lasted from 1640 until 1660, making it the longest-lasting Parliament in English and British history. It followed the fiasco of the Short Parliament, which had convened for only three weeks during the spring of 1640 after an 11-year parliamentary absence. In September 1640, King Charles I issued writs summoning a parliament to convene on 3 November 1640. He intended it to pass financial bills, a step made necessary by the costs of the Bishops' Wars against Scotland. The Long Parliament received its name from the fact that, by Act of Parliament, it stipulated it could be dissolved only with agreement of the members; and those members did not agree to its dissolution until 16 March 1660, after the English Civil War and near the close of the Interregnum.\nThe parliament first sat from 1640 until 1653. Following Pride's Purge in 1648, the remaining members sat as the Rump Parliament until Oliver Cromwell suspended it in April 1653, replacing it with a succession of nominated and elected parliaments.\nIn the chaos following the death of Cromwell in September 1658, the Rump was reinstalled in May 1659, and in February 1660 General George Monck allowed the members barred in 1648 to retake their seats, so that they could pass the necessary legislation to allow the Stuart Restoration and dissolve the Long Parliament. This cleared the way for a new parliament to be elected, which was known as the Convention Parliament. Some key members of the Long Parliament, such as Sir Henry Vane the Younger and General Edmond Ludlow, were barred from the final acts of the Long Parliament. They claimed the parliament was not legally dissolved, its final votes a procedural irregularity (the words used contemporaneously were \"device\" and \"conspiracy\") by Monck to ensure the restoration of King Charles II of England. On the restoration Monck was rewarded with a dukedom.\nThe Long Parliament later became a key moment in Whig histories of the seventeenth century. American Whig historian Charles Wentworth Upham believed the Long Parliament comprised \"a set of the greatest geniuses for government that the world ever saw embarked together in one common cause\" and whose actions produced an effect which, at the time, made their country the wonder and admiration of the world, and is still felt and exhibited far beyond the borders of that country, in the progress of reform, and the advancement of popular liberty. He believed its republican principles made it a precursor to the American Revolutionary War.\nExecution of Strafford.\nCharles found himself unable to fund the Bishops' Wars without taxes; in April 1640, Parliament was recalled for the first time in eleven years, but when it refused to vote taxes without concessions, he dissolved it after only three weeks. The humiliating terms imposed by the Scots Covenanters after a second defeat forced him to hold fresh elections in November, which produced a large majority for the opposition, led by John Pym.\nParliament was almost immediately presented with a series of \"Root and Branch petitions\". These demanded the expulsion of bishops from the Church of England, reflecting widespread concern at the growth of \"Catholic practices\" within the church. Charles' willingness to make war on the Protestant Scots, but not to assist his exiled nephew Charles Louis, led to fears he was about to sign an alliance with Spain, a view shared by the experienced Venetian and French ambassadors.\nThis meant ending arbitrary rule was important not just for England, but the Protestant cause in general. Since direct attacks on the monarch were considered unacceptable, the usual route was to prosecute his \"evil counsellors\". Doing so showed even if the king was above the law, his subordinates were not, and he could not protect them; the intention was to make others think twice about their actions. Further, they started to create a series of committees and sub-committees starting with the Grand Committee for Religion appointed on 6 November 1640.\nTheir main target was the Earl of Strafford, former Lord Deputy of Ireland; aware of this, he urged Charles to use military force to seize the Tower of London, and arrest any MP or peer guilty of \"treasonable correspondence with the Scots\". While Charles hesitated, Pym struck first; on 11 November Strafford was impeached, arrested, and sent to the Tower. Other targets, including John Finch, fled abroad; Archbishop William Laud\u2014by then sufficiently unpopular that in May 1640 a large armed mob attacked Lambeth Palace, seeking to kill him\u2014was impeached in December, joining Strafford in the Tower.\nAt his trial in March 1641, Strafford was indicted on 28 counts of \"arbitrary and tyrannical government\". Even if these charges were proved, it was not clear they constituted a crime against the king, the legal definition of treason. If he went free, his opponents would replace him in the Tower, and so Pym immediately moved a bill of attainder, asserting Strafford's guilt and ordering his execution.\nAlthough Charles announced he would not sign the attainder, on 21 April 204 MPs voted in favour, 59 against, while 250 abstained. On 1 May, rumours of a military plot to release Strafford from the Tower led to widespread demonstrations in London, and on 7th, the Lords voted for execution by 51 to 9. Claiming to fear for his family's safety, Charles signed the death warrant on 10 May, and Strafford was beheaded two days later.\nCommittees established by the Long Parliament.\nOn 5 November 1640 parliament created several committees to parcel out the work they intended to address. The first committee was the Committee for Privileges and Elections under the leadership of John Maynard, MP for Totnes. On the next day, 6 November, parliament established the Grand Committee for Religion.\nThe Grand Remonstrance.\nThis seemed to provide a basis for a programme of constitutional reforms, and Parliament voted Charles an immediate grant of \u00a3400,000. The Triennial Acts required Parliament meet at least every three years, and if the King failed to issue proper summons, the members could assemble on their own. Levying taxes without consent of Parliament was declared unlawful, including Ship money and forced loans, while the Star Chamber and High Commission courts abolished.\nThese reforms were supported by many who later became Royalists, including Edward Hyde, Viscount Falkland, and Sir John Strangways. Where they differed from Pym and his supporters was their refusal to accept Charles would not keep his commitments, despite evidence to the contrary. He reneged on those made in the 1628 Petition of Right, and agreed terms with the Scots in 1639, while preparing another attack. Both he and Henrietta Maria openly told foreign ambassadors any concessions were temporary, and would be retrieved by force if needed.\nIn this period, 'true religion' and 'good government' were seen as one and the same. Although the vast majority believed a 'well-ordered' monarchy was a divinely mandated requirement, they disagreed on what 'well-ordered' meant, and who held ultimate authority in clerical affairs. Royalists generally supported a Church of England governed by bishops, appointed by, and answerable to, the king; most Parliamentarians were Puritans, who tended to believe that church leaders should be appointed by their congregations.\nHowever, Puritan meant anyone who wanted to reform, or 'purify', the Church of England, and contained many different opinions. Some simply objected to Laud's reforms; Presbyterians like Pym wanted to reform the Church of England, along the same lines as the Church of Scotland. Independents believed any state church was wrong, while many were also political radicals like the Levellers. Presbyterians in England and Scotland gradually came to see them as more dangerous than the Royalists; an alliance between these three groups eventually led to the Second English Civil War in 1648.\nWhile it is not clear there was a majority for removing bishops from the Church, their presence in the House of Lords became increasingly resented due to their role in blocking many of these reforms. Tensions came to a head in October 1641 with the outbreak of the Irish Rebellion; both Charles and Parliament supported raising troops to suppress it, but neither trusted the other with their control.\nOn 22 November, the Commons passed the Grand Remonstrance by 159 votes to 148, and presented it to Charles on 1 December. The first half listed over 150 perceived 'misdeeds', the second proposed solutions, including church reform and Parliamentary control over the appointment of royal ministers. In the Militia Ordinance, Parliament asserted control over appointment of army and navy commanders; Charles rejected the Grand Remonstrance and refused to assent to the Militia Ordinance. It was at this point moderates like Hyde decided Pym and his supporters had gone too far, and switched sides.\nFirst English Civil War.\nIncreasing unrest in London culminated in 23 to 29 December 1641 with widespread riots in Westminster, while the hostility of the crowd meant the bishops stopped attending the Lords. On 30 December, Charles induced John Williams, Archbishop of York and eleven other bishops, to sign a complaint, disputing the legality of any laws passed by the Lords during their exclusion. This was viewed by the Commons as inviting the king to dissolve Parliament; all twelve were arrested.\nOn 3 January 1642, Charles ordered his Attorney-general to bring charges of treason against Edward Montagu, 2nd Earl of Manchester, and Five Members of the Commons; Pym, John Hampden, Denzil Holles, Arthur Haselrig, and William Strode. This confirmed fears he intended to use force to shut down Parliament. The members were pre-warned, and evaded arrest.\nSoon after, Charles left London, accompanied by many Royalist MPs, and members of the Lords, a major tactical mistake. By doing so, he abandoned the largest arsenal in England and the commercial power of the City of London and guaranteed his opponents majorities in both houses. In February, Parliament passed the Clergy Act, excluding bishops from the Lords; Charles approved it, since he had already decided to retrieve all such concessions by assembling an army.\nIn March 1642, Parliament decreed its own Parliamentary Ordinances were valid laws, even without royal assent. The Militia Ordinance gave them control of the local militia, or Trained Bands; those in London were the most strategically critical, because they could protect Parliament from armed intervention by any soldiers which Charles had near the capital. Charles declared Parliament in rebellion and began raising an army, by issuing a competing Commission of Array.\nAt the end of 1642, he set up his court at Oxford, where the Royalist MPs formed the Oxford Parliament. In 1645 Parliament reaffirmed its determination to fight the war to a finish. It passed the Self-denying Ordinance, by which all members of either House of Parliament resigned any military commands, and formed the New Model Army under the command of Fairfax and Cromwell. The New Model Army soon destroyed Charles' armies, and by early 1646, he was on the verge of defeat.\nCharles left Oxford in disguise on 27 April; on 6 May, Parliament received a letter from David Leslie, commander of Scottish forces besieging Newark, announcing that he had the king in custody. Charles ordered the Royalist governor, Lord Belasyse, to surrender Newark, and the Scots withdrew to Newcastle, taking the king with them. This marked the end of the First English Civil War.\nSecond English Civil War.\nMany Parliamentarians had assumed military defeat would force Charles to compromise, which proved a fundamental misunderstanding of his character. When Prince Rupert suggested in August 1645 the war was lost, Charles responded he was correct from a military viewpoint, but 'God will not suffer rebels and traitors to prosper'. This deeply-held conviction meant he refused any substantial concessions. Aware of divisions among his opponents, he used his position as king of both Scotland and England to deepen them, assuming that he was essential to any government; while this was true in 1646, by 1648 key actors believed it was pointless to negotiate with someone who could not be trusted to keep any agreement.\nUnlike in England, where Presbyterians were a minority, the Bishops' Wars resulted in a Covenanter, or Presbyterian government, and Presbyterian kirk, or Church of Scotland. The Scots wanted to preserve these achievements; the 1643 Solemn League and Covenant was driven by their concern at the implications for this settlement if Charles defeated Parliament. By 1646, they viewed Charles as a lesser threat than the Independents, who opposed their demand for a unified, Presbyterian church of England and Scotland; Cromwell claimed he would fight rather than agree to it.\nIn July, the Scots and English commissioners presented Charles with the Newcastle Propositions, which he rejected. His refusal to negotiate created a dilemma for the Covenanters. Even if Charles agreed to a Presbyterian union, there was no guarantee it would be approved by Parliament. Keeping him was too dangerous; as subsequent events proved, whether Royalist or Covenanter, many Scots supported his retention. In February 1647, they agreed to a financial settlement, handed Charles over to Parliament, and retreated into Scotland. \nIn England, Parliament was struggling with the economic cost of the war, a poor 1646 harvest, and a recurrence of the plague. The Presbyterian faction had the support of the London Trained Bands, the Army of the Western Association, leaders like Rowland Laugharne in Wales, and parts of the Royal Navy. By March 1647, the New Model was owed more than \u00a33 million in unpaid wages; Parliament ordered it to Ireland, stating that only those who agreed would be paid. When their representatives demanded full payment for all in advance, it was disbanded.\nThe New Model refused to be disbanded; in early June, Charles was removed from his Parliamentary guards, and taken to Thriplow, where he was presented with the Army Council's terms. Though they were more lenient than the Newcastle Propositions, Charles rejected them; on 26 July, pro-Presbyterian rioters burst into Parliament, demanding he be invited to London. In early August, Fairfax and the New Model Army took control of the city, while on 20 August Cromwell went to Parliament with a military escort, and forced the passing of the Null and Void Ordinance annulling all Parliamentary proceedings since 26 July, leading to the withdrawal of most of the Presbyterian MPs and presaging Pride's Purge the following year. The Putney Debates attempted to address radicals' objectives, but the return of royalist threats in November led to Fairfax demanding a declaration of loyalty; this re-established command authority over the rank and file, completed at Corkbush.\nIn late November, the king escaped from his guards, and made his way to Carisbrooke Castle. In April 1648, the Engagers became a majority in the Scottish Parliament; in return for restoring him to the English throne, Charles agreed to impose Presbyterianism in England for three years, and suppress the Independents. His refusal to take the Covenant himself split the Scots; the Kirk Party did not trust Charles, objected to an alliance with English and Scots Royalists, and denounced the Engagement as 'sinful.'\nAfter two years of constant negotiation, and refusal to compromise, Charles finally had the pieces in place for a rising by Royalists, supported by some English Presbyterians, and Scots Covenanters. However, lack of co-ordination meant the Second English Civil War was quickly suppressed.\nRump Parliament (6 December 1648\u00a0\u2013 20 April 1653).\nDivisions emerged between various factions, culminating in Pride's Purge on 7 December 1648, when, under the orders of Oliver Cromwell's son-in-law Henry Ireton, Colonel Pride physically barred and arrested 41 of the members of Parliament. Many of the excluded members were Presbyterians. Henry Vane the Younger removed himself from Parliament in protest of this unlawful action by Ireton. He was not party to the execution of Charles I, although Cromwell was. In the wake of the ejections, the remnant, the \"Rump Parliament\", arranged for the trial and execution of Charles I on 30 January 1649. It was also responsible for the setting up of the Commonwealth of England in 1649.\nHenry Vane the Younger was persuaded to rejoin Parliament on 17 February 1649 and a Council of state was installed, into whose hands the executive government of the nation was committed. Sir Henry Vane was appointed a member of the Council. Cromwell took great pains to induce Vane to accept the appointment, and after many consultations, he so far prevailed in satisfying Vane of the purity of his principles in reference to the Commonwealth, as to overcome his reluctance again to enter the public service. Sir Henry Vane was for some time President of the Council, and, as Treasurer and Commissioner for the Navy, he had almost the exclusive direction of that branch of public service.\nCromwell \"well knew that while the Long Parliament, that noble company, who had fought the great battle of liberty from the beginning, remained in session, and such men as Vane were enabled to mingle in its deliberations, it would be utterly useless for him to think of executing his purposes\" (to set up a Protectorate or Dictatorship). Henry Vane was working on a Reform Bill. Cromwell knew \"that if the Reform Bill should be suffered to pass, and a House of Commons be convened, freely elected on popular principles, and constituting a full and fair and equal representation, it would be impossible ever after to overthrow the liberties of the people, or break down the government of the country\". According to General Edmund Ludlow (an unapologetic supporter of the Good Old Cause who lived in exile after the Restoration), this reform bill provided for an equal representation of the people, disfranchised several boroughs which had ceased to have a population in proportion to representation, fixed the number of the House at four hundred\". It would have \"secured to England and to the rest of the world the blessings of republican institutions, two centuries earlier than can now be expected\".\n\"Harrison, who was in Cromwell's confidence on this occasion, rose to debate the motion, merely in order to gain time. Word was carried to Cromwell, that the House were on the point of putting the final motion; and Colonel Ingoldby hastened to Whitehall to tell him, that, if he intended to do anything decisive, he had no time to lose\". Once the troops were in place Cromwell entered the assembly. He was dressed in a suit of plain black; with grey worsted stockings. He took his seat; and appeared to be listening to the debate. As the Speaker was about to rise to put the question, Cromwell whispered to Harrison, \"Now is the time; I must do it\". As he rose, his countenance became flushed and blacked by the terrific passions which the crisis awakened. With the most reckless violence of manner and language, he abused the character of the House; and, after the first burst of his denunciations had passed, suddenly changing his tone, he exclaimed, \"You think, perhaps, this is not parliamentary language; I know it; nor are you to expect such from me\". He then advanced out into the middle of the hall, and walked to and fro, like a man beside himself. In a few moments he stamped upon the floor, the doors flew open and a file of musketeers entered. As they advanced, Cromwell exclaimed, looking over the House, \"You are no Parliament; I say you are no Parliament; begone, and give place to honester men\".\n\"While this extraordinary scene was transacting, the members, hardly believing their own ears and eyes, sat in mute amazement, horror, and pity of the maniac traitor who was storming and raving before them. At length Vane rose to remonstrate, and call him to his senses; but Cromwell, instead of listening to him, drowned his voice, repeating with great vehemence, and as though with the desperate excitement of the moment, \"Sir Harry Vane! Sir Harry Vane! Good Lord deliver me from Sir Harry Vane!\" He then seized the records, snatched the bill from the hands of the clerk, drove the members out at the point of the bayonet, locked the doors, put the key in his pocket, and returned to Whitehall.\nOliver Cromwell forcibly disbanded the Rump in 1653 when it seemed to be planning to perpetuate itself rather than call new elections as had been agreed. It was followed by Barebone's Parliament and then the First, Second and Third Protectorate Parliaments.\nRecall of the Rump (7 May 1659\u00a0\u2013 20 February 1660).\nAfter Richard Cromwell, who had succeeded his father Oliver as Lord Protector in 1658, was effectively deposed by an officers' coup in April 1659, the officers re-summoned the Rump Parliament to sit. It convened on 7 May 1659, but after five months in power it again clashed with the army (led by John Lambert) and was again forcibly dissolved on 13 October 1659. Once again, Sir Henry Vane was the leading catalyst for the republican cause in opposition to force by the military.\nThe persons connected with the administration as it existed at the death of Oliver were, of course, interested in keeping things as they were. Also, it was necessary for someone to assume the reins of government until the public will could be ascertained and brought into exercise. Henry Vane was elected to Parliament at Kingston upon Hull, but the certificate was given to another. Vane proceeded to Bristol, entered the canvass, and received the majority. Again the certificate was given to another. Finally Vane proceeded to Whitechurch in Hampshire and was elected a third time and was this time seated in Parliament. Vane managed the debates on behalf of the House of Commons. One of Vane's speeches effectively ended Richard Cromwell's career:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mr. Speaker, among all the people of the universe, I know none who have shown so much zeal for the liberty of their country, as the English, at this time, have done. They have, by the help of Divine Providence, overcome all obstacles, and have made themselves free\u00a0... I know not by what misfortune, we are fallen into the error of those, who poised the Emperor Titus to make room for Domitian, who made away Augustus that they might have Tiberius, and changed Claudius for Nero\u00a0... whereas the people of England are now renowned, all over the world, for their great virtue and discipline; and yet suffer an idiot, without courage, without sense, nay, without ambition, to have dominion in a country of liberty. One could bear a little with Oliver Cromwell, though, contrary to his oath of fidelity to Parliament, contrary to his duty to the public,\u00a0... But as for Richard Cromwell, his son, who is he? Where are his titles\u00a0... For my part, I declare, Sir, it shall never be said that I made such a man my master.\nThis speech swept everything before it. The Rump Parliament which Oliver Cromwell had dispersed in 1653 was once more summoned to assemble, by a declaration from the Council of Officers dated on 6 May 1659.\nEdmond Ludlow made several attempts to reconcile the army and parliament in this time period but was ultimately unsuccessful. Parliament ordered the regiments of Colonel Morley and Colonel Moss to march to Westminster for their security, and sent for the rest of the troops that were about London to draw down to them also with all speed.\nIn October 1659, Colonel Lambert and various subordinate members of the army, acting in the military interest, resisted Colonel Morley and others who were defending the rump Parliament. Colonel Lambert, Major Grimes, and Colonel Sydenham eventually gained their points, and placed guards both by land and water, to hinder the members of Parliament from approaching the House. Colonel Lambert subsequently acquitted himself to Henry Vane the Younger, Edmond Ludlow and the \"Committee on Safety,\" an instrument of the Wallingford House party acting under their misdirection.\nNevertheless, Parliament was closed once again by military force until such time that the army and leaders of Parliament could effect a resolution. Rule then passed to an unelected \"Committee of Safety\", including Lambert and Vane; pending a resolution or compromise with the Army.\nDuring these disorders, the Council of State still assembled at the usual place, and:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the Lord President Bradshaw, who was present, though by long sickness very weak and much extenuated, yet animated by his ardent zeal and constant affection to the common cause, upon hearing Col Syndenham's justifications of the proceedings of the army in again disrupting parliament, stood up and interrupted him, declaring his abhorrence of that detestable action, and telling the council, that being now going to his God, he had not patience to sit there to hear his great name so openly blasphemed; and thereupon departed to his lodgings, and withdrew himself from public employment. \nThe Council of Officers at first attempted to come to some agreement with the leaders of Parliament. On 15 October 1659, the Council of Officers appointed ten persons to \"consider of fit ways and means to carry on the affairs and government of the Commonwealth\". On 26 October 1659 the Council of Officers appointed a new Committee of Safety of twenty-three members.\nOn 1 November 1659, the Committee of Safety nominated a committee \"to consider of and prepare a form of government to be settled over the three nations in the way of a free state and Commonwealth, and afterwards to present it to the Committee of Safety for their further considerations\".\nThe designs of General Fleetwood of the army and the Wallingford House party were now suspected as being in a possible alliance with Charles II. According to Edmond Ludlow: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Wallingford House party, as if infatuated by a superior power to procure their own destruction, continued obstinately to oppose the Parliament, and fixed in their resolution to call another (that is a reformed Parliament more agreeable to their interests). On the other side, I was sorry to find most of the Parliament men as stiff, in requiring an absolute submission to their authority as if no differences had happened among us, nor the privileges of Parliament ever been violated, peremptorily insisting upon the entire subjection of the army, and refusing to hearken to any terms of accommodation, though the necessity of affairs seemed to demand it, if we would preserve our cause from ruin. \nEdmond Ludlow warned both the Army and key members of Parliament that unless a compromise could be made it would \"render all the blood and treasure that had been spent in asserting our liberties of no use to us, but also force us under such a yoke of servitude, that neither we nor our posterity should be able to bear\".\nStarting on 17 December 1659, Henry Vane representing the Parliament, Major Saloway and Colonel Salmon with powers from the officers of the army to treat with the fleet, and Vice-Admiral Lawson met in negotiating a compromise. The navy was very adverse to any proposal of terms to be made with the Parliament before Parliament's readmission, insisting upon the absolute submission of the army to the authority of Parliament. A plan was then put in place declaring a resolution to join with the Generals at Portsmouth, Colonel Monck, and Vice-Admiral Lawson, but it was still unknown to the republican party that Colonel Monck was in league with King Charles II.\nColonel Monck, though a hero to the restoration of King Charles II, was also treacherously disloyal to the Long Parliament, to his oath to the present Parliament, and to the Good Old Cause. Ludlow stated in early January 1660 when in conversation with several key officers of the army:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Then\", said Capt. Lucas, \"you do not think us to be for the Parliament?\" \"No indeed\", said I; \"and it is most manifest to me, that the design of those who now govern the Council of Officers, though at present it be covered with pretences for the Parliament, is to destroy both them and their friends, and to bring in the son of the late King\".\nThis statement may be verified by the many executions of key Parliament members and Generals after the restoration of King Charles II. Therefore, the restoration of King Charles II could not be an act of the Long Parliament acting freely under its own authority, but only under the influence of the sword by Colonel Monck, who traded his loyalties for the present Long Parliament, in preference to a reformed Long Parliament and to the restoration of King Charles II.\nGeneral George Monck, who had been Cromwell's viceroy in Scotland, feared that the military stood to lose power and secretly shifted his loyalty to the Crown. As he began to march south, Lambert, who had ridden out to face him, lost support in London. However, the Navy declared for Parliament, and on 26 December 1659 the Rump was restored to power.\nOn 9 January 1660, Monck arrived in London and his plans were communicated. Whereupon Henry Vane the Younger was discharged from being a member of the Long Parliament; and Major Saloway was reproved for his role and committed to the Tower during the pleasure of the house. Lieutenant-General Fleetwood, Col. Sydenham, Lord Commissioner Whitlock, Cornelius Holland, and Mr. Strickland were required to clear themselves touching their deportment in that affair. High treason was also declared against Miles Corbet, Cor. John Jones, Col. Thomlinson, and Edmond Ludlow on 19 January 1660. 1,500 other officers were removed from their command and \"scarce one of ten of the old officers of the army were continued\". Any known Anabaptists in the army were specifically discharged. So tame had Parliament become, that though it was most visible that Monck's letters and Arthur Haslerig's instructions were designed for the dissolution of the Long Parliament, they were obeyed by the remainder of the members and all these designs were to be put into execution. Though named by Parliament for treason, Miles Corbet and Edmond Ludlow were for a while were permitted to continue to sit with Parliament, and for a time the charges against these men were dropped.\nRestoration and dissolution of the Long Parliament (21 February\u00a0\u2013 16 March 1660).\nAfter his initial show of deference to the Rump, Monck quickly found them unwilling to continue in cooperation with his plan for an election of a new parliament (the Rump Parliament believed Monck was accountable to them and had its own plan for free elections); so on 21 February 1660 he forcibly reinstated the members 'secluded' by Pride's purge in 1648, so that they could prepare legislation for the Convention Parliament. Some of the Rump Parliament were opposed and refused to sit with the Secluded Members.\nOn 27 February 1660, \"the new Council of State being informed of some designs against the usurped power, issued out warrants for apprehending divers officers of the army; and having some jealousy of others that were members of Parliament, they procured an order of their House to authorize them to seize any member who had not sat since the coming in of the Secluded Members, if there should be occasion.\nWhen the house was ready to pass the act for dissolution, Crew who had been as forward as any man in beginning and carrying on the war against the last King, moved, that before they dissolved themselves, they would bear their witness against the horrid murder, as he called it, of the King. According to Ludlow: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mr. Thomas Scott, who had been so much deluded by the hypocrisy of Monk\u00a0... said: 'That though he knew not where to hide his head at that time, yet he durst not refuse to own, that not only his hand, but his heart also was in it' and after he had produced divers reasons to prove the justice of it, he concluded, 'that he should desire no greater honor in this world, than that the following inscription might be engraved on his tomb; \"Here lies one who had a hand and a heart in the execution of Charles Stuart late King of England.' Having said this, he and most of the members who had a right to sit in Parliament, withdrew from the House; so that there was not the fourth part of a quorum of lawful members present in the House when the Secluded Members, who had been voted out of the Parliament by those that had an undisputed authority over their own members, undertook to dissolve the Parliament, which was not to be done, unless by their own consent; and whether that consent was ever given, is submitted to the judgement of all impartial men.\nHaving called for elections for a new Parliament to meet on 25 April, the Long Parliament was dissolved on 16 March 1660.\nFinally, on 22 April 1660, \"Major-General Lambert's party was dispersed\" and General Lambert taken prisoner by Colonel Ingoldsby.\nAftereffects: royalist and republican theories.\n\"Hitherto Monk had continued to make solemn protestations of his affection and fidelity to the Commonwealth interest, against a King and House of Lords; but the new militia being settled, and a Convention, calling themselves a Parliament and fit for his purpose, being met at Westminster, he sent to such lords as had sat with the Parliament till 1648, to return to the place where they used to sit, which they did, upon assurance from him, that no others should be permitted to sit with them; which promise he also broke, and let in not only such as had deserted to Oxford, but the late created lords. And Charles Stuart, eldest son of the late King, being informed of these transactions, left the Spanish territories where he then resided, and by the advice of Monk went to Breda, a town belonging to the States of Holland: from when he sent his letters and a declaration to the two House by Sir John Greenvil; whereupon the nominal House of Commons, though called by a Commonwealth writ in the name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, passed a vote [on about April 25, 1660], 'That the government of the nation should be by a King, Lords and Commons, and that Charles Stuart should be proclaimed King of England'\".\n\"The Lord Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen of the City, treated their King with a collation under a tent, placed in St. George's Fields; and five or six hundred citizens cloathed in coats of black velvet, and (not improperly) wearing chains about their necks, by an order of the Common Council, attended on the triumph of that day;\u00a0... and those who had been so often defeated in the field, and had contributed nothing either of bravery or policy to this change, in ordering the souldiery to ride with swords drawn through the city of London to White Hall, the Duke of York and Monk leading the way; and intimating (as was supposed) a resolution to maintain that by force which had been obtained by fraud\".\nInitially seven, and later 'twenty persons were put to death for life and estate.' These included: Chief Justice Coke, who had been Solicitor to the High Court of Justice, Major-General Harrison, Col. John Jones (also a member of the High Court of Justice), Mr. Thomas Scot, Sir. Henry Vane, Sir. Arthur Haslerig, Sir. Henry Mildmay, Mr. Robert Wallop, the Lord Mounson, Sir. James Harrington, Mr. James Challoner, Mr. John Phelps, Mr. John Carew, Mr. Hugh Peters, Mr. Gregory Clement, Colonel Adrian Scroop, Col. Francis Hacker, Col. Daniel Axtel. Among those who appeared the most basely subservient to these 'exorbitancies' of the Court, 'Mr. William Prynn was singularly remarkable' and attempted to add to these all who 'abjured the family of the Stuarts' previously, though this motion failed.\n\"John Finch who had been accused of high treason twenty years before, by a full Parliament, and who by flying from their justice had saved his life, was appointed to judge some of those who should have been his judges; and Sir. Orlando Bridgman, who upon his submission to Cromwell had been permitted to practice the law in a private manner, and under that colour had served both as spy and agent for his master, was entrusted with the principal management of this tragic scene; and in his charge to the Grand Jury, had the assurance to tell them 'That no authority, no single person, or community of men; not the people collectively or representatively, had any coercive power over the King of England'\".\nIn framing the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, the House of Commons were unwilling to except Sir Henry Vane, Sir. Arthur Haslerig, and Major-General Lambert as they had no immediate hand in the death of the King, and there was as much reason to except them as most of the members of Parliament from its benefits. In Henry Vane's case the House of Lords were desirous of having him specifically excepted, so as to leave him at the mercy of the government and thus restrain him from the exercise of his great talents in promoting his favourite republican principles at any time during the remainder of his life. At a conference between the two Houses, it was concluded that the Commons should consent to except him from the act of indemnity, the Lords agreeing, on their part, to concur with the other House in petitioning the King, in case of the condemnation of Vane, not to carry the sentence into execution. General Edmond Ludlow, still loyal to the Rump Parliament was also excepted.\nAccording to contemporary royalist legal theory, the Long Parliament was regarded as having been automatically dissolved from the moment of Charles I's execution on 30 January 1649. This view was confirmed by a court ruling during the treason trial of Henry Vane the Younger \u2013 a ruling that Henry Vane himself had concurred with in opposition to Oliver Cromwell years earlier.\nThe trial given to Vane as to his own person, and defence of his own part played for the Long Parliament was a foregone conclusion. It was not a fair trial as both his defence, and deportment at the time of defence bears out. He was not given legal counsel (other than the judges that sat at his trial); and was left to conduct his own defence after years in prison. Sir Henry Vane maintained the following at his trial:\nKing Charles II did not keep the promise made to the house but executed the sentence of death on Sir Henry Vane the Younger. The solicitor, openly declared in his speech afterwards \"that he (Henry Vane) must be made a public sacrifice\". One of his judges stated: \"We knew not how to answer him, but we know what to do with him\".\nEdmond Ludlow one of the members of Parliament excepted by the act of indemnity, fled to Switzerland after the restoration of King Charles II, where he wrote his memoirs of these events.\nThe Long Parliament began with the execution of Lord Stafford, and effectively ended with the execution of Henry Vane the Younger.\nThe republican theory is that the goal and aim of the Long Parliament was to institute a constitutional, balanced, and equally representative form of government along similar lines as were later accomplished in America by the American Revolution. It is clear from the writings of both Ludlow, Vane, and historians of the early American period such as Upham, that this is what they were striving for and why they were excepted from the acts of indemnity. The republican theory also suggests that the Long Parliament would have been successful in these necessary reforms except through the forceful intervention of Oliver Cromwell (and others) in removing the loyalists party, the unlawful execution of King Charles I, later dissolving the Rump Parliament; and finally the forceful dissolution of the reconvened Rump Parliament by Monck when less than a fourth of the required members were present. It is believed that in many ways this struggle was but a precursor to the American Revolution.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18066", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18066", "title": "Lutherans", "text": ""}
{"id": "18069", "revid": "50570104", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18069", "title": "Lubricant", "text": "Substance introduced to reduce friction between surfaces in mutual contact\nA lubricant (sometimes shortened to lube) is a substance that helps to reduce friction between surfaces in mutual contact, which ultimately reduces the heat generated when the surfaces move. It may also have the function of transmitting forces, transporting foreign particles, or heating or cooling the surfaces. The property of reducing friction is known as lubricity.\nIn addition to industrial applications, lubricants are used for many other purposes. Other uses include cooking (oils and fats in use in frying pans and baking to prevent food sticking), to reduce rusting and friction in machinery, through the use of motor oil and grease, bioapplications on humans (e.g., lubricants for artificial joints), ultrasound examination, medical examination, and sexual intercourse. It is mainly used to reduce friction and to contribute to a better, more efficient functioning of a mechanism.\nHistory.\nLubricants have been in some use for thousands of years. Calcium soaps have been identified on the axles of chariots dated to 1400 BC. Building stones were slid on oil-impregnated lumber in the time of the pyramids. In the Roman era, lubricants were based on olive oil and rapeseed oil, as well as animal fats. The growth of lubrication accelerated in the Industrial Revolution with the accompanying use of metal-based machinery. Relying initially on natural oils, needs for such machinery shifted toward petroleum-based materials early in the 1900s. A breakthrough came with the development of vacuum distillation of petroleum, as described by the Vacuum Oil Company. This technology allowed the purification of very non-volatile substances, which are common in many lubricants.\nProperties.\nA good lubricant generally possesses the following characteristics:\nFormulation.\nTypically lubricants contain 90% base oil (most often petroleum fractions, called mineral oils) and less than 10% additives. Vegetable oils or synthetic liquids such as hydrogenated polyolefins, esters, silicones, fluorocarbons and many others are sometimes used as base oils. Additives deliver reduced friction and wear, increased viscosity, improved viscosity index, resistance to corrosion and oxidation, aging or contamination, etc.\nNon-liquid lubricants include powders (dry graphite, PTFE, molybdenum disulphide, tungsten disulphide, etc.), PTFE tape used in plumbing, air cushion and others. Dry lubricants such as graphite, molybdenum disulphide and tungsten disulphide also offer lubrication at temperatures (up to 350\u00a0\u00b0C) higher than liquid and oil-based lubricants are able to operate. Limited interest has been shown in low friction properties of compacted oxide glaze layers formed at several hundred degrees Celsius in metallic sliding systems; however, practical use is still many years away due to their physically unstable nature.\nAdditives.\nA large number of additives are used to impart performance characteristics to the lubricants. Modern automotive lubricants contain as many as ten additives, comprising up to 20% of the lubricant, the main families of additives are:\nIn 1999, an estimated 37,300,000 tons of lubricants were consumed worldwide. Automotive applications dominate, including electric vehicles but other industrial, marine, and metal working applications are also big consumers of lubricants. Although air and other gas-based lubricants are known (e.g., in fluid bearings), liquid lubricants dominate the market, followed by solid lubricants.\nLubricants are generally composed of a majority of base oil plus a variety of additives to impart desirable characteristics. Although generally lubricants are based on one type of base oil, mixtures of the base oils also are used to meet performance requirements.\nMineral oil.\nThe term \"mineral oil\" is used to refer to lubricating base oils derived from crude oil. The American Petroleum Institute (API) designates several types of lubricant base oil:\n Manufactured by solvent extraction, solvent or catalytic dewaxing, and hydro-finishing processes. Common Group I base oil are 150SN (solvent neutral), 500SN, and 150BS (brightstock)\n Manufactured by hydrocracking and solvent or catalytic dewaxing processes. Group II base oil has superior anti-oxidation properties since virtually all hydrocarbon molecules are saturated. It has water-white color.\n Manufactured by special processes such as isohydromerization. Can be manufactured from base oil or slax wax from dewaxing process.\nThe lubricant industry commonly extends this group terminology to include:\nCan also be classified into three categories depending on the prevailing compositions:\nSynthetic oils.\nPetroleum-derived lubricant can also be produced using synthetic hydrocarbons (derived ultimately from petroleum), \"synthetic oils\".\nThese include:\nSolid lubricants.\nPTFE: polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) is typically used as a coating layer on, for example, cooking utensils to provide a non-stick surface. Its usable temperature range up to 350\u00a0\u00b0C and chemical inertness make it a useful additive in special greases, where it can function both as a thickener and a lubricant. Under extreme pressures, PTFE powder or solids is of little value as it is soft and flows away from the area of contact. Ceramic or metal or alloy lubricants must be used then.\nInorganic solids: Graphite, hexagonal boron nitride, molybdenum disulfide and tungsten disulfide are examples of solid lubricants. Some retain their lubricity to very high temperatures. The use of some such materials is sometimes restricted by their poor resistance to oxidation (e.g., molybdenum disulfide degrades above 350\u00a0\u00b0C in air, but 1100\u00a0\u00b0C in reducing environments.\nMetal/alloy: Metal alloys, composites and pure metals can be used as grease additives or the sole constituents of sliding surfaces and bearings. Cadmium and gold are used for plating surfaces which gives them good corrosion resistance and sliding properties, Lead, tin, zinc alloys and various bronze alloys are used as sliding bearings, or their powder can be used to lubricate sliding surfaces alone.\nAqueous lubrication.\nAqueous lubrication is of interest in a number of technological applications. Strongly hydrated brush polymers such as PEG can serve as lubricants at liquid solid interfaces. By continuous rapid exchange of bound water with other free water molecules, these polymer films keep the surfaces separated while maintaining a high fluidity at the brush\u2013brush interface at high compressions, thus leading to a very low coefficient of friction.\nBiolubricant.\nBiolubricants are derived from vegetable oils and other renewable sources. They usually are triglyceride esters (fats obtained from plants and animals). For lubricant base oil use, the vegetable derived materials are preferred. Common ones include high oleic canola oil, castor oil, palm oil, sunflower seed oil and rapeseed oil from vegetable, and tall oil from tree sources. Many vegetable oils are often hydrolyzed to yield the acids which are subsequently combined selectively to form specialist synthetic esters. Other naturally derived lubricants include lanolin (wool grease, a natural water repellent).\nWhale oil was a historically important lubricant, with some uses up to the latter part of the 20th century as a friction modifier additive for automatic transmission fluid.\nIn 2008, the biolubricant market was around 1% of UK lubricant sales in a total lubricant market of 840,000 tonnes/year.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], researchers at Australia's CSIRO have been studying safflower oil as an engine lubricant, finding superior performance and lower emissions than petroleum-based lubricants in applications such as engine-driven lawn mowers, chainsaws and other agricultural equipment. Grain-growers trialling the product have welcomed the innovation, with one describing it as needing very little refining, biodegradable, a bioenergy and biofuel. The scientists have reengineered the plant using gene silencing, creating a variety that produces up to 93% of oil, the highest currently available from any plant. Researchers at Montana State University\u2019s Advanced Fuel Centre in the US studying the oil\u2019s performance in a large diesel engine, comparing it with conventional oil, have described the results as a \"game-changer\".\nGreases.\nGreases are a solid or semi-solid lubricant produced by blending thickening agents within a liquid lubricant. Greases are typically composed of about 80% lubricating oil, around 5% to 10% thickener, and approximately 10% to 15% additives. In most common greases, the thickener is a light or alkali metal soap, forming a sponge-like structure that encapsulates the oil droplets. Beyond lubrication, greases are generally expected to provide corrosion protection, typically achieved through additives. To prevent drying out at higher temperatures, dry lubricants are also added. By selecting appropriate oils, thickeners, and additives, the properties of greases can be optimized for a wide range of applications. There are greases suited for high or extremely low temperatures, vacuum applications, water-resistant and weatherproof greases, highly pressure-resistant or creeping types, food-grade, or exceptionally adhesive greases.\nRadiation effects.\nEvidence of lubricants under ionizing radiation is limited and outdated. Radiolysis can degrade or improve properties, and reviews recommend standardized comparative testing. \nFunctions.\nOne of the largest applications for lubricants, in the form of motor oil, is protecting the internal combustion engines in motor vehicles and powered equipment.\nLubricant vs. anti-tack coating.\nAnti-tack or anti-stick coatings are designed to reduce the adhesive condition (stickiness) of a given material. The rubber, hose, and wire and cable industries are the largest consumers of anti-tack products but virtually every industry uses some form of anti-sticking agent. Anti-sticking agents differ from \"lubricants\" in that they are designed to reduce the inherently adhesive qualities of a given compound while lubricants are designed to reduce friction between any two surfaces.\nKeep moving parts apart.\nLubricants are typically used to separate moving parts in a system. This separation has the benefit of reducing friction, wear and surface fatigue, together with reduced heat generation, operating noise and vibrations. Lubricants achieve this in several ways. The most common is by forming a physical barrier i.e., a thin layer of lubricant separates the moving parts. This is analogous to hydroplaning, the loss of friction observed when a car tire is separated from the road surface by moving through standing water. This is termed hydrodynamic lubrication. In cases of high surface pressures or temperatures, the fluid film is much thinner and some of the forces are transmitted between the surfaces through the lubricant.\nReduce friction.\nTypically the lubricant-to-surface friction is much less than surface-to-surface friction in a system without any lubrication. Thus use of a lubricant reduces the overall system friction. Reduced friction has the benefit of reducing heat generation and reduced formation of wear particles as well as improved efficiency. Lubricants may contain polar additives known as friction modifiers that chemically bind to metal surfaces to reduce surface friction even when there is insufficient bulk lubricant present for hydrodynamic lubrication, e.g. protecting the valve train in a car engine at startup. The base oil itself might also be polar in nature and as a result inherently able to bind to metal surfaces, as with polyolester oils.\nTransfer heat.\nBoth gas and liquid lubricants can transfer heat. However, liquid lubricants are much more effective on account of their high specific heat capacity. Typically the liquid lubricant is constantly circulated to and from a cooler part of the system, although lubricants may be used to warm as well as to cool when a regulated temperature is required. This circulating flow also determines the amount of heat that is carried away in any given unit of time. High flow systems can carry away a lot of heat and have the additional benefit of reducing the thermal stress on the lubricant. Thus lower cost liquid lubricants may be used. The primary drawback is that high flows typically require larger sumps and bigger cooling units. A secondary drawback is that a high flow system that relies on the flow rate to protect the lubricant from thermal stress is susceptible to catastrophic failure during sudden system shut downs. An automotive oil-cooled turbocharger is a typical example. Turbochargers get red hot during operation and the oil that is cooling them only survives as its residence time in the system is very short (i.e. high flow rate). If the system is shut down suddenly (pulling into a service area after a high-speed drive and stopping the engine) the oil that is in the turbo charger immediately oxidizes and will clog the oil ways with deposits. Over time these deposits can completely block the oil ways, reducing the cooling with the result that the turbo charger experiences total failure, typically with seized bearings. Non-flowing lubricants such as greases and pastes are not effective at heat transfer although they do contribute by reducing the generation of heat in the first place.\nCarry away contaminants and debris.\nLubricant circulation systems have the benefit of carrying away internally generated debris and external contaminants that get introduced into the system to a filter where they can be removed. Lubricants for machines that regularly generate debris or contaminants such as automotive engines typically contain detergent and dispersant additives to assist in debris and contaminant transport to the filter and removal. Over time the filter will get clogged and require cleaning or replacement, hence the recommendation to change a car's oil filter at the same time as changing the oil. In closed systems such as gear boxes the filter may be supplemented by a magnet to attract any iron fines that get created.\nIt is apparent that in a circulatory system the oil will only be as clean as the filter can make it, thus it is unfortunate that there are no industry standards by which consumers can readily assess the filtering ability of various automotive filters. Poor automotive filters \nsignificantly reduce the life of the machine (engine) as well as make the system inefficient.\nTransmit power.\nLubricants known as hydraulic fluid are used as the working fluid in hydrostatic power transmission. Hydraulic fluids comprise a large portion of all lubricants produced in the world. The automatic transmission's torque converter is another important application for power transmission with lubricants.\nProtect against wear.\nLubricants prevent wear by reducing friction between two parts. Lubricants may also contain anti-wear or extreme pressure additives to boost their performance against wear and fatigue.\nPrevent corrosion and rusting.\nMany lubricants are formulated with additives that form chemical bonds with surfaces or that exclude moisture, to prevent corrosion and rust. It reduces corrosion between two metallic surfaces and avoids contact between these surfaces to avoid immersed corrosion.\nSeal for gases.\nLubricants will occupy the clearance between moving parts through the capillary force, thus sealing the clearance. This effect can be used to seal pistons and shafts.\n\"Glaze\" formation (high-temperature wear).\nA further phenomenon that has undergone investigation in relation to high-temperature wear prevention and lubrication is that of a compacted oxide layer glaze formation. Such glazes are generated by sintering a compacted oxide layer. Such glazes are crystalline, in contrast to the amorphous glazes seen in pottery. The required high temperatures arise from metallic surfaces sliding against each other (or a metallic surface against a ceramic surface). Due to the elimination of metallic contact and adhesion by the generation of oxide, friction and wear is reduced. Effectively, such a surface is self-lubricating.\nAs the \"glaze\" is already an oxide, it can survive to very high temperatures in air or oxidising environments. However, it is disadvantaged by it being necessary for the base metal (or ceramic) having to undergo some wear first to generate sufficient oxide debris.\nDisposal and environmental impact.\nLubricants both fresh and used can cause considerable damage to the environment mainly due to their high potential of serious water pollution. Further, the additives typically contained in lubricant can be toxic to flora and fauna. In used fluids, the oxidation products can be toxic as well. Lubricant persistence in the environment largely depends upon the base fluid, however if very toxic additives are used they may negatively affect the persistence. Lanolin lubricants are non-toxic making them the environmental alternative which is safe for both users and the environment.\nIt is estimated that about 50% of all lubricants are released into the environment. Common disposal methods include recycling, burning, landfill and discharge into water, though typically disposal in landfill and discharge into water are strictly regulated in most countries, as even small amount of lubricant can contaminate a large amount of water. Most regulations permit a threshold level of lubricant that may be present in waste streams and companies spend hundreds of millions of dollars annually in treating their waste waters to get to acceptable levels.\nBurning the lubricant as fuel, typically to generate electricity, is also governed by regulations mainly on account of the relatively high level of additives present. Burning generates both airborne pollutants and ash rich in toxic materials, mainly heavy metal compounds. Thus lubricant burning takes place in specialized facilities that have incorporated special scrubbers to remove airborne pollutants and have access to landfill sites with permits to handle the toxic ash.\nUnfortunately, most lubricant that ends up directly in the environment is due to the general public discharging it onto the ground, into drains, and directly into landfills as trash. Other direct contamination sources include runoff from roadways, accidental spillages, natural or man-made disasters, and pipeline leakages.\nImprovement in filtration technologies and processes has now made recycling a viable option (with the rising price of base stock and crude oil). Typically various filtration systems remove particulates, additives, and oxidation products and recover the base oil. The oil may get refined during the process. This base oil is then treated much the same as virgin base oil however there is considerable reluctance to use recycled oils as they are generally considered inferior. Basestock fractionally vacuum distilled from used lubricants has superior properties to all-natural oils, but cost-effectiveness depends on many factors. Used lubricant may also be used as refinery feedstock to become part of crude oil. Again, there is considerable reluctance to this use as the additives, soot, and wear metals will seriously poison/deactivate the critical catalysts in the process. Cost prohibits carrying out both filtration (soot, additives removal) and re-refining (distilling, isomerization, hydrocrack, etc.) however the primary hindrance to recycling still remains the collection of fluids as refineries need continuous supply in amounts measured in cisterns (rail tanks).\nOccasionally, unused lubricant requires disposal. The best course of action in such situations is to return it to the manufacturer where it can be processed as a part of fresh batches.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18070", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18070", "title": "Lise Meitner", "text": "Austrian-Swedish nuclear physicist (1878\u20131968)\nElise &lt;templatestyles src=\"Nobold/styles.css\"/&gt;\"Lise&lt;templatestyles src=\"Nobold/styles.css\"/&gt;\" Meitner ( ; ; 7 November 1878 \u2013 27 October 1968) was an Austrian and Swedish nuclear physicist who was instrumental in the discovery of nuclear fission.\nAfter completing her doctoral research in 1906, Meitner became the second woman to earn a doctorate in physics from the University of Vienna. She spent much of her scientific career in Berlin, where she was a physics professor and a department head at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry. She was the first woman to become a full professor of physics in Germany. She lost her positions in 1935 because of the anti-Jewish Nuremberg Laws of Nazi Germany, and the 1938 Anschluss resulted in the loss of her Austrian citizenship. On 13\u201314 July 1938, she fled to the Netherlands with the help of Dirk Coster. She lived in Stockholm for many years, ultimately becoming a Swedish citizen in 1949, but relocated to Britain in the 1950s to be with family members.\nIn mid-1938, chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry demonstrated that isotopes of barium could be formed by neutron bombardment of uranium. Meitner was informed of their findings by Hahn, and in late December, with her nephew, fellow physicist Otto Robert Frisch, she worked out the physics of this process by correctly interpreting Hahn and Strassmann's experimental data. On 13 January 1939, Frisch replicated the process Hahn and Strassmann had observed. In Meitner and Frisch's report in the February 1939 issue of \"Nature\", they gave the process the name \"fission\". The discovery of nuclear fission led to the development of nuclear reactors and atomic bombs during World War\u00a0II.\nMeitner did not share the 1944 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for nuclear fission, which was awarded to her long-time collaborator Otto Hahn. Several scientists and journalists have called her exclusion \"unjust\". According to the Nobel Prize archive, she was nominated 19 times for the Nobel Prize in Chemistry between 1924 and 1948, and 30 times for the Nobel Prize in Physics between 1937 and 1967. Despite not having been awarded the Nobel Prize, Meitner was invited to attend the Lindau Nobel Laureate Meeting in 1962. She received many other honours, including the posthumous naming of element 109 meitnerium in 1997. Meitner was praised by Albert Einstein as the \"German Marie Curie\".\nEarly years.\nElise Meitner was born in November 1878 into a Jewish upper-middle-class family at the family home in 27 Kaiser Josefstra\u00dfe in the Leopoldstadt district of Vienna. She was the third of eight children of chess master Philipp Meitner and his wife Hedwig. The birth register of Vienna's Jewish community lists her as being born on 17 November 1878, but all other documents list her date of birth as 7 November, which is what she used. \nHer father was one of the first Jewish lawyers admitted to practice in Austria. She had two older siblings, Gisela and Auguste (Gusti), and four younger: Moriz (Fritz), Carola (Lola), Frida and Walter; all ultimately pursued an advanced education. Her father was a freethinker, and she was brought up as such. \nAs an adult, she converted to Christianity, following Lutheranism, and was baptised in 1908; her sisters Gisela and Lola converted to Catholicism that same year. She also adopted the shortened name \"Lise\".\nLise Meitner did not marry. She had a strong scientific career and focus, and did not have any long-term romantic relationships.\nEducation.\nMeitner's interest in science began when she was eight, when she kept a notebook of her scientific research under her pillow. She was drawn to mathematics and science, and studied the colours of an oil slick, thin films, and reflected light. The only career available to women was teaching, so she attended a high school for girls where she trained as a French teacher. As well as French, her education included bookkeeping, arithmetic, history, geography, science and gymnastics. She completed high school in 1892. \nWomen were not allowed to attend public institutions of higher education in Vienna until 1897, but when this restriction was lifted, the requirement for a gymnasium education was waived and women only needed to pass the , the secondary school leaving qualification required for university entrance. Her sister Gisela passed the and entered medical school in 1900. Meitner began taking private lessons with two other young women in 1899, cramming the missing years of secondary education into two. Physics was taught by Arthur Szarvasy. \nIn July 1901, they sat an external examination at the Akademisches Gymnasium. Four out of the fourteen women passed, including Meitner and Henriette Boltzmann, the daughter of physicist Ludwig Boltzmann.\nResearch, work and academia.\nUniversity of Vienna.\nMeitner entered the University of Vienna in October 1901. She was particularly inspired by Ludwig Boltzmann and often spoke with enthusiasm about his lectures. Her dissertation was supervised by Franz Exner and his assistant Hans Benndorf. Her thesis was submitted on 20 November 1905 and approved on 28 November. She passed an oral exam from Exner and Boltzmann on 19 December, and was awarded her doctorate on 1 February 1906. She became the second woman to earn a doctoral degree in physics at the University of Vienna, after Olga Steindler who had received her degree in 1903; the third was Selma Freud, who worked in the same laboratory as Meitner, and received hers in 1906. Meitner's thesis was published as ('Thermal Conduction in Inhomogeneous Bodies') on 22 February 1906.\nPaul Ehrenfest asked her to investigate an article on optics by Lord Rayleigh detailing an experiment that produced results Rayleigh had been unable to explain. She was able to explain the results, and also made predictions based on her explanation, which she then verified experimentally, demonstrating her ability to carry out independent and unsupervised research. She published the results in her report on \"Some Conclusions Derived from the Fresnel Reflection Formula\". In 1906, while engaged in this research, Meitner was introduced by Stefan Meyer to radioactivity, then a very new field of study. She started with alpha particles. In her experiments with collimators and metal foil, she found that scattering in a beam of alpha particles increased with the mass of the metal atoms. She submitted her findings to the on 29 June 1907. This was one of the experiments that led Ernest Rutherford to predict the nuclear atom.\nFriedrich Wilhelm University.\nEncouraged and backed by her father's financial support, Meitner entered the Friedrich Wilhelm University in Berlin, where the renowned physicist Max Planck taught. Planck invited her to his home, and allowed her to attend his lectures. This was an unusual gesture by Planck, who was on record as opposing the admission of women to universities in general, but apparently recognised Meitner as an exception. She became friends with Planck's twin daughters Emma and Grete, who were born in 1889, and shared Meitner's love of music.\nAttending Planck's lectures did not take up all her time, and Meitner approached Heinrich Rubens, the head of the experimental physics institute, about doing some research. Rubens said that he would be happy for her to work in his laboratory. He also added that Otto Hahn at the chemistry institute was looking for a physicist to collaborate with. A few minutes later she was introduced to Hahn. He had studied radioactive substances under William Ramsay and Ernest Rutherford, and was already credited with the discovery of what were then thought to be several new radioactive elements. Hahn was the same age as Meitner, and she noted his informal and approachable manner. In Montreal, Hahn had become accustomed to collaboration with physicists\u2014including at least one woman, Harriet Brooks.\nThe head of the chemistry institute, Emil Fischer, placed a former woodworking shop () at Hahn's disposal in the basement to use as a laboratory. Hahn equipped it with electroscopes to measure alpha and beta particles and gamma rays. It was not possible to conduct research in the wood shop, but Alfred Stock, the head of the inorganic chemistry department, let Hahn use a space in one of his two private laboratories. Like Meitner, Hahn was unpaid, and lived off an allowance from his father, although somewhat larger than hers. He completed his habilitation in early 1907, and became a . Most of the organic chemists at the chemistry institute did not regard Hahn's work\u2014detecting minute traces of isotopes too small to see, weigh or smell through their radioactivity\u2014as real chemistry. One department head remarked that \"it is incredible what one gets to be a these days!\" Lise Meitner helped discover the radioactive element protactinium.\nThe arrangement was difficult for Meitner at first. Women were not yet admitted to universities in the German state of the Kingdom of Prussia, which included Berlin. Meitner was allowed to work in the wood shop, which had its own external entrance, but she could not enter the rest of the institute, including Hahn's laboratory space upstairs. If she wanted to go to the toilet, she had to use one at the restaurant down the street. The following year, women were admitted to Prussian universities, and Fischer lifted the restrictions, and had women's toilets installed in the building. Not all the chemists were happy about this. The Institute of Physics was more accepting, and she became friends with the physicists there, including Otto von Baeyer, James Franck, Gustav Hertz, Robert Pohl, Max Planck, Peter Pringsheim and Wilhelm Westphal.\nDuring the first years Meitner worked with Hahn, they co-authored nine papers: three in 1908 and six in 1909. Together with Hahn, she discovered and developed a physical separation method known as radioactive recoil, in which a daughter nucleus is forcefully ejected as it recoils at the moment of decay. While Hahn was more concerned with discovering new elements (now known to be isotopes), Meitner was more interested in understanding their radiation. She observed that radioactive recoil, which had been discovered by Harriet Brooks in 1904, could be a new way of detecting radioactive substances. They soon discovered two more new isotopes, bismuth-211 and thallium-207. Meitner was particularly interested in beta particles. By this time, they were known to be electrons. Alpha particles were emitted with characteristic energy, and she expected that this would be true of beta particles too. Hahn and Meitner carefully measured the absorption of beta particles by aluminium, but the results were puzzling. In 1914, James Chadwick found that electrons emitted from the nucleus formed a continuous spectrum, but Meitner found this hard to believe, as it seemed to contradict quantum physics, which held that electrons in an atom can only occupy discrete energy states (quanta).\nKaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry.\nIn 1912, Hahn and Meitner moved to the newly founded Kaiser Wilhelm Institute (KWI) for Chemistry in Berlin. Hahn accepted an offer from Fischer to become a junior assistant in charge of its radiochemistry section, the first laboratory of its kind in Germany. The job came with the title of \"professor\" and a salary of 5,000 marks per annum (). Unlike the universities, the privately funded KWI had no policies excluding women, but Meitner worked without pay as a \"guest\" in Hahn's section. She may have encountered financial difficulties after the death of her father in 1910. Fearing she might return to Vienna, Planck appointed her as his assistant at the Institute for Theoretical Physics in the Friedrich Wilhelm University. As such, she marked his students' papers. It was her first paid position. Assistant was the lowest rung on the academic ladder, and Meitner was the first female scientific assistant in Prussia.\nProud officials presented Meitner to Kaiser Wilhelm\u00a0II at the official opening of the KWI for Chemistry on 23 October 1912. The following year she became a ('associate') like Hahn (although her salary was still less), and the radioactivity section became the Hahn-Meitner Laboratory. Meitner celebrated with a dinner party at the Hotel Adlon. Hahn and Meitner's salaries would soon be dwarfed by royalties from mesothorium (\"middle thorium\", radium-228, also called \"German radium\") produced for medical purposes, for which Hahn received 66,000 marks in 1914 (). He gave ten per cent to Meitner. In 1914, Meitner was offered an academic position in Prague, which was then part of her country of Austria-Hungary. Planck made it clear to Fischer that he did not want Meitner to leave, and Fischer arranged for her salary to be doubled to 3,000 marks ().\nThe move to new accommodation was fortunate, as the wood shop had become thoroughly contaminated by radioactive liquids that had been spilt, and radioactive gases that had vented and decayed then settled as radioactive dust, making sensitive measurements impossible. To ensure that their clean new laboratories stayed that way, Hahn and Meitner instituted strict procedures. Chemical and physical measurements were conducted in different rooms, people handling radioactive substances had to follow protocols that included not shaking hands, and rolls of toilet paper were hung next to every telephone and door handle. Strongly radioactive substances were stored in the old wood shop, and later in a purpose-built radium house on the institute grounds.\nWorld War I and the discovery of protactinium.\nIn July 1914\u2014shortly before the outbreak of World War I\u2014Hahn was called to active duty with the army in a regiment. Meitner undertook X-ray technician training, and a course on anatomy at the city hospital in Lichterfelde. Meanwhile, she completed both the work on the beta ray spectrum that she had begun before the war with Hahn and Baeyer, and her own study of the uranium decay chain. In July 1915, she returned to Vienna, where she joined the Austrian Army as an X-ray nurse-technician. Her unit was deployed to the Eastern front in Poland, and she also served on the Italian front before being discharged in September 1916.\nMeitner returned to the KWI for Chemistry and her research in October. In January 1917, she was appointed as head of her own physics section. The Hahn-Meitner Laboratory was divided into separate Hahn and Meitner Laboratories, and her pay was increased to 4,000 marks (). Hahn returned to Berlin on leave, and they discussed another loose end from their pre-war work: the search for the mother isotope of actinium (element 89). According to the radioactive displacement law of Fajans and Soddy, this had to be an isotope of the undiscovered element 91 on the periodic table that lay between thorium (element 90) and uranium (element 92). Kasimir Fajans and Oswald Helmuth G\u00f6hring discovered the missing element in 1913, and named it \"brevium\" after its short half-life. However, the isotope they had found was a beta emitter, and therefore could not be the mother isotope of actinium. This had to be another isotope of the same element.\nIn 1914, Hahn and Meitner had developed a new technique for separating the tantalum group from pitchblende, which they hoped would speed the isolation of the new isotope. When Meitner resumed this work in 1917, Hahn and most of the students, laboratory assistants and technicians had been called up to serve in the armed forces, so Meitner had to do everything herself. In February, she extracted 2 grams of silicon dioxide (SiO2) from 21 grams of pitchblende. She set 1.5 grams aside and added a tantalum pentafluoride (TaF5) carrier to the other 0.5 grams, which she dissolved in hydrogen fluoride (HF). She then boiled it in concentrated sulfuric acid (H2SO4), precipitated what was believed to be element 91, and verified that it was an alpha emitter. Hahn came home on leave in April, and together they devised a series of tests to eliminate other sources of alpha particles. The only known ones with similar chemical behaviour were lead-210 (which decays to alpha emitter polonium-210 via bismuth-210) and thorium-230.\nFurther investigation required more pitchblende. Meitner went to Vienna, where she met with Stefan Meyer. The export of uranium from Austria was forbidden due to wartime restrictions, but Meyer was able to offer her a kilogram of uranium residue, pitchblende from which the uranium had been removed, which was actually better for her purpose. The tests showed that the alpha activity was not due to these substances. All that now remained was to find evidence of actinium. For this yet more pitchblende was required, but this time Meyer was unable to assist, as the export was now prohibited. Meitner managed to obtain 100 grams of \"double residue\"\u2014pitchblende without uranium or radium\u2014from Friedrich Oskar Giesel and began tests with 43 grams of it, but its composition was different, and at first her tests did not work. With Giesel's help, she was able to produce a pure product that was strongly radioactive. By December 1917 she was able to isolate both the mother isotope and its actinium daughter product. She submitted their findings for publication in March 1918.\nAlthough Fajans and G\u00f6hring had been the first to discover the element, custom required that an element was represented by its longest-lived and most abundant isotope, and brevium did not seem appropriate. Fajans agreed to Meitner naming the element \"protoactinium\" (subsequently shortened to protactinium), and assigning it the chemical symbol Pa. In June 1918, Soddy and John Cranston announced that they had independently extracted a sample of the isotope, but unlike Meitner they were unable to describe its characteristics. They acknowledged Meitner's priority, and agreed to the name. The connection to uranium remained a mystery, as neither of the two known isotopes of uranium (uranium-234 and uranium-238) decayed into protactinium. It remained unsolved until uranium-235 was discovered by Arthur Jeffrey Dempster in 1935.\nBeta radiation.\nIn 1921, Meitner accepted an invitation from Manne Siegbahn to come to Sweden and give a series of lectures on radioactivity as a visiting professor at Lund University. She found that very little research had been done on radioactivity in Sweden, but she was eager to learn about X-ray spectroscopy, which was Siegbahn's specialty. At his laboratory, she met a Dutch doctoral candidate, Dirk Coster, who was studying X-ray spectroscopy, and his wife Miep, who was working on her doctorate in Indonesian language and culture. Armed with her newly acquired knowledge of X-ray spectroscopy, Meitner took a fresh look at the beta-ray spectra when she returned to Berlin. It was known that some beta emission was primary, with electrons being ejected directly from the nucleus, and some was secondary, in which alpha particles from the nucleus knocked electrons out of orbit. Meitner was sceptical of Chadwick's claim that the spectral lines were entirely due to secondary electrons, while the primary ones formed a continuous spectrum. Using techniques developed by Jean Danysz, she examined the spectra of lead-210, radium-226 and thorium-238. Meitner discovered the cause of the emission of electrons from surfaces of atoms with \"signature\" energies, now known as the Auger-Meitner effect, in 1922. The effect is co-named after Pierre Victor Auger, who independently discovered it in 1923.\nWomen were granted the right of habilitation in Prussia in 1920, and in 1922 Meitner was granted her habilitation and became a . She was the first woman to receive her habilitation in physics in Prussia, and only the second in Germany after Hedwig Kohn. Since Meitner had already published over 40 papers, she was not required to submit a thesis, but Max von\u00a0Laue recommended that the requirement for an inaugural lecture not be waived, since he was interested in what she had to say. She therefore gave an inaugural lecture on \"Problems of Cosmic Physics\". From 1923 to 1933, she taught a colloquium or tutorial at Friedrich Wilhelm University each semester, and supervised doctoral students at the KWI for Chemistry. In 1926, she became an ('extraordinary professor'), the first woman university physics professor in Germany. Her physics section became larger, and she acquired a permanent assistant. Scientists from Germany and around the world came to the KWI for Chemistry to conduct research under her supervision. In 1930, Meitner taught a seminar on \"Questions of Atomic Physics and Atomic Chemistry\" with Le\u00f3 Szil\u00e1rd.\nMeitner had a Wilson cloud chamber constructed at the KWI for Chemistry, the first one in Berlin, and with her student Kurt Freitag studied the tracks of alpha particles that did not collide with a nucleus. With her assistant Kurt Philipp she later used it to take the first images of positron traces from gamma radiation. She proved Chadwick's assertion that the discrete spectral lines were entirely the result of secondary electrons, and the continuous spectra were therefore indeed entirely caused by the primary ones. In 1927, Charles Drummond Ellis and William Alfred Wooster measured the energy of the continuous spectrum produced by the beta decay of bismuth-210 at 0.34\u00a0MeV where the energy of each disintegration was 0.35\u00a0MeV. Thus, the spectrum accounted for nearly, but not all, of the energy. Meitner found this result so troubling that she repeated the experiment with Wilhelm Orthmann using an improved method, and verified Ellis and Wooster's results.\nIt appeared that the law of conservation of energy did not hold for beta decay, something Meitner regarded as unacceptable. In 1930, Wolfgang Pauli wrote an open letter to Meitner and Hans Geiger in which he proposed that the continuous spectrum was caused by the emission of a second particle during beta decay, one that had no electric charge and little or no rest mass. The idea was taken up by Enrico Fermi in his 1934 theory of beta decay, and he gave the name \"neutrino\" to the hypothetical neutral particle. At the time there was scant hope of detecting neutrinos, but in 1956 Clyde Cowan and Frederick Reines did just that.\nNazi Germany.\nAdolf Hitler was sworn in as the Chancellor of Germany on 30 January 1933, as his Nazi Party (NSDAP) was now the largest party in the . The 7 April 1933 Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service removed Jews from the civil service, which included academia. Meitner never tried to conceal her Jewish descent, but initially was exempt from its impact on multiple grounds: she had been employed before 1914, had served in the military during the World War, was an Austrian rather than a German citizen, and the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute was a government-industry partnership. However, she was dismissed from her adjunct professorship on 6 September on the grounds that her World War I service was not at the front, and she had not completed her habilitation until 1922. This had no effect on her salary or work at the KWI for Chemistry. Carl Bosch, the director of IG Farben, a major sponsor of the KWI for Chemistry, assured Meitner that her position there was safe. Although Hahn and Meitner remained in charge, their assistants, Otto Erbacher and Kurt Philipp respectively, who were both NSDAP members, were given increasing influence over the day-to-day running of the institute.\nOthers were not so fortunate; her nephew Otto Robert Frisch was dismissed from his post in the Institute for Physical Chemistry at the University of Hamburg, as was Otto Stern, the director of the institute. Stern found Frisch a position with Patrick Blackett at Birkbeck College in England, and he later worked at the Niels Bohr Institute in Copenhagen from 1934 to 1939. Fritz Strassman had come to the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry to study under Hahn to improve his employment prospects. He declined a lucrative offer of employment because it required political training and Nazi Party membership, and resigned from the Society of German Chemists when it became part of the Nazi German Labour Front rather than become a member of a Nazi-controlled organisation. As a result, he could neither work in the chemical industry nor receive his habilitation. Meitner persuaded Hahn to hire him as an assistant. Soon he would be credited as a third collaborator on the papers they produced, and would sometimes even be listed first. Between 1933 and 1935, Meitner published exclusively in the journal , as its editor Arnold Berliner was Jewish, and he continued to accept submissions from Jewish scientists. This generated a boycott of the publication, and in August 1935 the publisher, Springer-Verlag, fired Berliner.\nTransmutation.\nAfter Chadwick discovered the neutron in 1932, Ir\u00e8ne Curie and Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Joliot irradiated aluminium foil with alpha particles, and found that this results in a short-lived radioactive isotope of phosphorus. They noted that positron emission continued after the irradiation ceased. Not only had they discovered a new form of radioactive decay, they had transmuted an element into a hitherto unknown radioactive isotope of another, thereby inducing radioactivity where there had been none before. Radiochemistry was now no longer confined to certain heavy elements, but extended to the entire periodic table. Chadwick noted that being electrically neutral, neutrons could penetrate the nucleus more easily than protons or alpha particles. Enrico Fermi and his colleagues in Rome picked up on this idea, and began irradiating elements with neutrons.\nThe radioactive displacement law of Fajans and Soddy said that beta decay causes isotopes to move one element up on the periodic table, and alpha decay causes them to move two down. When Fermi's group bombarded uranium atoms with neutrons, they found a complex mix of half-lives. Fermi therefore concluded that new elements with atomic numbers greater than 92 (known as transuranium elements) had been created. Meitner and Hahn had not collaborated for many years, but Meitner was eager to investigate Fermi's results. Hahn, initially, was not, but he changed his mind when Aristid von\u00a0Grosse suggested that what Fermi had found was an isotope of protactinium. \"The only question\", Hahn later wrote, \"seemed to be whether Fermi had found isotopes of transuranium elements, or isotopes of the next-lower element, protactinium. At that time Lise Meitner and I decided to repeat Fermi's experiments in order to find out whether the 13-minute isotope was a protactinium isotope or not. It was a logical decision, having been the discoverers of protactinium.\"\nBetween 1934 and 1938, Hahn, Meitner, and Strassmann found a great number of radioactive transmutation products, all of which they regarded as transuranic. At that time, the existence of actinides was not yet established, and uranium was wrongly believed to be a group 6 element similar to tungsten. It followed that the first transuranic elements would be similar to group 7 to 10 elements, rhenium and platinoids. They established the presence of multiple isotopes of at least four such elements, and (mistakenly) identified them as elements with atomic numbers 93 to 96. They were the first scientists to measure the 23-minute half-life of the synthetic radioisotope uranium-239 and to establish chemically that it was an isotope of uranium, but with their weak neutron sources they were unable to continue this work to its logical conclusion and identify the real element 93. They identified ten different half-lives, with varying degrees of certainty. To account for them, Meitner had to hypothesise a new class of reaction and the alpha decay of uranium, neither of which had ever been reported before, and for which physical evidence was lacking. Hahn and Strassmann refined their chemical procedures, while Meitner devised new experiments to examine the reaction processes.\nIn May 1937, Hahn and Meitner issued parallel reports, one in with Meitner as the first author, and one in with Hahn as the first author. Hahn concluded his by stating emphatically: ('Above all, their chemical distinction from all previously known elements needs no further discussion'). Meitner was increasingly uncertain. She considered the possibility that the reactions were from different isotopes of uranium; three were known: uranium-238, uranium-235 and uranium-234. However, when she calculated the neutron cross section, it was too large to be anything other than the most abundant isotope, uranium-238, and concluded that it must be another case of nuclear isomerism, a phenomenon Hahn had discovered in protactinium years before. She therefore ended her report on a very different note to Hahn, reporting that: \"The process must be neutron capture by uranium-238, which leads to three isomeric nuclei of uranium-239. This result is very difficult to reconcile with current concepts of the nucleus.\"\nEscape from Germany.\nWith the , Germany's annexation of Austria on 12 March 1938, Meitner lost her Austrian citizenship. Niels Bohr extended an offer to lecture in Copenhagen, and Paul Scherrer invited her to attend a congress in Switzerland, with all expenses paid. Carl Bosch still said that she could remain at the KWI for Chemistry, but by May she was aware that the Reich Ministry of Science, Education and Culture was looking into her case. On 9 May, she decided to accept Bohr's invitation to go to Copenhagen, where Frisch worked, but when she went to the Danish consulate to get a travel visa, she was told that Denmark no longer recognised her Austrian passport as valid. She could not leave for Denmark, Switzerland or any other country.\nBohr came to Berlin in June, and was gravely concerned. When he returned to Copenhagen, he began looking for a position for Meitner in Scandinavia. He also asked Hans Kramers to see if anything was available in the Netherlands. Kramers contacted Coster, who in turn notified Adriaan Fokker. Coster and Fokker attempted to secure a position for Meitner at the University of Groningen. They found that the Rockefeller Foundation would not support refugee scientists, and that the International Federation of University Women had been flooded with applications for support from Austria. On 27 June, Meitner received an offer of a one-year position at Manne Siegbahn's new Manne Siegbahn Laboratory in Stockholm, then under construction, which would be devoted to nuclear physics, and she decided to accept it. But on 4 July she learned that academics would no longer be granted permission to travel abroad.\nThrough Bohr in Copenhagen, Peter Debye communicated with Coster and Fokker, and they approached the Netherlands Ministry of Education with an appeal to allow Meitner to come to the Netherlands. As foreigners were not allowed to work for pay, an appointment as a non-salaried was required. Wander Johannes de\u00a0Haas and Anton Eduard van\u00a0Arkel arranged for one at Leiden University. Coster also spoke to the head of the border guards, who assured him that Meitner would be admitted. A friend of Coster, E.\u00a0H. Ebels, was a local politician from the border area, and he spoke directly to the guards on the border.\nOn 11 July, Coster arrived in Berlin, where he stayed with Debye. The following morning, Meitner arrived early at the KWI for Chemistry, and Hahn briefed her on the plan. To avoid suspicion, she maintained her usual routine, remaining at the institute until 20:00 correcting an associate's paper for publication. Hahn and Paul Rosbaud helped her pack two small suitcases, carrying only summer clothes. Hahn gave her a diamond ring he had inherited from his mother in case of emergency; she took only 10 marks in her purse (). She then spent the night at Hahn's house. The next morning Meitner met Coster at the railway station, where they pretended to have met by chance. They travelled on a lightly used line to Bad Nieuweschans railway station on the border, which they crossed without incident; the German border guards may have thought that Meitner was the wife of a professor. A telegram from Pauli informed Coster that he was now \"as famous for the abduction of Lise Meitner as for the discovery of hafnium\".\nMeitner learned on 26 July that Sweden had granted her permission to enter on her Austrian passport, and two days later she flew to Copenhagen, where she was greeted by Frisch, and stayed with Niels and Margrethe Bohr at their holiday house in Tisvilde. On 1 August she travelled by train and steamship to Gothenburg station in Sweden, where she was met by Eva von\u00a0Bahr. They took a train, and then a steamer, to Von\u00a0Bahr's home in Kung\u00e4lv, where she stayed until September. Hahn told everyone at the KWI for Chemistry that Meitner had gone to Vienna to visit her relatives, and a few days later the institute had closed for the summer. On 23 August, she wrote to Bosch requesting retirement. He tried to ship her belongings to Sweden, but the Reich Ministry of Education insisted they remain in Germany.\nMeitner was concerned about her family in Austria. One of her first actions in Sweden was to apply for a Swedish immigration permit for Gusti and her husband Justinian (Jutz) Frisch. Hahn selected Josef Mattauch to replace her as head of the physics section, and went to Vienna to offer him the job. While there he dined with Meitner's sisters Gusti and Gisela and their husbands Jutz Frisch and Karl Lion on 9 November. The next day Gusti informed him that Frisch had been arrested. That day, Meitner arrived in Copenhagen; arranging a travel visa had been difficult with her invalid Austrian passport. Hahn joined her in Copenhagen on 13 November, and had discussions about the uranium research with Meitner, Bohr and Otto Robert Frisch.\nNuclear fission.\nHahn and Strassmann isolated the three radium isotopes (verified by their half-lives) and used fractional crystallisation to separate it from its barium carrier by adding barium bromide crystals in four steps. Since radium precipitates preferentially in a solution of barium bromide, at each step the fraction drawn off would contain less radium than the one before. However, they found no difference between each of the fractions. In case their process was faulty in some way, they verified it with known isotopes of radium; the process was fine. On 19 December, Hahn wrote to Meitner, informing her that the radium isotopes behaved chemically like barium. Anxious to finish up before the Christmas break, Hahn and Strassmann submitted their findings to on 22 December without waiting for Meitner to reply. Hahn concluded the paper with: \"As chemists... we should substitute the symbols Ba, La, Ce for Ra, Ac, Th. As 'nuclear chemists' fairly close to physics we cannot yet bring ourselves to take this step which contradicts all previous experience in physics.\"\nFrisch normally celebrated Christmas with Meitner in Berlin, but in 1938 she accepted an invitation from Eva von\u00a0Bahr to spend it with her family at Kung\u00e4lv, and Meitner asked Frisch to join her there. Meitner received the letter from Hahn describing his chemical proof that some of the product of the bombardment of uranium with neutrons was barium. Barium had an atomic mass 40% less than uranium, and no previously known methods of radioactive decay could account for such a large difference in the mass of the nucleus. Nonetheless, she had immediately written back to Hahn to say: \"At the moment the assumption of such a thoroughgoing breakup seems very difficult to me, but in nuclear physics we have experienced so many surprises, that one cannot unconditionally say: 'It is impossible.'\"\nMeitner dismissed the possibility that Hahn's identification of barium was in error; her faith in Hahn's expertise as a chemist was absolute. Meitner and Frisch then considered how it could be possible. Previous attempts at atom splitting had never had enough energy to chip away more than individual protons or alpha particles, but a barium nucleus was much larger. They considered the liquid-drop model of the nucleus that had been proposed by George Gamow: perhaps it was possible for a drop to become elongated and then divide itself in two.\nFrisch later wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At that point we both sat down on a tree trunk (all that discussion had taken place while we walked through the wood in the snow, I with my skis on, Lise Meitner making good her claim that she could walk just as fast without), and started to calculate on scraps of paper. The charge of a uranium nucleus, we found, was indeed large enough to overcome the effect of the surface tension almost completely; so the uranium nucleus might indeed resemble a very wobbly unstable drop, ready to divide itself at the slightest provocation, such as the impact of a single neutron.But there was another problem. After separation, the two drops would be driven apart by their mutual electric repulsion and would acquire high speed and hence a very large energy, about 200\u00a0MeV in all; where could that energy come from? Fortunately Lise Meitner remembered the empirical formula for computing the masses of nuclei and worked out that the two nuclei formed by the division of a uranium nucleus together would be lighter than the original uranium nucleus by about one-fifth the mass of a proton. Now whenever mass disappears energy is created, according to Einstein's formula \"E\"\u00a0= \"mc\"2, and one-fifth of a proton mass was just equivalent to 200\u00a0MeV. So here was the source for that energy; it all fitted! \nMeitner and Frisch had correctly interpreted Hahn's results to mean that the nucleus of uranium had split roughly in half. The first two reactions that the Berlin group had observed were light elements created by the breakup of uranium nuclei; the third, the 23-minute one, was a decay into the real element 93. On returning to Copenhagen, Frisch informed Bohr, who slapped his forehead and exclaimed \"What idiots we have been!\" Bohr promised not to say anything until they had a paper ready for publication. To speed the process, they decided to submit a one-page note to \"Nature\". At this point, the only evidence that they had was the barium. Logically, if barium was formed, the other element must be krypton, but Hahn had mistakenly believed that the atomic masses had to add up to 239 rather than the atomic numbers adding up to 92, and thought it was masurium (technetium), and so did not check for it:\n 92U + n \u2192 56Ba + 36Kr + some n \nOver a series of long-distance phone calls, Meitner and Frisch came up with a simple experiment to bolster their claim: to measure the recoil of the fission fragments, using a Geiger counter with the threshold set above that of the alpha particles. Frisch conducted the experiment on 13 January, and found the pulses caused by the reaction just as they had predicted. He decided he needed a name for the newly discovered nuclear process. He spoke to William A. Arnold, an American biologist working with George de Hevesy, and asked him what biologists called the process by which living cells divided into two. Arnold told him that biologists called it fission. Frisch then applied that name to the nuclear process in his paper. He mailed both papers to \"Nature\" on 16 January; the jointly-authored note appeared in print on 11 February and Frisch's paper on recoil on 18 February.\nThese three reports, the first Hahn-Strassmann publications of 6 January and 10 February 1939, and the Frisch-Meitner publication of 11 February 1939, had electrifying effects on the scientific community. In 1940 Frisch and Rudolf Peierls produced the Frisch\u2013Peierls memorandum, which established that an atomic explosion could be generated.\nNobel Prize.\nDespite the many honours that Meitner received in her lifetime, she did not receive the Nobel Prize while it was awarded to Otto Hahn for the discovery of nuclear fission. She was nominated 49 times for Physics and Chemistry Nobel Prizes but never won. On 15 November 1945, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences announced that Hahn had been awarded the 1944 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for \"his discovery of the fission of heavy atomic nuclei\". Meitner was the one who told Hahn and Strassman to test their radium in more detail, and it was she who told Hahn that it was possible for the nucleus of uranium to disintegrate. Without these contributions of Meitner, Hahn would not have found that the uranium nucleus can split in half.\nIn 1945 the Nobel Committee for Chemistry in Sweden that selected the Nobel Prize in Chemistry decided to award that prize solely to Hahn, who found out from a newspaper while detained in Farm Hall in England. In the 1990s, the long-sealed records of the Nobel Committee's proceedings became public, and the comprehensive biography of Meitner published in 1996 by Ruth Lewin Sime took advantage of this unsealing to reconsider Meitner's exclusion. In a 1997 article in the American Physical Society journal \"Physics Today\", Sime and her colleagues Elisabeth Crawford and Mark Walker wrote: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It appears that Lise Meitner did not share the 1944 prize because the structure of the Nobel committees was ill-suited to assess interdisciplinary work; because the members of the chemistry committee were unable or unwilling to judge her contribution fairly; and because during the war the Swedish scientists relied on their own limited expertise. Meitner's exclusion from the chemistry award may well be summarized as a mixture of disciplinary bias, political obtuseness, ignorance, and haste.\nMax Perutz, the 1962 Nobel Prize for chemistry winner, reached a similar conclusion: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Having been locked up in the Nobel Committee's files these fifty years, the documents leading to this unjust award now reveal that the protracted deliberations by the Nobel jury were hampered by lack of appreciation both of the joint work that had preceded the discovery and of Meitner's written and verbal contributions after her flight from Berlin.\nThe five-member physics committee included Manne Siegbahn; his former student Erik Hulth\u00e9n, the professor of experimental physics at Uppsala University; and Axel Lindh, who eventually succeeded Hulth\u00e9n. All three were part of the Siegbahn school of X-ray spectroscopy. The poor relationship between Siegbahn and Meitner was a factor here, as was the bias towards experimental rather than theoretical physics. In his report on the work of Meitner and Frisch, Hulth\u00e9n relied on pre-war papers. He did not think that their work was groundbreaking and argued that the prize for physics was given for experimental rather than theoretical work, which had not been the case for many years. At the time Meitner herself wrote in a letter: \"Surely Hahn fully deserved the Nobel Prize for chemistry. There is really no doubt about it. But I believe that Frisch and I contributed something not insignificant to the clarification of the process of uranium fission\u2014how it originates and that it produces so much energy and that was something very remote to Hahn.\" Hahn's Nobel Prize was long expected; both he and Meitner had been nominated for both the chemistry and the physics prizes several times even before the discovery of nuclear fission. According to the Nobel Prize archive, she was nominated 19 times for Nobel Prize in Chemistry between 1924 and 1948, and 30 times for Nobel Prize in Physics between 1937 and 1967. Her nominators included Arthur Compton, Dirk Coster, Kasimir Fajans, James Franck, Otto Hahn, Oskar Klein, Niels Bohr, Max Planck and Max Born. Despite not having been awarded the Nobel Prize, Meitner was invited to attend the Lindau Nobel Laureate Meeting in 1962.\nLater life.\nMeitner found that Siegbahn did not want her. At the time the offer to come to Sweden had been extended, he had said that he had no money, and could only offer Meitner a place to work. Eva von\u00a0Bahr had then written to Carl Wilhelm Oseen, who had provided money from the Nobel Foundation. This left her with laboratory space, but now she had to perform work that she had been able to delegate to her laboratory technicians for the previous twenty years. Ruth Lewin Sime wrote that: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Sweden there was no general sympathy for refugees from Nazi Germany: the country was small, with a weak economy and no immigrant tradition, and its academic culture had always been firmly pro-German, a tradition that did not change much until the middle of the war when it became obvious that Germany would not win. During the war, members of Siegbahn's group saw Meitner as an outsider, withdrawn and depressed; they did not understand the displacement and anxiety common to all refugees, or the trauma of losing friends and relatives to the Holocaust, or the exceptional isolation of a woman who had single mindedly devoted her life to her work.\nOn 14 January 1939, Meitner learned that her brother-in-law Jutz had been released from Dachau and he and her sister Gusti were permitted to emigrate to Sweden. Jutz's boss, Gottfried Bermann, had escaped to Sweden, and he offered Jutz his old job back at the publishing firm if he was able to come. Niels Bohr interceded with a Swedish official, Justitier\u00e5d Alexandersson, who said that Jutz would receive a labour permit on arrival in Sweden. He worked there until he was pensioned off in 1948, and then moved to Cambridge to join Otto Robert Frisch. Her sister Gisela and brother-in-law Karl Lion moved to England, and Meitner also considered moving there. She visited Cambridge in July 1939 and accepted an offer from William Lawrence Bragg and John Cockcroft of a position at the Cavendish Laboratory on a three-year contract with Girton College, Cambridge, but the Second World War broke out in September 1939 before she could make the move.\nIn Sweden, Meitner continued her research as best she could. She measured the neutron cross sections of thorium, lead and uranium using dysprosium as a neutron detector, an assay technique pioneered by George de Hevesy and Hilde Levi. She was able to arrange for Hedwig Kohn, who faced deportation to Poland, to come to Sweden, and eventually to emigrate to the United States, travelling via the Soviet Union. She was unsuccessful in bringing Stefen Meyer out of Germany, but he managed to survive the war. She declined an offer to join Frisch on the British contribution to the Manhattan Project at the Los Alamos Laboratory, declaring \"I will have nothing to do with a bomb!\" She later said that the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki had come as a surprise to her, and that she was \"sorry that the bomb had to be invented\". After the war, Meitner acknowledged her own moral failing in staying in Germany from 1933 to 1938. She wrote: \"It was not only stupid but very wrong that I did not leave at once.\" She regretted her own inaction during this period, and was also bitterly critical of Hahn, Max von\u00a0Laue, Werner Heisenberg, and other German scientists. In a June 1945 letter addressed to Hahn, that he never received, she wrote: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You all worked for Nazi Germany. And you did not even try passive resistance. Granted, to absolve your conscience you helped some oppressed person here and there, but millions of innocent human beings were murdered and there was no protest. Here in neutral Sweden, long before the end of the war, there was discussion of what should be done with German scholars once the war is over. What then must the English and Americans be thinking? I and many others are of the opinion that the one path for you would be to deliver an open statement that you are aware that through your passivity you share responsibility for what has happened, and that you have the need to work for what can be done to make amends. But many think it is too late for that. These people say that first you betrayed your friends, then your men and your children in that you let them stake their lives on a criminal war \u2013 and finally that you betrayed Germany itself, because when the war was already quite hopeless, you never once spoke out against the meaningless destruction of Germany. That sounds pitiless but nevertheless I believe that the reason I write this to you is true friendship. In the last few days one had heard of the unbelievably gruesome things in the concentration camps; it overwhelms everything one previously feared. When I heard on English radio a very detailed report by the English and Americans about Belsen and Buchenwald, I began to cry out loud and lay awake all night. And if you had seen those people who were brought here from the camps. One should take a man like Heisenberg and millions like him, and force them to look at these camps and the martyred people. The way he turned up in Denmark in 1941 is unforgettable. \nIn the aftermath of the bombing of Hiroshima, Meitner became a celebrity. She had a radio interview with Eleanor Roosevelt, and a few days later another one with a radio station in New York, during which she heard her sister Frida's voice for the first time in years. \"I am of Jewish descent\", she told Frida, \"I am not Jewish by belief, know nothing of the history of Judaism, and do not feel closer to Jews than to other people.\" On 25 January 1946, Meitner arrived in New York, where she was greeted by her sisters Lola and Frida, and by Frisch, who had made the two-day train trip from Los Alamos. Lola's husband Rudolf Allers arranged a visiting professorship for Meitner at the Catholic University of America. Meitner lectured at Princeton University, Harvard University and Columbia University, and discussed physics with Albert Einstein, Hermann Weyl, Tsung-Dao Lee, Yang Chen-Ning and Isidor Isaac Rabi. She went to Durham, North Carolina and saw Hertha Sponer and Hedwig Kohn, and spent an evening in Washington, DC, with James Chadwick, who was now the head of the British Mission to the Manhattan Project. She also met the project's director, Major General Leslie Groves. She spoke at Smith College, and went to Chicago, where she met Enrico Fermi, Edward Teller, Victor Weisskopf and Leo Szilard. On 8 July, Meitner boarded the for England, where she met with Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger, Wolfgang Pauli and Max Born. There were belated celebrations for the 300th birthday of Isaac Newton, but the only German invited to attend was Max Planck.\nFor her friends in Sweden, Siegbahn's opposition to Meitner's Nobel Prize was the final straw, and they resolved to get her a better position. In 1947, Meitner moved to the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH) in Stockholm, where Gudmund Borelius established a new facility for atomic research. There had been scant nuclear physics research in Sweden, which was blamed on Siegbahn's lack of support for Meitner's work, and now such knowledge seemed vital for Sweden's future. At the KTH, Meitner had three rooms, two assistants, and access to technicians, with Sigvard Eklund occupying the room next door. The intention was that Meitner would have the salary and title of a \"research professor\"\u2014one without teaching duties.\nThe professorship fell through when the Minister for Education, Tage Erlander, unexpectedly became the Prime Minister of Sweden in 1946, but Borelius and Klein ensured that she had the salary of a professor, if not the title. In 1949, she became a Swedish citizen, but without surrendering her Austrian citizenship thanks to a special act passed by the Riksdag. Plans were approved for R1, Sweden's first nuclear reactor, in 1947, with Eklund as the project director, and Meitner worked with him on its design and construction. In her last scientific papers in 1950 and 1951, she applied magic numbers to nuclear fission. She retired in 1960 and moved to the UK where many of her relatives were.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, Meitner enjoyed visiting Germany and staying with Hahn and his family for several days on different occasions. Hahn wrote in his memoirs that he and Meitner had remained lifelong close friends. Even though their friendship was full of trials, arguably more so experienced by Meitner, she \"never voiced anything but deep affection for Hahn\". On occasions such as their 70th, 75th, 80th and 85th birthdays, they addressed recollections in each other's honour. Hahn emphasised Meitner's intellectual productivity, and work such as her research on the nuclear shell model, always passing over the reasons for her move to Sweden as quickly as possible. She emphasised Hahn's personal qualities, his charm and musical ability.\nA strenuous trip to the United States in 1964 led to Meitner having a heart attack, which she spent several months recovering from. Her physical and mental condition was weakened by atherosclerosis. After breaking her hip in a fall and suffering several small strokes in 1967, Meitner made a partial recovery, but was eventually weakened to the point where she had to move into a Cambridge nursing home. Meitner died in her sleep on 27 October 1968 at the age of 89. She was not informed of the deaths of Otto Hahn on 28 July 1968 or his wife Edith on 14 August, as her family believed it would be too much for someone so frail. As was her wish, she was buried in the village of Bramley in Hampshire, at St James parish church, close to her younger brother Walter, who had died in 1964. Her nephew Frisch composed the inscription on her headstone. It reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Lise Meitner: a physicist who never lost her humanity.\nAwards and honours.\nMeitner was praised by Albert Einstein as the \"German Marie Curie\". On her visit to the US in 1946, she received the honour \"Woman of the Year\" from the National Press Club and had dinner with the President of the United States, Harry S. Truman, at the Women's National Press Club. She received the Leibniz Medal from the Prussian Academy of Sciences in 1924, the Lieben Prize from the Austrian Academy of Sciences in 1925, the Ellen Richards Prize in 1928, the City of Vienna Prize for science in 1947, Max Planck Medal of the German Physical Society jointly with Hahn in 1949, the inaugural Otto Hahn Prize of the German Chemical Society in 1954, the Wilhelm Exner Medal in 1960, and in 1967, the Austrian Decoration for Science and Art.\nThe President of Germany, Theodor Heuss, awarded Meitner the highest German order for scientists, the peace class of the Pour le M\u00e9rite in 1957, the same year as Hahn. Meitner became a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1945, and a full member in 1951, permitting her to participate in the Nobel Prize process. Four years later she was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society. She was also elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1960. She received honorary doctorates from Adelphi College, the University of Rochester, Rutgers University and Smith College in the United States, the Free University of Berlin in Germany, and the Stockholm University in Sweden.\nIn September 1966 the United States Atomic Energy Commission jointly awarded the Enrico Fermi Award to Hahn, Strassmann and Meitner for their discovery of fission. The ceremony was held in the Hofburg palace in Vienna. It was the first time that this prize had been awarded to non-Americans, and the first time it was presented to a woman. Meitner's diploma bore the words: \"For pioneering research in the naturally occurring radioactivities and extensive experimental studies leading to the discovery of fission\". Hahn's diploma was slightly different: \"For pioneering research in the naturally occurring radioactivities and extensive experimental studies culminating in the discovery of fission.\" Hahn and Strassmann were present, but Meitner was too ill to attend, so Frisch accepted the award on her behalf. Glenn Seaborg, the discoverer of plutonium, presented it to her in the home of Max Perutz in Cambridge on 23 October 1966.\nAfter her death in 1968, Meitner received many naming honours. In 1997, element 109 was named meitnerium. She is the first and so far the only non-mythological woman thus exclusively honoured (since curium was named after both Marie and Pierre Curie). Additional naming honours are the Hahn\u2013Meitner-Institut in Berlin, craters on the Moon and Venus, and the main-belt asteroid 6999 Meitner. In 2000, the European Physical Society established the biennial Lise Meitner Prize for excellent research in nuclear science. In 2006 the \"Gothenburg Lise Meitner Award\" was established by the University of Gothenburg and Chalmers University of Technology in Sweden; it is awarded annually to a scientist who has made a breakthrough in physics. In October 2010, the building at the Free University of Berlin that had once housed the KWI for Chemistry, and had been known as the Otto Hahn Building since 1956, was renamed the Hahn-Meitner Building, and in July 2014 a statue of Meitner was unveiled in the garden of the Humboldt University of Berlin next to similar statues of Hermann von\u00a0Helmholtz and Max Planck.\nSchools and streets were named after her in many cities in Austria and Germany, and a short residential street in Bramley, her resting place, is named Meitner Close. Since 2008 the Austrian Physical Society and the German Physical Society have organized the Lise Meitner Lectures, a series of annual public talks given by distinguished female physicists, and since 2015 the AlbaNova University Centre in Stockholm has had an annual Lise Meitner Distinguished Lecture. In 2016, the Institute of Physics in the UK established the Meitner Medal for public engagement within physics. In 2017, the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy in the United States named a major nuclear energy research program after her. On 6 November 2020, a satellite named after her (\u00d1uSat 16 or \"Lise\", COSPAR 2020-079H) was launched. The International Atomic Energy Agency named its library in her honour and established a programme to \"provide early- and mid\u2011career women professionals with opportunities to participate in a multi-week visiting professional programme and advance their technical and soft skills\".\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18071", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18071", "title": "Llama", "text": "Species of wooly domesticated mammal\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe llama (; or ) (Lama glama) is a domesticated South American camelid, widely used as a meat and pack animal by Andean cultures since the pre-Columbian era.\nLlamas are social animals and live with others as a herd. Their wool is soft and contains only a small amount of lanolin. Llamas can learn simple tasks after a few repetitions. When using a pack, they can carry about 25 to 30% of their body weight for 8 to 13 km (5\u20138 miles). The name \"llama\" (also historically spelled \"lama\" or \"glama\") was adopted by European settlers from native Peruvians.\nThe ancestors of llamas are thought to have originated on the Great Plains of North America about 40 million years ago and subsequently migrated to South America about three million years ago during the Great American Interchange. By the end of the last ice age (10,000\u201312,000 years ago), camelids were extinct in North America. As of 2007, there were over seven million llamas and alpacas in South America. Some were imported to the United States and Canada late in the 20th century; their descendants now number more than 158,000 llamas and 100,000 alpacas.\nIn Aymara mythology, llamas are important beings. The Heavenly Llama is said to drink water from the ocean and urinates as it rains. According to Aymara eschatology, llamas will return to the water springs and ponds where they come from at the end of time.\nClassification.\nLamoids, or llamas (as they are more generally known as a group), consist of the vicu\u00f1a (\"Lama vicugna\"), guanaco (\"Lama guanicoe\"), Suri alpaca, and Huacaya alpaca (\"Lama pacos\"), and the domestic llama (\"Lama glama\"). Guanacos and vicu\u00f1as live in the wild, while llamas and alpacas exist only as domesticated animals. Although early writers compared llamas to sheep, their similarity to the camel was soon recognized. They were included in the genus \"Camelus\" along with alpaca in the \"Systema Naturae\" (1758) of Carl Linnaeus. They were, however, separated by Georges Cuvier in 1800 under the name of \"lama\" along with the guanaco. DNA analysis has confirmed that the guanaco is the wild ancestor of the llama, while the vicu\u00f1a is the wild ancestor of the alpaca.\nThe genus \"Lama\" is, with the three species of true camels, the sole existing representatives of a very distinct section of the Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates) called Tylopoda, or \"bump-footed\", from the peculiar bumps on the soles of their feet. The Tylopoda consists of a single family, the Camelidae, and shares the order Artiodactyla with the Suina (pigs), the Tragulina (chevrotains), the Pecora (ruminants), and the Whippomorpha (hippos and cetaceans, which belong to Artiodactyla from a cladistic, if not traditional, standpoint). The Tylopoda have more or less affinity to each of the sister taxa, standing in some respects in a middle position between them, sharing some characteristics from each, but in others showing special modifications not found in any of the other taxa.\nThe 19th-century discoveries of a vast and previously unexpected extinct Paleogene fauna of North America, as interpreted by paleontologists Joseph Leidy, Edward Drinker Cope, and Othniel Charles Marsh, aided understanding of the early history of this family. Llamas were not always confined to South America; abundant llama-like remains were found in Pleistocene deposits in the Rocky Mountains and in Central America. Some of the fossil llamas were much larger than current forms. Some species remained in North America during the last ice ages. North American llamas are categorized as an extinct genus, \"Hemiauchenia\". Llama-like animals would have been a common sight 25,000 years ago in modern-day California, Texas, New Mexico, Utah, Missouri, and Florida.\nThe camelid lineage has a good fossil record. Camel-like animals have been traced back through early Miocene forms from the thoroughly differentiated, modern species. Their characteristics became more general, and they lost those that distinguished them as camelids; hence, they were classified as ancestral artiodactyls. No fossils of these earlier forms have been found in the Old World, indicating that North America was the original home of camelids and that the ancestors of Old World camels crossed over via the Bering Land Bridge from North America. The formation of the Isthmus of Panama three million years ago allowed camelids to spread to South America as part of the Great American Interchange, where they evolved further. Meanwhile, North American camelids died out at the end of the Pleistocene.\nCharacteristics.\nA full-grown llama can reach a height of at the top of the head and can weigh between . At maturity, males can weigh 94.74\u00a0kg, while females can weigh 102.27\u00a0kg. At birth, a baby llama (called a \"cria\") can weigh between . Llamas typically live for 15 to 25\u00a0years, with some individuals surviving 30 years or more.\nThe following characteristics apply especially to llamas. Dentition of adults: incisors canines , premolars , molars ; total 32. In the upper jaw, a compressed, sharp, pointed laniariform incisor near the hinder edge of the premaxilla is followed in the male at least by a moderate-sized, pointed, curved true canine in the anterior part of the maxilla. The isolated canine-like premolar that follows in the camels is not present. The teeth of the molar series, which are in contact with each other, consist of two very small premolars (the first almost rudimentary) and three broad molars, generally constructed like those of \"Camelus\". In the lower jaw, the three incisors are long, spatulate, and procumbent; the outer ones are the smallest. Next to these is a curved, suberect canine, followed after an interval by an isolated minute and often deciduous simple conical premolar; then a contiguous series of one premolar and three molars, which differ from those of \"Camelus\" in having a small accessory column at the anterior outer edge.\nThe skull generally resembles that of \"Camelus\", with a larger brain cavity and orbits and less-developed cranial ridges due to its smaller size. The nasal bones are shorter and broader and are joined by the premaxilla.\nVertebrae:\nThe ears are rather long and slightly curved inward, characteristically known as \"banana\" shaped. There is no dorsal hump. The feet are narrow, the toes being more separated than in the camels, each having a distinct plantar pad. The tail is short, and the fiber is long, woolly, and soft.\nIn essential structural characteristics, as well as in general appearance and habits, all the animals of this genus very closely resemble each other, so whether they should be considered as belonging to one, two, or more species is a matter of controversy among naturalists.\nThe question is complicated by the circumstances of most individuals who have come under observation, either in a completely or partially domesticated state. Many are also descended from ancestors previously domesticated, a state that tends to produce a certain amount of variation from the original type. The four forms commonly distinguished by the inhabitants of South America are recognized as distinct species, though there are difficulties in defining their distinctive characteristics.\nThese are:\nThe llama and alpaca are only known in the domestic state and are variable in size and of many colors, often white, brown, or piebald. Some are grey or black. The guanaco and vicu\u00f1a are wild. The guanaco is endangered; it has a nearly uniform light-brown color, passing into white below.\nThe guanaco and vicu\u00f1a certainly differ: The vicu\u00f1a is more petite, more slender in its proportions, and has a shorter head than the guanaco.\nThe vicu\u00f1a lives in herds on the bleak and elevated parts of the mountain range bordering the region of perpetual snow, amidst rocks and precipices, occurring in various suitable localities throughout Peru, in the southern part of Ecuador, and as far south as the middle of Bolivia. Its manners very much resemble those of the chamois of the European Alps; it is as vigilant, wild, and timid.\nVicu\u00f1a fiber is extremely delicate and soft and highly valued for weaving, but the quantity that each animal produces is small.\nAlpacas are primarily descended from wild vicu\u00f1a ancestors. In contrast, domesticated llamas are descended primarily from wild guanaco ancestors, although a considerable amount of hybridization between the two species has occurred.\nDifferential characteristics between llamas and alpacas include the llama's larger size, longer head, and curved ears. Alpaca fiber is generally more expensive but not always more valuable. Alpacas tend to have a more consistent color throughout the body. The most apparent visual difference between llamas and camels is that camels have a humps and llamas do not.\nLlamas are not ruminants, pseudo-ruminants, or modified ruminants. They do have a complex three-compartment stomach that allows them to digest lower quality, high cellulose foods. The stomach compartments allow for fermentation of tricky foodstuffs, followed by regurgitation and re-chewing. Ruminants (cows, sheep, goats) have \"four\" compartments, whereas llamas have only three stomach compartments: the rumen, omasum, and abomasum.\nIn addition, the llama (and other camelids) have an extremely long and complex large intestine (colon). The large intestine's role in digestion is to reabsorb water, vitamins, and electrolytes from food waste passing through it. The length of the llama's colon allows it to survive on much less water than other animals. This is a major advantage in arid climates where they live.\nReproduction.\nLlamas have an unusual reproductive cycle for a large animal. Female llamas are induced ovulators. Through mating, the female releases an egg and is often fertilized on the first attempt. Female llamas do not go into estrus (\"heat\").\nLike humans, llama males and females mature sexually at different rates. Females reach puberty at about 12 months old; males do not become sexually mature until around three years of age.\nMating.\nLlamas mate in a kush (lying down) position, similar to big cats and canines, which is unusual in a large animal. They mate for an extended time (20\u201345 minutes), also unusual in a large animal.\nGestation.\nThe gestation period of a llama is 11.5 months (350 days). Dams (female llamas) do not lick off their babies, as they have an attached tongue that does not reach outside of the mouth more than . Rather, they will nuzzle and hum to their newborns.\nCrias.\nA cria (from Spanish for \"baby\") is the name for a baby llama, alpaca, vicu\u00f1a, or guanaco. Crias are typically born with all the herd's females gathering to protect against the male llamas and potential predators. Llamas give birth standing. Birth is usually quick and problem-free, over in less than 30 minutes. Most births occur between 8 am and noon, during the warmer daylight hours. This may increase cria survival by reducing fatalities due to hypothermia during cold Andean nights. This birthing pattern is considered a continuation of the birthing patterns observed in the wild. Their crias are up and standing, walking, and attempting to suckle within the first hour after birth. Crias are partially fed with llama milk that is lower in fat and salt and higher in phosphorus and calcium than cow or goat milk. A female llama will only produce about of milk at a time when she gives milk, so the cria must frequently suckle to receive the nutrients it requires.\nBreeding methods.\nIn harem mating, the male is left with females most of the year.\nFor field mating, a female is turned into a field with a male llama and left there for some time. This is the easiest method in terms of labor but the least useful in predicting a likely birth date. An ultrasound test can be performed, and together with the exposure dates, a better idea of when the cria is expected can be determined.\nHand mating is the most efficient method, but it requires the most work on the part of the human involved. A male and female llama are put into the same pen, and mating is monitored. They are then separated and re-mated every other day until one refuses the mating. Usually, one can get in two matings using this method, though some stud males routinely refuse to mate a female more than once. The separation presumably helps to keep the sperm count high for each mating and also helps to keep the condition of the female llama's reproductive tract more sound. If the mating is unsuccessful within two to three weeks, the female is mated again.\nNutrition.\nOptions for feeding llamas are quite wide; various commercial and farm-based feeds are available. The major determining factors include feed cost, availability, nutrient balance and energy density required. Young, actively growing llamas require a greater concentration of nutrients than mature animals because of their smaller digestive tract capacities.\nBehavior.\nLlamas that are well-socialized and trained to halter and lead after weaning are very friendly and pleasant to be around. They are extremely curious, and most will approach people easily. However, llamas that are bottle-fed or over-socialized and over-handled as youth will become extremely difficult to handle when mature, when they will begin to treat humans as they treat each other, which is characterized by bouts of spitting, kicking and neck wrestling.\nLlamas are now utilized as certified therapy animals in nursing homes and hospitals. Rojo the Llama, located in the Pacific Northwest was certified in 2008. The Mayo Clinic says animal-assisted therapy can reduce pain, depression, anxiety, and fatigue. This type of therapy is growing in popularity, and several organizations throughout the United States participate.\nWhen correctly reared, llamas spitting at a human is a rare thing. Llamas are very social herd animals, however, and sometimes spit at each other to discipline lower-ranked llamas. A llama's social rank in a herd is never static. They can always move up or down the social ladder by picking small fights. This is usually done between males to see which will become dominant. Their fights are visually dramatic, characterized by spitting, ramming each other with their chests, neck wrestling, and kicking, mainly to knock the other off balance. The females are usually only seen spitting to control other herd members. One may determine how agitated the llama is by the materials in the spit. The more irritated the llama is, the further back into each of the three stomach compartments it will try to draw materials from for its spit.\nWhile the social structure might constantly change, they live as a family and care for each other. If one notices a strange noise or feels threatened, an alarm call - a loud, shrill sound that rhythmically rises and falls - is sent out, and all others become alert. They will often hum to each other as a form of communication.\nThe llama's groaning noises or going \"mwa\" (/mwa\u02b0/) is often a sign of fear or anger. Unhappy or agitated llamas will lay their ears back, while ears being perked upwards is a sign of happiness or curiosity.\nAn \"orgle\" is the mating sound of a llama or alpaca, made by the sexually aroused male. The sound is reminiscent of gargling but with a more forceful, buzzing edge. Males begin the sound when they become aroused and continue throughout copulation.\nGuard behavior.\nUsing llamas as livestock guards in North America began in the early 1980s, and some sheep producers have used llamas successfully since then. Some would even use them to guard their smaller cousins, the alpaca. They are used most commonly in the western regions of the United States, where larger predators, such as coyotes and feral dogs, are prevalent. Typically, a single gelding (castrated male) is used.\nResearch suggests using multiple guard llamas is not as effective as one. Multiple males tend to bond with one another rather than with the livestock and may ignore the flock. A gelded male of two years of age bonds closely with its new charges and is instinctively very effective in preventing predation. Some llamas bond more quickly to sheep or goats if introduced just before lambing. Many sheep and goat producers indicate a special bond quickly develops between lambs and their guard llama, and the llama is particularly protective of the lambs.\nUsing llamas as guards has reduced the losses to predators for many producers. The value of the livestock saved each year exceeds a llama's purchase cost and annual maintenance. Although not every llama is suited to the job, most are a viable, nonlethal alternative for reducing predation, requiring no training and little care.\nFiber.\nLlamas have a fine undercoat, which can be used for handicrafts and garments. The coarser outer guard hair is used for rugs, wall hangings, and lead ropes. The fiber comes in many colors, ranging from white or grey to reddish-brown, brown, dark brown, and black.\nMedical uses.\nDoctors and researchers have determined that llamas possess antibodies that are well-suited to treat certain diseases. Scientists have been studying the way llamas might contribute to the fight against coronaviruses, including MERS and SARS-CoV-2 (which causes COVID-19).\nHistory of domestication.\nPre-Incan cultures.\nScholar Alex Chepstow-Lusty has argued that the switch from a hunter-gatherer lifestyle to widespread agriculture was only possible because of the use of llama dung as fertilizer.\nThe Moche people frequently placed llamas and their parts in the burials of important people as offerings or provisions for the afterlife. The Moche of pre-Columbian Peru depicted llamas quite realistically in their ceramics.\nInca Empire.\nIn the Inca Empire, llamas were the only beasts of burden, and many of the people dominated by the Inca had long traditions of llama herding. For the Inca nobility, the llama was symbolic, and llama figures were often buried with the dead.\nIn South America, llamas are still used as beasts of burden, as well as for the production of fiber and meat.\nThe Inca deity Urcuchillay was depicted in the form of a multicolored llama.\nCarl Troll has argued that the large numbers of llamas found in the southern Peruvian highlands were an essential factor in the rise of the Inca Empire. It is worth considering the maximum extent of the Inca Empire roughly coincided with the most significant distribution of alpacas and llamas in Pre-Hispanic America. The link between the Andean biomes of puna and p\u00e1ramo, llama pastoralism and the Inca state is a matter of research.\nSpanish Empire.\nOne of the main uses for llamas at the time of the Spanish conquest was to bring down ore from the mines in the mountains. Gregory de Bolivar estimated that in his day, as many as 300,000 were employed in the transport of produce from the Potos\u00ed mines alone, but since the introduction of horses, mules, and donkeys, the importance of the llama as a beast of burden has greatly diminished.\nAccording to Juan Ignacio Molina, the Dutch captain Joris van Spilbergen observed the use of hueques (possibly a llama type) by native Mapuches of Mocha Island as plow animals in 1614.\nIn Chile hueque, populations declined towards extinction in the 16th and 17th century being replaced by European livestock. The causes of its extinction are not clear. However, it is known that the introduction of sheep caused some competition among both domestic species. Anecdotal evidence of the mid-17th century shows that both species coexisted and suggests that there were many more sheep than hueques. The decline of hueques reached a point in the late 18th century when only the Mapuche from Mariquina and Huequ\u00e9n next to Angol raised the animal.\nUnited States.\nLlamas were first imported into the US in the late 1800s as zoo exhibits. Restrictions on importation of livestock from South America due to hoof and mouth disease, combined with lack of commercial interest, resulted in the number of llamas staying low until the late 20th century. In the 1970s, interest in llamas as livestock began to grow, and the number of llamas increased as farmers bred and produced an increasing number of animals. Both the price and number of llamas in the US climbed rapidly in the 1980s and 1990s. With little market for llama fiber or meat in the US and the value of guard llamas limited, the primary value in llamas was in breeding more animals, a classic sign of a speculative bubble in agriculture. By 2002, there were almost 145,000 llamas in the US, according to the US Department of Agriculture, and animals sold for as much as $220,000. However, the lack of any end market for the animals resulted in a crash in both llama prices and the number of llamas; the Great Recession further dried up investment capital, and the number of llamas in the US began to decline as fewer animals were bred and older animals died of old age. By 2017, the number of llamas in the US had dropped below 40,000. A similar speculative bubble was experienced with the closely related alpaca, which burst shortly after the llama bubble.\nCulture.\nBeing an important animal and long-standing cultural icon in South America, Llamas gained in recent history cultural prominence in Western culture.\nFor example, the video game company Maxis has used llamas extensively as elements in their games, particularly in the widely popular game series The Sims, with llamas being the national symbol of the country where the broader series of Sim games are set. The online video game Fortnite uses pi\u00f1ata llamas as loot containers, which contain various in-game resources. Game developer Jeff Minter also named his company Llamasoft in honor of the animal.\nThe programming language Perl, with its Llama book, has been associated with llamas.\nIn \"The Emperor's New Groove,\" a 2000 animated Disney film, an Incan emperor gets turned into a llama.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18072", "revid": "14967932", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18072", "title": "Law of the Sea", "text": ""}
{"id": "18073", "revid": "35907208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18073", "title": "L cut", "text": "Film editing technique in which audio cuts after the picture cuts\nIn film editing, an L cut is a variant of a split edit technique in which the audio from the preceding scene overlaps the picture from the following scene, so that the audio cuts after the picture, and continues playing over the beginning of the next scene.\nThe name of the cut refers to the shape of audio and video pieces of the second of two scenes cut together when it was done on analog film. This creates a shape similar to the letter \"L\" on the timeline, with the main body representing the video from the previous clip and the foot of the \"L\" representing the continuing audio. The L-Cut frequently appears in interviews, documentaries, and dialogue-heavy video scenes.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18075", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18075", "title": "Lutheran", "text": ""}
{"id": "18077", "revid": "38056903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18077", "title": "Lexicon", "text": "Vocabulary of a language or branch of knowledge\nA lexicon (pl.\u2009lexicons, rarely lexica) is the vocabulary of a language or branch of knowledge (such as nautical or medical). In linguistics, a lexicon is a language's inventory of lexemes. The word \"lexicon\" derives from Greek word (), neuter of () meaning 'of or for words'.\nLinguistic theories generally regard human languages as consisting of two parts: a lexicon, essentially a catalogue of a language's words (its wordstock); and a grammar, a system of rules which allow for the combination of those words into meaningful sentences. The lexicon is also thought to include bound morphemes, which cannot stand alone as words (such as most affixes). In some analyses, compound words and certain classes of idiomatic expressions, collocations and other phrasemes are also considered to be part of the lexicon. Dictionaries are lists of the lexicon, in alphabetical order, of a given language; usually, however, bound morphemes are not included.\nSize and organization.\nItems in the lexicon are called lexemes, lexical items, or word forms. Lexemes are not atomic elements but contain both phonological and morphological components. When describing the lexicon, a reductionist approach is used, trying to remain general while using a minimal description. To describe the size of a lexicon, lexemes are grouped into lemmas. A lemma is a group of lexemes generated by inflectional morphology. Lemmas are represented in dictionaries by headwords that list the citation forms and any irregular forms, since these must be learned to use the words correctly. Lexemes derived from a word by derivational morphology are considered new lemmas. The lexicon is also organized according to open and closed categories. Closed categories, such as determiners or pronouns, are rarely given new lexemes; their function is primarily syntactic. Open categories, such as nouns and verbs, have highly active generation mechanisms and their lexemes are more semantic in nature.\nLexicalization and other mechanisms in the lexicon.\nA central role of the lexicon is documenting established \"lexical norms and conventions\". Lexicalization is the process by which new words, having gained widespread usage, enter the lexicon. Since lexicalization may modify lexemes phonologically and morphologically, it is possible that a single etymological source may be inserted into a single lexicon in two or more forms. These pairs, called a doublet, are often close semantically. Two examples are \"aptitude\" versus \"attitude\" and \"employ\" versus \"imply\".\nThe mechanisms, not mutually exclusive, are:\nNeologisms (new words).\nNeologisms are new lexeme candidates which, if they gain wide usage over time, become part of a language's lexicon. Neologisms are often introduced by children who produce erroneous forms by mistake. Other common sources are slang and advertising.\nNeologisms that maintain the sound of their external source.\nThere are two types of borrowings (neologisms based on external sources) that retain the sound of the source language material:\nGuestwords, foreignisms and loanwords.\nThe following are examples of external lexical expansion using the source language lexical item as the basic material for the neologization, listed in decreasing order of phonetic resemblance to the original lexical item (in the source language):\nPhono-semantic matches, semanticized phonetic matches and phonetic matches.\nThe following are examples of simultaneous external and internal lexical expansion using target language lexical items as the basic material for the neologization but still resembling the sound of the lexical item in the source language:\nRole of morphology.\nAnother mechanism involves generative devices that combine morphemes according to a language's rules. For example, the suffix \"-able\" is usually only added to transitive verbs, as in \"readable\" but not \"cryable\".\nCompounding.\nA compound word is a lexeme composed of several established lexemes, whose semantics is not the sum of that of their constituents. They can be interpreted through analogy, common sense and, most commonly, context. Compound words can have simple or complex morphological structures. Usually, only the head requires inflection for agreement. Compounding may result in lexemes of unwieldy proportion. This is compensated by mechanisms that reduce the length of words. A similar phenomenon has been recently shown to feature in social media also where hashtags compound to form longer-sized hashtags that are at times more popular than the individual constituent hashtags forming the compound. Compounding is the most common of word formation strategies cross-linguistically.\nDiachronic mechanisms.\nComparative historical linguistics studies the evolution of languages and takes a diachronic view of the lexicon. The evolution of lexicons in different languages occurs through a parallel mechanism. Over time historical forces work to shape the lexicon, making it simpler to acquire and often creating an illusion of great regularity in language.\nSecond-language lexicon.\nThe term \"lexicon\" is generally used in the context of a single language. Therefore, multi-lingual speakers are generally thought to have multiple lexicons. Speakers of language variants (Brazilian Portuguese and European Portuguese, for example) may be considered to possess a single lexicon. Thus a \"cash dispenser\" (British English) as well as an automatic teller machine or ATM in American English would be understood by both American and British speakers, despite each group using different dialects.\nWhen linguists study a lexicon, they consider such things as what constitutes a word; the word/concept relationship; lexical access and lexical access failure; how a word's phonology, syntax, and meaning intersect; the morphology-word relationship; vocabulary structure within a given language; language use (pragmatics); language acquisition; the history and evolution of words (etymology); and the relationships between words, often studied within philosophy of language.\nVarious models of how lexicons are organized and how words are retrieved have been proposed in psycholinguistics, neurolinguistics and computational linguistics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18079", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18079", "title": "Leonardo da Vinci", "text": "Italian Renaissance polymath (1452\u20131519)\nLeonardo di ser Piero da Vinci (15 April 1452 \u2013 2 May 1519) was an Italian polymath of the High Renaissance who was active as a painter, draughtsman, engineer, scientist, theorist, sculptor, and architect. While his fame initially rested on his achievements as a painter, he has also become known for his notebooks, in which he made drawings and notes on a variety of subjects, including anatomy, astronomy, botany, cartography, painting, and palaeontology. Leonardo is widely regarded to have been a genius who epitomised the Renaissance humanist ideal, and his collective works comprise a contribution to later generations of artists matched only by that of his younger contemporary Michelangelo.\nBorn out of wedlock to a successful notary and a lower-class woman in, or near, Vinci, he was educated in Florence by the Italian painter and sculptor Andrea del Verrocchio. He began his career in the city, but then spent much time in the service of Ludovico Sforza in Milan. Later, he worked in Florence and Milan again, as well as briefly in Rome, all while attracting a large following of imitators and students. Upon the invitation of Francis I, he spent his last three years in France, where he died in 1519. Since his death, there has not been a time when his achievements, diverse interests, personal life, and empirical thinking have failed to incite interest and admiration, making him a frequent namesake and subject in culture.\nLeonardo is identified as one of the greatest painters in the history of Western art and is often credited as the founder of the High Renaissance. Despite having many lost works and fewer than 25 attributed major works \u2013 including numerous unfinished works \u2013 he created some of the most influential paintings in the Western canon. The \"Mona Lisa\" is his best known work and is regarded as the world's most famous individual painting. \"The Last Supper\" is the most reproduced religious painting of all time and his \"Vitruvian Man\" drawing is also regarded as a cultural icon. In 2017, \"Salvator Mundi\", attributed in whole or part to Leonardo, was sold at auction for US$, setting a new record for the most expensive painting ever sold at public auction.\nRevered for his technological ingenuity, he conceptualised flying machines, a type of armoured fighting vehicle, concentrated solar power, a ratio machine that could be used in an adding machine, and the double hull. Relatively few of his designs were constructed or were even feasible during his lifetime, as the modern scientific approaches to metallurgy and engineering were only in their infancy during the Renaissance. Some of his smaller inventions, however, entered the world of manufacturing unheralded, such as an automated bobbin winder and a machine for testing the tensile strength of wire. He made substantial discoveries in anatomy, civil engineering, hydrodynamics, geology, optics, and tribology, but he did not publish his findings and they had little to no direct influence on subsequent science.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBiography.\nEarly life (1452\u20131472).\nBirth and background.\nLeonardo da Vinci, properly named Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci (\"Leonardo, son of ser Piero from Vinci\"), was born on 15 April 1452 in, or close to, the Tuscan hill town of Vinci, Italy 20 miles from Florence. He was born out of wedlock to Piero da Vinci (Ser Piero da Vinci d'Antonio di ser Piero di ser Guido; 1426\u20131504), a Florentine legal notary, and Caterina di Meo Lippi (c.\u20091434\u20131494), from the lower class. It remains uncertain where Leonardo was born; the traditional account, from a local oral tradition recorded by the historian Emanuele Repetti, is that he was born in Anchiano, a country hamlet that would have offered sufficient privacy for the illegitimate birth, though it is still possible he was born in a house in Florence that Ser Piero almost certainly had. Leonardo's parents both married separately the year after his birth. Caterina \u2013 who later appears in Leonardo's notes as only \"Caterina\" or \"Catelina\" \u2013 is usually identified as the Caterina Buti del Vacca, who married the local artisan Antonio di Piero Buti del Vacca, nicknamed . Having been betrothed to her the previous year, Ser Piero married Albiera Amadori and after her death in 1464, went on to have three subsequent marriages. From all the marriages, Leonardo eventually had 16 half-siblings (of whom 11 survived infancy) who were much younger than he (the last was born when Leonardo was 46 years old) and with whom he had very little contact.\nVery little is known about Leonardo's childhood and much is shrouded in myth, partially because of his biography in the frequently apocryphal \"Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects\" (1550) by 16th-century art historian Giorgio Vasari. Tax records indicate that by at least 1457 he lived in the household of his paternal grandfather, Antonio da Vinci, but it is possible that he spent the years before then in the care of his mother in Vinci, either Anchiano or Campo Zeppi in the parish of San Pantaleone. He is thought to have been close to his uncle, Francesco da Vinci, but his father was probably in Florence most of the time. Ser Piero, who was the descendant of a long line of notaries, established an official residence in Florence by at least 1469 and had a successful career. Despite his family history, Leonardo only received a basic and informal education in (vernacular) writing, reading, and mathematics; possibly because his artistic talents were recognised early, so his family decided to focus their attention there.\nLater in life, Leonardo recorded his earliest memory, now in the Codex Atlanticus. While writing on the flight of birds, he recalled as an infant when a kite came to his cradle and opened his mouth with its tail; commentators still debate whether the anecdote was an actual memory or a fantasy.\nVerrocchio's workshop.\nIn the mid-1460s, Leonardo's family moved to Florence, which at the time was the centre of Christian Humanist thought and culture. Around the age of 14, he became a \"garzone\" (studio boy) in the workshop of Andrea del Verrocchio, who was the leading Florentine painter and sculptor of his time. This was about the time of the death of Verrocchio's master, the great sculptor Donatello. Leonardo became an apprentice by the age of 17 and remained in training for seven years. Other famous painters apprenticed in the workshop or associated with it include Ghirlandaio, Perugino, Botticelli, and Lorenzo di Credi. Leonardo was exposed to both theoretical training and a wide range of technical skills, including drafting, chemistry, metallurgy, metal working, plaster casting, leather working, mechanics, and woodwork, as well as the artistic skills of drawing, painting, sculpting, and modelling.\nLeonardo was a contemporary of Botticelli, Ghirlandaio and Perugino, who were all slightly older than he was. He would have met them at the workshop of Verrocchio or at the Platonic Academy of the Medici. Florence was ornamented by the works of artists such as Donatello's contemporaries Masaccio, whose figurative frescoes were imbued with realism and emotion, and Ghiberti, whose \"Gates of Paradise\", gleaming with gold leaf, displayed the art of combining complex figure compositions with detailed architectural backgrounds. Piero della Francesca had made a detailed study of perspective, and was the first painter to make a scientific study of light. These studies and Leon Battista Alberti's treatise \"De pictura\" were to have a profound effect on younger artists and in particular on Leonardo's own observations and artworks.\nMuch of the painting in Verrocchio's workshop was done by his assistants. According to Vasari, Leonardo collaborated with Verrocchio on his \"The Baptism of Christ\" (c.\u20091472\u20131475), painting the young angel holding Jesus's robe with skill so far superior to his master's that Verrocchio purportedly put down his brush and never painted again (the latter claim probably being apocryphal). The new technique of oil paint was applied to areas of the mostly tempera work, including the landscape, the rocks seen through the brown mountain stream, and much of Jesus's figure, indicating Leonardo's hand. Additionally, Leonardo may have been a model for two works by Verrocchio: the bronze statue of \"David\" in the Bargello and the archangel Raphael in \"Tobias and the Angel\".\nVasari tells a story of Leonardo as a very young man: a local peasant made himself a round buckler shield and requested that Ser Piero have it painted for him. Leonardo, inspired by the story of Medusa, responded with a painting of a monster spitting fire that was so terrifying that his father bought a different shield to give to the peasant and sold Leonardo's to a Florentine art dealer for 100 ducats, who in turn sold it to the Duke of Milan.\nFirst Florentine period (1472 \u2013 c. 1482).\nBy 1472, at the age of 20, Leonardo qualified as a master in the Guild of Saint Luke, the guild of artists and doctors of medicine, but even after his father set him up in his own workshop, his attachment to Verrocchio was such that he continued to collaborate and live with him. Leonardo's earliest known dated work is a 1473 pen-and-ink drawing of the Arno valley (see below). According to Vasari, the young Leonardo was the first to suggest making the Arno river a navigable channel between Florence and Pisa.\nIn January 1478, Leonardo received an independent commission to paint an altarpiece for the Chapel of Saint Bernard in the Florentine town hall, the Palazzo della Signoria, an indication of his independence from Verrocchio's studio. An anonymous early biographer, known as Anonimo Gaddiano, claims that in 1480 Leonardo was living with the Medici and often worked in the garden of the Piazza San Marco, Florence, where a Neoplatonic academy of artists, poets and philosophers organised by the Medici met. In March 1481, he received a commission from the monks of for \"The Adoration of the Magi\". Neither of these initial commissions were completed, being abandoned when Leonardo went to offer his services to Duke of Milan Ludovico Sforza. Leonardo wrote Sforza a letter which described the diverse things that he could achieve in the fields of engineering and weapon design, and mentioned that he could paint. He brought with him a silver string instrument \u2013 either a lute or lyre \u2013 in the form of a horse's head.\nWith Alberti, Leonardo visited the home of the Medici and through them came to know the older Humanist philosophers of whom Marsiglio Ficino, proponent of Neoplatonism; Cristoforo Landino, writer of commentaries on Classical writings, and John Argyropoulos, teacher of Greek and translator of Aristotle were the foremost. Also associated with the Platonic Academy of the Medici was Leonardo's contemporary, the brilliant young poet and philosopher Pico della Mirandola. In 1482, Leonardo was sent as an ambassador by Lorenzo de' Medici to Ludovico il Moro, who ruled Milan between 1479 and 1499.\nFirst Milanese period (c. 1482\u20131499).\nLeonardo worked in Milan from 1482 until 1499. He was commissioned to paint the \"Virgin of the Rocks\" for the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception and \"The Last Supper\" for the monastery of Santa Maria delle Grazie. In the spring of 1485, Leonardo travelled to Hungary (on behalf of Sforza) to meet king Matthias Corvinus, and was commissioned by him to paint a Madonna. In 1490 he was called as a consultant, together with Francesco di Giorgio Martini, for the building site of the cathedral of Pavia and was struck by the equestrian statue of Regisole, of which he left a sketch. Leonardo was employed on many other projects for Sforza, such as preparation of floats and pageants for special occasions; , and wooden model for, a competition to design the cupola for Milan Cathedral; and a model for a huge equestrian monument to Ludovico's predecessor Francesco Sforza. This would have surpassed in size the only two large equestrian statues of the Renaissance, Donatello's \"Gattamelata\" in Padua and Verrocchio's \"Bartolomeo Colleoni\" in Venice, and became known as the \"Gran Cavallo\". Leonardo completed a model for the horse and made detailed plans for its casting, but in November 1494, Ludovico gave the metal to his brother-in-law to be used for a cannon to defend the city from Charles\u00a0VIII of France.\nContemporary correspondence records that Leonardo and his assistants were commissioned by the Duke of Milan to paint the Sala delle Asse in the Sforza Castle, c. 1498. The project became a trompe-l'\u0153il decoration that made the great hall appear to be a pergola created by the interwoven limbs of sixteen mulberry trees, whose canopy included an intricate labyrinth of leaves and knots on the ceiling.\nSecond Florentine period (1500\u20131508).\nWhen Ludovico Sforza was overthrown by France in 1500, Leonardo fled Milan for Venice, accompanied by his assistant Sala\u00ec and friend, the mathematician Luca Pacioli. In Venice, Leonardo was employed as a military architect and engineer, devising methods to defend the city from naval attack. On his return to Florence in 1500, he and his household were guests of the Servite monks at the monastery of Santissima Annunziata and were provided with a workshop where, according to Vasari, Leonardo created the cartoon of \"The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne and Saint John the Baptist\", a work that won such admiration that \"men [and] women, young and old\" flocked to see it \"as if they were going to a solemn festival.\"\nIn Cesena in 1502, Leonardo entered the service of Cesare Borgia, the son of Pope Alexander VI, acting as a military architect and engineer and travelling throughout Italy with his patron. Leonardo created a map of Cesare Borgia's stronghold, a town plan of Imola in order to win his patronage. Upon seeing it, Cesare hired Leonardo as his chief military engineer and architect. Later in the year, Leonardo produced another map for his patron, one of Chiana Valley, Tuscany, so as to give his patron a better overlay of the land and greater strategic position. He created this map in conjunction with his other project of constructing a dam from the sea to Florence, in order to allow a supply of water to sustain the canal during all seasons.\nLeonardo had left Borgia's service and returned to Florence by early 1503, where he rejoined the Guild of Saint Luke on 18 October of that year. By this same month, Leonardo had begun working on a portrait of Lisa del Giocondo, the model for the \"Mona Lisa\", which he would continue working on until his later years. In January 1504, he was part of a committee formed to recommend where Michelangelo's statue of \"David\" should be placed. He then spent two years in Florence designing and painting a mural of \"The Battle of Anghiari\" for the Signoria, with Michelangelo designing its companion piece, \"The Battle of Cascina\".\nIn 1506, Leonardo was summoned to Milan by Charles II d'Amboise, the acting French governor of the city. There, Leonardo took on another pupil, Count Francesco Melzi, the son of a Lombard aristocrat, who is considered to have been his favourite student. The Council of Florence wished Leonardo to return promptly to finish \"The Battle of Anghiari\", but he was given leave at the behest of Louis XII, who considered commissioning the artist to make some portraits. Leonardo may have commenced a project for an equestrian figure of d'Amboise; a wax model attributed to him survives and would be the only extant example of Leonardo's sculpture, but the attribution is not widely accepted. Leonardo was otherwise free to pursue his scientific interests. Many of Leonardo's most prominent pupils either knew or worked with him in Milan, including Bernardino Luini, Giovanni Antonio Boltraffio, and Marco d'Oggiono. In 1507, Leonardo was in Florence sorting out a dispute with his brothers over the estate of his father, who had died in 1504.\nSecond Milanese period (1508\u20131513).\nBy 1508, Leonardo was back in Milan, living in his own house in Porta Orientale in the parish of Santa Babila.\nIn 1512, Leonardo was working on plans for an equestrian monument for Gian Giacomo Trivulzio, but this was prevented by an invasion of a confederation of Swiss, Spanish and Venetian forces, which drove the French from Milan. Leonardo stayed in the city, spending several months in 1513 at the Medici's Vaprio d'Adda villa.\nRome and France (1513\u20131519).\nIn March 1513, Lorenzo de' Medici's son Giovanni assumed the papacy (as Leo X); Leonardo went to Rome that September, where he was received by the pope's brother Giuliano. From September 1513 to 1516, Leonardo spent much of his time living in the Belvedere Courtyard in the Apostolic Palace, where Michelangelo and Raphael were both active. Leonardo was given an allowance of 33 ducats a month and, according to Vasari, decorated a lizard with scales dipped in quicksilver. The pope gave him a painting commission of unknown subject matter, but cancelled it when the artist set about developing a new kind of varnish. Leonardo became ill, in what may have been the first of multiple strokes leading to his death. He practised botany in the Vatican Gardens, and was commissioned to make plans for the Pope's proposed draining of the Pontine Marshes. He also dissected cadavers, making notes for a treatise on vocal cords; these he gave to an official in hopes of regaining the Pope's favour, but he was unsuccessful.\nIn October 1515, King Francis I of France recaptured Milan. On 21 March 1516 Antonio Maria Pallavicini, the French ambassador to the Holy See, received a letter sent from Lyon a week previously by the royal advisor Guillaume Gouffier, seigneur de Bonnivet, containing the French king's instructions to assist Leonardo in his relocation to France and to inform the artist that the King was eagerly awaiting his arrival. Pallavicini was also asked to reassure Leonardo that he would be well received at court, both by the King and by his mother, Louise of Savoy. Leonardo entered Francis's service later that year, and was given the use of the manor house Clos Luc\u00e9 near the King's residence at the royal Ch\u00e2teau d'Amboise. He was frequently visited by Francis, and drew plans for an immense castle town the King intended to erect at Romorantin. He also made a mechanical lion, which during a pageant walked towards the King and \u2013 upon being struck by a wand \u2013 opened its chest to reveal a cluster of lilies.\nLeonardo was accompanied during this time by his friend and apprentice Francesco Melzi, and was supported by a pension totalling 10,000\u00a0scudi. At some point, Melzi drew a ; the only others known from his lifetime were a sketch by an unknown assistant on the back of one of Leonardo's studies (c.\u20091517) and a drawing by Giovanni Ambrogio Figino depicting an elderly Leonardo with his right arm wrapped in clothing. The latter, in addition to the record of an October 1517 visit by Louis d'Aragon, confirms an account of Leonardo's right hand being paralytic when he was 65, which may indicate why he left works such as the \"Mona Lisa\" unfinished. He continued to work at some capacity until eventually becoming ill and bedridden for several months.\nDeath.\nLeonardo died at Clos Luc\u00e9 on 2 May 1519 at the age of 67, possibly of a stroke. Francis I had become a close friend. Vasari describes Leonardo as lamenting on his deathbed, full of repentance, that \"he had offended against God and men by failing to practice his art as he should have done.\" Vasari states that in his last days, Leonardo sent for a priest to make his confession and to receive the Holy Sacrament. Vasari also records that the King held Leonardo's head in his arms as he died, although this story may be legend rather than fact. In accordance with his will, sixty beggars carrying tapers followed Leonardo's casket. Melzi was the principal heir and executor, receiving, as well as money, Leonardo's paintings, tools, library and personal effects. Leonardo's other long-time pupil and companion, Sala\u00ec, and his servant Baptista de Vilanis, each received half of Leonardo's vineyards. His brothers received land, and his serving woman received a fur-lined cloak. On 12 August 1519, Leonardo's remains were interred in the Collegiate Church of Saint Florentin at the Ch\u00e2teau d'Amboise.\nSome 20 years after Leonardo's death, Francis was reported by the goldsmith and sculptor Benvenuto Cellini as saying: \"There had never been another man born in the world who knew as much as Leonardo, not so much about painting, sculpture and architecture, as that he was a very great philosopher.\"\nSala\u00ec, or Il Salaino (\"The Little Unclean One\", i.e., the devil), entered Leonardo's household in 1490 as an assistant. After only a year, Leonardo made a list of his misdemeanours, calling him \"a thief, a liar, stubborn, and a glutton,\" after he had made off with money and valuables on at least five occasions and spent a fortune on clothes. Nevertheless, Leonardo treated him with great indulgence, and he remained in Leonardo's household for the next thirty years. Sala\u00ec executed paintings under the name of Andrea Sala\u00ec, but although Vasari claims that Leonardo \"taught him many things about painting,\" his work is generally considered to be of less artistic merit than others among Leonardo's pupils, such as Marco d'Oggiono and Boltraffio.\nAt the time of his death in 1524, Sala\u00ec owned a painting referred to as \"Joconda\" in a posthumous inventory of his belongings; it was assessed at 505 lire, an exceptionally high valuation for a small panel portrait.\nPersonal life.\nDespite the thousands of pages Leonardo left in notebooks and manuscripts, he scarcely made reference to his personal life.\nWithin Leonardo's lifetime, his extraordinary powers of invention, his \"great physical beauty\" and \"infinite grace,\" as described by Vasari, as well as all other aspects of his life, attracted the curiosity of others. One such aspect was his love for animals, likely including vegetarianism and according to Vasari, a habit of purchasing caged birds and releasing them.\nLeonardo had many friends who are now notable either in their fields or for their historical significance, including mathematician Luca Pacioli, with whom he collaborated on the book \"Divina proportione\" in the 1490s. Leonardo appears to have had no close relationships with women except for his friendship with Cecilia Gallerani and the two Este sisters, Beatrice and Isabella. While on a journey that took him through Mantua, he drew a portrait of Isabella that appears to have been used to create a painted portrait, now lost.\nBeyond friendship, Leonardo kept his private life secret. His sexuality has been the subject of satire, analysis, and speculation. This trend began in the mid-16th century and was revived in the 19th and 20th centuries, most notably by Sigmund Freud in his \"Leonardo da Vinci, A Memory of His Childhood\". Leonardo's most intimate relationships were perhaps with his pupils Sala\u00ec and Melzi. Melzi, writing to inform Leonardo's brothers of his death, described Leonardo's feelings for his pupils as both loving and passionate. It has been claimed since the 16th century that these relationships were of a sexual or erotic nature. Walter Isaacson in his biography of Leonardo makes explicit his opinion that the relations with Sala\u00ec were intimate and homosexual.\nIn 1476, when he was aged twenty-four, court records show that Leonardo and three other young men were charged with sodomy in an incident involving a known male prostitute. The charges were dismissed for lack of evidence, and there is speculation that since one of the accused, Lionardo de Tornabuoni, was related to Lorenzo de' Medici, the family exerted its influence to secure the dismissal. Since that date much has been written about his presumed homosexuality and its role in his art, particularly in the androgyny and eroticism manifested in \"Saint John the Baptist\" and \"Bacchus\" and more explicitly in erotic drawings. \nPaintings.\nDespite the recent awareness and admiration of Leonardo as a scientist and inventor, for the better part of four hundred years his fame rested on his achievements as a painter. A handful of works that are either authenticated or attributed to him have been regarded as among the great masterpieces. These paintings are famous for a variety of qualities that have been much imitated by students and discussed at great length by connoisseurs and critics. By the 1490s Leonardo had already been described as a \"Divine\" painter.\nAmong the qualities that make Leonardo's work unique are his innovative techniques for laying on the paint; his detailed knowledge of anatomy, light, botany and geology; his interest in physiognomy and the way humans register emotion in expression and gesture; his innovative use of the human form in figurative composition; and his use of subtle gradation of tone. All these qualities come together in his most famous painted works, the \"Mona Lisa\", the \"Last Supper\", and the \"Virgin of the Rocks\".\nEarly works.\nLeonardo first gained attention for his work on the \"Baptism of Christ\", painted in conjunction with Verrocchio. Two other paintings appear to date from his time at Verrocchio's workshop, both of which are Annunciations. One is small, long and high. It is a \"predella\" to go at the base of a larger composition, a painting by Lorenzo di Credi from which it has become separated. The other is a much larger work, long. In both Annunciations, Leonardo used a formal arrangement, like two well-known pictures by Fra Angelico of the same subject, of the Virgin Mary sitting or kneeling to the right of the picture, approached from the left by an angel in profile, with a rich flowing garment, raised wings and bearing a lily. Although previously attributed to Ghirlandaio, the larger work is now generally attributed to Leonardo.\nIn the smaller painting, Mary averts her eyes and folds her hands in a gesture that symbolised submission to God's will. Mary is not submissive, however, in the larger piece. The girl, interrupted in her reading by this unexpected messenger, puts a finger in her bible to mark the place and raises her hand in a formal gesture of greeting or surprise. This calm young woman appears to accept her role as the Mother of God, not with resignation but with confidence. In this painting, the young Leonardo presents the humanist face of the Virgin Mary, recognising humanity's role in God's incarnation.\nPaintings of the 1480s.\nIn the 1480s, Leonardo received two very important commissions and commenced another work that was of ground-breaking importance in terms of composition. Two of the three were never finished, and the third took so long that it was subject to lengthy negotiations over completion and payment.\nOne of these paintings was \"Saint Jerome in the Wilderness\", which Bortolon associates with a difficult period of Leonardo's life, as evidenced in his diary: \"I thought I was learning to live; I was only learning to die.\" Although the painting is barely begun, the composition can be seen and is very unusual. Jerome, as a penitent, occupies the middle of the picture, set on a slight diagonal and viewed somewhat from above. His kneeling form takes on a trapezoid shape, with one arm stretched to the outer edge of the painting and his gaze looking in the opposite direction. J. Wasserman points out the link between this painting and Leonardo's anatomical studies. Across the foreground sprawls his symbol, a great lion whose body and tail make a double spiral across the base of the picture space. The other remarkable feature is the sketchy landscape of craggy rocks against which the figure is silhouetted.\nThe daring display of figure composition, the landscape elements and personal drama also appear in the great unfinished masterpiece, the \"Adoration of the Magi\", a commission from the Monks of San Donato a Scopeto. It is a complex composition, of about 250 \u00d7 250 centimetres. Leonardo did numerous drawings and preparatory studies, including a detailed one in linear perspective of the ruined classical architecture that forms part of the background. In 1482 Leonardo went to Milan at the behest of Lorenzo de' Medici in order to win favour with Ludovico il Moro, and the painting was abandoned.\nThe third important work of this period is the \"Virgin of the Rocks\", commissioned in Milan for the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception. The painting, to be done with the assistance of the de Predis brothers, was to fill a large complex altarpiece. Leonardo chose to paint an apocryphal moment of the infancy of Christ when the infant John the Baptist, in protection of an angel, met the Holy Family on the road to Egypt. The painting demonstrates an eerie beauty as the graceful figures kneel in adoration around the infant Christ in a wild landscape of tumbling rock and whirling water. While the painting is quite large, about 200 \u00d7 120 centimetres, it is not nearly as complex as the painting ordered by the monks of San Donato, having only four figures rather than about fifty and a rocky landscape rather than architectural details. The painting was eventually finished; in fact, two versions of the painting were finished: one remained at the chapel of the Confraternity, while Leonardo took the other to France. The Brothers did not get their painting, however, nor the de Predis their payment, until the next century.\nLeonardo's most remarkable portrait of this period is the \"Lady with an Ermine\", presumed to be Cecilia Gallerani (c.\u20091483\u20131490), lover of Ludovico Sforza. The painting is characterised by the pose of the figure with the head turned at a very different angle to the torso, unusual at a date when many portraits were still rigidly in profile. The ermine plainly carries symbolic meaning, relating either to the sitter, or to Ludovico who belonged to the prestigious Order of the Ermine.\nPaintings of the 1490s.\nLeonardo's most famous painting of the 1490s is \"The Last Supper\", commissioned for the refectory of the Convent of Santa Maria della Grazie in Milan. It represents the last meal shared by Jesus with his disciples before his capture and death, and shows the moment when Jesus has just said \"one of you will betray me\", and the consternation that this statement caused.\nThe writer Matteo Bandello observed Leonardo at work and wrote that some days he would paint from dawn till dusk without stopping to eat and then not paint for three or four days at a time. This was beyond the comprehension of the prior of the convent, who hounded him until Leonardo asked Ludovico to intervene. Vasari describes how Leonardo, troubled over his ability to adequately depict the faces of Christ and the traitor Judas, told the duke that he might be obliged to use the prior as his model.\nThe painting was acclaimed as a masterpiece of design and characterisation, but it deteriorated rapidly, so that within a hundred years it was described by one viewer as \"completely ruined.\" Leonardo, instead of using the reliable technique of fresco, had used tempera over a ground that was mainly gesso, resulting in a surface subject to mould and to flaking. Despite this, the painting remains one of the most reproduced works of art; countless copies have been made in various mediums.\nToward the end of this period, in 1498 Leonardo's trompe-l'\u0153il decoration of the Sala delle Asse was painted for the Duke of Milan in the Castello Sforzesco.\nPaintings of the 1500s.\nIn 1505, Leonardo was commissioned to paint \"The Battle of Anghiari\" in the Salone dei Cinquecento (\"Hall of the Five Hundred\") in the Palazzo Vecchio, Florence. Leonardo devised a dynamic composition depicting four men riding raging war horses engaged in a battle for possession of a standard, at the Battle of Anghiari in 1440. Michelangelo was assigned the opposite wall to depict the Battle of Cascina. Leonardo's painting deteriorated rapidly and is now known from a copy by Rubens.\nAmong the works created by Leonardo in the 16th century is the small portrait known as the \"Mona Lisa\" or \"La Gioconda\", the laughing one. In the present era, it is arguably the most famous painting in the world. Its fame rests, in particular, on the elusive smile on the woman's face, its mysterious quality perhaps due to the subtly shadowed corners of the mouth and eyes such that the exact nature of the smile cannot be determined. The shadowy quality for which the work is renowned came to be called \"sfumato,\" or \"Leonardo's smoke\". Vasari wrote that the smile was \"so pleasing that it seems more divine than human, and it was considered a wondrous thing that it was as lively as the smile of the living original.\"\nOther characteristics of the painting are the unadorned dress, in which the eyes and hands have no competition from other details; the dramatic landscape background, in which the world seems to be in a state of flux; the subdued colouring; and the extremely smooth nature of the painterly technique, employing oils laid on much like tempera, and blended on the surface so that the brushstrokes are indistinguishable. Vasari expressed that the painting's quality would make even \"the most confident master ... despair and lose heart.\" The perfect state of preservation and the fact that there is no sign of repair or overpainting is rare in a panel painting of this date.\nIn the painting \"Virgin and Child with Saint Anne\", the composition again picks up the theme of figures in a landscape, which Wasserman describes as \"breathtakingly beautiful\" and harkens back to the \"Saint Jerome\" with the figure set at an oblique angle. What makes this painting unusual is that there are two obliquely set figures superimposed. Mary is seated on the knee of her mother, Saint Anne. She leans forward to restrain the Christ Child as he plays roughly with a lamb, the sign of his own impending sacrifice. This painting, which was copied many times, influenced Michelangelo, Raphael, and Andrea del Sarto, and through them Pontormo and Correggio. The trends in composition were adopted in particular by the Venetian painters Tintoretto and Veronese.\nDrawings.\nLeonardo was a prolific draughtsman, keeping journals full of small sketches and detailed drawings recording all manner of things that took his attention. As well as the journals there exist many studies for paintings, some of which can be identified as preparatory to particular works such as \"The Adoration of the Magi\", \"The Virgin of the Rocks\" and \"The Last Supper\". His earliest dated drawing is a \"Landscape of the Arno Valley\", 1473, which shows the river, the mountains, Montelupo Castle and the farmlands beyond it in great detail.\nAmong his famous drawings are the \"Vitruvian Man\", a study of the proportions of the human body; the \"Head of an Angel\", for \"The Virgin of the Rocks\" in the Louvre; a botanical study of \"Star of Bethlehem\"; and a large drawing (160\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0100\u00a0cm) in black chalk on coloured paper of \"The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne and Saint John the Baptist\" in the National Gallery, London. This drawing employs the subtle \"sfumato\" technique of shading, in the manner of the \"Mona Lisa\". It is thought that Leonardo never made a painting from it, the closest similarity being to \"The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne\" in the Louvre.\nOther drawings of interest include numerous studies generally referred to as \"caricatures\" because, although exaggerated, they appear to be based upon observation of live models. Vasari relates that Leonardo would look for interesting faces in public to use as models for some of his work. There are numerous studies of beautiful young men, often associated with Sala\u00ec, with the rare and much admired facial feature, the so-called \"Grecian profile\". These faces are often contrasted with that of a warrior. Sala\u00ec is often depicted in fancy-dress costume. Leonardo is known to have designed sets for pageants with which these may be associated. Other, often meticulous, drawings show studies of drapery. A marked development in Leonardo's ability to draw drapery occurred in his early works. Another often-reproduced drawing is a macabre sketch that was done by Leonardo in Florence in 1479 showing the body of Bernardo Baroncelli, hanged in connection with the murder of Giuliano, brother of Lorenzo de' Medici, in the Pazzi conspiracy. In his notes, Leonardo recorded the colours of the robes that Baroncelli was wearing when he died.\nLike the two contemporary architects Donato Bramante (who designed the Belvedere Courtyard) and Antonio da Sangallo the Elder, Leonardo experimented with designs for centrally planned churches, some of which appear in his journals, as both plans and views, although none was ever realised.\nJournals and notes.\nRenaissance humanism recognised no mutually exclusive polarities between the sciences and the arts, and Leonardo's studies in science and engineering are sometimes considered as impressive and innovative as his artistic work. These studies were recorded in 13,000 pages of notes and drawings, which fuse art and natural philosophy (the forerunner of modern science). They were made and maintained daily throughout Leonardo's life and travels, as he made continual observations of the world around him. Leonardo's notes and drawings display an enormous range of interests and preoccupations, some as mundane as lists of groceries and people who owed him money and some as intriguing as designs for wings and shoes for walking on water. There are compositions for paintings, studies of details and drapery, studies of faces and emotions, of animals, babies, dissections, plant studies, rock formations, whirlpools, war machines, flying machines and architecture.\nThese notebooks \u2013 originally loose papers of different types and sizes \u2013 were largely entrusted to Leonardo's pupil and heir Francesco Melzi after the master's death. These were to be published, a task of overwhelming difficulty because of its scope and Leonardo's idiosyncratic writing. Some of Leonardo's drawings were copied by an anonymous Milanese artist for a planned treatise on art (\"Codex Huygens\", c.\u20091570). After Melzi's death in 1570, the collection passed to his son, the lawyer Orazio, who initially took little interest in the journals. In 1587, a Melzi household tutor named Lelio Gavardi took 13 of the manuscripts to Pisa; there, the architect Giovanni Magenta reproached Gavardi for having taken the manuscripts illicitly and returned them to Orazio. Having many more such works in his possession, Orazio gifted the volumes to Magenta. News spread of these lost works of Leonardo's, and Orazio retrieved seven of the 13 manuscripts, which he then gave to Pompeo Leoni for publication in two volumes; one of these was the \"Codex Atlanticus.\" The other six works had been distributed to a few others. After Orazio's death, his heirs sold the rest of Leonardo's possessions, and thus began their dispersal.\nSome works have found their way into major collections such as the Royal Library at Windsor Castle, the Louvre, the , the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Biblioteca Ambrosiana in Milan, which holds the 12-volume Codex Atlanticus, and the British Library in London, which has put a selection from the Codex Arundel (BL Arundel MS 263) online. Works have also been at Holkham Hall, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and in the private hands of John Nicholas Brown\u00a0I and Robert Lehman. The Codex Leicester is the only privately owned major scientific work of Leonardo; it is owned by Bill Gates and displayed once a year in different cities around the world.\nMost of Leonardo's writings are in mirror-image cursive. Since Leonardo wrote with his left hand, it was probably easier for him to write from right to left. Leonardo used a variety of shorthand and symbols, and states in his notes that he intended to prepare them for publication. In many cases a single topic is covered in detail in both words and pictures on a single sheet, together conveying information that would not be lost if the pages were published out of order. Why they were not published during Leonardo's lifetime is unknown.\nScience and inventions.\nLeonardo's approach to science was observational: he tried to understand a phenomenon by describing and depicting it in utmost detail and did not emphasise experiments or theoretical explanation. Since he lacked formal education in Latin and mathematics, contemporary scholars mostly ignored Leonardo the scientist, although he did teach himself Latin. His keen observations in many areas were noted, such as when he wrote \"Il sole non si muove\" (\"The Sun does not move\").\nIn the 1490s he studied mathematics under Luca Pacioli and prepared a series of drawings of regular solids in a skeletal form to be engraved as plates for Pacioli's book \"Divina proportione\", published in 1509. While living in Milan, he studied light from the summit of Monte Rosa. Scientific writings in his notebook on fossils have been considered as influential on early palaeontology.\nThe content of his journals suggest that he was planning a series of treatises on a variety of subjects. A coherent treatise on anatomy is said to have been observed during a visit by Cardinal Louis d'Aragon's secretary in 1517. Aspects of his work on the studies of anatomy, light and the landscape were assembled for publication by Melzi and eventually published as \"A Treatise on Painting\" in France and Italy in 1651 and Germany in 1724, with engravings based upon drawings by the Classical painter Nicolas Poussin. According to Arasse, the treatise, which in France went into 62 editions in 50 years, caused Leonardo to be seen as \"the precursor of French academic thought on art.\"\nWhile Leonardo's experimentation followed scientific methods, a recent and exhaustive analysis of Leonardo as a scientist by Fritjof Capra argues that Leonardo was a fundamentally different kind of scientist from Galileo, Newton and other scientists who followed him in that, as a \"Renaissance Man\", his theorising and hypothesising integrated the arts and particularly painting.\nAnatomy and physiology.\nLeonardo started his study of the anatomy of the human body under the apprenticeship of Verrocchio, who demanded that his students develop a deep knowledge of the subject. As an artist, he quickly became master of \"topographic anatomy\", drawing many studies of muscles, tendons and other visible anatomical features.\nAs a successful artist, Leonardo was given permission to dissect human corpses at the Hospital of Santa Maria Nuova in Florence and later at hospitals in Milan and Rome. From 1510 to 1511 he collaborated in his studies with the doctor Marcantonio della Torre, professor of Anatomy at the University of Pavia. Leonardo made over 240 detailed drawings and wrote about 13,000 words toward a treatise on anatomy. Only a small amount of the material on anatomy was published in Leonardo's \"Treatise on Painting\". During the time that Melzi was ordering the material into chapters for publication, they were examined by anatomists and artists, including Vasari, Cellini and Albrecht D\u00fcrer, who made drawings from them.\nLeonardo's anatomical drawings include many studies of the human skeleton, its parts, and the muscles and sinews. He studied the mechanical functions of the skeleton and the muscular forces that are applied to it in a manner that prefigured the modern science of biomechanics. He drew the heart and vascular system, the sex organs and other internal organs, making one of the first scientific drawings of a foetus \"in utero\". The drawings and notation are far ahead of their time, and if published would undoubtedly have made a major contribution to medical science.\nLeonardo also closely observed and recorded the effects of age and of human emotion on the physiology, studying in particular the effects of age. He drew many figures who had significant facial deformities or signs of illness. Leonardo also studied and drew the anatomy of many animals, dissecting cows, birds, monkeys, bears, and frogs, and comparing in his drawings their anatomical structure with that of humans. He also made studies of horses.\nLeonardo's dissections and documentation of muscles, nerves, and vessels helped to describe the physiology and mechanics of movement. He attempted to identify the source of 'emotions' and their expression. He found it difficult to incorporate the prevailing system and theories of bodily humours, but eventually he abandoned these physiological explanations of bodily functions. He made the observations that humours were not located in cerebral spaces or ventricles. He documented that the humours were not contained in the heart or the liver, and that it was the heart that defined the circulatory system. He was the first to define atherosclerosis and liver cirrhosis. He created models of the cerebral ventricles with the use of melted wax and constructed a glass aorta to observe the circulation of blood through the aortic valve by using water and grass seed to watch flow patterns.\nEngineering and inventions.\nDuring his lifetime, Leonardo was also valued as an engineer. With the same rational and analytical approach that moved him to represent the human body and to investigate anatomy, Leonardo studied and designed many machines and devices. He drew their \"anatomy\" with unparalleled mastery, producing the first form of the modern technical drawing, including a perfected \"exploded view\" technique, to represent internal components. Those studies and projects collected in his codices fill more than 5,000 pages. In a letter of 1482 to the lord of Milan Ludovico il Moro, he wrote that he could create all sorts of machines both for the protection of a city and for siege. When he fled from Milan to Venice in 1499, he found employment as an engineer and devised a system of moveable barricades to protect the city from attack. In 1502, he created a scheme for diverting the flow of the Arno river, a project on which Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli also worked. He continued to contemplate the canalisation of Lombardy's plains while in Louis XII's company and of the Loire and its tributaries in the company of Francis I. Leonardo's journals include a vast number of inventions, both practical and impractical. They include musical instruments, a mechanical knight, hydraulic pumps, reversible crank mechanisms, finned mortar shells, and a steam cannon.\nLeonardo was fascinated by the phenomenon of flight for much of his life, producing many studies, including \"Codex on the Flight of Birds\" (c.\u20091505), as well as plans for several flying machines, such as a flapping ornithopter and a machine with a helical rotor. In a 2003 documentary by British television station Channel Four, titled \"Leonardo's Dream Machines\", various designs by Leonardo, such as a parachute and a giant crossbow, were interpreted and constructed. Some of those designs proved successful, whilst others fared less well when tested. Similarly, a team of engineers built ten machines designed by Leonardo in the 2009 American television series \"Doing DaVinci\", including a fighting vehicle and a self-propelled cart.\nResearch performed by Marc van den Broek revealed older prototypes for more than 100 inventions that are ascribed to Leonardo. Similarities between Leonardo's illustrations and drawings from the Middle Ages and from Ancient Greece and Rome, the Chinese and Persian Empires, and Egypt suggest that a large portion of Leonardo's inventions had been conceived before his lifetime. Leonardo's innovation was to combine different functions from existing drafts and set them into scenes that illustrated their utility. By reconstituting technical inventions he created something new.\nIn his notebooks, Leonardo first stated the 'laws' of sliding friction in 1493. His inspiration for investigating friction came about in part from his study of perpetual motion, which he correctly concluded was not possible. His results were never published and the friction laws were not rediscovered until 1699 by Guillaume Amontons, with whose name they are now usually associated. For this contribution, Leonardo was named as the first of the 23 \"Men of Tribology\" by Duncan Dowson.\nLegacy.\nAlthough he had no formal academic training, many historians and scholars regard Leonardo as the prime exemplar of the \"Universal Genius\" or \"Renaissance Man\", an individual of \"unquenchable curiosity\" and \"feverishly inventive imagination.\" He is widely considered one of the most diversely talented individuals ever to have lived. According to art historian Helen Gardner, the scope and depth of his interests were without precedent in recorded history, and \"his mind and personality seem to us superhuman, while the man himself mysterious and remote.\" Scholars interpret his view of the world as being based in logic, though the empirical methods he used were unorthodox for his time.\nLeonardo's fame within his own lifetime was such that the King of France carried him away like a trophy, and was claimed to have supported him in his old age and held him in his arms as he died. Interest in Leonardo and his work has never diminished. Crowds still queue to see his best-known artworks, T-shirts still bear his most famous drawing, and writers continue to hail him as a genius while speculating about his private life, as well as about what one so intelligent actually believed in.\nThe continued admiration that Leonardo commanded from painters, critics and historians is reflected in many other written tributes. Baldassare Castiglione, author of \"Il\u00a0Cortegiano\" (\"The Courtier\"), wrote in 1528: \"...Another of the greatest painters in this world looks down on this art in which he is unequalled...\" while the biographer known as \"Anonimo Gaddiano\" wrote, c.\u20091540: \"His genius was so rare and universal that it can be said that nature worked a miracle on his behalf...\" Vasari, in his \"Lives of the Artists\" (1568), opens his chapter on Leonardo:\nIn the normal course of events many men and women are born with remarkable talents; but occasionally, in a way that transcends nature, a single person is marvellously endowed by Heaven with beauty, grace and talent in such abundance that he leaves other men far behind, all his actions seem inspired and indeed everything he does clearly comes from God rather than from human skill. Everyone acknowledged that this was true of Leonardo da Vinci, an artist of outstanding physical beauty, who displayed infinite grace in everything that he did and who cultivated his genius so brilliantly that all problems he studied he solved with ease.\nThe 19th century brought a particular admiration for Leonardo's genius, causing Henry Fuseli to write in 1801: \"Such was the dawn of modern art, when Leonardo da Vinci broke forth with a splendour that distanced former excellence: made up of all the elements that constitute the essence of genius...\" This is echoed by A. E. Rio who wrote in 1861: \"He towered above all other artists through the strength and the nobility of his talents.\"\nBy the 19th century, the scope of Leonardo's notebooks was known, as well as his paintings. Hippolyte Taine wrote in 1866: \"There may not be in the world an example of another genius so universal, so incapable of fulfilment, so full of yearning for the infinite, so naturally refined, so far ahead of his own century and the following centuries.\"\nArt historian Bernard Berenson wrote in 1896: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Leonardo is the one artist of whom it may be said with perfect literalness: Nothing that he touched but turned into a thing of eternal beauty. Whether it be the cross section of a skull, the structure of a weed, or a study of muscles, he, with his feeling for line and for light and shade, forever transmuted it into life-communicating values.\nThe interest in Leonardo's genius has continued unabated; experts study and translate his writings, analyse his paintings using scientific techniques, argue over attributions and search for works which have been recorded but never found. Liana Bortolon, writing in 1967, said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Because of the multiplicity of interests that spurred him to pursue every field of knowledge...Leonardo can be considered, quite rightly, to have been the universal genius par excellence, and with all the disquieting overtones inherent in that term. Man is as uncomfortable today, faced with a genius, as he was in the 16th century. Five centuries have passed, yet we still view Leonardo with awe. The Elmer Belt Library of Vinciana is a special collection at the University of California, Los Angeles.\nTwenty-first-century author Walter Isaacson based much of his biography of Leonardo on thousands of notebook entries, studying the personal notes, sketches, budget notations, and musings of the man whom he considers the greatest of innovators. Isaacson was surprised to discover a \"fun, joyous\" side of Leonardo in addition to his limitless curiosity and creative genius.\nOn the 500th anniversary of Leonardo's death, the Louvre in Paris arranged for the largest ever single exhibit of his work, called \"Leonardo\", between November 2019 and February 2020. The exhibit includes over 100 paintings, drawings and notebooks. Eleven of the paintings that Leonardo completed in his lifetime were included. Five of these are owned by the Louvre, but the \"Mona Lisa\" was not included because it is in such great demand among general visitors to the Louvre; it remains on display in its gallery. \"Vitruvian Man\", however, is on display following a legal battle with its owner, the Gallerie dell'Accademia in Venice. \"Salvator Mundi\" was also not included because its Saudi owner did not agree to lease the work.\nThe \"Mona Lisa\", considered Leonardo's magnum opus, is often regarded as the most famous portrait ever made. \"The Last Supper\" is the most reproduced religious painting of all time, and Leonardo's \"Vitruvian Man\" drawing is also considered a cultural icon.\nMore than a decade of analysis of Leonardo's genetic genealogy, conducted by Alessandro Vezzosi and Agnese Sabato, came to a conclusion in mid-2021. It was determined that the artist has 14 living male relatives. The work could also help determine the authenticity of remains thought to belong to Leonardo.\nLocation of remains.\nWhile Leonardo was certainly buried in the collegiate church of Saint Florentin at the Ch\u00e2teau d'Amboise in 12 August 1519, the current location of his remains is unclear. Much of Ch\u00e2teau d'Amboise was damaged during the French Revolution, leading to the church's demolition in 1802. Some of the graves were destroyed in the process, scattering the bones interred there and thereby leaving the whereabouts of Leonardo's remains subject to dispute; a gardener may have even buried some in the corner of the courtyard.\nIn 1863, fine-arts inspector general Ars\u00e8ne Houssaye received an imperial commission to excavate the site and discovered a partially complete skeleton with a bronze ring on one finger, white hair, and stone fragments bearing the inscriptions \"EO\", \"AR\", \"DUS\", and \"VINC\"\u00a0\u2013 interpreted as forming \"Leonardus Vinci\". The skull's eight teeth correspond to someone of approximately the appropriate age, and a silver shield found near the bones depicts a beardless Francis I, corresponding to the king's appearance during Leonardo's time in France.\nHoussaye postulated that the unusually large skull was an indicator of Leonardo's intelligence; author Charles Nicholl describes this as a \"dubious phrenological deduction\". At the same time, Houssaye noted some issues with his observations, including that the feet were turned toward the high altar, a practice generally reserved for laymen, and that the skeleton of seemed too short. Art historian Mary Margaret Heaton wrote in 1874 that the height would be appropriate for Leonardo. The skull was allegedly presented to Napoleon III before being returned to the Ch\u00e2teau d'Amboise, where they were re-interred in the chapel of Saint Hubert in 1874. A plaque above the tomb states that its contents are only presumed to be those of Leonardo.\nIt has since been theorised that the folding of the skeleton's right arm over the head may correspond to the paralysis of Leonardo's right hand. In 2016, it was announced that DNA tests would be conducted to determine whether the attribution is correct. The DNA of the remains will be compared to that of samples collected from Leonardo's work and his half-brother Domenico's descendants; it may also be sequenced.\nIn 2019, documents were published revealing that Houssaye had kept the ring and a lock of hair. In 1925, his great-grandson sold these to an American collector. Sixty years later, another American acquired them, leading to their being displayed at the Leonardo Museum in Vinci beginning on 2 May 2019, the 500th anniversary of the artist's death.\nNotes.\nGeneral\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDates of works\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\nEarly\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\nEarly.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern.\nBooks\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournals and encyclopedia articles\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nSee and for extensive bibliographies\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeneral\nWorks"}
{"id": "18080", "revid": "48535834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18080", "title": "Lacrosse", "text": "Team sport\nLacrosse is a contact team sport played with a lacrosse stick and a lacrosse ball. It is the oldest organized sport in North America, with its origins with the indigenous people of North America as early as the 12th century. The game was extensively modified by European colonists, reducing the violence, to create its current collegiate and professional form.\nPlayers use the head of the lacrosse stick to carry, pass, catch, and shoot the ball into the goal. The sport has five versions that have different sticks, fields, rules and equipment: field lacrosse, women's lacrosse, box lacrosse, lacrosse sixes and intercrosse. The men's games, field lacrosse (outdoor) and box lacrosse (indoor), are contact sports and all players wear protective gear: helmet, gloves, shoulder pads, and elbow pads. The women's game is played outdoors and does not allow body contact but does allow stick to stick contact. The only protective gear required for women players is eyegear, while goalies wear helmets and protective pads. Lacrosse sixes is played by both men and women on a smaller field and is the most common version at multi-sport events. Intercrosse is a mixed-gender non-contact sport that uses an all-plastic stick and a softer ball.\nThe modern sport is governed by World Lacrosse and is the only international sport organization to recognize First Nations bands and Native American tribes as sovereign nations. The organization hosts the World Lacrosse Championship for men, the Women's Lacrosse World Cup, the World Indoor Lacrosse Championship for box lacrosse, and the Under-19 World Lacrosse Championships for both men and women. Each is held every four years. Lacrosse at the Summer Olympics has been contested at two editions of the Summer Olympic Games, 1904 and 1908. It will be contested at the 2028 Olympic Games in the lacrosse sixes format. It was also held as a demonstration event at the 1928, 1932, and 1948 Summer Olympics.\nHistory.\nLacrosse is based on games played by various Native American communities as early as 1100 AD. By the 17th century, a version of lacrosse was well-established and was documented by Jesuit missionary priests in the territory of present-day Canada.\nIn the traditional aboriginal Canadian version, each team consisted of about 100 to 1,000 men on a field several miles/kilometers long. These games lasted from sunup to sundown for two to three days straight and were played as part of ceremonial ritual, a kind of symbolic warfare, or to give thanks to the Creator or Master.\nLacrosse played a significant role in the community and religious life of tribes across the continent for many years. Early lacrosse was characterized by deep spiritual involvement, befitting the spirit of combat in which it was undertaken. Those who took part did so in the role of warriors, with the goal of bringing glory and honour to themselves and their tribes. The game was said to be played \"for the Creator\" or was referred to as \"The Creator's Game\", and a version of the game was called \"baggataway\".\nThe French Jesuit missionary saw Huron tribesmen play the game during 1637 in present-day Ontario. He called it , \"the stick\" in French. The name seems to be originated from the French term for field hockey, .\nJames Smith described in some detail a game being played in 1757 by Mohawk people \"wherein now they used a wooden ball, about in diameter, and the instrument they moved it with was a strong staff about long, with a hoop net on the end of it, large enough to contain the ball\".\nEnglish-speaking people from Montreal noticed Mohawk people playing the game and started playing themselves in the 1830s. In 1856, William George Beers, a Canadian dentist, founded the Montreal Lacrosse Club. In 1860, Beers codified the game, shortening the length of each game and reducing the number of players to 12 per team. The first game played under Beers's rules was at Upper Canada College in 1867; they lost to the Toronto Cricket Club by a score of 3\u20131.\nThe new sport proved to be very popular and spread across the English-speaking world; by 1900 there were dozens of men's clubs in Canada, the United States, England, Australia, and New Zealand. The women's game was introduced by Louisa Lumsden in Scotland in 1890. The first women's club in the United States was started by Rosabelle Sinclair at Bryn Mawr School in 1926.\nIn the United States, lacrosse during the late 1800s and first half of the 1900s was primarily a regional sport centered around the Mid-Atlantic states, especially New York and Maryland. However, in the last half of the 20th century, the sport spread outside this region, and can be currently found in most of the United States. According to a survey conducted by US Lacrosse in 2016, there are over 825,000 lacrosse participants nationwide and lacrosse is the fastest-growing team sport among NFHS member schools.\nVersions of lacrosse.\nField lacrosse.\nField lacrosse is the men's outdoor version of the sport. There are ten players on each team: three attackmen, three midfielders, three defensemen, and one goalie. Each player carries a lacrosse stick. A short stick measures between long and is used by attackmen and midfielders. A maximum of four players on the field per team may carry a long stick which is between long and is used by the three defensemen and sometimes one defensive midfielder. The goalie uses a stick with a head as wide as that can be between long.\nThe field of play is . The goals are and are apart. Each goal sits inside a circular \"crease\", measuring in diameter. The goalie has special privileges within the crease to avoid opponents' stick checks. Offensive players or their sticks may not enter into the crease at any time. The mid-field line separates the field into an offensive and defensive zone for each team. Each team must keep four players in its defensive zone and three players in its offensive zone at all times. It does not matter which positional players satisfy the requirement, although usually the three attackmen stay in the offensive zone, the three defensemen and the goalie stay in the defensive zone, and the three middies play in both zones. A team that violates this rule is offsides and either loses possession of the ball if they have it or incurs a technical foul if they do not.\nThe regulation playing time of a game is 60 minutes, divided into four periods of 15 minutes each. Play is started at the beginning of each quarter and after each goal with a face-off. During a face-off, two players lay their sticks on the ground parallel to the mid-line, the two heads of their sticks on opposite sides of the ball. At the whistle, the face-off-men scrap for the ball, often by \"clamping\" it under their stick and flicking it out to their teammates. When one of the teams has possession of the ball, they bring it into their offensive zone and try to score a goal. Due to the offsides rule, settled play involves six offensive players versus six defensive players and a goalie.\nIf the ball goes out of bounds, possession is awarded against the team that touched it last. The exception is when the ball is shot towards the goal. Missed shots that go out of bounds are awarded to the team that has the player who is the closest to the ball when and where the ball goes out. During play, teams may substitute players in and out if they leave and enter the field through the substitution area, sometimes referred to as \"on the fly\". After penalties and goals, players may freely substitute and do not have to go through the substitution area.\nPenalties are awarded for rule violations and result in the offending team losing possession (loss of possession) or temporarily losing a player (time serving). During time serving penalties, the penalized team plays with one fewer player for the duration of the penalty. Time serving penalties are either releasable or non-releasable. When serving a releasable penalty, the offending player may re-enter play if a goal is scored by the opposing team during the duration of the penalty. Non-releasable penalties do not allow this and the player must serve the entire duration. In conjunction with the offsides rule, the opponent may play with six attackers versus the penalized team's five defenders and goalie. The team that has taken the penalty is said to be playing man down, while the other team is man up. Teams will use various lacrosse strategies to attack and defend while a player is being penalized.\nThere are two classes of rule violations that result in penalties: technical fouls and personal fouls. Technical fouls, such as offsides, pushing, and holding, result in either a loss of possession or a 30-second penalty, depending on which team has the ball. Personal fouls, such as cross-checking, illegal body checking, or slashing, concern actions that endanger player safety. Cross-checking is when a player strikes another player with the shaft of the stick between his hands. A slash is when a player strikes another player with the end of the stick anywhere besides the gloves. These fouls draw 1-minute or longer penalties; the offending player must leave the field.\nBox lacrosse.\nBox lacrosse is played by teams of five runners plus a goalie on an ice hockey rink where the ice has been removed or covered by artificial turf, or in an indoor soccer field. The enclosed playing area is called a box, in contrast to the open playing field of the traditional game. This version of the game was introduced in Canada in the 1930s to promote business for hockey arenas outside of the ice hockey season.157 Within several years it had nearly supplanted field lacrosse in Canada.120\nThe goals in box lacrosse are smaller than field lacrosse, traditionally wide and tall. Also, the goaltender wears much more protective padding, including a massive chest protector and armguard combination known as \"uppers\", large shin guards known as leg pads (both of which must follow strict measurement guidelines), and ice hockey-style goalie masks.\nThe style of the game is quick, accelerated by the close confines of the floor and a shot clock. The shot clock requires the attacking team to take a shot on goal within 30 seconds of gaining possession of the ball. Box lacrosse is also a much more physical game. Since cross checking is legal in box lacrosse, players wear rib pads and the shoulder and elbow pads are bigger and stronger than what field lacrosse players wear. Box lacrosse players wear a hockey helmet with a box lacrosse cage. There is no offsides in box lacrosse, the players substitute freely from their bench areas as in hockey. However, most players specialize in offense or defense, so usually all five runners substitute for teammates as their team transitions between offense and defense.\nFor penalties, the offending player is sent to the penalty box and his team has to play without him, or man-down, for the length of the penalty. Most fouls are minor penalties and last for two minutes, major penalties for serious offenses last five minutes. What separates box lacrosse (and ice hockey) from other sports is that at the top levels of professional and junior lacrosse, participating in a fight does not automatically cause an ejection, but a five-minute major penalty is given.\nBox lacrosse is played at the highest level in the National Lacrosse League and by the Senior A divisions of the Canadian Lacrosse Association. The National Lacrosse League (NLL) employs some minor rule changes from the Canadian Lacrosse Association (CLA) rules. Notably, the goals are wide instead of and the games are played during the winter. The NLL games consist of four fifteen-minute quarters compared with three periods of twenty minutes each in CLA games. NLL players may only use sticks with hollow shafts, while CLA permits solid wooden sticks.\nWomen's lacrosse.\nThe rules of women's lacrosse differ significantly from men's lacrosse, most notably by equipment and the degree of allowable physical contact. Women's lacrosse rules also differ significantly between the US and all other countries, who play by the Federation of International Lacrosse (FIL) rules. Women's lacrosse does not allow physical contact; the only protective equipment worn is a mouth guard and eye guard. In the early part of the 21st century, there were discussions of requiring headgear to prevent concussions. In 2008, Florida was the first state to mandate headgear in women's lacrosse. \nStick checking is permitted in the women's game, but only in certain levels of play and within strict rules. Women's lacrosse also does not allow players to have a pocket, or loose net, on the lacrosse stick. Women start the game with a \"draw\" instead of a face-off. The two players stand up and the ball is placed between their stick heads while their sticks are horizontal at waist-height. At the whistle, the players lift their sticks into the air, trying to control where the ball goes.\nThe first modern women's lacrosse game was held at St Leonards School in Scotland in 1890. It was introduced by the school's headmistress Louisa Lumsden after a visit to Quebec, where she saw it played. The first women's lacrosse team in the United States was established at Bryn Mawr School in Baltimore, Maryland in 1926.\nBoth the number of players and the lines on the field differ from men's lacrosse. There are 12 players in women's lacrosse and players must abide by certain boundaries that do not exist in men's play. The three specific boundaries are the \"fan\" in front of the goal ( internationally), the ( internationally) half circle that surrounds the 8-meter fan, and the draw circle in the center of the field, which is used for draws to start quarters and after goals. The goal circle is also positioned slightly closer to the end line in women's lacrosse compared to men's. In women's lacrosse on either the offensive or defensive end, the players besides the goaltender are not able to step inside the goal circle; this becomes a \"goal-circle violation\". However, at the women's collegiate level, defenders may pass through the goal circle.\nThe 8-meter fan that is in front of the goal circle has a few restrictions in it. Defenders cannot stand inside the 8-meter fan longer than 3 seconds without being a stick-length away from the offensive player they are guarding. This is very similar to the three-second rule in basketball. A three seconds violation results in a player from the other team taking a free shot against the goalie. If you are an attacker trying to shoot the ball into the goal, you are not supposed to take a shot while a defender is in \"shooting space\". To make sure that you, the defender, are being safe, you want to lead with your lacrosse stick and once you are a sticks-length away, you can be in front of her.\nLacrosse sixes.\nLacrosse sixes is a variant of lacrosse played outdoors with six players on each side. The game follows similar rules to traditional field lacrosse, with modifications and a shorter game time. It was created in 2021 by World Lacrosse in a bid to achieve lacrosse's participation in the Olympic Games, and will make its Olympic debut at the 2028 edition in Los Angeles.\nLacrosse sixes has similar rules for men and women but preserves some differences, such as the amount of contact allowed. The major rule differences as compared to traditional field lacrosse are as follows:\nIntercrosse.\nIntercrosse, or soft stick lacrosse, is a non-contact form of lacrosse with a standardized set of rules using modified lacrosse equipment. An intercrosse stick is different from a normal lacrosse stick, the head is made completely of plastic instead of leather or nylon pockets in traditional lacrosse sticks. The ball is larger, softer and hollow, unlike a lacrosse ball, which is solid rubber.\nIntercrosse as a competitive adult sport is popular in Quebec, Canada, as well as in many European countries, particularly in the Czech Republic. Generally, teams consist of five players per side, and the field size is wide and long. Goals for adults are the same size as box lacrosse, in height and width. The international governing body, the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale d'Inter-Crosse, hosts a World Championship bi-annually.\nSoft stick lacrosse is a popular way to introduce youth to the sport. It can be played outdoors or indoors and has a developed curriculum for physical education classes.\nInternational lacrosse.\nLacrosse has historically been played for the most part in Canada and the United States, with small but dedicated lacrosse communities in the United Kingdom and Australia. Recently, however, lacrosse has begun to flourish at the international level, with teams being established around the world, particularly in Europe and East Asia.\nWorld Lacrosse.\nIn August 2008, the men's international governing body, the International Lacrosse Federation, merged with the women's, the International Federation of Women's Lacrosse Associations, to form the Federation of International Lacrosse (FIL). The FIL changed its name to World Lacrosse in May 2019. There are currently 62 member nations of World Lacrosse.\nTournaments.\nWorld Lacrosse sponsors five world championship tournaments: the World Lacrosse Championship for men's field, the Women's Lacrosse World Championship for women's, the World Indoor Lacrosse Championship for box lacrosse, as well as the Men's Under-20 World Lacrosse Championships and Women's Under-20 World Lacrosse Championships. Each is held every four years.\nThe World Lacrosse Championship (WLC) began in 1968 as a four-team invitational tournament sponsored by the International Lacrosse Federation. Until 1990, only the United States, Canada, England, and Australia had entered. With the expansion of the game internationally, the 2014 World Lacrosse Championship was contested by 38 countries. The WLC has been dominated by the United States. Team USA has won 11 of the 14 titles, with Canada winning the other three.\nThe Women's Lacrosse World Cup (WLWC) began in 1982. The United States has won 9 of the 11 titles, with Australia winning the other two. Canada and England have always finished in the top five. The 2017 tournament was held in England and featured 25 countries.\nThe first World Indoor Lacrosse Championship (WILC) was held in 2003 and contested by six nations at four sites in Ontario. Canada won the championship by beating the Iroquois Nationals 21\u20134 in the final. The 2007 championship hosted by the Onondaga Nation included 13 teams. Canada has dominated the competition, winning all five gold medals and never losing a game.\nThe Iroquois Nationals are the men's national team representing the Six Nations of the Iroquois Confederacy in international field lacrosse competition. The team was admitted to the FIL in 1987. It is the only First Nations team sanctioned for international competition in any sport. The Nationals placed fourth in the 1998, 2002 and 2006 World Lacrosse Championships and third in 2014. The indoor team won the silver medal in all four World Indoor Lacrosse Championships. In 2008, the Iroquois women's team was admitted to the FIL as the Haudenosaunee Nationals. They placed 7th at the 2013 Women's Lacrosse World Cup.\nOlympic Games.\nField lacrosse was a medal sport in the 1904 and the 1908 Summer Olympics. In 1904, three teams competed in the games held in St. Louis. Two Canadian teams, the Winnipeg Shamrocks and a team of Mohawk people from the Iroquois Confederacy, plus the local St. Louis Amateur Athletic Association team representing the United States participated. The Winnipeg Shamrocks captured the gold medal. The 1908 games held in London, England, featured only two teams, representing Canada and Great Britain. The Canadians again won the gold medal in a single championship match by a score of 14\u201310.\nIn the 1928, 1932, and the 1948 Summer Olympics, lacrosse was a demonstration sport. The 1928 Olympics in Amsterdam featured three teams: the United States, Canada, and Great Britain. The 1932 games in Los Angeles featured a three-game exhibition between a Canadian all-star team and the United States. The United States was represented by Johns Hopkins in both the 1928 and 1932 Olympics. The 1948 games featured an exhibition by an \"All-England\" team organized by the English Lacrosse Union and the collegiate lacrosse team from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute representing the United States. This exhibition match ended in a 5\u20135 tie.\nEfforts were made to include lacrosse as an exhibition sport at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Georgia, and the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia, but they were not successful.\nAn obstacle for lacrosse to return to the Olympics has been insufficient international participation. To be considered for the Olympics, a sport had to be played on four continents and by at least 75 countries. Lacrosse is played on all six continents, but as of August 2019 when Ghana joined, there are only 63 countries playing the sport. However, nowadays numeric criteria about widely practiced sports have been abolished. The International Olympic Committee granted provisional status to World Lacrosse in 2018. In August 2022, it was announced that nine sports had made the shortlist to be included in the games, among them lacrosse, with presentations expected to be made later that month. In October 2023, the LA28 Organizing Committee announced that it had recommended lacrosse as one of five sports that may be added to the program for the 2028 Summer Olympics. On October 16, 2023, lacrosse received approval from the International Olympic Committee for inclusion in the 2028 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles.\nOther.\nThe European Lacrosse Federation (ELF) was established in 1995 and held the first European Lacrosse Championships that year. Originally an annual event, it is now held every four years, in between FIL's men's and women's championships. In 2004, 12 men's and 6 women's teams played in the tournament, making it the largest international lacrosse event of the year. The last men's tournament was in 2016, when 24 countries participated. England won its ninth gold medal out of the ten tournaments played. 2015 was the last women's tournament, when 17 teams participated in the Czech Republic. England won its sixth gold medal, with Wales earning silver and Scotland bronze. These three countries from Great Britain have dominated the women's championships, earning all but three medals since the tournament began in 1996. There are currently 29 members of the ELF, they make up the majority of nations in the FIL.\nThe Asia Pacific Lacrosse Union was founded in 2004 by Australia, Hong Kong, South Korea and Japan. It currently has 12 members and holds the Asia Pacific Championship for both men's and women's teams every two years.\nLacrosse, in 10 x 10 format, was played in the World Games for the first time at the 2017 World Games held in Poland. Only women's teams took part in the competition. The United States won the gold medal defeating Canada in the finals. Australia won the bronze medal match. The Haudenosaunee Nationals women's lacrosse team could not participate.\nBoth men and women tournaments, in sixes format, were held in the 2022 World Games in Birmingham, Alabama, USA. Women tournament will be played again, in same format, in 2025 World games.\nLacrosse in the United States.\nCollege lacrosse.\nMen's college lacrosse.\nCollegiate lacrosse in the United States is played at the NCAA, NAIA and club levels. There are currently 71 NCAA Division I men's lacrosse teams, 93 Division II teams, and 236 Division III teams. Thirty-two schools participate at the NAIA level. 184 men's club teams compete in the Men's Collegiate Lacrosse Association, including most universities and colleges outside the northeastern United States. The National College Lacrosse League and Great Lakes Lacrosse League are two other lower-division club leagues. In Canada, 14 teams from Ontario and Quebec play field lacrosse in the fall in the Canadian University Field Lacrosse Association.\nThe first U. S. intercollegiate men's lacrosse game was played on November 22, 1877, between New York University and Manhattan College. An organizing body for the sport, the U. S. National Lacrosse Association, was founded in 1879 and the first intercollegiate lacrosse tournament was held in 1881, with Harvard beating Princeton 3\u20130 in the championship game. Annual post-season championships were awarded by a variety of early lacrosse associations through the 1930s. From 1936 to 1972, the United States Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association awarded the Wingate Memorial Trophy to the best college lacrosse team each year.\nThe NCAA began sponsoring a men's lacrosse championship in 1971, when Cornell took the first title over Maryland, 12\u20136. Syracuse has 10 Division I titles, Johns Hopkins 9, and Princeton 6. The NCAA national championship weekend tournament draws over 80,000 fans.\nWomen's college lacrosse.\nThere are currently 112 Division I women's lacrosse teams, 109 Division II teams, and 282 Division III teams. There are 36 NAIA women's lacrosse teams. The NCAA started sponsoring a women's lacrosse championship in 1982. Maryland has traditionally dominated women's intercollegiate play, producing many head coaches and U.S. national team players. The Terrapins won seven consecutive NCAA championships from 1995 through 2001. Princeton's women's teams have made it to the final game seven times since 1993 and have won three NCAA titles, in 1993, 2002, and 2003. In recent years, Northwestern has become a force, winning the national championship from 2005 through 2009. Maryland ended Northwestern's streak by defeating the Wildcats in the 2010 final, however, Northwestern won the next two titles in 2011 and 2012. Maryland again claimed the national championship in 2014, 2015, and 2017.\nThe Women's Collegiate Lacrosse Associates (WCLA) is a collection of over 260 college club teams that are organized by US Lacrosse. Teams are organized into two divisions and various leagues.\nProfessional lacrosse.\nActive leagues.\nNational Lacrosse League.\nThe National Lacrosse League (NLL) is a men's semi-professional box lacrosse league in North America. The NLL currently has fifteen teams, ten in the United States and five in Canada. The 18-game regular season runs from December to April; games are always on the weekends. The champion is awarded the National Lacrosse League Cup in early June.\nGames are played in ice rinks with artificial turf covering the ice. Venues range from NHL arenas seating 19,000 to smaller arenas with under 10,000 capacity. In 2017, average attendance ranged from 3,200 per game in Vancouver to over 15,000 in Buffalo. Overall, the league averaged 9,500 people per game.\nWith an average salary around $20,000 per season, players have regular jobs, mostly non-lacrosse related, and live in different cities, flying into town for games. Canadians and Native Americans make up over 90% of the players.\nThe NLL started in 1987 as the Eagle Pro Box Lacrosse League. Teams in Philadelphia, New Jersey, Baltimore and Washington, DC, played a 6-game season. The league operated as the Major Indoor Lacrosse League from 1989 to 1997, when there were six teams playing a 10-game schedule. The current NLL name began in the 1998 season, which included the first Canadian team.\nThe most successful franchises have been the Toronto Rock and the former Philadelphia Wings (now the Albany FireWolves), each has won six championships.\nPremier Lacrosse League.\nIn October 2018, former MLL player Paul Rabil branched away from the MLL and created the Premier Lacrosse League. The PLL focuses on being a traveling lacrosse league that will bring the best players in the world to different cities in the United States.\nEach player has a minimum salary of $25,000, equity in the league, and medical benefits. The average salary is $35,000. The most successful team is Whipsnakes Lacrosse Club which has two championships.\nSince its inaugural season in 2019, the PLL has expanded to eight teams and merged with the MLL.\nBeginning with the 2022 season, the PLL has had a broadcasting deal with ESPN.\nPrior to the 2023 season the PLL announced that they would be assigning home-cities to each team for the 2024 season. The touring model would not cease, however, with each team hosting one regular season weekend where they play a doubleheader. There will also be two neutral site weekends.\nWomen's Lacrosse League.\nWomen's Lacrosse League is a professional women's league that will play lacrosse sixes beginning in 2025.\nDefunct leagues.\nAthletes Unlimited Lacrosse.\nAthletes Unlimited Lacrosse was a women's lacrosse league that operated from 2021-2024. Rather than having set teams, at the end of each week, the top four players are determined by a point system and named captains of next week's teams. They then draft their team for the next week. The champion of the league is the player that scores the most points. There were 56 players in the league in 2023.\nMajor League Lacrosse.\nMajor League Lacrosse (MLL) was a semi-professional field lacrosse league started in 2001 with six teams in the Northeastern United States. The leagues final year had six teams, playing a week long round-robin regular season. MLL rules were based on NCAA men's rules with several exceptions, such as a 16-yard 2-point line and a 60-second shot clock.\nMLL venues ranged from small stadiums with under 10,000 capacity to an NFL stadium in Denver that seats 76,000. Overall league average attendance is around 4,000 per game, although the leagues Denver Outlaws had averaged around 10,000 per game since their founding in 2006.\nThe rookie salary was $7,000 per season and most players made between $10,000 and $20,000 per season. Therefore, the players had other jobs, often non-lacrosse related, and travel to games on the weekends.\nThe Chesapeake Bayhawks, who had played in the Annapolis\u2013Baltimore\u2013Washington, DC area since 2001, were the most successful franchise with six championships.\nOn December 16, 2020, it was announced that the MLL was merging all operations with the Premier Lacrosse League. The PLL added the Boston Cannons and rebranded them to \"Cannons Lacrosse Club\". No other MLL teams were added into the PLL.\nUnited Women's Lacrosse League.\nThe United Women's Lacrosse League (UWLX), was a four-team women's lacrosse league, was launched in 2016. The teams are the Baltimore Ride, Boston Storm, Long Island Sound and Philadelphia Force. Long Island won the first two championships. The league closed in 2020.\nWomen's Professional Lacrosse League.\nThe Women's Professional Lacrosse League was a professional women's lacrosse league with 5 teams that started in 2018. It closed in 2020.\nEquipment.\nStick.\nThe lacrosse stick has two parts, the head and the shaft. There are three parts to the head: the scoop, sidewall, and pocket. The scoop is the top of the stick that affects picking up ground ball as well as passing and shooting. The sidewall is the side of the head that affects the depth of the head and the stiffness. The pocket is the leather or nylon mesh attached to the sidewall and scoop. A wider pocket allows an easier time catching balls but will also cause less ball control. A narrower pocket makes catching harder but allows more ball retention and accuracy.\nShafts are usually made of hollow metal. They are octagonal, instead of round, in order to provide a better grip. Most are made of aluminum, titanium, scandium, or alloys, but some shafts are made from other materials, including wood, plastic, carbon fiber, or fiberglass.\nStick length, both shaft and head together, is governed by NCAA regulations, which require that men's sticks be from long for offensive players, and long for defensemen, and long for goalies.\nWomen's sticks must be an overall length of . The head must be seven to nine inches wide and the top of the ball must remain above the side walls when dropped in the pocket. The goalkeeper's stick must be long. The head of the goalie's stick can up to wide and the pocket may be mesh.\nBall.\nThe ball is made of solid rubber. It is typically white for men's lacrosse, or yellow for women's lacrosse; but is also produced in a wide variety of colors, such as yellow, orange or lime green according to the Men's Lacrosse Rules and Interpretations.\nMen's field protective equipment.\nMen's field lacrosse protective equipment contains a pair of gloves, elbow pads, shoulder pads, helmet, mouthguard, and cleats. Pads differ in size and protection from player to player based on position, ability, comfort and preference. For example, many attack players wear larger and more protective elbow pads to protect themselves from checks thrown at them while defenders typically wear smaller and less protective pads due to their smaller possibility of being checked and goalies usually wear no elbow pads due to the very limited opportunities of being checked. A goalkeeper must also wear a large protective chest pad to cover their stomach and chest and a plastic neck guard that connects to the chin of their helmet to protect them from shots hitting their windpipe. In addition, male goalkeepers are required to wear a protective cup.\nMen's box protective equipment.\nMen's box players wear more protective gear than field players due to the increased physical contact and more permissive checking rules. Cross-checking in the back is allowed by the rules. Runners wear larger and heavier elbow pads and stronger shoulder pads that extend down the back of the player. Most players wear rib pads as well. Box goalies wear equipment very similar to ice hockey goalies, the leg blockers are somewhat smaller, although the shoulder pads are bigger than ice hockey pads.\nWomen's field protective equipment.\nWomen's field players are not required to wear protective equipment besides eyewear and a mouthguard. Eyegear is a metal cage covering the eyes attached with a strap around the back of the head. In recent years, there has been discussion about allowing or requiring padded headgear to protect against concussions. Women goalies wear a helmet, gloves, and chest protector.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18081", "revid": "41219559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18081", "title": "Liverpool", "text": "City in Merseyside, England\nLiverpool is a port city and metropolitan borough in Merseyside, England. It is situated on the eastern side of the Mersey Estuary, near the Irish Sea, north-west of London. It had a population of 508,961 in 2024 and is the administrative, cultural and economic centre of the Liverpool City Region, a combined authority area with a population of over 1.5 million. \nEstablished as a borough in Lancashire in 1207, Liverpool became significant in the late 17th century when the Port of Liverpool was heavily involved in the Atlantic slave trade. The port also imported cotton for the Lancashire textile mills, and became a major departure point for English and Irish emigrants to North America. Liverpool rose to global economic importance at the forefront of the Industrial Revolution in the 19th century and was home to the first inter-city railway, the first non-combustible warehouse system (the Royal Albert Dock), and a pioneering elevated electrical railway; it was granted city status in 1880 and was moved from Lancashire to the newly created county of Merseyside in 1974. It entered a period of decline in the mid-20th century, which was largely reversed after the European Union selected it as the European Capital of Culture for 2008, reportedly generating over \u00a3800million for the local economy within a year.\nThe economy of Liverpool is diverse and encompasses tourism, culture, maritime, hospitality, healthcare, life sciences, advanced manufacturing, creative and digital sectors. The city is home to the UK's second highest number of art galleries, national museums, listed buildings, and parks and open spaces, behind only London. It is often used as a filming location due to its architecture and was the fifth most visited UK city by foreign tourists in 2022. It has produced numerous musicians, most notably the Beatles, and recording artists from the city have had more UK No. 1 singles than anywhere else in the world. It has also produced numerous , , , , , , , , and . It is the home of Premier League football teams Everton and Liverpool. The world's oldest still-operating main line railway station, Liverpool Lime Street, is in the city centre; it is also served by the underground Merseyrail network. The city's port was the fourth largest in the UK in 2023, with numerous shipping and freight lines having headquarters and offices there.\nResidents of Liverpool are formally known as Liverpudlians but are more often called Scousers in reference to scouse, a local stew made popular by sailors. The city's distinct local accent is also primarily known as Scouse. Its cultural and ethnic diversity is the result of attracting immigrants from various areas, particularly Ireland, Scandinavia, and Wales; it is also home to the UK's oldest black community and Europe's oldest Chinese community, as well as the first mosque in England.\nToponymy.\nThe name comes from the Old English , meaning thick or muddy water, and , meaning a pool or creek, and is first recorded around 1190 as \"Liuerpul\". According to the \"Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names\", \"The original reference was to a pool or tidal creek now filled up into which two streams drained\". Other origins of the name have been suggested, including \"elverpool\", a reference to the large number of eels in the Mersey. The adjective \"Liverpudlian\" was first recorded in 1833.\nHistory.\n \nEarly history.\nIn the Middle Ages, Liverpool first existed as farmland within the West Derby Hundred before growing into a small town of farmers, fishermen and tradesmen and tactical army base for King John of England. A tidal creek, known as the Pool provided a natural harbour for ships. The town was planned with its own castle, although due to outbreaks of disease and its subordinance to the nearby Roman port of Chester, the town's growth and prosperity stagnated until the late 17th and early 18th centuries. There was substantial growth in the mid- to late 18th century, when the town became the European port most heavily involved in the Atlantic slave trade.\nKing John's letters patent of 1207 announced the foundation of the borough of Liverpool (then spelt as \"Liuerpul\"). There is no evidence that the place had previously been a centre of any trade. The borough was probably created because King John decided that it would be a convenient place to embark men and supplies for his Irish campaigns: in particular his Irish campaign of 1209. The original street plan of Liverpool is said to have been designed by King John near the same time it was granted a royal charter, making it a borough. The original seven streets were laid out in the shape of a double cross: Bank Street (now Water Street), Castle Street, Chapel Street, Dale Street, Juggler Street (now High Street), Moor Street (now Tithebarn Street) and Whiteacre Street (now Old Hall Street). Liverpool Castle was built before 1235, and survived until it was demolished in the 1720s. By the middle of the 16th century, the population was still around 600, although this was likely to have fallen from an earlier peak of 1,000 people due to slow trade and the effects of the plague.\nIn the 17th century, there was slow progress in trade and population growth. Battles for control of the town were waged during the English Civil War, including a brief siege in 1644. In 1699, the same year as its first recorded slave ship, \"Liverpool Merchant\", set sail for Africa, Liverpool was made a parish by Act of Parliament. But arguably, the legislation of 1695 that reformed the Liverpool council was of more significance to its subsequent development. Since Roman times nearby Chester on the River Dee had been the region's principal port on the Irish Sea. However, as the Dee began to silt up, maritime trade from Chester became increasingly difficult and shifted towards Liverpool on the neighbouring River Mersey. The first of the Liverpool docks was constructed in 1715, and the system of docks gradually grew into a large interconnected system.\nAs trade from the West Indies, including sugar, surpassed that of Ireland and Europe, and as the River Dee continued to silt up, Liverpool began to grow even faster. The first commercial wet dock was built in Liverpool in 1715. Substantial profits from the slave trade and tobacco helped the town to prosper and rapidly grow, although several prominent local men, including William Rathbone, William Roscoe and Edward Rushton, were at the forefront of the local abolitionist movement.\n19th century.\nThe 19th century saw Liverpool rise to global economic importance. Pioneering arose, and world-first technology and civic facilities launched in the city to serve the accelerating population, one that was fuelled by an influx of ethnic and religious communities from all around the world.\nBy the start of the 19th century, a large volume of trade was passing through Liverpool, and the construction of major buildings reflected this wealth. In 1830, Liverpool and Manchester became the first cities to have an intercity rail link, through the Liverpool and Manchester Railway. The population continued to rise rapidly, especially during the 1840s when Irish migrants began arriving by the hundreds of thousands as a result of the Great Famine. While many Irish people settled in the city at that time, a large percentage also emigrated to the United States or moved to the industrial centres of Lancashire, Yorkshire, and the Midlands.\nIn her poetical illustration \"Liverpool\" (1832), which celebrates the city's worldwide commerce, Letitia Elizabeth Landon refers specifically to the Macgregor Laird expedition to the Niger River, at that time in progress. This is accompanied by a painting by Samuel Austin, \"Liverpool, from the Mersey\".\nBritain was a major market for cotton imported from the Deep South of the United States, which fed the textile industry in the country. Given the crucial place cotton held in the city's economy, during the American Civil War Liverpool was, in the words of historian Sven Beckert, \"the most pro-Confederate place in the world outside the Confederacy itself\". Liverpool merchants helped to bring out cotton from ports blockaded by the Union Navy, built ships of war for the Confederacy, and supplied\nthe South with military equipment and credit.\nDuring the war, the Confederate Navy ship, the CSS \"Alabama\", was built at Birkenhead on the Mersey, and the CSS \"Shenandoah\" surrendered there (being the final surrender at the end of the war). The city was also the centre of Confederate purchases of war materiel, including arms and ammunition, uniforms, and naval supplies to be smuggled by British blockade runners to the South.\nFor periods during the 19th century, the wealth of Liverpool exceeded that of London, and Liverpool's Custom House was the single largest contributor to the British Exchequer. Liverpool was the only British city ever to have its own Whitehall office. During this century, at least 40% of the world's entire trade passed through Liverpool.\nIn the early 19th century, Liverpool played a major role in the Antarctic sealing industry, in recognition of which Liverpool Beach in the South Shetland Islands is named after the city.\nAs early as 1851, the city was described as \"the New York of Europe\". During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Liverpool was attracting immigrants from across Europe. This resulted in the construction of a diverse array of religious buildings in the city for the new ethnic and religious groups, many of which are still in use today. The Deutsche Kirche, Greek Orthodox Church of St Nicholas, Gustav Adolf Church and Princes Road Synagogue were all established in the 1800s to serve Liverpool's growing German, Greek, Nordic and Jewish communities, respectively. One of Liverpool's oldest surviving churches, St. Peter's Roman Catholic Church, served the Polish community in its final years as a place of worship.\n20th century.\nThe 20th century saw Liverpool's established rank as a global economic powerhouse challenged. Its strategic location as an international seaport made it particularly vulnerable in two World wars. Economic depressions (both in the United Kingdom and across the world), changing housing patterns and containerisation in the maritime industry contributed to a downtrend in the city's productivity and prosperity. Despite this, the city's influence on global popular culture excelled and by the end of the century, the continuing process of urban renewal paved the way for the redefined modern city of the 21st century.\nThe period after the Great War was marked by social unrest, as society grappled with the massive war losses of young men, as well as trying to re-integrate veterans into civilian life and the economy. Unemployment and poor living standards greeted many ex-servicemen. Union organising and strikes took place in numerous locations, including a police strike in Liverpool among the City Police. Numerous colonial soldiers and sailors from Africa and India, who had served with the British Armed Forces, settled in Liverpool and other port cities. In June 1919, they were subject to attack by whites in racial riots; residents in the port included Swedish immigrants, and both groups had to compete with native people from Liverpool for jobs and housing. In this period, race riots also took place in other port cities.\nThe Housing Act 1919 resulted in mass council housing being built across Liverpool during the 1920s and 1930s. In the 1920s and 1930s, as much as 15% of the city's population (around 140,000 people) was relocated from the inner-city to new purpose built, lower density suburban housing estates, based on the belief that this would improve their standard of living, though the overall benefits have been contested. Numerous private homes were also built during this era. During the Great Depression of the early 1930s, unemployment peaked at around 30% in the city. Liverpool was the site of Britain's first provincial airport, operating from 1930.\nDuring the Second World War, the critical strategic importance of Liverpool was recognised by both Hitler and Churchill. The city was heavily bombed by the Germans, suffering a blitz second only to London's. The pivotal Battle of the Atlantic was planned, fought and won from Liverpool.\nThe \"Luftwaffe\" made 80air raids on Merseyside, killing 2,500people and causing damage to almost half the homes in the metropolitan area. Significant rebuilding followed the war, including massive housing estates and the Seaforth Dock, the largest dock project in Britain. Since 1952, Liverpool has been twinned with Cologne, Germany, a city that also suffered severe aerial bombing during the war. In the 1950s and 1960s, much of the immediate reconstruction that took place in the city centre proved to be deeply unpopular. The historic portions of the city that had survived German bombing suffered extensive destruction during urban renewal. It has been argued that the so-called \"Shankland Plan\" of the 1960s, named after the town planner Graeme Shankland, led to compromised town planning and vast road-building schemes that devastated and divided inner city neighbourhoods. Concrete brutalist architecture, compromised visions, botched projects and grand designs that were never realised became the subject of condemnation. Historian Raphael Samuel labelled Graeme Shankland \"the butcher of Liverpool\".\nA West Indian black community has existed in the city since the first two decades of the 20th century. Like most British cities and industrialised towns, Liverpool became home to Commonwealth immigrants, beginning after World War I with colonial soldiers and sailors who had served in the area. More immigrants arrived after World War II, mostly settling in older inner-city areas such as Toxteth, where housing was less expensive. The black population of Liverpool was recorded at 1.90% in 2011. In the 2021 Census, 5.2% described themselves as black African, Caribbean, mixed white and black African, mixed white and Caribbean or 'other black'.\nIn the 1960s, Liverpool was the centre of the \"Merseybeat\" sound whose best-known band is the Beatles. Liverpool Airport was renamed after Beatle and Liverpudlian John Lennon in 2002, the first British airport to be named in honour of an individual.\nPreviously part of Lancashire, and a county borough from 1889, Liverpool became a metropolitan borough within the newly created metropolitan county of Merseyside, in 1974. From the mid-1970s onwards, Liverpool's docks and traditional manufacturing industries declined due to restructuring of shipping and heavy industry, causing massive losses of jobs. The advent of containerisation meant that the city's docks became largely obsolete, and dock workers were made unemployed. By the early 1980s, unemployment rates in Liverpool were among the highest in the UK, standing at 17% by January 1982 although, this was about half the level of unemployment that had affected the city during the Great Depression some 50 years previously. During this period, Liverpool became a hub of fierce left-wing opposition to the central government in London. Liverpool in the 1980s has been labelled as Britain's 'shock city'. Once the acclaimed second city of the British Empire which rivalled the capital city in global significance, Liverpool had collapsed in to its 'nadir' at the depths of post-colonial, post-industrial Britain.\nIn the late 20th century, Liverpool's economy began to recover. The late 1980s saw the opening of a regenerated Albert Dock which proved to be a catalyst for further regeneration. In the mid-1990s, the city enjoyed growth rates higher than the national average. At the end of the 20th century, Liverpool was concentrating on regeneration, a process that continues today.\n21st century.\nOngoing regeneration combined with the hosting of internationally significant events has helped to re-purpose Liverpool as one of the most visited, tourist orientated, cities in the United Kingdom. City leaders are focussing on long-term strategies to grow the city's population and economy, while national government explores the continuous potential for devolution in the city.\nIn 2002, Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh visited Liverpool to mark the Golden Jubilee. On speaking to an audience at Liverpool Town Hall, the Queen recognised Liverpool as \"one of the most distinctive and energetic parts of the United Kingdom\", and paid tribute to the city's \"major orchestras, world-class museums and galleries\". She also acknowledged Liverpool's bid to become the European Capital of Culture. To celebrate the Golden Jubilee of Elizabeth II in 2002, the conservation charity Plantlife organised a competition to choose county flowers; the sea-holly was Liverpool's final choice. The initiative was designed to highlight growing threats to the UK's flower species and also ask the public about which flowers best represented their county.\nCapitalising on the popularity of 1960s rock groups, such as the Beatles, as well as the city's world-class art galleries, museums and landmarks, tourism and culture have become a significant factor in Liverpool's economy.\nIn 2004, property developer Grosvenor started the Paradise Project, a \u00a3920million development based on Paradise Street. This produced one of the most significant changes to Liverpool's city centre since the post-war reconstruction. Renamed as 'Liverpool One,' the centre opened in May 2008.\nIn 2007, events and celebrations took place in honour of the 800th anniversary of the founding of the borough of Liverpool. Liverpool was designated as a joint European Capital of Culture for 2008. The celebrations included the erection of La Princesse, a large mechanical spider 20 metres high and weighing 37 tonnes, which represented the \"eight legs\" of Liverpool: honour, history, music, the Mersey, the ports, governance, sunshine and culture. La Princesse roamed the streets of the city during the festivities, and concluded by entering the Queensway Tunnel.\nSpearheaded by the multi-billion-pound Liverpool ONE development, regeneration continued throughout the 2010s. Some of the most significant redevelopment projects included new buildings in the Commercial District, King's Dock, Mann Island, around Lime Street, the Baltic Triangle, RopeWalks, and Edge Lane.\nChanges to Liverpool's governance took place in 2014. The local authority of Liverpool City Council decided to pool its power and resources with surrounding boroughs through the formation of the Liverpool City Region Combined Authority in a form of devolution. With a devolved budget granted by central government, the authority now oversees and invests in foremost strategic affairs throughout the Liverpool City Region, including major regeneration projects. The authority, along with Liverpool City Council itself, has embarked on long-term plans to grow the population and economy of the city.\nBy the 2020s, urban regeneration throughout the city continues. Liverpool Waters, a mixed-use development in the city's disused northern docklands, has been identified as one of the largest megaprojects in the UK's history. Everton's new stadium at Bramley-Moore Dock was regarded as the largest single-site private sector development in the United Kingdom at the time of construction.\nMajor events, business and political conferences regularly take place in the city and form an important part of the economy. In June 2014, Prime Minister David Cameron launched the International Festival for Business in Liverpool, the world's largest business event in 2014, and the largest in the UK since the Festival of Britain in 1951. The Labour Party has chosen Liverpool numerous times since the mid 2010s for their annual Labour Party Conference. Liverpool hosted the Eurovision Song Contest 2023.\nInventions and innovations.\nLiverpool has been a centre of invention and innovation. Railways, transatlantic steamships, municipal trams, and electric trains were all pioneered in Liverpool as modes of mass transit. In 1829 and 1836, the first railway tunnels in the world were constructed under Liverpool (Wapping Tunnel). From 1950 to 1951, the world's first scheduled passenger helicopter service ran between Liverpool and Cardiff.\nThe first School for the Blind, Mechanics' Institute, High School for Girls, council house, and Juvenile Court were all founded in Liverpool. Charities such as the RSPCA, NSPCC, Age Concern, Relate, and Citizen's Advice Bureau all evolved from work in the city.\nThe first lifeboat station, public bath and wash-house, sanitary act, medical officer for health (William Henry Duncan), district nurse, slum clearance, purpose-built ambulance, X-ray medical diagnosis, school of tropical medicine (Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine), motorised municipal fire-engine, free school meal, cancer research centre, and zoonosis research centre all originated in Liverpool. The first British Nobel Prize was awarded in 1902 to Ronald Ross, professor at the School of Tropical Medicine, the first school of its kind in the world. Orthopaedic surgery was pioneered in Liverpool by Hugh Owen Thomas, and modern medical anaesthetics by Thomas Cecil Gray.\nThe world's first integrated sewer system was constructed in Liverpool by James Newlands, appointed in 1847 as the UK's first borough engineer. Liverpool also founded the UK's first Underwriters' Association and the first Institute of Accountants. The Western world's first financial derivatives (cotton futures) were traded on the Liverpool Cotton Exchange in the late 1700s.\nIn the arts, Liverpool was home to the first lending library (The Lyceum), athenaeum society (Liverpool Athenaeum), arts centre (Bluecoat Chambers), and public art conservation centre (National Conservation Centre). It is also home to the UK's oldest surviving classical orchestra (Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra) and repertory theatre (Liverpool Playhouse).\nIn 1864, Peter Ellis built the world's first iron-framed, curtain-walled office building, Oriel Chambers, which was a prototype of the skyscraper. The UK's first purpose-built department store was Compton House, completed in 1867 for the retailer J.R. Jeffrey. It was the largest store in the world at the time.\nBetween 1862 and 1867, Liverpool held an annual Grand Olympic Festival. Devised by John Hulley and Charles Pierre Melly, these games were the first to be wholly amateur in nature and international in outlook. The programme of the first modern Olympiad in Athens in 1896 was almost identical to that of the Liverpool Olympics. In 1865, Hulley co-founded the National Olympian Association in Liverpool, a forerunner of the British Olympic Association. Its articles of foundation provided the framework for the Olympic Charter.\nA concept devised by retail entrepreneur David Lewis, the first Christmas grotto opened in Lewis's department store in Liverpool in 1879. Sir Alfred Lewis Jones, a shipowner, introduced bananas to the UK via Liverpool's docks in 1884. The Mersey Railway, opened in 1886, incorporated the world's first tunnel under a tidal estuary and the world's first deep-level underground stations (Liverpool James Street railway station).\nIn 1889, borough engineer John Alexander Brodie invented the football goal net. He was also a pioneer in the use of pre-fabricated housing and oversaw the construction of the UK's first ring road (A5058) and intercity highway (East Lancashire Road), as well as the Queensway Tunnel linking Liverpool and Birkenhead. Described as \"the eighth wonder of the world\" at the time of its construction, it was the longest underwater tunnel in the world for 24 years.\nIn 1897, the Lumi\u00e8re brothers filmed Liverpool, including what is believed to be the world's first tracking shot, taken from the Liverpool Overhead Railway, the world's first elevated electrified railway. The Overhead Railway was the first railway in the world to use electric multiple units, employ automatic signalling, and install an escalator.\nLiverpool inventor Frank Hornby was a visionary in toy development and manufacture, producing three of the most popular lines of toys in the 20th century: Meccano, Hornby Model Railways (both in 1901), and Dinky Toys in 1934. The British Interplanetary Society, founded in Liverpool in 1933 by Phillip Ellaby Cleator, is the world's oldest existing organisation devoted to the promotion of spaceflight. Its journal, the \"Journal of the British Interplanetary Society\", is the longest-running astronautical publication in the world.\nIn 1999, Liverpool was the first city outside London to be awarded blue plaques by English Heritage in recognition of the \"significant contribution made by its sons and daughters in all walks of life\".\nGovernment.\nFor the purposes of local government, Liverpool is classified as a metropolitan borough with city status. The metropolitan borough is located within both the county of Merseyside and the Liverpool City Region. Each of these geographical areas is treated as an administrative area with different levels of local governance applying to each.\nLiverpool City Council is the governing body solely for the Metropolitan Borough of Liverpool and performs functions that are standard of an English Unitary Authority. \nThe Liverpool City Region Combined Authority and the Mayor of the Liverpool City Region reserve major strategic powers over such things as transport, economic development and regeneration for the city along with the 5 surrounding boroughs of the Liverpool City Region. The Combined Authority has competency over areas which have been devolved by national government and are specific to the city region.\nNevertheless, there are a few exceptions to local governance apart from these two structures. Liverpool was administered by Merseyside County Council between 1974 and 1986 and some residual aspects of organisation which date back to this time have survived. When the County Council was disbanded in 1986, most civic functions were transferred to Liverpool City Council. However, several authorities such as the police and fire and rescue service, continue to be run at a county-wide level. The county of Merseyside, therefore, continues to exist as an administrative area for a few limited services only, while the capability and capacity of the Liverpool City Region Combined Authority is evolving over time.\nThe city also elects five members of Parliament (MPs) to the Westminster Parliament, all Labour as of the 2024 general election.\nLiverpool City Council.\nCity Council Leader and Cabinet.\nLiverpool City Council operates under a constitution comprising 85 city councillors who are directly elected by the Liverpool electorate every four years and represent a variety of different political parties. The city councillors make decisions about local services for the city's people.\nAt each election, the political party that wins the majority of the 85 council seats leads the council for the following four years. The local leader of this party assumes the role of Leader of the City Council who then chairs a Cabinet of 9 councillors who are assigned specific responsibilities known as 'portfolios'.\nThe incumbent Leader of Liverpool City Council is Councillor Liam Robinson, who represents the Labour Party, which secured a large majority at the 2023 local election, the Leader is also a member of the Mayor of the Liverpool City Regions cabinet (\"Separate from the City Council Cabinet\"), at present Robinson holds the portfolio of Cabinet Member for Innovation. \nThe City Council's decisions and scrutiny of activities are undertaken by a number of different committees and panels which include the Overview and Scrutiny Committees, Scrutiny Panels, Regulatory Committees and other committees. The day-to-day management of the council is carried out by the management team which includes the Chief Executive and several directors and senior officers. The management team works with the Cabinet and councillors to deliver strategic direction and priorities such as the budget and the City Plan.\nLiverpool City Council elections.\nEvery four years, the city elects 85 councillors from 64 local council wards. \nDuring the 2023 Liverpool City Council election, the Labour Party consolidated its control of Liverpool City Council, following on from the previous elections. Out of the total 85 City Council seats up for election, The Labour Party won 61 seats (53.13% of the electorate's total votes), the Liberal Democrats won 15 seats (21.61% of the votes), the Green Party won three seats (9.76% of the votes), the Liverpool Community Independents won three seats (4.64% of the votes) and the Liberal Party won the remaining three seats (3.21% of the votes). The Conservative Party, the political party in power at national government, had no representation on Liverpool City Council. Only 27.27% of the eligible Liverpool electorate turned out to vote.\nThroughout most of the 19th and early 20th centuries, Liverpool was a municipal stronghold of Toryism. However, support for the Conservative Party in recent times has been among the lowest in any part of Britain, particularly since the monetarist economic policies of former prime minister Margaret Thatcher. After the 1979 general election, many have claimed that her victory contributed to longstanding high unemployment and decline in the city. Liverpool is one of the Labour Party's key strongholds; however, the city has also seen hard times under Labour governments. Particularly in the Winter of Discontent (late 1978 and early 1979) when Liverpool suffered public sector strikes along with the rest of the United Kingdom, but also when it suffered the particularly humiliating misfortune of having grave-diggers going on strike, leaving the dead unburied for long periods.\nCity Council criticism and improvement.\nIn recent years, Liverpool City Council began an extensive improvement program designed to ensure that the authority makes efficient use of taxpayers' money and to encourage more business and investment in the city. Grosvenor Group, the property company responsible for Liverpool One, commended the changes as an \"opportunity for bold thinking in liverpool\".\nIn 2021, a highly critical government inspection and subsequent report of Liverpool City Council (referred to as the Caller report) identified multiple shortcomings at Liverpool City Council. The Secretary of State for Housing, Communities and Local Government, Robert Jenrick sent government commissioners to oversee the City Council's highways, regeneration, property management, governance and financial decision-making. The authority was compelled to commit to a three-year improvement plan in which the entire structure of the council would be overhauled. As a result of the intervention, major structural changes at the City Council took place by the 2023 United Kingdom local elections, which were labelled \"the most unpredictable [elections] in the city's history\". The number of electoral wards in the city was doubled from 30 to 64, while the overall number of city councillors up for election was reduced from 90 to 85. In future, the council would also change to 'all out' elections every four years whereby every single city councillor would be eligible for re-election at the same time. The role of elected city mayor was also abolished and the Council reverted to the previous Leader and Cabinet style of leadership. The outcome of the elections were seen not only as a test of how the general public would respond to the government intervention in the city, but also to Prime Minister Rishi Sunak's government as a whole.\nLiam Robinson became the new Leader of Liverpool City Council at the 2023 City Council election. The Liverpool Strategic Futures Advisory Panel, chaired by the Mayor of Liverpool City Region Steve Rotheram, and including several high-profile figures with experience in local government, was established. The panel was tasked with directing the council's long-term future outside of government intervention measures and to advise on plans and priorities that the city should pursue.\nIn February 2008, Liverpool City Council was reported to be the worst-performing council in the country, receiving just a one-star rating (classified as inadequate). The main cause of the poor rating was attributed to the council's poor handling of tax-payer money, including the accumulation of a \u00a320million shortfall while the city held the title of European Capital of Culture. In April 2024, the Office for Local Government released a ranking of local authorities, placing Liverpool City Council 317th out of a possible 318.\nLord Mayor of Liverpool.\nThe Lord Mayor of Liverpool is an ancient ceremonial role. Councillors within Liverpool City Council (not the general public) elect the Lord Mayor annually, who then serves a one-year term. The Lord Mayor is styled as the \"first citizen\" and is chosen to represent the city at civic functions and engagements, promote it to the wider world, support local charities and community groups, attend religious events, meet delegates from Liverpool's twin cities, chair council meetings and confer Honorary Freemen and associations. The Lord Mayor is also the presiding officer for Liverpool City Council full meetings.\nMayor of the Liverpool City Region.\nLiverpool is one of the six constituent boroughs of the Liverpool City Region. The Mayor of the Liverpool City Region is directly every four years by residents of those six boroughs and oversees the Liverpool City Region Combined Authority. The Combined Authority is the top-tier administrative body for the local governance of the city region and is tasked with taking major strategic decisions on issues such as transport and investment, economic development, employment and skills, tourism, culture, housing and physical infrastructure. The current Mayor is Steve Rotheram.\nParliamentary constituencies and MPs.\nLiverpool is included within five parliamentary constituencies, through which MPs are elected to represent the city in Westminster: Liverpool Garston, Liverpool Riverside, Liverpool Walton, Liverpool Wavertree and Liverpool West Derby. At the last general election, all were won by Labour with representation being from Maria Eagle, Kim Johnson, Dan Carden, Paula Barker and Ian Byrne respectively.\nGeography.\nEnvironment.\nLiverpool has been described as having \"the most splendid setting of any English city\". At (53.4, \u22122.98), north-west of London, located on the Liverpool Bay of the Irish Sea, Liverpool is built across a ridge of sandstone hills rising up to a height of around above sea-level at Everton Hill, which represents the southern boundary of the West Lancashire Coastal Plain.\nThe Mersey Estuary separates Liverpool from the Wirral Peninsula. The boundaries of Liverpool are adjacent to Bootle, Crosby and Maghull in south Sefton to the north, and Kirkby, Huyton, Prescot and Halewood in Knowsley to the east.\nClimate.\nLiverpool experiences a temperate maritime climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"), like much of the British Isles, with relatively mild summers, cool winters and rainfall spread fairly evenly throughout the year. Rainfall and temperature records had been kept at Bidston Hill since 1867, but records for atmospheric pressure go back as far as at least 1846. Bidston closed down in 2002 but the Met Office also has a weather station at Crosby. Since records began in 1867, temperatures have ranged from on 21 December 2010 to on 2 August 1990, although Liverpool Airport recorded a temperature of on 19 July 2006.\nThe lowest amount of sunshine on record was 16.5 hours in December 1927 whereas the most was 314.5 hours in July 2013.\nTornado activity or funnel cloud formation is very rare in and around the Liverpool area and tornadoes that do form are usually weak. Recent tornadoes or funnel clouds in Merseyside have been seen in 1998 and 2014.\nDuring the period 1981\u20132010, Crosby recorded an average of 32.8 days of air frost per year, which is low for the United Kingdom. Snow is fairly common during the winter although heavy snow is rare. Snow generally falls between November and March but can occasionally fall earlier and later. In recent times, the earliest snowfall was on 1 October 2008 while the latest occurred on 15 May 2012. Although historically, the earliest snowfall occurred on 10 September 1908 and the latest on 2 June 1975.\nRainfall, although light, is quite a common occurrence in Liverpool, with the wettest month on record being August 1956, which recorded of rain and the driest being February 1932, with . The driest year on record was 1991, with of rainfall and the wettest was 1872, with .\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHuman.\nSuburbs and districts.\nSuburbs and districts of Liverpool include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGreen Liverpool.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2010, Liverpool City Council and the Primary Care Trust commissioned the Mersey Forest to complete \"A Green Infrastructure Strategy\" for the city.\nGreen belt.\nLiverpool is a core urban element of a green belt region that extends into the wider surrounding counties, which is in place to reduce urban sprawl, prevent the towns in the conurbation from further convergence, protect the identity of outlying communities, encourage brownfield reuse, and preserve nearby countryside. This is achieved by restricting inappropriate development within the designated areas and imposing stricter conditions on permitted building.\nDue to being already highly built up, the city contains limited portions of protected green belt area within greenfield throughout the borough at Fazakerley, Croxteth Hall and country park and Craven Wood, Woodfields Park and nearby golf courses in Netherley, small greenfield tracts east of the Speke area by the St Ambrose primary school, and the small hamlet of Oglet and the surrounding area south of Liverpool Airport.\nThe green belt was first drawn up in 1983 under Merseyside County Council and the size in the city amounts to .\nDemonyms.\nScouser.\nSince the mid-20th century, Scouser has become the predominant demonym for the inhabitants of Liverpool, and is strongly associated with the Scouse accent and dialect of the city. The Scouse accent is described as progressively diverging from the Lancastrian accent in the late 19th century.\nThe etymology of Scouser is derived from the traditional dish Scouse brought to the area by sailors travelling through Liverpool's port.\nEarlier demonyms.\nEarlier terms used to refer to inhabitants of Liverpool include:\nProfessor Tony Crowley writes that up until the 1950s, inhabitants of Liverpool were generally referred to by a number of demonyms, including, in the mid-20th century, the rival terms of 'Liverpolitan' and 'Liverpudlian'. Debate surrounded the lexicology of these terms and their connotations of social class.\nProfessor John Belchem suggests that a series of other nicknames such as 'Dick Liver', 'Dicky Sam' and 'whacker' were used, but gradually fell out of use. Belchem and Philip Boland suggest that comedic radio presenters and entertainers brought the Liverpool identity to a national audience, which in turn encouraged locals to be gradually more known as 'scousers'. By the time that Frank Shaw's \"My Liverpool, a Celebration of 'Scousetown\"' was published in 1971, Belchem argues, 'Scouser' had firmly become the dominant demonym.\nDemography.\nPopulation.\nThe city.\nThe city of Liverpool is at the core of a much larger and more populous metropolitan area; however, at the most recent UK Census in 2021, the area governed by Liverpool City Council had a population of 486,100, a 4.2% increase from the previous Census in 2011. This figure increased to 500,500 people by 2022, according to data from Liverpool City Council.\nTaking in to account how local government is organised within the cities and metropolitan areas of England, the Liverpool was the fifth largest of England's 'core cities' and had the second-overall-highest population density of those, by 2021.\nThe population of the city has steadily risen since the 2001 Census. As well as having a growing population, the population density also grew at the 2021 Census compared to the previous census. Since 2011, its population size ranked 10th out of 309 local authority areas.\nThe population of the city is comparatively younger than that of England as a whole. Family life in the city is also growing at odds with the North West England region as a whole: At the 2021 Census, the percentage of households including a couple without children increased in Liverpool, but fell across the North West. The percentage of people aged 16 years and over (excluding full-time students) who were employed also increased in Liverpool compared to the overall North West region where it fell. \nThe 2021 Census also showed that Liverpool's ethnic and international population was growing. The number of residents in the city born outside of England has increased since the previous census, while the number of residents who did not identify with any national identity associated with the UK has also increased at a faster rate than England as a whole. The overall share of the city's population who identified as Asian and Black increased, while the percentage who identified as white decreased in the city compared with previous Census.\nIt has been argued that the city can claim to have one of the strongest Irish heritages in the United Kingdom, with as many as 75 per cent (estimated) of Liverpool's population with some form of Irish ancestry.\nThe growing population of Liverpool in the 21st century reverses a trend which took place between the 1930s and 2001, when the population of the city proper effectively halved.\nAt the 1931 United Kingdom census, Liverpool's population reached an all-time high of 846,302. Following this peak, in response to central government policy, the Council authority of Liverpool then built and owned large several 'new town' council estates in the suburbs within Liverpool's metropolitan area. Tens of thousands of people were systematically relocated to new housing in areas such as Halton, Knowsley, St Helens, Sefton, Wirral, Cheshire West and Chester, West Lancashire, Warrington and as far as North Wales.\nSuch a mass relocation and population loss during this time was common practice for many British cities, including London and Manchester, In contrast, satellite towns such as Kirkby, Skelmersdale and Runcorn saw a corresponding rise in their populations (Kirkby being the fastest growing town in Britain during the 1960s).\nUrban and metropolitan area.\nLiverpool is typically grouped with the wider Merseyside (plus Halton) area for the purpose of defining its metropolitan footprint, and there are several methodologies. Sometimes, this metropolitan area is broadened to encompass urban settlements in the neighbouring counties of Lancashire and Cheshire. \nThe Office for National Statistics in the United Kingdom uses the international standardised International Territorial Levels (ITLs) to divide up the economic territory of the UK. This enables the ONS to calculate regional and local statistics and data. The ONS uses a series of codes to identify these areas. In order of hierarchy from largest area to smallest area, Liverpool is part of the following regions:\nITL 1 region.\nNorth West England (code TLD)\n&lt;br&gt;At the 2021 Census, the ITL 1 region of North West England had a usual resident population of 7,417,300.\nITL 2 region.\nMerseyside (code TLD7) \n&lt;br&gt;The ITL 2 region of Merseyside is defined as the area comprising East Merseyside (TLD71) plus Liverpool (TLD72), Sefton (TLD73) and Wirral (TLD74).\n&lt;br&gt;At the 2021 Census, the population of this area was as follows:\nEast Merseyside (TLD71):\nLiverpool (TLD72) = 486,100\nSefton (TLD73) = 279,300\nWirral (TLD74) = 320,200\nTherefore, the total population of the ITL 2 Merseyside region was 1,551,500 based on the 2021 Census.\nITL 3 region.\nThe smallest ITL 3 area classed as Liverpool (code TLD72), therefore, had a population of 486,100 at the 2021 Census.\nOther definitions.\nAt the 2021 Census, the ONS used a refreshed concept of built-up areas (BUAs) based on the physical built environment, using satellite imagery to recognise developed land, such as cities, towns and villages. This allows the ONS to investigate economic and social statistics based on actual settlements where most people live. Data from the 2021 Census is not directly comparable with 2011 Census data due to this revised methodology. Using the population figures of BUAs at the 2021 Census (excluding London), Liverpool Built-up Area is the third largest in England with some 506,565 usual residents (behind only Birmingham and Leeds). Liverpool's built-up area is, therefore, larger than the major English cities of Bristol, Manchester, Newcastle upon Tyne, Nottingham and Sheffield.\nExcluding London, the Liverpool City Region was the fourth-largest combined authority area in England, by 2021. The population is approximately 1.6million. The Liverpool City Region is a political and economic partnership between local authorities including Liverpool, plus the Metropolitan boroughs of Knowsley, Sefton, St Helens, Wirral and the Borough of Halton. The Liverpool City Region Combined Authority exercises strategic governance powers for the region in many areas. The economic data of the Liverpool city region is of particular policy interest to the Office for National Statistics, particularly as the British Government continuously explores the potential to negotiate increased devolved powers for each combined authority area.\nA 2011 report, \"Liverpool City Region \u2013 Building on its Strengths\", by Michael Heseltine and Terry Leahy, stated that \"what is now called Liverpool City Region has a population of around 1.5million\", but also referred to \"an urban region that spreads from Wrexham and Flintshire to Chester, Warrington, West Lancashire and across to Southport\", with a population of 2.3million.\nIn 2006, in an attempt to harmonise the series of metropolitan areas across the European Union, ESPON (now European Observation Network for Territorial Development and Cohesion) released a study defining a \"Liverpool/Birkenhead Metropolitan area\" with an estimated population of 2.241 million people. The metro area comprised a functional urban area consisting of a contiguous urban sprawl, labour pool, and commuter Travel to work areas. The analysis defined this metropolitan area as Liverpool itself, combined with the surrounding areas of Birkenhead, Wigan/Ashton, Warrington, Widnes/Runcorn, Chester, Southport, Ellesmere Port, Ormskirk and Skelmersdale.\nLiverpool and Manchester are sometimes considered as one large polynuclear metropolitan area, or megalopolis.\nEthnicity.\nIn recent decades, Liverpool's population is becoming more multicultural. According to the 2021 census, 77% of all Liverpool residents described their ethnic group as White English, Welsh, Scottish, Northern Irish or British. The remaining 23% were described as non-White English/British. Between 2011 and 2021, there was population growth across all ethnic groups, except 'White English/British' and 'Any Other', where there were overall losses. The number of 'Other White residents' in Liverpool also increased by almost 12,000 people, with notable increases in the 'Other Asian', 'Arab', and 'Other Mixed/Multiple' population categories. The non-White English/British population as a percentage of the total population across the 'newly organised city electoral wards' ranged from 5% in the Orrell Park ward to 69% in the Princes Park ward. Nine out of ten Liverpool residents regarded English as their main language. The most spoken non-English languages in the city were Arabic (5,743 main speakers) followed by Polish (4,809 main speakers). Overall, almost 45,000 residents had a main language that was not English.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nAccording to a 2014 survey, the ten most popular surnames of Liverpool and their occurrence in the population are:\n1. Jones \u2013 23,012\n2. Smith \u2013 16,276\n3. Williams \u2013 13,997\n4. Davies \u2013 10,149\n5. Hughes \u2013 9,787\n6. Roberts \u2013 9,571\n7. Taylor \u2013 8,219\n8. Johnson \u2013 6,715\n9. Brown \u2013 6,603\n10. Murphy \u2013 6,495\nLiverpool is home to the UK's oldest black community, dating back to at least the 1730s. Some Liverpudlians can trace their black ancestry in the city back ten generations. Early Black settlers in the city included seamen, the children of traders sent to be educated, and freed slaves, since slaves entering the country after 1722 were deemed free men. Since the 20th century, Liverpool is also noted for its large African-Caribbean, Ghanaian, and Somali communities, formed of more recent African-descended immigrants and their subsequent generations.\nThe city is also home to the oldest Chinese community in Europe; the first residents of the city's Chinatown arrived as seamen in the 19th century. The traditional Chinese gateway erected in Liverpool's Chinatown is the largest such gateway outside China. Liverpool also has a long-standing Filipino community. Lita Roza, a singer from Liverpool who was the first woman to achieve a UK number one hit, had Filipino ancestry.\nThe city is also known for its large Irish and Welsh populations. In 1813, 10 per cent of Liverpool's population was Welsh, leading to the city becoming known as \"the capital of North Wales.\"\nDuring, and in the decades following, the Great Irish Famine in the mid-19th century, up to two million Irish people travelled to Liverpool within one decade, with many subsequently departing for the United States. By 1851, more than 20 per cent of the population of Liverpool was Irish. At the 2001 Census, 1.17 per cent of the population were Welsh-born and 0.75 per cent were born in the Republic of Ireland, while 0.54 per cent were born in Northern Ireland, but many more Liverpudlians are of legacy Welsh or Irish ancestry.\nOther contemporary ethnicities include Indian, Latin American, Malaysian, and Yemeni communities, which number several thousand each.\nReligion.\nThe thousands of migrants and sailors passing through Liverpool resulted in a religious diversity that is still apparent today. This is reflected in the equally diverse collection of religious buildings, including two Christian cathedrals.\nLiverpool is known to be England's 'most Catholic city', with a Catholic population much larger than in other parts of England. This is mainly due to high historic Irish migration to the city and their descendants since.\nThe parish church of Liverpool is the Anglican Our Lady and St Nicholas, colloquially known as \"the sailors church\", which has existed near the waterfront since 1257. It regularly plays host to Catholic masses. Other notable churches include the Greek Orthodox Church of St Nicholas (built in the Neo-Byzantine architecture style) and the Gustav Adolf Church (the Swedish Seamen's Church, reminiscent of Nordic styles).\nLiverpool's wealth as a port city enabled the construction of two enormous cathedrals in the 20th century. The Anglican Cathedral, which was designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott and plays host to the annual Liverpool Shakespeare Festival, has one of the longest naves, largest organs and heaviest and highest peals of bells in the world. The Roman Catholic Metropolitan Cathedral, on Mount Pleasant next to Liverpool Science Park, was initially planned to be even larger. Of Sir Edwin Lutyens's original design, only the crypt was completed. The cathedral was eventually built to a simpler design by Sir Frederick Gibberd. While this is on a smaller scale than Lutyens' original design, it still incorporates the largest panel of stained glass in the world. The road running between the two cathedrals is called Hope Street. The cathedral has long been colloquially referred to as \"Paddy's Wigwam\" due to its shape.\nLiverpool contains several synagogues, of which the Grade I listed Moorish Revival Princes Road Synagogue is architecturally the most notable. Princes Road is widely considered to be the most magnificent of Britain's Moorish Revival synagogues and one of the finest buildings in Liverpool. Liverpool has a thriving Jewish community with a further two orthodox Synagogues, one in the Allerton district of the city and a second in the Childwall district of the city where a significant Jewish community reside. A third orthodox Synagogue in the Greenbank Park area of L17 has recently closed and is a listed 1930s structure. There is also a Lubavitch Chabad House and a reform synagogue. Liverpool has had a Jewish community since the mid-18th century. The Jewish population of Liverpool is around 5,000. The Liverpool Talmudical College existed from 1914 until 1990, when its classes moved to the Childwall Synagogue.\nLiverpool also has a Hindu community, with a Mandir on Edge Lane, Edge Hill. The Shri Radha Krishna Temple from the Hindu Cultural Organisation in Liverpool is located there. Liverpool also has the Guru Nanak Sikh Gurdwara in Wavertree and a Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Centre in the same area.\nThe city had the earliest Mosque in England and possibly the UK, founded in 1887 by William Abdullah Quilliam, a lawyer who had converted to Islam who set up the Liverpool Muslim Institute in a terraced house on West Derby Road. Apart from the first mosque in England which now houses a museum, the largest and main one, Al-Rahma mosque, was also the third purpose-built mosque in the United Kingdom. The second largest mosque in Liverpool is the Masjid Al-Taiseer. Other mosques in the city include the Bait ul Lateef Ahmadiyya Mosque, Hamza Center (Community Center), Islamic community centre, Liverpool Mosque and Islamic Institute, Liverpool Towhid Centre, Masjid Annour, and the Shah Jalal Mosque.\nEconomy.\nCity and region.\nLiverpool forms an integral part of North West England's economy, the third largest regional economy in the United Kingdom. The city is also a major contributor to the economy of Liverpool City Region, worth over \u00a340billion per year.\nThe local authority area governed by Liverpool City Council accounts for 39% of the Liverpool city region's total jobs, 40% of its total GVA and 35% of its total businesses. At the local authority level, the city's GVA (balanced) at current basic prices was \u00a314.3billion in 2021. Its GDP at current market prices was \u00a315.9billion. This equates to \u00a332,841 per head of the population.\nAt the 2021 United Kingdom census, 51.1% of Liverpool's population aged 16 years and over was classed as employed, 44.2% economically inactive and 4.8% unemployed. Of those employed, the most popular industries providing the employment were human health and social work activities (18.7%), wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles and motor cycles (15%), education (10.8%), public administration and defence; compulsory social security (7.3%), accommodation and food service activities (6.8%), construction (6.5%), transport and storage (5.8%), manufacturing (5.5%) and professional, scientific and technical activities (5.2%).\nAccording to the ONS Business Register and Employment Survey 2021, some industries within Liverpool perform strongly compared to other local authorities in Great Britain. In terms of absolute number of jobs per industry in Great Britain's local authority areas, Liverpool features in the national top 10 for human health and social work activities; arts, entertainment and recreation; public administration and defence; compulsory social security; accommodation and food service activities and real estate activities. Liverpool features in the national top 20 for number of jobs in education; construction; wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles; transportation and storage; financial and insurance activities and professional, scientific and technical activities.\nIn 2023, Liverpool City Council set out an economic growth plan for the city over the following 20 years. The City Council will have particular focus on economic sectors such as the visitor economy (tourism), culture, life sciences, digital and creative sectors, and advanced car manufacturing.\nAccording to the International passenger Survey, from the ONS, Liverpool was one of the top 5 most visited cities in the UK by overseas tourists in 2022. As of the same year, the city's tourist industry was worth a total of \u00a33.5billion annually and was part of a larger city region tourist industry worth \u00a35billion. A consistent calendar of major events, as well as a plethora of cultural attractions, continue to provide a significant draw for tourists. Tourism related to the Beatles is worth an estimated \u00a3100million to the Liverpool economy each year alone. Liverpool One, as well as a growing retail offer overall, has led to the city being one of the most prominent destinations for shopping in the UK. Liverpool Cruise Terminal, which is situated close to the Pier Head, enables tourists to berth in the centre of the city.\nLiverpool is home to the Knowledge Quarter, a 450-acre city centre district that hosts some of the world's most influential institutions in science, health, technology, education, music and the creative performing arts. The UK government has also identified the city as a 'pharmaceutical production superpower' and one of the UK's leading regions for bioprocessing. The accolade led to the government choosing the city for England's second ever 'Investment Zone' in 2023. This will involve millions of pounds being invested over the coming years in to science orientated districts including the Knowledge Quarter and the so-called 'pharma cluster' in the city suburb of Speke. The two clusters form an internationally significant role in infectious disease control. Liverpool City Council also plan to invest in the city's Baltic Triangle, which is renowned in the creative and digital industries.\nCar manufacturing also takes place in the city at the Jaguar Land Rover Halewood plant, where the Range Rover Evoque model is assembled. In 2023, Jaguar Land Rover announced that the Halewood plant would begin to shift its focus to electric car production.\nHistorically, the economy of Liverpool was centred on the city's port and manufacturing base. Today, the Port of Liverpool is the UK's fourth-largest port by tonnage of freight, handling over 30 million tonnes in 2020. The city is also the UK's largest port for transatlantic trade, handling 45% of the country's trade from the United States. In 2023, the city was chosen by the British government to be a designated Freeport to encourage growing international commerce.\nThe Liverpool2 container terminal, completed in 2022, has greatly increased the volume of cargo which Liverpool is able to handle and has facilitated the world's biggest container vessels.\nLiverpool is also home to numerous UK headquarters, or the major strategic branch offices, of many shipping and freight lines including: Atlantic Container Line, Bibby Line, Borchard Lines Ltd, CMA CGM, Hapag-Lloyd, Independent Container Line, Irish Ferries, Maersk Line, Mediterranean Shipping Company and Zim Integrated Shipping Services.\nLiverpool's rich architectural base has helped the city become the second most filmed city in the UK outside London. As well as being a featured location in its own right, it often doubles up for Chicago, London, Moscow, New York City, Paris and Rome. The Depot studios, close to the city centre, provide space for film and TV productions.\nMajor economic projects planned for the city include the revitalisation of disused land in the North docks/Ten Streets area, Liverpool Waters and a new purpose-built TV studio at the former Littlewoods Pools building, adjacent to the Depot.\nCity region economy and devolution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe policy agenda of the British Government is to continuously monitor the economy and productivity of the UK's core cities within the context of their respective city regions. The government's longer-term plan is to assess each area's potential for increased devolution and transfer of additional powers and budgets from central government in Whitehall to their corresponding combined authorities. As such, official statistics about Liverpool's economy within the context of the Liverpool City Region, are closely monitored by the Office for National Statistics. This allows policy and decision makers to more accurately assess the 'functional economic area' of the city, which is not bound by traditional local government geographies.\nAs of 2023, there are ten city regions in England with combined authorities. The economy of Liverpool's combined authority area in comparison to the other city regions is as follows:\nLandmarks.\nLiverpool's long commercial history has given rise to a considerable variety of architectural styles found within the city, ranging from 16th-century Tudor buildings to modern-day contemporary architecture. The majority of buildings in the city date from the late 18th century onwards, the period during which the city grew into one of the foremost powers in the British Empire. There are over 2,500 listed buildings in Liverpool, of which 27 are Grade I listed and 85 are Grade II* listed. The city also has a greater number of public sculptures than any other location in the United Kingdom aside from Westminster and significant number of Georgian houses still exist. This richness of architecture has subsequently seen Liverpool described by English Heritage, as England's finest Victorian city.\nThe value of Liverpool's architecture and design was recognised in 2004, when several areas throughout the city were declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Known as the Liverpool Maritime Mercantile City, the sites were added in recognition of the city's role in the development of international trade and docking technology. However, this status was revoked in July 2021, when UNESCO resolved that recent and proposed developments, such as the Bramley-Moore Dock Stadium and Liverpool Waters projects, had resulted in the \"serious deterioration\" of the area's significance.\nWaterfront and docks.\nAs a major British port, the docks in Liverpool have historically been central to the city's development. Several major docking firsts have occurred in the city including the construction of the world's first enclosed wet dock (the Old Dock) in 1715 and the first ever hydraulic lifting cranes. The best-known dock in Liverpool is the Royal Albert Dock, which was constructed in 1846 and today comprises the largest single collection of Grade I listed buildings anywhere in Britain. Built under the guidance of Jesse Hartley, it was considered to be one of the most advanced docks anywhere in the world upon completion and is often attributed with helping the city to become one of the most important ports in the world. Today, the Royal Albert Dock houses restaurants, bars, shops, two hotels as well as the Merseyside Maritime Museum, International Slavery Museum, Tate Liverpool and The Beatles Story. North of the city centre is Stanley Dock, home to the Stanley Dock Tobacco Warehouse, which was at the time of its construction in 1901, the world's largest building in terms of area and today stands as the world's largest brick-work building.\nOne of the most famous locations in Liverpool is the Pier Head, renowned for the trio of buildings\u2014the Royal Liver Building, the Cunard Building and the Port of Liverpool Building\u2014which sit upon it. Collectively referred to as the \"Three Graces\", these buildings stand as a testament to the great wealth in the city during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Built in a variety of architectural styles, they are recognised as being the symbol of 'maritime Liverpool' and are regarded by many as contributing to one of the most impressive waterfronts in the world.\nIn the 21st century, several areas along Liverpool's waterfront have undergone significant redevelopment. Among the notable developments are the Museum of Liverpool, the construction of the Liverpool Arena, ACC Liverpool and Exhibition Centre Liverpool on King's Dock, Alexandra Tower and 1 Princes Dock on Prince's Dock and Liverpool Marina around Coburg and Brunswick Docks. The Wheel of Liverpool opened on 25 March 2010.\nHowever, plans to redevelop parts of Liverpool city centre have been marred by controversy. In December 2016, a newly formed company called North Point Global Ltd. was given the rights to develop part of the docks under the \"New Chinatown\" working name. Though heavily advertised in Liverpool, Hong Kong and Chinese cities with high-profile advertisements and videos, the \"New Chinatown\" development failed to materialise. In January 2018, the \"Liverpool Echo\" and \"Asia Times\" revealed that the site remained sans any construction. North Point Global as well as its subcontractor \"Bilt\" had both declared bankruptcy, and the small investors (mostly middle class couples) who had already paid money for the apartments had lost most of their savings in them.\nCommercial district and cultural quarter.\nLiverpool's historic position as one of the most important trading ports in the world has meant that over time many grand buildings have been constructed in the city as headquarters for shipping firms, insurance companies, banks and other large firms. The great wealth this brought then allowed for the development of grand civic buildings, which were designed to allow the local administrators to 'run the city with pride'.\nThe commercial district is centred on the Castle Street, Dale Street and Old Hall Street areas of the city, with many of the area's roads still following their medieval layout. Having developed predominantly over a period of three centuries, the area is regarded as one of the most important architectural locations in the city, as recognised by its inclusion in Liverpool's former World Heritage site.\nThe oldest building in the area is the Grade I listed Liverpool Town Hall, which is located at the top of Castle Street and dates from 1754. Often regarded as the city's finest piece of Georgian architecture, the building is known as one of the most extravagantly decorated civic buildings anywhere in Britain. Also on Castle Street is the Grade I listed Bank of England Building, constructed between 1845 and 1848, as one of only three provincial branches of the national bank. Among the other buildings in the area are the Tower Buildings, Albion House (the former White Star Line headquarters), the Municipal Buildings and Oriel Chambers, which is considered to be one of the earliest Modernist style buildings ever built.\nThe area around William Brown Street is referred to as the city's 'Cultural Quarter', owing to the presence of numerous civic buildings, including the William Brown Library, Walker Art Gallery, Picton Reading Rooms and World Museum Liverpool. The area is dominated by neo-classical architecture, of which the most prominent, St George's Hall, is widely regarded as the best example of a neo-classical building anywhere in Europe. A Grade I listed building, it was constructed between 1840 and 1855 to serve a variety of civic functions in the city and its doors are inscribed with \"S.P.Q.L.\" (Latin \"senatus populusque Liverpudliensis\"), meaning \"the senate and people of Liverpool\". William Brown Street is also home to numerous public monuments and sculptures, including Wellington's Column and the Steble Fountain. Many others are located around the area, particularly in St John's Gardens, which was specifically developed for this purpose. The William Brown Street area has been likened to a modern recreation of the Roman Forum.\nOther notable landmarks.\nWhile the majority of Liverpool's architecture dates from the mid-18th century onwards, there are several buildings that pre-date this time. One of the oldest surviving buildings is Speke Hall, a Tudor manor house located in the south of the city, which was completed in 1598. The building is one of the few remaining timber framed Tudor houses left in the north of England and is particularly noted for its Victorian interiors, which were added in the mid-19th century. In addition to Speke Hall, many of the city's other oldest surviving buildings are also former manor houses including Croxteth Hall and Woolton Hall, which were completed in 1702 and 1704 respectively.\nThe oldest building within the city centre is the Grade I listed Bluecoat Chambers, which was built between 1717 and 1718. Constructed in British Queen Anne style architecture, the building was influenced in part by the work of Christopher Wren and was originally the home of the Bluecoat School (who later moved to a larger site in Wavertree in the south of the city). Since 1908, it has acted as a centre for arts in Liverpool.\nLiverpool is noted for having two cathedrals, each of which imposes over the landscape around it. The Anglican Cathedral, which was constructed between 1904 and 1978, is the largest cathedral in Britain and the fifth largest in the world. Designed and built in Gothic style, it is regarded as one of the greatest buildings to have been constructed during the 20th century and was described by former British Poet Laureate, John Betjeman, as \"one of the great buildings of the world\". The Roman Catholic Metropolitan Cathedral was constructed between 1962 and 1967 and is known as one of the first cathedrals to break the traditional longitudinal design.\nIn the 21st century, many parts of Liverpool's city centre have undergone significant redevelopment and regeneration after years of decline. So far, the largest of these developments has been Liverpool One, which saw almost \u00a31billion invested in the redevelopment of of land, providing new retail, commercial, residential and leisure space. Around the north of the city centre, several new skyscrapers have also been constructed including the RIBA award-winning Unity Buildings and West Tower, which at 140m is Liverpool's tallest building. Many redevelopment schemes are also in progress including Circus, King's Dock, Paddington Village and Liverpool Waters.\nThere are many other notable buildings in Liverpool, including the art deco former terminal building of Speke Airport, the University of Liverpool's Victoria Building, (which provided the inspiration for the term \"Red Brick University\"), and the Adelphi Hotel, which was in the past considered to be one of the finest hotels anywhere in the world.\nParks and gardens.\nThe Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in England describes Merseyside's as collectively the \"most important in the country\". Liverpool has ten listed parks and cemeteries, including two Grade I and five Grade II*, more than any other English city apart from London.\nTransport.\nLiverpool has an extensive transport infrastructure that connects the city with its metropolitan area, the rest of the United Kingdom, Europe and the world. Various modes of transport provide considerable connections by road, rail, air and sea. The local network of buses, trains and ferries is managed by Merseytravel, on behalf of the Liverpool City Region Combined Authority and the Metro Mayor of the Liverpool City Region. The Mayor and Combined Authority have control of a devolved transport budget and associated transport powers for this local system. The city's major port and international airport provide global links for both passengers and freight.\nNational and international travel.\nRoads.\nThe city sits at the centre of a much larger metropolitan area. Its suburbs run contiguously into the neighbouring boroughs defined by the ONS as the Liverpool Built-up Area. The wider City Region and Merseyside in general is densely urbanised and divided by several motorways and major roads. The city is served by a network motorways. The three motorways in closest proximity are the M58 to the north, and M62 and M57 to the east.\nTo the north, the M58 motorway runs 12 miles and provides links to the neighbouring counties of Lancashire and Greater Manchester, finally joining with the M6 west of Wigan.\nTo the east, the M62 runs across the north of England, ultimately connecting Liverpool with Hull on the opposite coast, and along the route with several large cities including Manchester, Leeds and Bradford. The M62 also provides a connection to both the M6 and M1 motorways, providing indirect links to more distant areas including Birmingham, London, Nottingham, Preston and Sheffield.\nTo the east, but running north-south, the M57 acts as a 10-mile ring road for the city itself and links the M62 and M58 motorways, as well as the A580 East Lancashire Road providing a link directly to the A5300 that links to the bridges that cross the Mersey to the south of the city.\nTo the south, Liverpool is connected to Widnes and Warrington via the A562 and A5300 and across the River Mersey to Runcorn in Cheshire, via the Silver Jubilee and Mersey Gateway bridges. The M56 motorway then provides routes into parts of the neighbouring counties, with connections to the Wirral and North Wales, and a direct route to Manchester Airport.\nThe Kingsway and Queensway Tunnels connect Liverpool with the settlements on the Wirral Peninsula across the Mersey to the west, including Birkenhead and Wallasey. The A41 road and M53 motorway, which both begin in Birkenhead, link to Cheshire and Shropshire and via the A55, to North Wales.\nRailway.\nThe national network, which is managed by Network Rail, provides Liverpool with connections to major towns and cities across England. The city's primary main line station is Liverpool Lime Street, which is the terminus for several lines into the city. \nThe station is served by six train operating companies: Avanti West Coast, East Midlands Railway, Northern Trains, Transport for Wales, TransPennine Express and West Midlands Trains. Between them, the station is connected with direct services to numerous destinations including London Euston (in 2 hours 8 minutes with Pendolino trains), Birmingham New Street, Cleethorpes, Glasgow Central, Leeds, Manchester Piccadilly, Newcastle, Norwich, Nottingham, Preston, Sheffield and York. \nOpened in 1836, Lime Street is the world's oldest main line terminus station still in use. In the south of the city, Liverpool South Parkway provides a connection to the city's airport.\nPort.\nThe Port of Liverpool connects passengers and freight to Liverpool from all around the world. Passenger ferry services depart from the city across the Irish Sea to Belfast and the Isle of Man. Services are provided by several companies, including the Isle of Man Steam Packet Company, P&amp;O Ferries and Stena Line.\nThe Liverpool Cruise Terminal handles over 200,000 passengers and crew annually and is located alongside the Pier Head in the city centre. Berthing facilities for long-distance passenger cruises are provided and served by a large number of different cruise lines. Ports in Australia, France, Faroe Islands, Iceland, North America, Norway, Spain and the Caribbean are served by the facility. The cruise lines that call at Liverpool cruise terminal include the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2022[ [update]], the Port of Liverpool is the fourth busiest port in the UK by freight tonnage, handling 33milliontonnes of freight cargo. \nIt is the main port in the country for transatlantic trade and the largest port on the west coast of the UK. The Royal Seaforth and Liverpool2 container terminals are the port's two main terminals and handle a wide variety of cargo including containers, liquid and dry bulk cargoes such as coal and grain, biomass and roll-on/roll-off cargoes such as cars and trucks.\nLeeds and Liverpool Canal runs into Liverpool city centre via Liverpool Canal Link at Pier Head since 2009.\nAirport.\nLiverpool John Lennon Airport, which is located in the south of the city, provides direct air connections across the United Kingdom and Europe. It offers direct services to over 60 airports worldwide and to over 100 destinations via one-stop connections in Frankfurt, Dublin and Keflav\u00edk. The airport is primarily served by low-cost airlines namely Aer Lingus, easyJet, Jet2.com, Loganair, Lufthansa, Ryanair, Wider\u00f8e and Wizz Air, although it does provide facilities for private aircraft.\nLocal travel.\nRailway.\nLiverpool's urban railway network, known as Merseyrail, is one of the busiest and most extensive in the country. The network provides approximately 30 million passenger journeys per year, across a system of 69 stations throughout Liverpool's metropolitan area, within the formal boundaries of the Liverpool city region and adjacent areas of Cheshire and Lancashire.\nThe network consists of three lines: \nThe network is predominantly electric and covers of track. Trains are owned and operated by the Merseyrail franchise and managed by Merseytravel under the direction of the Liverpool City Region Combined Authority. Local services on the City Line are operated by Northern Trains, although the line itself remains part of the Merseyrail network. Within Liverpool city centre, four stations and over of tunnels are underground. Birkenhead Hamilton Square and Liverpool James Street are the oldest deep level underground stations in the world. \nIn 2023, for the first time in UK history, battery-powered passenger trains launched on Merseyrail tracks from the newly opened Headbolt Lane station in Kirkby. The Liverpool City Region Combined Authority's long term \"Merseyrail for All\" plan is to reduce dependency on live third rail and promote battery power in order to further expand Merseyrail to previously inaccessible places across the city region and as far as Manchester, Wrexham, Warrington and Preston.\nBuses.\nLocal bus services within and around Liverpool are managed by Merseytravel and are run by several different companies, including Arriva and Stagecoach Merseyside. The two principal termini for local buses are Queen Square bus station (located near Lime Street station) for services north and east of the city, and Liverpool One bus station (located near the Royal Albert Dock) for services to the south and east. Cross-river services to the Wirral use roadside terminus points in Castle Street and Sir Thomas Street. A night bus service also operates on Saturdays providing services from the city centre across Liverpool and wider region.\nTour bus services are provided by Maghull Coaches which allow tourists to hop-on-hop-off and view historical landmarks and attractions, as well as Liverpool F.C. and Beatles related locations. National Express services operate from the Liverpool One bus station to and from destinations across the UK. In 2023, the Liverpool city region confirmed plans to become the second place outside London to implement bus franchising. Local leaders have argued that it will improve services by transferring control over fares, ticketing and routes from bus companies to the Combined Authority. The full implementation of bus franchising will take place by the end of 2028.\nMersey Ferry.\nThe cross-river ferry service in Liverpool, known as the Mersey Ferry, is managed and operated by Merseytravel, with services operating between the Pier Head in Liverpool city centre and both Woodside in Birkenhead and Seacombe in Wallasey. Services operate at intervals ranging from 20 minutes, at peak times, to every hour during the middle of the day and at weekends. Despite remaining an important transport link between the city and the Wirral Peninsula, the Mersey Ferry has become an increasingly popular tourist attraction within the city, with daytime River Explorer Cruises providing passengers with an historical overview of the River Mersey and surrounding areas.\nCycling and scooters.\nA scooter-sharing system and electric bicycle scheme operates throughout Liverpool which allows residents and visitors to move around the city on rented scooters and bicycles. The scheme is operated by Swedish technology company Voi; riders are able to pick up and drop off bikes and scooters at various locations around the city. National Cycle Route 56, National Cycle Route 62 and National Cycle Route 810 run through Liverpool.\nCulture.\nAs with other large cities, Liverpool is an important cultural centre within the United Kingdom, incorporating music, performing arts, museums and art galleries, literature and nightlife among others. In 2008, the cultural heritage of the city was celebrated with the city holding the title of European Capital of Culture, during which time a wide range of cultural celebrations took place in the city, including Go Superlambananas! and La Princesse. Liverpool has also held Europe's largest music and poetry event, the Welsh national Eisteddfod, three times, despite being in England, in 1884, 1900, and 1929.\nMusic.\nLiverpool is internationally known for music and is recognised by \"Guinness World Records\" as the \"World Capital City of Pop\". Musicians from the city have produced 58 No. 1 singles, more than any other city in the world. Both the most successful male band and girl group in global music history have contained Liverpudlian members. Liverpool is most famous as the birthplace of the Beatles and during the 1960s was at the forefront of the Beat Music movement, which would eventually lead to the British Invasion. Many notable musicians of the time originated in the city including Billy J. Kramer, Cilla Black, Gerry and the Pacemakers and the Searchers. The influence of musicians from Liverpool, coupled with other cultural exploits of the time, such as the Liverpool poets, prompted American poet Allen Ginsberg to proclaim that the city was \"the centre of consciousness of the human universe\". Other musicians from Liverpool include Billy Fury, A Flock of Seagulls, Echo &amp; the Bunnymen, Frankie Goes to Hollywood, Frankie Vaughan, Anathema, Ladytron, the Zutons, Cast, Atomic Kitten and Rebecca Ferguson. The La's 1990 hit single \"There She Goes\" was described by \"Rolling Stone\" as a \"founding piece of Britpop's foundation.\"\nThe city is also home to the oldest surviving professional symphony orchestra in the UK, the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra, which is based in the Philharmonic Hall. The chief conductor of the orchestra is Vasily Petrenko. Sir Edward Elgar dedicated his Pomp and Circumstance March No. 1 to the Liverpool Orchestral Society, and the piece had its first performance in the city in 1901. Among Liverpool's curiosities, the Austrian \u00e9migr\u00e9 Fritz Spiegl is notable. He not only became a world expert on the etymology of Scouse, but composed the music to Z-cars and the Radio 4 UK Theme.\nWell established festivals in the city include Africa Oy\u00e9 and Brazilica which are the UK's largest free African and Brazilian music festivals respectively. The dance music festival Creamfields was established by the Liverpool-based Cream clubbing brand which started life as a weekly event at Nation nightclub. There are numerous music venues located across the city, however, the Liverpool Arena is by far the largest. Opened in 2008, the 11,000-seat arena hosted the MTV Europe Music Awards the same year, and since then has played host to world-renowned acts such as Andrea Bocelli, Beyonc\u00e9, Elton John, Kanye West, Kasabian, the Killers, Lady Gaga, Oasis, Pink, Rihanna, and UB40.\nOn 7 October 2022, the BBC and the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) announced that Liverpool would host the Eurovision Song Contest 2023 on behalf of the previous year's winning country Ukraine, which was unable to meet the demands of hosting the event due to security concerns caused by the Russian invasion of the country. The contest was held at Liverpool Arena, and consisted of two semi-finals on 9 and 11 May and a final on 13 May 2023. This was the first time that the contest took place in the city, and was also a record-extending ninth time that the UK has hosted the contest, having last done so in Birmingham in 1998.\nVisual arts.\nLiverpool has more galleries and national museums than any other city in the United Kingdom apart from London. National Museums Liverpool is the only English national collection based wholly outside London. The Tate Liverpool gallery houses the modern art collection of the Tate in the North of England and was, until the opening of Tate Modern, the largest exhibition space dedicated to modern art in the United Kingdom. The FACT centre hosts touring multimedia exhibitions, while the Walker Art Gallery houses one of the most impressive permanent collections of Pre-Raphaelite art in the world. Sudley House contains another major collection of pre-20th-century art. Liverpool University's Victoria Building was re-opened as a public art gallery and museum to display the university's artwork and historical collections which include the largest display of art by Audubon outside the US. A number of artists have also come from the city, including painter George Stubbs who was born in Liverpool in 1724.\nThe Liverpool Biennial festival of arts runs from mid-September to late November and comprises three main sections; the International, The Independents and New Contemporaries although fringe events are timed to coincide. It was during the 2004 festival that Yoko Ono's work \"My mummy was beautiful\" invited controversy when photographs of a woman's breast and crotch were exhibited on the main shopping street.\nLiterature.\nFelicia Hemans (n\u00e9e Browne) was born in Dale Street, Liverpool, in 1793, although she later moved to Flintshire, in Wales. Felicia was born in Liverpool, a granddaughter of the Venetian consul in that city. Her father's business soon brought the family to Denbighshire in North Wales, where she spent her youth. They made their home near Abergele and St. Asaph (Flintshire), and it is clear that she came to regard herself as Welsh by adoption, later referring to Wales as \"Land of my childhood, my home and my dead\". Her first poems, dedicated to the Prince of Wales, were published in Liverpool in 1808, when she was only fourteen, arousing the interest of Percy Bysshe Shelley, who briefly corresponded with her.\nAn engraving of a painting of . by S. F. Serres was published in Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1834 with a poetical illustration by Letitia Elizabeth Landon to which she adds the note 'I believe that to this haunted gate, a common superstition is attached, namely, that to wish, and to have that wish fulfilled, is the result of such wish being uttered while passing'. It stood on the North Shore before the docks were built and was a place where farewells could be waved to departing voyagers.\nA number of notable authors have visited Liverpool, including Daniel Defoe, Washington Irving, Charles Dickens, Thomas De Quincey, Herman Melville, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Gerard Manley Hopkins and Hugh Walpole. Defoe, after visiting the city, described it, as \"one of the wonders of Britain in his 'Tour through England and Wales'\". Melville's novel \"Redburn\" deals with the first seagoing voyage of 19 years old Wellingborough Redburn between New York and Liverpool in 1839. Largely autobiographical, the middle sections of the book are set in Liverpool and describe the young merchantman's wanderings, and his reflections. From 1842 to 1869, Dickens visited the city to give public readings of his novels. Hawthorne was stationed in Liverpool as United States consul between 1853 and 1856. Hopkins served as priest at St Francis Xavier Church, Langdale St., Liverpool, between 1879 and 81. Although he is not known to have ever visited Liverpool, Jung famously had a vivid dream of the city which he analysed in one of his works.\n\"Her Benny\", a novel telling the tragic story of Liverpool street urchins in the 1870s, written by Methodist preacher Silas K. Hocking, was a best-seller and the first book to sell a million copies in the author's lifetime. The prolific writer of adventure novels, Harold Edward Bindloss (1866\u20131945), was born in Liverpool.\nThe writer, docker and political activist George Garrett was born in Seacombe, on the Wirral Peninsula in 1896 and was brought up in Liverpool's South end, around Park Road, the son of a fierce Liverpool\u2013Irish Catholic mother and a staunch 'Orange' stevedore father. In the 1920s and 1930s, his organisation within the Seamen's Vigilance Committees, unemployed demonstrations, and hunger marches from Liverpool became part of a wider cultural force. He spoke at reconciliation meetings in sectarian Liverpool, and helped found the Unity Theatre in the 1930s as part of the Popular Front against the rise of fascism, particularly its echoes in the Spanish Civil War. Garrett died in 1966.\nThe novelist and playwright James Hanley (1897\u20131985) was born in Kirkdale, Liverpool, in 1897 (not Dublin, nor 1901 as he generally implied) to a working-class family. Hanley grew up close to the docks and much of his early writing is about seamen. \"The Furys\" (1935) is first in a sequence of five loosely autobiographical novels about working-class life in Liverpool. James Hanley's brother, novelist Gerald Hanley (1916\u201392) was also born in Liverpool (not County Cork, Ireland, as he claimed). While he published a number of novels he also wrote radio plays for the BBC as well as some film scripts, most notably \"The Blue Max\" (1966). He was also one of several scriptwriters for a life of Gandhi (1964). Novelist Beryl Bainbridge (1932\u20132010) was born in Liverpool and raised in nearby Formby. She was primarily known for her works of psychological fiction, often set among the English working classes. Bainbridge won the Whitbread Awards prize for best novel in 1977 and 1996 and was nominated five times for the Booker Prize. \"The Times\" newspaper named Bainbridge among their list of \"The 50 greatest British writers since 1945\".\nJ. G. Farrell was born in Liverpool in 1935 but left at the outbreak of war in 1939. A novelist of Irish descent, Farrell gained prominence for his historical fiction, most notably his \"Empire Trilogy\" (\"Troubles\", \"The Siege of Krishnapur\" and \"The Singapore Grip\"), dealing with the political and human consequences of British colonial rule. However, his career ended when he drowned in Ireland in 1979 at the age of 44.\nHelen Forrester was the pen name of June Bhatia (n\u00e9e Huband) (1919\u20132011), who was known for her books about her early childhood in Liverpool during the Great Depression, including \"Twopence to Cross the Mersey\" (1974), as well as several works of fiction. During the late 1960s the city became well known for the Liverpool poets, who include Roger McGough and the late Adrian Henri. An anthology of poems, \"The Mersey Sound\", written by Henri, McGough and Brian Patten, has sold well since it was first being published in 1967.\nLiverpool has produced several noted writers of horror fiction, often set on Merseyside\u2014Ramsey Campbell, Clive Barker and Peter Atkins among them. A collection of Liverpudlian horror fiction, \"Spook City\" was edited by a Liverpool expatriate, Angus Mackenzie, and introduced by Doug Bradley, also from Liverpool. Bradley is famed for portraying Barker's creation Pinhead in the \"Hellraiser\" series of films.\nPerforming arts.\nLiverpool also has a long history of performing arts, reflected in several annual theatre festivals such as the Liverpool Shakespeare Festival, which takes place inside Liverpool Cathedral and in the adjacent historic St James' Gardens every summer; the Everyword Festival of new theatre writing, the only one of its kind in the country; Physical Fest, an international festival of physical theatre; the annual festivals organised by Liverpool John Moores University's drama department and the Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts; and other festivals by the large number of theatres in the city, such as the Empire, Everyman, Playhouse, Royal Court, and Unity theatres.\nNotable actors and actresses from Liverpool include Arthur Askey, Tom Baker, Kim Cattrall, Jodie Comer, Stephen Graham, Rex Harrison, Jason Isaacs, Tina Malone, the McGann brothers (Joe, Mark, Paul, and Stephen), David Morrissey, Elizabeth Morton, Peter Serafinowicz, Elisabeth Sladen, Alison Steadman, and Rita Tushingham. Actors and actresses from elsewhere in the world have strong ties to the city, such as Canadian actor Mike Myers (whose parents were both from Liverpool) and American actress Halle Berry (whose mother was from Liverpool).\nNightlife.\nLiverpool has a thriving and varied nightlife. The majority of the city's late-night restaurants, bars, pubs, nightclubs, music venues and comedy clubs are located in a number of distinct districts.\nIn 2023, figures from global data company Square show that night-time spending in bars and restaurants in Liverpool city centre outperformed all major UK cities, including London.\nFigures by the Liverpool BID Company suggest that the busiest nights of the week in Liverpool city centre are Friday and Saturday. Using cameras to track the flow of people in key locations between 7pm and 4am, at least 1.5million people pass through the city centre every Friday night and almost 2 million people on Saturday nights. The data demonstrates that Monday night is the quietest night of the week in the city centre and footfall then increases every single night to reach its peak on Saturday nights. 125,889 people worked in the city's night time economy as of 2022, according to the Liverpool BID Company.\nLiverpool's nightlife is concentrated in a number of districts including Ropewalks which comprises Concert Square, St. Peter's Square and the adjoining Seel Street and Duke Street. Other popular areas include Hardman Street, the Cavern Quarter, Baltic Triangle, Royal Albert Dock and the city's Pride Quarter, which is home to a large number of LGBT venues.\nIn the city's suburbs, Lark Lane in Aigburth is noted for an abundance of bars and late-night venues.\nEducation.\nIn Liverpool primary and secondary education is available in various forms supported by the state including secular, Church of England, Jewish, and Roman Catholic. Islamic education is available at primary level, but there is no secondary provision.\nOne of Liverpool's important early schools was The Liverpool Blue Coat School; founded in 1708 as a charitable school. It is now a state grammar school.\nThe Liverpool Blue Coat School is the top-performing school in the city with 100% 5 or more A*-C grades at GCSE resulting in the 30th best GCSE results in the country and an average point score per student of 1087.4 in A/AS levels. Other notable schools include Liverpool College founded in 1840 Merchant Taylors' School founded in 1620. Another of Liverpool's notable senior schools is St. Edward's College situated in the West Derby area of the city. Historic grammar schools, such as the Liverpool Institute High School and Liverpool Collegiate School\u2014both closed in the 1980s\u2014are still remembered as centres of academic excellence. Bellerive Catholic College is the city's top-performing non-selective school, based upon GCSE results in 2007.\nLiverpool has three universities: the University of Liverpool, Liverpool John Moores University and Liverpool Hope University. Edge Hill University, founded as a teacher-training college in the Edge Hill district of Liverpool, is now located in Ormskirk in South-West Lancashire. Liverpool is also home to the Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts (LIPA).\nThe University of Liverpool was established in 1881 as University College Liverpool. In 1884, it became part of the federal Victoria University. Following a Royal Charter and Act of Parliament in 1903, it became an independent university, the University of Liverpool, with the right to confer its own degrees. It was the first university to offer degrees in biochemistry, architecture, civic design, veterinary science, oceanography and social science.\n Liverpool Hope University, which was formed through the merger of three colleges, the earliest of which was founded in 1844, gained university status in 2005. It is the only ecumenical university in Europe. It is situated on both sides of Taggart Avenue in Childwall and has a second campus in the city centre (the Cornerstone).\nThe Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, founded to address some of the problems created by trade, continues today as a post-graduate school affiliated with the University of Liverpool and houses an anti-venom repository.\nLiverpool John Moores University was previously a polytechnic, and gained status in 1992. It is named in honour of Sir John Moores, one of the founders of the Littlewoods football pools and retail group, who was a major benefactor. The institution was previously owned and run by Liverpool City Council. It traces it lineage to the Liverpool Mechanics' institute, opened in 1823, making it by this measure England's third-oldest university.\nThe city has one further education college, City of Liverpool College in the city centre. Liverpool City Council operates Burton Manor, a residential adult education college in nearby Burton, on the Wirral Peninsula.\nThere are two Jewish schools in Liverpool, both belonging to the King David Foundation. King David School, Liverpool, is the High School and the King David Primary School. There is also a King David Kindergarten, featured in the community centre of Harold House. These schools are all run by the King David Foundation located in Harold House in Childwall; conveniently next door to the Childwall Synagogue.\nSport.\nFootball.\nLiverpool is one of the most successful footballing cities in England, and is home to two top flight Premier League teams. Everton F.C. was founded in 1878 and was one of the twelve founder members of the Football League. It plays at Hill Dickinson Stadium. Liverpool F.C. were founded in 1892 and play at Anfield. Between them, the clubs have won 28 English First Division titles, 12 FA Cup titles, 10 League Cup titles, 6 European Cup titles, 1 FIFA Club World Cup title, 1 European Cup Winners' Cup title, 3 UEFA Cup titles, and 24 FA Charity Shields.\nThe two clubs contest the Merseyside derby, dubbed the 'friendly derby'. Despite the name the fixture is known for its keen rivalry, having seen more sending-offs in this fixture than any other. Unlike many other derbies it is not rare for families in the city to contain supporters of both clubs. Liverpool F.C. is the English and British club with the most European Cup titles with six, the latest in 2019.\nLiverpool has played at Anfield since 1892, when the club was formed to occupy the stadium following Everton's departure due to a dispute with their landlord. Liverpool are still playing there 125 years later, although the ground has been completely rebuilt since the 1970s. The Spion Kop (rebuilt as an all-seater stand in 1994\u201395) was the most famous part of the ground, gaining cult status across the world due to the songs and celebrations of the many fans who packed onto its terraces. Anfield as capacity for 54,000 spectators in comfort and is a distinctive landmark in an area filled with smaller and older buildings. Liverpool club also has a multimillion-pound youth training facility called The Academy.\n After leaving Anfield in 1892, Everton moved to Goodison Park on the opposite side of Stanley Park. The ground was opened on 24 August 1892, by Lord Kinnaird and Frederick Wall of the FA but the first crowds to attend the ground saw a short athletics meeting followed by a selection of music and a fireworks display. Everton's first game there was on 2 September 1892 when they beat Bolton 4\u20132. It was one of the host venues during the 1966 FIFA World Cup. It now has the capacity for just under 40,000 spectators all-seated, but the last expansion took place in 1994 when a new Park End Stand gave the stadium an all-seater capacity. The Goodison Road Stand dates back to the 1970s, while the Gwladys Street Stand and Bullens Road Stand are refurbished pre-Second World War structures.\nEverton has recently completed the process of relocating, with a stadium move first mooted as early as 1996. In 2003, the club were forced to abandon plans for a 55,000-seat stadium at King's Dock due to financial constraints, with further proposed moves to Kirkby (comprising part of Destination Kirkby, moving the stadium just beyond Liverpool's council boundary into Kirkby) and Walton Hall Park similarly scrapped.\nThe club relocated to the multimillion-pound Everton Stadium designed by the American architect Dan Meis at the nearby Bramley-Moore Dock on the River Mersey waterfront for the beginning of the 2025/26 season, with ground broken on the project in August 2021. The new stadium will have a capacity of 52,888 which could be expanded to 62,000 demand permitting and it will be a host venue for the UEFA Euro 2028. Everton also have a multimillion-pound training facility based at Finch Farm. The Everton Women's Team play in the Women's Super League and moved into Goodison Park following the men's team's exit, having previously played at Walton Hall Park Stadium.\nRugby league.\nDespite being a popular sport in Northern England, professional rugby league failed to develop in the Liverpool city region. Liverpool City was the city's first professional club, but only competed in the 1906\u201307 season where they finished 26th of 26. Despite the failure to establish a team, the Northern Union scheduled four Kangaroo Tour matches at Goodison Park in their first three tours to Great Britain between 1908 and 1922, hosting three English League XIII games and one Lancashire game.\nProfessional rugby league did not return to the city until 1934 with the formation of Liverpool Stanley. The following year, England played Wales at the club's ground in the 1935 European Rugby League Championship. Stanley competed until 1968 twice reaching the playoffs. The club hosted Australia in their 1956\u201357 tour, the first time the Kangaroos had played in Liverpool since 1922.\nProfessional rugby league was again absent from the city until Anfield hosted the 1989 Charity Shield where Widnes beat Wigan 27\u201322. Two years later, the stadium hosted the 1991 World Club Challenge where Wigan beat Penrith 21\u20134. Trying to capitalise on the growing interest in the sport, not just in Liverpool but across the country, St Helens (the only professional club in the wider Merseyside region) held a number of home games at Anfield in the mid to late 1990s. However wider problems with the sport as a result of the Super League war stopped this initiative.\nThe professional game would again be absent from city until the mid and late 2010s when Anfield again hosted the 2016 Rugby League Four Nations final, Test 2 of the 2018 Baskerville Shield, and Magic Weekend in 2019. 40,042 attended the Four Nations final.\nEverton's new Bramley-Moore Dock Stadium will host Test 2 of the 2025 Ashes.\nBoxing.\nBoxing is massively popular in Liverpool. The city has a proud heritage and history in the sport and is home to around 22 amateur boxing clubs, which are responsible for producing many successful boxers, such as Nel Tarleton, Alan Rudkin, John Conteh, Andy Holligan, Liam Smith, Paul Hodkinson, Tony Bellew and Robin Ried. The city also boasts a consistently strong amateur contingent which is highlighted by Liverpool being the most represented city on the GB Boxing team, as well as at the 2012 London Olympics, the most notable Liverpool amateur fighters include; Jimmy Lloyd, George Turpin, Tony Willis, Robin Reid and David Price who have all medalled at the Olympic Games. Boxing events are usually hosted at the Echo Arena and Liverpool Olympia within the city, although the former home of Liverpool boxing was the renowned Liverpool Stadium.\nHorse racing.\n Aintree Racecourse in the adjacent Metropolitan Borough of Sefton is home to the world's most famous steeple-chase, the Randox Grand National which takes place annually in early April. The race meeting attracts horse owners/ jockeys from around the world to compete in the demanding and 30-fence course. There have been many memorable moments of the Grand National, for instance, the 100/1 outsider Foinavon in 1967, the dominant Red Rum and Ginger McCain of the 1970s and Mon Mome (100/1) who won the 2009 meeting. In 2010, the National became the first horse race to be televised in high-definition in the UK.\nGolf.\nThe Royal Liverpool Golf Club, situated in the nearby town of Hoylake on the Wirral Peninsula, has hosted The Open Championship on a number of occasions, most recently in 2023. It also hosted the Walker Cup in 1983. \nGreyhound racing.\nLiverpool once contained four greyhound tracks, Seaforth Greyhound Stadium (1933\u20131965), Breck Park Stadium (1927\u20131948), Stanley Greyhound Stadium (1927\u20131961) and White City Stadium (1932\u20131973). Breck Park also hosted boxing bouts and both Stanley and Seaforth hosted Motorcycle speedway.\nAthletics.\nWavertree Sports Park is home to the Liverpool Harriers athletics club, which has produced such athletes as Curtis Robb, Allyn Condon (the only British athlete to compete at both the Summer and Winter Olympics), and Katarina Johnson-Thompson; Great Britain was represented by Johnson-Thompson at the 2012 London Olympics in the women's heptathlon, and she would go on to win the gold medal at the 2019 World Championships, giving Liverpool its first gold medal and breaking the British record in the process.\nGymnastics.\nIn August 2012, Liverpool gymnast Beth Tweddle won an Olympic bronze medal in London 2012 in the uneven bars at her third Olympic Games, thus becoming the most decorated British gymnast in history. Park Road Gymnastics Centre provides training to a high level.\nSwimming.\nLiverpool has produced several swimmers who have represented their nation at major championships such as the Olympic Games. The most notable of which is Steve Parry who claimed a bronze medal at the 2004 Athens Olympics in the 200m butterfly. Others include Herbert Nickel Haresnape, Margaret Kelly, Shellagh Ratcliffe and Austin Rawlinson. There is a purpose-built aquatics centre at Wavertree Sports Park, which opened in 2008. The City of Liverpool Swimming Club has been National Speedo League Champions 8 out of the last 11 years.\nCricket.\nThe city is the hub of the Liverpool and District Cricket Competition, an ECB Premier League. Sefton Park and Liverpool are the league's founder members based in the city with Wavertree, Alder and Old Xaverians clubs having joined the league more recently. Liverpool plays host Lancashire County Cricket Club as an outground most seasons, including six of eight home County Championship games during Lancashire's 2011 title winning campaign while Old Trafford was refurbished.\nTennis.\nSince 2014 Liverpool Cricket Club has played host to the annual Tradition-ICAP Liverpool International tennis tournament, which has seen tennis stars such as Novak Djokovic, David Ferrer, Mardy Fish, Laura Robson and Caroline Wozniacki. Previously this had been held at Calderstones Park, situated in Allerton in the south of the city. Liverpool Tennis Development Programme at Wavertree Tennis Centre is one of the largest in the UK.\nBasketball.\nProfessional basketball came to the city in 2007 with the entry of Everton Tigers, later known as Mersey Tigers, into the elite British Basketball League. The club was originally associated with Everton F.C., and was part of the \"Toxteth Tigers\" youth development programme, which reached over 1,500 young people every year. The Tigers began to play in Britain's top league for the 2007\u201308 season, playing at the Greenbank Sports Academy before moving into the newly completed Echo Arena during that season. After the 2009\u201310 season, Everton F.C. withdrew funding from the Tigers, who then changed their name to Mersey Tigers. The club were expelled from the British Basketball League in 2013 due to financial problems.\nBaseball.\nLiverpool is one of three cities which still host the traditional sport of British baseball and it hosts the annual England-Wales international match every two years, alternating with Cardiff and Newport. Liverpool Trojans are the oldest existing baseball club in the UK.\nCycling.\nThe 2014 Tour of Britain cycle race began in Liverpool on 7 September, using a city centre circuit to complete of racing. The Tour of Britain took nine stages and finished in London on 14 September.\nOther.\nA 2016 study of UK fitness centres found that, of the top 20 UK urban areas, Liverpool had the highest number of leisure and sports centres per capita, with 4.3 centres per 100,000 of the city population.\nMedia.\nThe city has one daily newspaper: the \"Echo\", published by Reach plc. \"The Liverpool Daily Post\" was also published until 2013. The UK's first online-only weekly newspaper called \"Southport Reporter\" (\"Southport and Mersey Reporter\"), is also one of the many other news outlets that cover the city. The independent media organisation \"The Post\" also covers Liverpool, while \"Nerve\" magazine publishes articles and reviews of cultural events.\nLiverpool TV is a local television station serving Liverpool City Region and surrounding areas. The station is owned and operated by Made Television Ltd and forms part of a group of eight local TV stations. It broadcasts from studios and offices in Liverpool.\nThe ITV region which covers Liverpool is ITV Granada. In 2006, the Television company opened a new newsroom in the Royal Liver Building. Granada's regional news broadcasts were produced at the Royal Albert Dock News Centre during the 1980s and 1990s. The BBC also opened a new newsroom on Hanover Street in 2006.\nITV's daily magazine programme \"This Morning\" was broadcast from studios at Royal Albert Dock until 1996, when production was moved to London. Granada's short-lived shopping channel \"Shop!\" was also produced in Liverpool until it was cancelled in 2002.\nLiverpool is the home of the TV production company Lime Pictures, formerly Mersey Television, which produced the now-defunct soap operas \"Brookside\" and \"Grange Hill\". It also produces the soap opera \"Hollyoaks\", which was formerly filmed in Chester and began on Channel 4 in 1995. All three series were/are largely filmed in the Childwall area of Liverpool.\nRadio stations include BBC Radio Merseyside, Hits Radio Liverpool, Greatest Hits Radio, Capital Liverpool, In Demand Radio and Liverpool Live Radio. \nLiverpool has also featured in films; see List of films set in Liverpool for some of them. In films the city has \"doubled\" for London, Paris, New York, Chicago, Moscow, Dublin, Venice and Berlin.\n\"See \"\nInternational links.\nTwin cities.\nLiverpool is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFriendship links.\nLiverpool has friendship links (without formal constitution) with the following cities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nConsulates.\nThe first overseas consulate of the United States was opened in Liverpool in 1790, and it remained operational for almost two centuries. Today, a large number of consulates are located in the city serving Chile, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Romania, Sweden and Thailand. Tunisian &amp; Ivory Coast Consulates are located in the neighbouring Metropolitan Borough of Sefton.\nFreedom of the City.\nThe following people and military units have received the Freedom of the City of Liverpool.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18084", "revid": "31831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18084", "title": "Long jump", "text": "Track and field event\nThe long jump is a track and field event in which athletes combine speed, strength and agility in an attempt to leap as far as possible from a takeoff point. Along with the triple jump, the two events that measure jumping for distance as a group are referred to as the \"horizontal jumps\". This event has a history in the ancient Olympic Games and has been a modern Olympic event for men since the first Olympics in 1896 and for women since 1948.\nRules.\nAt the elite level, competitors run down a runway (usually coated with the same rubberized surface as running tracks, crumb rubber or vulcanized rubber, known generally as an all-weather track) and jump as far as they can from a wooden or synthetic board, 20\u00a0centimetres or eight inches wide, that is built flush with the runway, into a pit filled with soft damp sand. If the competitor starts the leap with any part of the foot past the foul line, the jump is declared a foul and no distance is recorded. To detect this occurrence, a layer of plasticine is placed at a 90\u00b0 angle immediately after the board. An official (similar to a referee) will also watch the jump and make the determination. In recent times, camera technology and laser sensors have replaced the plasticine at elite competitions (like Diamond League meetings). The competitor can initiate the jump from any point behind the foul line; however, the distance measured will always be perpendicular from the foul line to the nearest break in the sand caused by any part of the body or uniform. Therefore, it is in the best interest of the competitor to get as close to the foul line as possible. Competitors are allowed to place two marks along the side of the runway in order to assist them to jump accurately. At a lesser meet and facilities, the plasticine will likely not exist, the runway might be a different surface or jumpers may initiate their jump from a painted or taped mark on the runway. At a smaller meet, the number of attempts might also be limited to four or three.\nEach competitor has a set number of attempts. That would normally be three trials, with three additional jumps being awarded to the best eight or nine (depending on the number of lanes on the track at that facility, so the event is equatable to track events) competitors. All valid attempts will be recorded but only the best mark counts towards the results. The competitor with the longest valid jump (from either the trial or final rounds) is declared the winner at the end of competition. In the event of an exact tie, then comparing the next best jumps of the tied competitors will be used to determine place. In a large, multi-day elite competition (like the Olympics or World Championships), a qualification is held in order to select at least twelve finalists. Ties and automatic qualifying distances are potential factors. The qualification usually takes place in two groups, with each competitor having three attempts. In the final, a set of three trial rounds will be held, with the best eight performers advancing to the final rounds (attempts four to six). At the 2025 World Championships, the international athletics governing body World Athletics added a new procedure. After the three trial round jumps in the final, the top ten received an additional fourth attempt, the subsequent top eight a fifth attempt and the subsequent top six a final sixth attempt. (For specific rules and regulations in United States Track &amp; Field see Rule 185)\nFor record purposes, the maximum accepted wind assistance is .\nTake-off-zone reform.\nWorld Athletics has considered fundamental rule changes to the long jump. In a test phase starting with the 2025 indoor season, athletes will take off from a wider zone instead of the traditional take-off board. This new 40-centimetre take-off zone was introduced by World Athletics to reduce the number of invalid attempts (around 30%) that have been common in recent years. The international athletics governing body believes that the new take-off zone will not only improve fairness and excitement for the athletes but also provide a more thrilling experience for the spectators.\nTraditionally, the jump distance is measured perpendicularly from the foul line to the nearest break in the sand. Under the new trial, the measurement will instead be taken from the exact point where the jumper's front foot leaves the zone. Consequently, the effective jump distance is crucial for the outcome of the competition.\nDuring the test phase, the jumps will also be recorded according to the traditional rules and will therefore be eligible for records and top lists.\nHistory.\nThe long jump is the only known jumping event of ancient Greece's original Olympics' pentathlon events. All events that occurred at the Olympic Games were initially supposed to act as a form of training for warfare. The long jump emerged probably because it mirrored the crossing of obstacles such as streams and ravines. After investigating the surviving depictions of the ancient event it is believed that unlike the modern event, athletes were only allowed a short running start. The athletes carried a weight in each hand, which were called halteres (between 1 and 4.5\u00a0kg). These weights were swung forward as the athlete jumped in order to increase momentum. It was commonly believed that the jumper would throw the weights behind him in midair to increase his forward momentum; however, halteres were held throughout the duration of the jump. Swinging them down and back at the end of the jump would change the athlete's center of gravity and allow the athlete to stretch his legs outward, increasing his distance. The jump itself was made from the \"bater\" (\"that which is trod upon\"). It was most likely a simple board placed on the stadium track which was removed after the event. The jumpers would land in what was called a \"skamma\" (\"dug-up\" area). The idea that this was a pit full of sand is wrong. Sand in the jumping pit is a modern invention. The \"skamma\" was simply a temporary area dug up for that occasion and not something that remained over time.\nThe long jump was considered one of the most difficult of the events held at the Games since a great deal of skill was required. Music was often played during the jump and Philostratus says that pipes at times would accompany the jump so as to provide a rhythm for the complex movements of the halteres by the athlete. Philostratus is quoted as saying, \"The rules regard jumping as the most difficult of the competitions, and they allow the jumper to be given advantages in rhythm by the use of the flute, and in weight by the use of the halter.\" Most notable in the ancient sport was a man called Chionis, who in the 656 BC Olympics staged a jump of 7.05\u00a0m ().\nThere has been some argument by modern scholars over the long jump. Some have attempted to recreate it as a triple jump. The images provide the only evidence for the action so it is more well received that it was much like today's long jump. The main reason some want to call it a triple jump is the presence of a source that claims there once was a fifty-five ancient foot jump done by a man named Phayllos.\nThe long jump has been part of modern Olympic competition since the inception of the Games in 1896. In 1914, Dr. Harry Eaton Stewart recommended the \"running broad jump\" as a standardized track and field event for women. However, it was not until 1948 that the women's long jump was added to the Olympic athletics programme.\nTechnique.\nThere are five main components of the long jump: the approach run, the last two strides, takeoff, action in the air, and landing. Speed in the run-up, or approach, and a high leap off the board are the fundamentals of success. Because speed is such an important factor of the approach, it is not surprising that many long jumpers also compete successfully in sprints. Classic examples of this long jump / sprint doubling are performances by Carl Lewis and Heike Drechsler.\nApproach.\nThe objective of the approach is to gradually accelerate to a maximum controlled speed at takeoff. The most important factor for the distance travelled by an object is its velocity at takeoff \u2013 both the speed and angle. Elite jumpers usually leave the ground at an angle of 20\u00b0 or less; therefore, it is more beneficial for a jumper to focus on the speed component of the jump. The greater the speed at takeoff, the longer the trajectory of the center of mass will be. The importance of takeoff speed is a factor in the success of sprinters in this event.\nThe length of the approach is usually consistent distance for an athlete. Approaches can vary between 12 and 19 steps on the novice and intermediate levels, while at the elite level they are closer to between 20 and 22 steps. The exact distance and number of steps in an approach depends on the jumper's experience, sprinting technique, and conditioning level. Consistency in the approach is important as it is the competitor's objective to get as close to the front of the takeoff board as possible without crossing the line with any part of the foot.\nLast two steps.\nThe objective of the last two steps is to prepare the body for takeoff while conserving as much speed as possible.\nThe penultimate step is longer than the previous ones and than the final one before takeoff. The competitor begins to lower his or her center of gravity to prepare the body for the vertical impulse. The last step is shorter because the body is beginning to raise the center of gravity in preparation for takeoff.\nThe last two steps are extremely important because they determine the velocity at which the competitor will enter the jump.\nTakeoff.\nThe objective of the takeoff is to create a vertical impulse through the athlete's center of gravity while maintaining balance and control.\nThis phase is one of the most technical parts of the long jump. Jumpers must be conscious to place the foot flat on the ground, because jumping off either the heels or the toes negatively affects the jump. Taking off from the board heel-first has a braking effect, which decreases velocity and strains the joints. Jumping off the toes decreases stability, putting the leg at risk of buckling or collapsing from underneath the jumper. While concentrating on foot placement, the athlete must also work to maintain proper body position, keeping the torso upright and moving the hips forward and up to achieve the maximum distance from board contact to foot release.\nThere are four main styles of takeoff: the double-arm style, the kick style, the power sprint or bounding takeoff, and the sprint takeoff.\nDouble-arm.\nThe double-arm style of takeoff works by moving both arms in a vertical direction as the competitor takes off. This produces a high hip height and a large vertical impulse.\nKick.\nThe kick style takeoff is where the athlete actively cycles the leg before a full impulse has been directed into the board then landing into the pit. This requires great strength in the hamstrings. This causes the jumper to jump to large distances.\nPower sprint or bounding.\nThe power sprint takeoff, or bounding takeoff, is one of the more common elite styles. Very similar to the sprint style, the body resembles a sprinter in full stride. However, there is one major difference. The arm that pushes back on takeoff (the arm on the side of the takeoff leg) fully extends backward, rather than remaining at a bent position. This additional extension increases the impulse at takeoff.\nSprint.\nThe sprint takeoff is the style most widely instructed by coaching staff. This is a classic single-arm action that resembles a jumper in full stride. It is an efficient takeoff style for maintaining velocity through takeoff.\nThe \"correct\" style of takeoff will vary from athlete to athlete.\nAction in the air and landing.\nThere are three major flight techniques for the long jump: the hang, the hitch-kick, and the sail. Each technique is to combat the forward rotation experienced from take-off but is basically down to preference from the athlete. Once the body is airborne, there is nothing that the athlete can do to change the direction they are traveling and consequently where they are going to land in the pit. However, certain techniques influence an athlete's landing, which can affect the distance measured. For example, if an athlete lands feet first but falls back because they are not correctly balanced, a lower distance will be measured.\nHang.\nFollowing the pivotal takeoff phase, the jumper executes a deliberate maneuver wherein the free leg descends until it aligns directly beneath the hips. This strategic positioning, characterized by an elongated and streamlined body silhouette, is meticulously crafted to minimize rotational forces. By maximizing the distance between both the arm and leg extremities and the hips\u2014the theoretical center of mass\u2014the rotational inertia is significantly increased. Leveraging the principle that longer levers rotate at a slower pace than shorter ones, this configuration facilitates a controlled and stable aerial trajectory.\nAs the free leg descends to meet the takeoff leg, forming an angle of 180\u00b0 relative to the ground, a symmetrical alignment is achieved with both knees positioned directly beneath the hips. This alignment marks the apex of stability during the airborne phase, as minimal rotational tendencies are manifested. This aerodynamically advantageous posture, colloquially termed the \"180\u00b0 position\", epitomizes the pinnacle of equilibrium, affording the jumper enhanced control and poise amidst the dynamic forces encountered in flight.\nHitch-kick.\nIn the realm of athletic performance, particularly in the domain of jumping techniques, a prevalent strategy observed among practitioners involves the utilization of a single-step arm and leg cycle. This technique, ingrained within the repertoire of many athletes, serves a fundamental purpose: to mitigate and alleviate the forward rotation momentum experienced during the jump. Characterized by a deliberate and synchronized motion of the arms and legs, this cycling maneuver is strategically devised to offset the rotational forces generated at the moment of takeoff.\nCentral to the efficacy of this technique is its capacity to orchestrate secondary rotations of both the upper and lower extremities, thereby fostering a mechanical equilibrium that counterbalances the initial rotational impulses triggered upon liftoff. By implementing this methodological approach, athletes can harness the principles of biomechanics to optimize their jumping performance, enhancing stability, control, and overall efficiency in their aerial endeavors. This nuanced understanding underscores the intricate interplay between physics and human kinetics, illuminating the sophisticated strategies employed by athletes to excel in their athletic pursuits.\nSail.\nThe \"sail technique\" represents a fundamental long jump approach widely employed by athletes in competitive settings. Following the culmination of the takeoff phase, practitioners swiftly elevate their legs into a configuration aimed at touching the toes. This maneuver serves as an entry-level strategy particularly beneficial for novice jumpers, facilitating an early transition into the landing posture. However, despite its utility in expediting the landing process, this technique fails to mitigate the inherent forward rotational momentum of the body effectively. Consequently, while advantageous for its simplicity and expedited landing preparation, the sail technique lacks the requisite mechanisms to adequately counteract excessive forward rotation, posing a notable limitation to its effectiveness in optimizing jump performance.\nSomersault.\nIn the 1970s, some jumpers used a forward somersault, including Tuariki Delamere who used it at the 1974 NCAA Championships, and who matched the jump of the then Olympic champion Randy Williams. The somersault jump has potential to produce longer jumps than other techniques because in the flip, no power is lost countering forward momentum, and it reduces wind resistance in the air. The front flip jump was subsequently banned for fear that it was unsafe.\nRecords.\nThe men's long jump world record has been held by just four individuals for the majority of time since the IAAF (now World Athletics) started to ratify records. The first mark recognized by the IAAF in 1912, the 7.61\u00a0m () performance by Peter O'Connor in August 1901, stood just short of 20 years (nine years as an IAAF record). After it was broken in 1921, the record changed hands five times until Jesse Owens set the mark of 8.13\u00a0m () at the 1935 Big Ten track meet in Ann Arbor, Michigan, a record that was not broken for over 25 years, until 1960 by Ralph Boston. Boston improved upon it and exchanged records with Igor Ter-Ovanesyan three times over the next seven years. At the 1968 Summer Olympics, Bob Beamon jumped 8.90\u00a0m () at an altitude of , a record jump not exceeded for almost 23 years, and which remains the second longest wind legal jump of all time; it has now stood as the Olympic record for over years. On 30 August 1991, Mike Powell of the United States set the current men's world record at the World Championships in Tokyo. It was in a dramatic showdown against Carl Lewis who also surpassed Beamon's record that day, but his jump was wind-assisted (and thus not legal for record purposes). Powell's record of 8.95\u00a0m () has now stood for over years.\nSome jumps over 8.95\u00a0m () have been officially recorded. Wind-assisted 8.99\u00a0m () were recorded by Powell at high altitude in Sestriere in 1992. A potential world record of 8.96\u00a0m () was recorded by Iv\u00e1n Pedroso also in Sestriere. Despite a \"legal\" wind reading, the jump was not validated because videotape revealed a person standing in front of the wind gauge, invalidating the reading (and costing Pedroso a Ferrari valued at $130,000\u2014the prize for breaking the record at that meet). As mentioned above, Lewis jumped 8.91\u00a0m () moments before Powell's record-breaking jump with the wind exceeding the maximum allowed. This jump remains the longest ever not to win an Olympic or World Championship gold medal, or any competition in general.\nThe women's world record has seen more consistent improvement, though the current record has stood longer than any other long jump world record by men or women. The longest to hold the record prior was by Fanny Blankers-Koen during World War II, who held it for over 10 years. There have been four occasions when the record was tied and three when it was improved upon twice in the same competition. The current women's world record is held by Galina Chistyakova of the former Soviet Union who leapt 7.52\u00a0m () in Leningrad on 11 June 1988, a mark that has now stood for over years.\nContinental records.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAll-time top 25.\nMen.\nKey.\nTables show data for two definitions of \"Top 25\" - the top 25 distances and the top 25 athletes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Light Yellow: \"denotes top performance for athletes in the top 25 distances\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0White: \"denotes lesser performances, still in the top 25 distances, by repeat athletes\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Green: \"denotes top performance (only) for other top 25 athletes who fall outside the top 25 distances\"\nWomen.\nKey.\nTables show data for two definitions of \"Top 25\" - the top 25 distances and the top 25 athletes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Light Yellow: \"denotes top performance for athletes in the top 25 distances\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0White: \"denotes lesser performances, still in the top 25 distances, by repeat athletes\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Green: \"denotes top performance (only) for other top 25 athletes who fall outside the top 25 distances\"\nWorld leading marks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNational records.\nMen (outdoor).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWomen (outdoor).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMen (indoor).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWomen (indoor).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18085", "revid": "40138691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18085", "title": "Luke (given name)", "text": "Luke is a masculine given name, and less commonly, a surname.\nThe name Luke is the English form and the diminutive of the Latin name . It is derived from the Latin name \"Lucius\", and it either means \"the bright one\" or \"the one born at dawn,\". It could also be a shortened form of the Latin name. Lucius likely derives from Latin word (gen. ), meaning \"light\" (&lt;PIE *\"leuk-\", \"brightness\"), related to the Latin verb (\"to shine\"). Another proposed etymology is derivation from Etruscan \"Lauchum\" (or \"Lauchme\") meaning \"king,\" which was more directly transferred into Latin as . The frequently-stated translation of as \"man from Lucania\" does not appear supported by reliable sources. \nThe best-known historical use of the name is in the Gospel of Luke, written around 70 to 90 AD. Luke the Evangelist, who is credited with the authorship of the Gospel of Luke, was a physician who lived around 30 to 130 AD. Luke is also credited with the Book of Acts in the Bible, and also is mentioned by the Apostle Paul in some of Paul's letters to first-century churches.\nPeople.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIndex\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name. "}
{"id": "18086", "revid": "6454287", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18086", "title": "League of Augsburg", "text": ""}
{"id": "18087", "revid": "1317701683", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18087", "title": "Lonsdaleite", "text": "Hexagonal lattice allotrope of carbon\nLonsdaleite (named in honour of Kathleen Lonsdale), also called hexagonal diamond in reference to the crystal structure, is an allotrope of carbon with a hexagonal lattice, as opposed to the cubical lattice of conventional diamond. It is found in nature in meteorite debris; when meteors containing graphite strike the Earth, the immense heat and stress of the impact transforms the graphite into diamond, but retains graphite's hexagonal crystal lattice. Lonsdaleite was first identified in 1967 from the Canyon Diablo meteorite, where it occurs as microscopic crystals mixed in with ordinary diamond.\nIt is translucent and brownish-yellow and has an index of refraction of 2.40\u20132.41 and a specific gravity of 3.2\u20133.3. Its hardness is theoretically superior to that of cubic diamond (up to 58% more), according to computational simulations, but natural specimens exhibited somewhat lower hardness through a large range of values (from 7\u20138 on Mohs hardness scale). The cause is speculated to be due to the samples having been riddled with lattice defects and impurities.\nIn addition to meteorite deposits, hexagonal diamond has been synthesized in the laboratory (1966 or earlier; published in 1967) by compressing and heating graphite either in a static press or using explosives.\nHardness.\nAccording to the conventional interpretation of the results of examining the meagre samples collected from meteorites or manufactured in the lab, lonsdaleite has a hexagonal unit cell, related to the diamond unit cell in the same way that the hexagonal and cubic close packed crystal systems are related. Its diamond structure can be considered to be made up of interlocking rings of six carbon atoms, in the chair conformation. In lonsdaleite, some rings are in the boat conformation instead. At nanoscale dimensions, cubic diamond is represented by \"diamondoids\" while hexagonal diamond is represented by \"wurtzoids\".\nIn diamond, all the carbon-to-carbon bonds, both within a layer of rings and between them, are in the staggered conformation, thus causing all four cubic-diagonal directions to be equivalent; whereas in lonsdaleite the bonds between layers are in the eclipsed conformation, which defines the axis of hexagonal symmetry.\nMineralogical simulation predicts lonsdaleite to be 58% harder than diamond on the &lt;100&gt; face, and to resist indentation pressures of 152\u00a0GPa, whereas diamond would break at 97\u00a0GPa. This is yet exceeded by IIa diamond's &lt;111&gt; tip hardness of 162\u00a0GPa.\nThe extrapolated properties of lonsdaleite have been questioned, particularly its superior hardness, since specimens under crystallographic inspection have not shown a bulk hexagonal lattice structure, but instead a conventional cubic diamond dominated by structural defects that include hexagonal sequences. A quantitative analysis of the X-ray diffraction data of lonsdaleite has shown that about equal amounts of hexagonal and cubic stacking sequences are present. Consequently, it has been suggested that \"stacking disordered diamond\" is the most accurate structural description of lonsdaleite. On the other hand, recent shock experiments with in situ X-ray diffraction show strong evidence for creation of relatively pure lonsdaleite in dynamic high-pressure environments comparable to meteorite impacts.\nOccurrence.\nLonsdaleite occurs as microscopic crystals associated with diamond in several meteorites: Canyon Diablo, Kenna, and Allan Hills 77283. It is also naturally occurring in non-bolide diamond placer deposits in the Sakha Republic. Material with d-spacings consistent with Lonsdaleite has been found in sediments with highly uncertain dates at Lake Cuitzeo, in the state of Guanajuato, Mexico, by proponents of the controversial Younger Dryas impact hypothesis, which is now refuted by earth scientists and planetary impact specialists. Claims of Lonsdaleite and other nanodiamonds in a layer of the Greenland ice sheet that could be of Younger Dryas age have not been confirmed and are now disputed. Its presence in local peat deposits is claimed as evidence for the Tunguska event being caused by a meteor rather than by a cometary fragment.\nManufacture.\nIn addition to laboratory synthesis by compressing and heating graphite either in a static press or using explosives, lonsdaleite has also been produced by chemical vapor deposition, and also by the thermal decomposition of a polymer, poly(hydridocarbyne), at atmospheric pressure, under argon atmosphere, at .\nIn 2020, researchers at Australian National University found by accident they were able to produce lonsdaleite at room temperatures using a diamond anvil cell.\nIn 2021, Washington State University's Institute for Shock Physics published a paper stating that they created lonsdaleite crystals large enough to measure their stiffness, confirming that they are stiffer than common cubic diamonds. However, the explosion used to create these crystals also destroys them nanoseconds later, providing just enough time to measure stiffness with lasers.\nIn July 2025, Chinese researchers reported the successful synthesis of high-purity lonsdaleite crystals, ranging from micrometre to millimetre in size, by compressing ultrapure graphite single crystals under precisely controlled high-pressure, high-temperature, and quasi-hydrostatic conditions. The work, published in \"Nature\", is regarded as the first clear laboratory production of bulk hexagonal diamond, which is predicted to have greater hardness and thermal stability than conventional cubic diamond.\nExistence controversy.\nSince its discovery in Canyon\u202fDiablo meteorite fragments, and independent synthesis as \"hexagonal diamond\", lonsdaleite has remained contentious. First\u2011principles calculations predicted an indentation hardness 58\u202f% greater than cubic diamond, fuelling interest in its technological potential.\nHigh\u2011resolution electron\u2011microscopy work in 2014 argued that diffraction features ascribed to lonsdaleite could be explained by twins and stacking faults in cubic diamond, casting doubt on its existence. Subsequent studies quantified hexagonal stacking in meteoritic and synthetic diamonds, while shock\u2011compression experiments showed nanosecond\u2011scale formation of lonsdaleite above 170\u202fGPa.\nWork published in 2021 reported bulk, high\u2011purity hexagonal diamond with Vickers hardness up to 164\u202fGPa produced from compressed graphite, and a 2023 density\u2011functional study outlined shear\u2011stress pathways and spectroscopic fingerprints for unambiguous identification. Experimental nano\u2011indentation the same year measured hardness values for both meteoritic and synthetic lonsdaleite comparable to or exceeding diamond.\nThe longstanding dispute was largely resolved in 2025, whereby combined density\u2011functional theory, molecular dynamics, Raman simulations and simulated electron diffraction was used to generate definitive structural fingerprints distinguishing lonsdaleite from faulted cubic diamond establishing lonsdaleite as a metastable but distinct carbon allotrope. The work also predicted and demonstrated a reproducible high\u2011pressure\u2013high\u2011temperature synthesis route.\nScams.\nSince the characteristics of lonsdaleite are unknown to most people outside of scientists trained in geology and mineralogy, the names \"lonsdaleite\" and \"hexagonal diamond\" have frequently been used in the fraudulent sale of ceramic artifacts passed off as meteorites on online e-commerce sites and at street fairs and street markets, with prices ranging from a few dollars to thousands of dollars.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18088", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18088", "title": "Labrador duck", "text": "Extinct species of bird\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Labrador duck (Camptorhynchus labradorius) is an extinct North American duck species. It has the distinction of being the first known endemic North American bird species to become extinct after the Columbian Exchange, with the last reported sighting occurring in 1878 in Elmira, New York, and the last preserved specimen was shot in the fall of 1875 in Long Island, New York, by J.G. Bell. It was already a rare duck before European settlers arrived, and as a result of its rarity, information on the Labrador duck is not abundant, although some, such as its habitat, characteristics, dietary habits and reasons behind its extinction, are known. There are 55 specimens of the Labrador duck preserved in museum collections around the globe.\nTaxonomy.\nThe Labrador duck was also known as the pied duck and skunk duck, the former being a vernacular name that it shared with the surf scoter and the common goldeneye (and even the American oystercatcher), a fact that has led to difficulties in interpreting old records of these species. Both names refer to the male's striking white/black piebald colouration. Yet another common name was sand shoal duck, referring to its habit of feeding in shallow water. \nThe Labrador duck is considered a sea duck. A basic difference in the shape of the process of metacarpal I divides the sea ducks into two groups:\nThe position of the nutrient foramen of the tarsometatarsus also separates the two groups of sea ducks. In the first group, the foramen is lateral to the long axis of the lateral groove of the hypotarsus; in the second, the foramen is on or medial to the axis of that groove.\nThe closest evolutionary relatives of the Labrador duck were thought to be the scoters (\"Melanitta\"). However a mitogenomic study of the placement of the Labrador duck found the species to be closely related to the Steller's eider as shown below.\nDescription.\nThe female plumage was grey. Although weakly patterned, the pattern was scoter-like. The male's plumage was black and white in an eider-like pattern, but the wings were entirely white except for the primaries. The trachea of the male was scoter-like. An expansion of the tracheal tube occurred at the anterior end, and two enlargements (as opposed to one enlargement as seen in scoters) were near the middle of the tube. The bulla was bony and round, puffing out from the left side. This asymmetrical and osseus bulla was unlike that of scoters; this bulla was similar to eiders and harlequin duck's bullae. The Labrador duck has been considered the most enigmatic of all North American birds.\nThe Labrador duck had an oblong head with small, beady eyes. Its bill was almost as long as its head. The body was short and depressed with short, strong feet that were far behind the body. The feathers were small and the tail was short and rounded. The Labrador duck belongs to a monotypic genus.\nHabitat.\nThe Labrador duck migrated annually, wintering off the coasts of New Jersey and New England in the eastern United States, where it favored southern sandy coasts, sheltered bays, harbors, and inlets, and breeding in Labrador and northern Quebec in the summer. John James Audubon's son reported seeing a nest belonging to the species in Labrador. Some believe that it may have laid its eggs on the islands in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence. The breeding biology of the Labrador duck is largely unknown.\nDiet.\nThe Labrador duck fed on small molluscs, and some fishermen reported catching it on fishing lines baited with mussels. The structure of the bill was highly modified from that of most ducks, having a wide, flattened tip with numerous lamellae inside. In this way, it is considered an ecological counterpart of the North Pacific/North Asian Steller's eider. The beak was also particularly soft and may have been used to probe through sediment for food.\nAnother, completely unrelated, duck with similar (but even more specialized) bill morphology is the Australian pink-eared duck, which feeds largely on plankton, but also mollusks; the condition in the Labrador duck probably resembled that of the blue duck most in outward appearance.\nIts peculiar bill suggests it ate shellfish and crustaceans from silt and shallow water. The Labrador duck may have survived by eating snails.\nExtinction.\nThe Labrador duck is thought to have been always rare, but between 1850 and 1870, populations waned further. The exact reasons for its extinction is still not fully known. The IUCN recognized the last year the species was seen as 1875. It was last seen in Canada, in 1874 on Grand Manan.\nAlthough hunted for food, this duck was considered to taste bad, rotted quickly, and fetched a low price. Consequently, it was not sought much by hunters. However, the eggs may have been overharvested, and it may have been subject to depredations by the feather trade in its breeding area, as well. Another possible factor in the bird's extinction was the decline in mussels and other shellfish on which they are believed to have fed in their winter quarters, due to growth of population and industry on the Eastern Seaboard. Although all sea ducks readily feed on shallow-water molluscs, no Western Atlantic bird species seems to have been as dependent on such food as the Labrador duck.\nAnother theory that was said to lead to their extinction was a huge increase of human influence on the coastal ecosystems in North America, causing the birds to flee their niches and find another habitat. These ducks were the only birds whose range was limited to the American coast of the North Atlantic, so changing niches was a difficult task. Whatever the causes may be, the Labrador duck became extinct in the late 19th century.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18089", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18089", "title": "Lettres de cachet", "text": "Orders of the King of France, often arrest warrants\nLettres de cachet (; lit.\u2009'\"letters of the sign/signet\"') were letters signed by the king of France, countersigned by one of his ministers, and closed with the royal seal. They contained orders directly from the king, often to enforce actions and judgments that could not be appealed.\nIn the case of organized bodies, \"lettres de cachet\" were issued for the purpose of preventing assembly, or to accomplish some other definite act. The provincial estates were convoked (called to assembly) in this manner, and it was by a \"lettre de cachet\" (in this case, a \"lettre de jussipri\"), or by showing in person in a \"lit de justice\", that the king ordered a \"parlement\" to register a law despite that \"parlement\"'s refusal to pass it.\nThe best-known \"lettres de cachet\", however, were penal, by which a subject was imprisoned without trial and without an opportunity of defense (after inquiry and due diligence by the \"lieutenant de police\") in a state prison or an ordinary jail, confined in a convent or the General Hospital of Paris, transported to the colonies, or expelled to another part of the realm, or from the realm altogether. The \"lettres\" were mainly used against drunkards, troublemakers, prostitutes, squanderers of the family fortune, or insane persons. The wealthy sometimes petitioned such \"lettres\" to dispose of inconvenient individuals, especially to prevent unequal marriages (nobles with commoners), or to prevent a scandal (the \"lettre\" could prevent court cases that might otherwise dishonour a family).\nIn this respect, the \"lettres de cachet\" were a prominent symbol of the abuses of the \"ancien r\u00e9gime\" monarchy, and as such were suppressed during the French Revolution. In 1789 and 1790, all cases were reviewed by a commission which confirmed most of the sentences. Historian Claude Qu\u00e9tel has interpreted these confirmations as indicating that the \"lettres\" were not as arbitrary and unjust as they have been represented after the Revolution, and he hence speaks of a \"L\u00e9gende noire\".\nHistory.\nThe power to issue \"lettres de cachet\" was a royal privilege recognized by the French monarchic civil law that developed during the 13th century, as the Capetian monarchy overcame its initial distrust of Roman law. The principle can be traced to a maxim which furnished a text of the \"Pandects\" of Justinian: in their Latin version, \"Rex solutus est a legibus\", or \"The king is released from the laws\". \"The French legal scholars interpreted the imperial office of the Justinian code generically and arrived at the conclusion that every 'king is an emperor in his own kingdom', that is, he possesses the prerogatives of legal absolutism that the \"Corpus Juris Civilis\" attributes to the Roman emperor.\"\nThis meant that when the king intervened directly, he could decide without heeding the laws, and even contrary to the laws. This was an early conception, and in early times the order in question was simply verbal; some letters patent of Henry III in 1576 state that Fran\u00e7ois de Montmorency was \"prisoner in our castle of the Bastille in Paris by verbal command\" of the late king Charles IX.\nIn the 14th century, the principle was introduced that the order should be written, and hence arose the \"lettre de cachet\". The \"lettre de cachet\" belonged to the class of \"lettres closes\", as opposed to \"lettres patentes\", which contained the expression of the legal and permanent will of the king, and had to be furnished with the seal of state affixed by the chancellor.\nThe \"lettres de cachet\", on the contrary, were signed simply by a secretary of state for the king; they bore merely the imprint of the king's privy seal, from which circumstance they were often called, in the 14th and 15th centuries, \"lettres de petit signet\" or \"lettres de petit cachet\", and were entirely exempt from the control of the chancellor.\nAs a tool.\nIn addition to serving the government as a silent weapon against political adversaries or controversial writers and as a means of punishing culprits of high birth without the scandal of a lawsuit, the \"lettres de cachet\" had many other uses. They were employed by the police in dealing with prostitutes, and on their authority lunatics were shut up in hospitals and sometimes in prisons.\nThey were also often used by heads of families as a means of correction, for example, to protect the family honour from the disorderly or criminal conduct of sons. The case of the Marquis de Sade (imprisoned 1777\u20131790 under a \"lettre de cachet\" obtained by his wealthy and influential mother-in-law) is a prominent example. Wives, too, took advantage of them to curb the profligacy of husbands, and vice versa.\nIn reality, the secretary of state had delegated powers, and could issue them at his own discretion, and in most cases the king was unaware of their issue. In the 18th century the letters were often issued blank, i.e. without containing the name of the person against whom they were directed; the recipient, or mandatary, filled in the name in order to make the letter effective.\nProtests.\nProtests against the \"lettres de cachet\" were made continually by the \"Parlement\" of Paris and by the provincial \"parlements\", and also by the Estates-General. In 1648, during the Fronde, the sovereign courts of Paris, by their \"Arr\u00eat d'Union\", procured their momentary suppression in a kind of charter of liberties which they imposed upon the crown, but which was short-lived.\nIt was not until the reign of Louis XVI that a reaction against the abuse became clearly perceptible. At the beginning of that reign Malesherbes during his short ministry endeavoured to infuse some measure of justice into the system, and in March 1784 the baron de Breteuil, a minister of the king's household, addressed a circular to the intendants and the lieutenant of police with a view to preventing the most serious abuses connected with the issue of \"lettres de cachet\".\nThe Comte de Mirabeau wrote a scathing indictment of \"lettres de cachet\" while imprisoned in the dungeon of Vincennes (by \"lettre de cachet\" obtained by his father). The treatise was published after his liberation in 1782 under the title \"Les Lettres de cachet et des prisons d'etat\" and was widely read throughout Europe.\nBesides the Bastille, there were thirty prisons in Paris by 1779 in which a person could be detained without trial. Convents were used for the same purpose.\nThey were reported to have been openly sold, in the reign of Louis XV, by the mistress of one of his ministers.\nIn Paris, in 1779, the Cour des Aides demanded their suppression, and in March 1788 the \"Parlement\" of Paris made some exceedingly energetic remonstrances, which are important for the light they throw upon old French public law. The crown, however, did not decide to lay aside this weapon, and in a declaration to the States-General in the royal session of June 23, 1789 (art. 15) it did not renounce it absolutely.\nAbolition and reinstatement.\n\"Lettres de cachet\" were abolished after the French Revolution by the Constituent Assembly, but Napoleon reestablished their penal equivalent by a political measure in the decree of 8 March 1801 on the state prisons. This was one of the acts brought up against him by the senatus-consulte of 3 April 1814, which pronounced his fall \"considering that he has violated the constitutional laws by the decrees on the state prisons.\"\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18090", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18090", "title": "Lilia Podkopayeva", "text": "Ukrainian gymnast (born 1978)\nLilia Oleksandrivna Podkopayeva (; born 15 August 1978) is a Ukrainian former artistic gymnast. She is the 1995 world all-around champion, and the 1996 Olympic all-around and floor exercise champion. Often thought of as a complete athlete, Podkopayeva was known for combining power, style, and balletic grace.\nGymnastics career.\n1993\u201395.\nIn March 1993, Lilia won her only National All Around Title in Ukraine. In April 1993, Podkopayeva competed at the World Artistic Gymnastics Championships in Birmingham, England. She qualified for the vault final, but crashed on her first attempt and finished last with a score of 8.893.\nAt the 1994 World Championships in Brisbane, Australia, she placed sixth in the all-around with a score of 38.942. In event finals, she placed eighth on vault, scoring 9.424; fifth on uneven bars, scoring 9.350; and second on balance beam, scoring 9.737. In November 1994, at the World Team Championships in Dortmund, Germany, she contributed an all-around score of 38.099 toward the Ukrainian team's fifth-place finish.\nThe following year, Podkopayeva competed at the 1995 World Championships in Sabae, Japan. She helped Ukraine place fifth and qualify a full team to the 1996 Olympics. Podkopayeva then won the all-around final with a score of 39.248. In event finals, she placed first on vault (9.781), second on uneven bars (9.837), second on balance beam (9.837), and seventh on floor (9.087).\n1996.\nAt the beginning of the year, Podkopayeva was seriously injured when she fell from the beam in practice, fracturing two ribs. However, in May, she competed at the European Championships in Birmingham, where she helped the Ukrainian team place third and won the individual all-around with a score of 39.205. In event finals, she placed third on balance beam (9.756), first on uneven bars (9.825), and first on floor (9.862).\nAtlanta Olympics.\nIn July, Podkopayeva competed at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Georgia. In the team final, she contributed a combined compulsory and optional score of 78.061 toward the Ukrainian team's fifth-place finish. She then won the all-around final with a score of 39.255. In event finals, she placed fifth on uneven bars (9.787), second on balance beam (9.825), and first on floor (9.887). She was the fourth gymnast to win the Olympic all-around title as the reigning world champion, and the first gymnast to win the all-around without winning a team medal. She was also the last female gymnast to win the all-around title and an event-final gold medal until Simone Biles did this in 2016.\n1997.\nPodkopayeva originally intended to continue competing after the 1996 Olympics, and she was named to the Ukrainian team for the 1997 World Championships. However, injuries forced her to sit out the competition and, later, to retire.\nEponymous skills.\nPodkopayeva has two eponymous skills listed in the Code of Points.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPost-retirement.\nIn 2002, Podkopayeva started the Golden Lilia International Sports Festival, an exhibition featuring artistic and rhythmic gymnasts, acrobats, and dancers. She said, \"It's important to us to show outstanding people and brightest talent so that the next generation can follow the best of the best.\"\nIn December 2004, she married a Ukrainian businessman Tymofiy Nahornyi. They have two children: Vadym, adopted in Ukraine in July 2006, and Karolina, born in November 2006. The couple divorced in 2009.\nIn 2005, Podkopayeva became a United Nations goodwill ambassador on HIV/AIDS in Ukraine. She is also an Ambassador of the Council of Europe for Sport, Tolerance, and Fair Play.\nIn 2007, she won Ukraine's \"Dancing With the Stars\" with partner Sergiy Kostetskyi. The next year, she represented Ukraine in the Eurovision Dance Contest. Along with partner Kyrylo Khytrov, she placed third in the competition.\nIn 2014, Podkopayeva did a gala event in Mexico, using similar choreography to the floor routine she performed in Atlanta, as well as doing back handsprings and round-offs.\nIn 2019, Podkopayeva joined the coaching staff at Marcus Jewish Community Center of Atlanta's Perimeter Gymnastics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "18091", "revid": "50130126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18091", "title": "Lisbon", "text": "Capital and largest city of Portugal\n \nLisbon, officially the Very Noble and Ever Loyal City of Lisbon, is the capital and most populous municipality of Portugal, with an estimated population of 575,739, as of 2024, within its administrative limits and 3,028,000 within the metropolis, as of 2025. Lisbon is mainland Europe's westernmost capital city (second overall after Reykjav\u00edk), and the only one along the Atlantic coast, the others (Reykjav\u00edk and Dublin) being on islands. The city lies in the western portion of the Iberian Peninsula, on the northern shore of the River Tagus. The western portion of its metro area, the Portuguese Riviera, hosts the westernmost point of Continental Europe, culminating at Cabo da Roca.\nLisbon is one of the oldest cities in the world and the second-oldest European capital city (after Athens), predating other modern European capitals by centuries. Settled by pre-Celtic tribes and later founded and civilized by the Phoenicians, Julius Caesar made it a municipium called \"Felicitas Julia\", adding the term to the name \"Olissipo\". After the fall of the Roman Empire, it was ruled by a series of Germanic tribes from the 5th century, most notably the Visigoths. Later it was captured by the Moors in the 8th century. In 1147, Afonso Henriques conquered the city and in 1255, it became Portugal's capital, replacing Coimbra. It has since been the political, economic, and cultural centre of the country.\nAs the political centre of the country, Lisbon hosts the government, Assembly of the Republic, Supreme Court of Justice, Armed Forces and residence of the head of state. It is also the centre of Portuguese diplomacy, with ambassadors from 86 countries residing in the city, as well as representations from Taiwan and Palestine. About 3.01 million people live in the Lisbon metropolitan area, which extends beyond the city's administrative area, making it the third largest metropolitan area in the Iberian Peninsula (after Madrid and Barcelona) as well as figuring amongst the 10 most populous urban areas in the European Union. It represents approximately 28% of the country's population.\nLisbon is recognised as an alpha\u2212 level global city because of its importance in finance, commerce, fashion, media, entertainment, arts, international trade, education, and tourism. Lisbon is amongst the two Portuguese cities (the other being Porto) to be recognised as a global city, and it is also home to three companies in the Global 2000 (EDP Group, Galp Energia and Jer\u00f3nimo Martins). Lisbon is one of the major economic centres in Europe, with a growing financial sector, with PSI-20 being part of Euronext, the largest center for debt and funds listings in the world. The Lisbon region has a higher GDP PPP per capita than any other region in Portugal. Its GDP PPP amounts to US$179 billion and thus $61,713 per capita.\nThe city occupies the 40th place of highest gross earnings in the world. Most of the headquarters of multinational corporations in Portugal are located in the Lisbon area.\nEtymology.\nThe precise origin of the name is unknown. Lisbon's name may derive from Proto-Celtic or Celtic \"Olisippo\", \"Lissoppo\", or a similar name which other visiting ancient peoples such as the Phoenicians, Greeks, and Romans adapted accordingly, such as the pre-Roman appellation for the Tagus River, \"Lisso\" or \"Lucio\". Classical authors writing in Latin and Greek, including Strabo, Solinus, and Martianus Capella, referred to popular legends that the city of Lisbon was founded by the mythical hero Ulysses (Odysseus). Lisbon's name was written \"Ulyssippo\" in Latin by the geographer Pomponius Mela, a native of Hispania. It was later referred to as \"Olisippo\" by Pliny the Elder and by the Greeks as \"Olissipo\" (\u1f48\u03bb\u03b9\u03c3\u03c3\u03b9\u03c0\u03ce\u03bd) or \"Olissipona\" (\u1f48\u03bb\u03b9\u03c3\u03c3\u03b9\u03c0\u03cc\u03bd\u03b1).\nAnother claim repeated in historical literature is that the name of Lisbon could originate from a supposed ancient Phoenician term \"Alis-Ubbo\", meaning \"safe harbour\" or \"pleasant haven\". Although modern archaeological excavations show there may have been Phoenician presence at this location since 1000BC, this folk etymology completely lacks any evidence and \"is never attested in ancient classical literature\".\nLisbon's name is commonly abbreviated as \"LX\" or \"Lx\", originating in an antiquated spelling of Lisbon as \"Lixb\u00f5a\". While the old spelling has since been completely dropped from usage and goes against modern language standards, the abbreviation is still commonly used.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nDuring the Neolithic period, the region was inhabited by Pre-Celtic tribes, who built religious and funerary monuments, megaliths, dolmens and menhirs, which still survive in areas on the periphery of Lisbon. The Indo-European Celts invaded in the 1st millennium BC, mixing with the Pre-Indo-European population, thus giving rise to Celtic-speaking local tribes such as the Cempsi or Sefes.\nAlthough the first fortifications on Lisbon's Castelo hill are known to be no older than the 2nd century BC, recent archaeological finds have shown that Iron Age people occupied the site from the 8th to 6th centuries BC. This indigenous settlement maintained commercial relations with the Phoenicians, which would account for the recent findings of Phoenician pottery and other material objects. Archaeological excavations made near the Castle of S\u00e3o Jorge (\"Castelo de S\u00e3o Jorge\") and Lisbon Cathedral indicate there may have been a Phoenician presence at this location since 1000 BC, and it can be stated with confidence that a Phoenician trading post stood on a site now the centre of the present city, on the southern slope of the Castle hill. The sheltered harbour in the Tagus River estuary was an ideal spot for an Iberian settlement and would have provided a secure harbour for unloading and provisioning trading ships. The Tagus settlement was an important centre of commercial trade with the inland tribes, providing an outlet for the valuable metals, salt and salted-fish they collected, and for the sale of the Lusitanian horses renowned in antiquity.\nAccording to a persistent legend, the location was named for the Greek mythical king of Ithaca, Ulysses, who founded the city when he sailed westward to the ends of the known world.\nRoman era.\nFollowing the defeat of Hannibal in 202 BC during the Punic wars, the Romans determined to deprive Carthage of its most valuable possession: Hispania (the Iberian Peninsula). The defeat of Carthaginian forces by Scipio Africanus in Eastern Hispania allowed the pacification of the west, led by Consul Decimus Junius Brutus Callaicus. Decimus obtained the alliance of Olissipo (which sent men to fight alongside the Roman Legions against the northwestern Celtic tribes) by integrating it into the empire, as the \"Municipium Cives Romanorum Felicitas Julia\". Local authorities were granted self-rule over a territory that extended ; exempt from taxes, its citizens were given the privileges of Roman citizenship, and it was then integrated with the Roman province of Lusitania (whose capital was Emerita Augusta).\nLusitanian raids and rebellions during Roman occupation required the construction of a wall around the settlement. During Augustus' reign, the Romans also built a great theatre; the Cassian Baths (underneath \"Rua da Prata\"); temples to Jupiter, Diana, Cybele, Tethys and Idea Phrygiae (an uncommon cult from Asia Minor), in addition to temples to the Emperor; a large necropolis under \"Pra\u00e7a da Figueira\"; a large forum and other buildings such as insulae (multi-storied apartment buildings) in the area between Castle Hill and the historic city core. Many of these ruins were first unearthed during the mid-18th century (when the recent discovery of Pompeii made Roman archaeology fashionable among Europe's upper classes).\nThe city prospered as piracy was eliminated and technological advances were introduced, consequently \"Felicitas Julia\" became a center of trade with the Roman provinces of Britannia (particularly Cornwall) and the Rhine. Economically strong, Olissipo was known for its garum (a fish sauce highly prized by the elites of the empire and exported in amphorae to Rome), wine, salt, and horse-breeding, while Roman culture permeated the hinterland. The city was connected by a broad road to Western Hispania's two other large cities, Bracara Augusta in the province of Tarraconensis (Portuguese Braga), and Emerita Augusta, the capital of Lusitania. The city was ruled by an oligarchical council dominated by two families, the Julii and the Cassiae, although regional authority was administered by the Roman Governor of Emerita or directly by Emperor Tiberius. Among the majority of Latin speakers lived a large minority of Greek traders and slaves.\nOlissipo, like most great cities in the Western Empire, was a center for the dissemination of Christianity. Its first attested Bishop was Potamius (c. 356), and there were several martyrs during the period of persecution of the Christians: Verissimus, Maxima, and Julia are the most significant examples. By the time of the Fall of Rome, Olissipo had become a notable Christian center.\nMiddle Ages.\nFollowing the disintegration of the Western Roman Empire, there were barbarian invasions; between 409 and 429 the city was occupied successively by Sarmatians, Alans and Vandals. The Germanic Suebi, who established a kingdom in Gallaecia (modern Galicia and northern Portugal), with its capital in \"Bracara Augusta\", also controlled the region of Lisbon until 585. In 585, the Suebi Kingdom was integrated into the Germanic Visigothic Kingdom of Toledo, which comprised all of the Iberian Peninsula: Lisbon was then called \"Ulishbona\".\nOn 6 August 711, Lisbon was taken by the Muslim forces of the Umayyad Caliphate. These conquerors built many mosques and houses, rebuilt the city wall (known as the \"Cerca Moura\") and established administrative control, while permitting the diverse population of Muwallads, Arabs, Berbers, Mozarabs, \"Saqaliba\", and Jews to maintain their socio-cultural lifestyles. Mozarabic was the native language spoken by most of the Christian population although Arabic was widely known as spoken by all religious communities. Islam was the official religion practised by the Arabs, Berbers, Saqaliba and Muwallad.\nThe ancient Muslim influence is still visible in the Alfama district, an old quarter of Lisbon that survived the 1755 Lisbon earthquake: many place-names are derived from Arabic and the Alfama (the oldest existing district of Lisbon) was derived from the Arabic \"\"al-hamma\"\".\nFor a brief time, Lisbon was an independent Muslim kingdom known as the Taifa of Lisbon (1022\u20131034), before being conquered by the larger Taifa of Badajoz.\nIn 1108 Lisbon was raided and occupied by Norwegian crusaders led by Sigurd I on their way to the Holy Land as part of the Norwegian Crusade and occupied by crusader forces for three years. It was taken by the Moorish Almoravids in 1111.\nIn 1147, as part of Portuguese theatre of the Reconquista, Afonso I of Portugal laid siege and conquered Lisbon with the aid of crusader knights. The city, with around 154,000 residents at the time, was returned to Christian rule. The conquest of Portugal and re-establishment of Christianity is one of the most significant events in Lisbon's history, described in the chronicle \"Expugnatione Lyxbonensi\", which describes, among other incidents, how the local bishop was killed by the crusaders and the city's residents prayed to the Virgin Mary as it happened. Some of the Muslim residents converted to Roman Catholicism and most of those who did not convert fled to other parts of the Islamic world, primarily Muslim Spain and North Africa. All mosques were either destroyed or altered and converted into churches. As a result of the end of Muslim rule in the mid-12th century, spoken Arabic quickly lost its place in Lisbon, and disappeared altogether.\nWith its central location, Lisbon became the capital city of the new Portuguese territory in 1255.\nThe first Portuguese university was founded in Lisbon in 1290 by King Denis I; for many years the \"Studium Generale\" (\"General Study\") was transferred intermittently to Coimbra, where it was installed permanently in the 16th century as the University of Coimbra.\nIn 1384, the city was besieged by King Juan I of Castille, as a part of the ongoing 1383\u20131385 Crisis. The result of the siege was a victory for the Portuguese led by Nuno \u00c1lvares Pereira.\nDuring the last centuries of the Middle Ages, Lisbon expanded substantially and became an important trading post with both Northern European and Mediterranean cities.\nEarly Modern.\nWhen the Spaniards expelled the Jews from Spanish territory, many of them fled to Lisbon. Although acknowledging the central importance of the Jews to the city's prosperity, Manuel I decreed in 1497 that all Jews must convert to Christianity, only those who refused being forced to leave, but not before the expropriation of their property. In 1506, an anti-semitic movement among the Old Christians of Lisbon culminated in a massacre lasting four days in which some 1,000 to 4,000 New Christian men, women and children, converted descendants of Sephardic Jews, are estimated to have been killed. The king was at \u00c9vora when these events occurred, but angered when he received the news, he ordered an investigation which resulted in two of the instigating friars being excommunicated and burned alive.\nMost of the Portuguese expeditions of the Age of Discovery set out from Lisbon during the period from the end of the 15th century to the beginning of the 17th century, including Vasco da Gama's expedition to India in 1498. The following years of the 16th century began Lisbon's golden era: the city was the European hub of commerce between Africa, India, the Far East and later, Brazil, and acquired great riches by exploiting the trade in spices, slaves, sugar, textiles and other goods. This period saw the rise of the exuberant Manueline style in architecture, which left its mark in many 16th-century monuments (including Lisbon's Bel\u00e9m Tower and Jer\u00f3nimos Monastery, which were declared UNESCO World Heritage Sites). A description of Lisbon in the 16th century was written by Dami\u00e3o de G\u00f3is and published in 1554.\nThe succession crisis of 1580 initiated a sixty-year period of dual monarchy in Portugal and Spain under the Spanish Habsburgs. This is referred to as the \"Philippine Dominion\" (\"Dom\u00ednio Filipino\"), since all three Spanish kings during that period were called Philip (\"Filipe\"). In 1589, Lisbon was the target of an incursion by the English Armada led by Francis Drake, while Queen Elizabeth supported a Portuguese pretender in Antonio, Prior of Crato, but support for Crato was lacking and the expedition was a failure. The Portuguese Restoration War, which began with a coup d'\u00e9tat organised by the nobility and bourgeoisie in Lisbon and executed on 1 December 1640, restored Portuguese independence. The period from 1640 to 1668 was marked by periodic skirmishes between Portugal and Spain, as well as short episodes of more serious warfare until the Treaty of Lisbon was signed in 1668.\nIn the early 18th century, gold from Brazil allowed King John V to sponsor the building of several Baroque churches and theatres in the city. Prior to the 18th century, Lisbon had experienced several significant earthquakes \u2013 eight in the 14th century, five in the 16th century (including the 1531 earthquake that destroyed 1,500 houses and the 1597 earthquake in which three streets vanished), and three in the 17th century.\nOn 1 November 1755, the city was destroyed by another devastating earthquake, which killed an estimated 30,000 to 40,000 Lisbon residents of a population estimated at between 200,000 and 275,000, and destroyed 85 percent of the city's structures. Among several important buildings of the city, the Ribeira Palace and the Hospital Real de Todos os Santos were lost. In coastal areas, such as Peniche, situated about north of Lisbon, many people were killed by the following tsunami.\nBy 1755, Lisbon was one of the largest cities in Europe; the catastrophic event shocked the whole of Europe and left a deep impression on its collective psyche. Voltaire wrote a long poem, \"Po\u00eame sur le d\u00e9sastre de Lisbonne\", shortly after the quake, and mentioned it in his 1759 novel \"Candide\" (indeed, many argue that this critique of optimism was inspired by that earthquake). Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. also mentions it in his 1857 poem, \"The Deacon's Masterpiece, or The Wonderful One-Hoss Shay\".\nAfter the 1755 earthquake, the city was rebuilt largely according to the plans of Prime Minister Sebasti\u00e3o Jos\u00e9 de Carvalho e Melo, the 1st Marquis of Pombal; the lower town began to be known as the \"Baixa Pombalina\" (Pombaline central district). Instead of rebuilding the medieval town, Pombal decided to demolish what remained after the earthquake and rebuild the city centre in accordance with principles of modern urban design. It was reconstructed in an open rectangular plan with two great squares: the \"Pra\u00e7a do Rossio\" and the \"Pra\u00e7a do Com\u00e9rcio\". The first, the central commercial district, is the traditional gathering place of the city and the location of the older caf\u00e9s, theatres and restaurants; the second became the city's main access to the River Tagus and point of departure and arrival for seagoing vessels, adorned by a triumphal arch (1873) and a monument to King Joseph I.\nModern era.\nIn the first years of the 19th century, Portugal was invaded by the troops of Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte, forcing Queen Maria I and Prince-Regent John (future John VI) to flee temporarily to Brazil. By the time the new King returned to Lisbon, many of the buildings and properties were pillaged, sacked or destroyed by the invaders.\nDuring the 19th century, the Liberal movement introduced new changes into the urban landscape. The principal areas were in the \"Baixa\" and along the \"Chiado\" district, where shops, tobacconists shops, caf\u00e9s, bookstores, clubs and theatres proliferated. The development of industry and commerce determined the growth of the city, seeing the transformation of the Passeio P\u00fablico, a Pombaline era park, into the Avenida da Liberdade, as the city grew farther from the Tagus.\nLisbon was the site of the regicide of Carlos I of Portugal in 1908, an event which culminated two years later in the establishment of the First Republic.\nThe city refounded its university in 1911 after centuries of inactivity in Lisbon, incorporating reformed former colleges and other non-university higher education schools of the city (such as the \"Escola Polit\u00e9cnica\", now \"Faculdade de Ci\u00eancias\"). Today there are two public universities in the city (University of Lisbon and New University of Lisbon), a public university institute (ISCTE - Lisbon University Institute) and a polytechnic institute (IPL \u2013 Instituto Polit\u00e9cnico de Lisboa).\nDuring World War II, Lisbon was one of the very few neutral, open European Atlantic ports, a major gateway for refugees to the U.S. and a haven for spies. More than 100,000 refugees were able to flee Nazi Germany via Lisbon.\nDuring the Estado Novo regime (1926\u20131974), Lisbon, under the influence of Duarte Pacheco, the minister of works, was expanded at the cost of other districts within the country, resulting in nationalist and monumental projects. New residential and public developments were constructed; the zone of Bel\u00e9m was modified for the 1940 Portuguese Exhibition, while along the periphery new districts appeared to house the growing population. The inauguration of the bridge over the Tagus allowed a rapid connection between both sides of the river.\nLisbon was the site of three revolutions in the 20th century. The first, the 5 October 1910 revolution, brought an end to the Portuguese monarchy and established the highly unstable and corrupt Portuguese First Republic. The 6 June 1926 revolution ended the first republic and firmly established the Estado Novo, or the Portuguese Second Republic, as the ruling regime.\nContemporary.\nThe Carnation Revolution, which took place on 25 April 1974, ended the right-wing Estado Novo regime and reformed the country to its current state as the Portuguese Third Republic.\nIn the 1990s, many of the districts were renovated and projects in the historic quarters were established to modernise those areas. Architectural and patrimonial buildings were renovated, the northern margin of the Tagus was re-purposed for leisure and residential use, the Vasco da Gama Bridge was constructed and the eastern part of the municipality was re-purposed for Expo '98 to commemorate the 500th anniversary of Vasco da Gama's sea voyage to India, which brought immense riches to Lisbon and led to the construction of many of Lisbon's landmarks.\nIn 1988, a fire in the historical district of Chiado saw the destruction of many 18th-century Pombaline style buildings. A series of restoration works has brought the area back to its former self and made it a high-scale shopping district.\nThe Lisbon Agenda was a European Union agreement on measures to revitalise the EU economy, signed in Lisbon in March 2000. In October 2007 Lisbon hosted the 2007 EU Summit, where an agreement was reached regarding a new EU governance model. The resulting Treaty of Lisbon was signed on 13 December 2007 and came into force on 1 December 2009.\nLisbon has been the site for many international events and programmes. In 1994, Lisbon was the European Capital of Culture. On 3 November 2005, Lisbon hosted the MTV European Music Awards. On 7 July 2007, Lisbon held the ceremony of the \"New 7 Wonders Of The World\" election, in the Luz Stadium, with live transmission for millions of people all over the world. Every two years, Lisbon hosts the Rock in Rio Lisboa Music Festival, one of the largest in the world. Lisbon hosted the NATO summit (19\u201320 November 2010), a summit meeting that is regarded as a periodic opportunity for Heads of State and Heads of Government of NATO member states to evaluate and provide strategic direction for Alliance activities. The city hosts the Web Summit and is the head office for the Group of Seven Plus (G7+). In 2018 it hosted the Eurovision Song Contest for the first time as well as the Michelin Gala. On 11 July 2018, the Aga Khan officially chose the Henrique de Mendon\u00e7a Palace, located on Rua Marqu\u00eas de Fronteira, as the \"Divan\", or seat, of the global Nizari Muslim Imamate. Lisbon hosted World Youth Day 2023 in August of that year, attracting Catholic youth from the around the world. Pope Francis led several events, with the final mass held in the city's Parque do Tejo having an estimated 1.5 million attendees.\nGeography.\nPhysical geography.\nLisbon is located at , situated at the mouth of the Tagus River and is the westernmost capital of a mainland European country. The river delta is inverted.\nThe westernmost part of Lisbon is occupied by the Monsanto Forest Park, a urban park, one of the largest in Europe, which takes up 10% of the municipality.\nThe city occupies an area of , and its city boundaries, unlike those of most major cities, coincide with those of the municipality. The rest of the urbanised area of the Lisbon urban area, known generically as Greater Lisbon () includes several administratively defined cities and municipalities, in the north bank of the Tagus River. The larger Lisbon metropolitan area includes the Set\u00fabal Peninsula to the south.\nClimate.\nLisbon has a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csa\"), characterized by mild, rainy winters and warm to hot, dry summers. The average annual temperature is , with average daily highs of and lows of .\nIn the coldest month, January, daytime highs typically range from , while nighttime lows range from , with an average sea temperature of . In the warmest month, August, daytime highs typically range from , nighttime lows range from , and the average sea temperature is around .\nThe climate of Lisbon is moderate, largely due to its location in southwestern Europe, its proximity to the Azores High and the Atlantic Ocean. The highest temperature ever recorded in Lisbon was on 4 August 2018, while the lowest temperature ever recorded was in February 1956; although other locations in its metropolitan area have recorded lower temperatures, not being as affected by the urban heat island effect of the city centre, with Sintra and Set\u00fabal having reached and respectively, both experiencing about 13 days of frost per year on average.\nLisbon receives around of precipitation annually, with the majority falling during the autumn and winter months. November and December are the wettest months, contributing to a third of the total annual rainfall. The dry season typically lasts from early June to mid-September, with July and August being the driest months. During this period, there are typically around 8 days with measurable precipitation.\nThe city has around 2,875 hours of sunshine per year, one of the highest amounts in Europe. August is the sunniest month, with sunshine occurring for approximately 80% of the daytime, while December is the dullest, with sunshine occurring only 51% of the time.\nTemperatures across Lisbon's metropolitan area can vary significantly, especially during the summer months. In areas with greater exposure to the Atlantic Ocean, such as Sintra or Cascais to the west of the city, temperatures tend to be more moderate and are generally cooler. In extreme cases, summer daytime highs can differ by as much as between the city of Lisbon and Cabo da Roca.\nFreguesias.\nThe municipality of Lisbon included 53 \"freguesias\" until November 2012. A new law (\"Lei n.\u00ba 56/2012\") reduced the number of \"freguesias\" to the following 24:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNeighborhoods.\nLocally, Lisbon's inhabitants may commonly refer to the spaces of Lisbon in terms of historic \"Bairros de Lisboa\" (neighbourhoods). These communities have no clearly defined boundaries and represent distinctive quarters of the city that have in common a historical culture, similar living standards, and identifiable architectural landmarks, as exemplified by the \"Bairro Alto\", \"Alfama\", \"Chiado\", and so forth.\nAlc\u00e2ntara.\nAlc\u00e2ntara is situated along the northern bank of the Tagus River, between the parishes of Bel\u00e9m to the west and Estrela to the east. Its proximity to both the city centre and the riverside makes it a well-connected and popular area for both locals and tourists. Although today it is quite central, it was once a mere suburb of Lisbon, comprising mostly farms and country estates of the nobility with their palaces. Amongst the palaces found in the neighbourhood the most notable are:\nIn the 16th century, there was a brook there which the nobles used to promenade in their boats.\nDuring the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Alc\u00e2ntara became a popular industrial area, with many small factories and warehouses and docks along the waterfront. The presence of these industries attracted many working-class families.\nBy the mid-20th century, the area had experienced some decline as industries closed down. However, since the late 20th century, Alc\u00e2ntara has seen revitalisation, with many of the old factories repurposed into trendy spaces such as art galleries, nightclubs, and creative hubs. In the early 1990s, Alc\u00e2ntara began to attract youth because of the number of pubs and discoth\u00e8ques. This was mainly due to its outer area of mostly commercial buildings, which acted as barriers to the noise-generating nightlife (which acted as a buffer to the residential communities surrounding it). In the meantime, some of these areas began to become gentrified, attracting loft developments and new flats, which have profited from its river views and central location.\nAlc\u00e2ntara has emerged as one of Lisbon's most dynamic areas for nightlife and culture. The riverfront of Alc\u00e2ntara is known for its nightclubs and bars. The area is commonly known as \"docas\" (docks), since most of the clubs and bars are housed in converted dock warehouses.\nKey places of interest/cultural landmarks in the neighbourhood include:\nThe neighbourhood is also noticeable for hosting the \"Lisbon Congress Centre\" (Centro de congressos de Lisboa), the Lisbon Metropolitan Orchestra (Orquestra Metropolitana de Lisboa) and the Arquivo Hist\u00f3rico Ultramarino.\nAlfama.\nAlfama, the oldest district of Lisbon, spreads down the southern slope from the Castle of S\u00e3o Jorge to the River Tagus. Its name, derived from the Arabic \"Al-hamma\", means fountains or baths. During the Islamic invasion of Iberia, the Alfama constituted the largest part of the city, extending west to the Baixa neighbourhood. Increasingly, the Alfama became inhabited by fishermen and the poor: its fame as a poor neighbourhood continues to this day. Many of the buildings date back to the 18th century, showcasing traditional Portuguese architecture, complete with colorful tiled facades and wrought-iron balconies. While the 1755 Lisbon earthquake caused considerable damage throughout the capital, the Alfama was largely spared and survived with little damage, thanks to its compact labyrinth of narrow streets and small squares.\nThis historic district has retained much of its original character. It is a historical quarter of mixed-use buildings occupied by Fado bars, restaurants, and homes with small shops downstairs. Fado, the typically Portuguese style of melancholy music, is common (but not obligatory) in the restaurants of the district.\nModernising trends have invigorated the district: old houses have been re-purposed or remodelled, while new buildings have been constructed.\nAlfama hosts several events throughout the year, including the popular Festas de Santo Ant\u00f3nio, where locals celebrate with street parties, music, and food. This vibrant atmosphere showcases the community's spirit and connection to its cultural roots.\nKey places of interest/cultural landmarks in the neighbourhood include:\nMouraria.\nThe Mouraria, or Moorish quarter, is one of the most traditional neighbourhoods of Lisbon, although most of its old buildings were demolished by the Estado Novo between the 1930s and the 1970s. It takes its name from the fact that after the reconquest of Lisbon, the Muslims who remained were confined to this part of the city. In turn, the Jews were confined to three neighbourhoods called \"Judiarias\".\nBairro Alto.\nBairro Alto (literally \"the upper quarter\" in Portuguese) is an area of central Lisbon that functions as a residential, shopping and entertainment district; it is the center of the Portuguese capital's nightlife, attracting hipster youth and members of various music subcultures. Lisbon's punk, gay, metal, goth, hip hop and reggae scenes all find a home in the \"Bairro\" with its many clubs and bars that cater to them. The crowds in the Bairro Alto are a multicultural mix of people representing a broad cross-section of modern Portuguese society, many of them being entertainment seekers and devotees of various music genres outside the mainstream, Fado, Portugal's national music, still survives in the midst of the new nightlife.\nBaixa.\nThe heart of the city is the \"Baixa\" or city centre; the Pombaline Baixa is an elegant district, primarily constructed after the 1755 Lisbon earthquake. The district takes its name from its benefactor, Sebasti\u00e3o Jos\u00e9 de Carvalho e Melo, 1st Marquis of Pombal, who was the minister of Joseph I of Portugal (1750\u20131777) and a key figure of the Portuguese Enlightenment. Following the 1755 disaster, Pombal took the lead in rebuilding Lisbon, imposing strict conditions and guidelines on the construction of the city, and transforming the organic street plan that characterised the district before the earthquake into its current grid pattern. As a result, the Pombaline Baixa is one of the first examples of earthquake-resistant construction. Architectural models were tested by having troops march around them to simulate an earthquake. Notable features of Pombaline structures include the Pombaline cage, a symmetrical wood-lattice framework aimed at distributing earthquake forces, and inter-terrace walls that were built higher than roof timbers to inhibit the spread of fires.\nBeato.\nThe parish of Beato stands out for the new cultural dynamics it has been experiencing in recent years. The manufacturing districts and the industrial facilities by the riverside docks are the place of choice for contemporary art galleries, iconic bars, and gourmet restaurants that simmer in the streets. This reality has not gone unnoticed by the national press, and Vis\u00e3o, TimeOut, or Jornal de Neg\u00f3cios have already made notice of this parish that hides treasures such as the National Museum of the Azulejo or the Palacio do Grilo.\nBel\u00e9m.\nBel\u00e9m is famous as the place from which many of the great Portuguese explorers set off on their voyages of discovery. In particular, it is the place from which Vasco da Gama departed for India in 1497 and Pedro \u00c1lvares Cabral departed for Brazil in 1499. It is also a former royal residence and features the 17th \u2013 18th-century Bel\u00e9m Palace, a former royal residence now occupied by the President of Portugal, and the Ajuda Palace, begun in 1802 but never completed.\nPerhaps Bel\u00e9m's most famous feature is its tower, Torre de Bel\u00e9m, whose image is much used by Lisbon's tourist board. The tower was built as a fortified lighthouse late in the reign of Dom Manuel l (1515\u20131520) to guard the entrance to the port. It stood on a little island on the right side of the Tagus, surrounded by water. Bel\u00e9m's other major historical building is the \"Mosteiro dos Jer\u00f3nimos\" (Jer\u00f3nimos Monastery), which the Torre de Bel\u00e9m was built partly to defend. Bel\u00e9m's most notable modern feature is the Padr\u00e3o dos Descobrimentos (Monument to the Discoveries) built for the Portuguese World Fair in 1940. In the heart of Bel\u00e9m is the \"Pra\u00e7a do Imp\u00e9rio\": gardens centred upon a large fountain, laid out during World War II. To the west of the gardens lies the \"Centro Cultural de Bel\u00e9m\". Bel\u00e9m is one of the most visited Lisbon districts. Here is located the Est\u00e1dio do Restelo, home to Belenenses.\nChiado.\nThe Chiado is a traditional shopping area that mixes old and modern commercial establishments, concentrated specially in the Rua do Carmo and the Rua Garrett. Locals as well as tourists visit the Chiado to buy books, clothing and pottery as well as to have a cup of coffee. The most famous caf\u00e9 of Chiado is \"A Brasileira\", famous for having had poet Fernando Pessoa among its customers. The Chiado is also an important cultural area, with several museums and theatres, including the opera. Several buildings of the Chiado were destroyed in a fire in 1988, an event that deeply shocked the country. Thanks to a renovation project that lasted more than 10 years, coordinated by celebrated architect Siza Vieira, the affected area has now virtually recovered.\nEstrela.\nThe ornate, late 18th-century Estrela Basilica is the main attraction of this district. The church with its large dome is located on a hill in what was at the time the western part of Lisbon and can be seen from great distances. The style is similar to that of the Mafra National Palace, late baroque and neoclassical. The fa\u00e7ade has twin bell towers and includes statues of saints and some allegorical figures. S\u00e3o Bento Palace, the seat of the Portuguese parliament and the official residences of the Prime Minister of Portugal and the President of the Assembly of the Republic of Portugal, are in this district. Also in this district is Estrela Park, a favorite with families. There are exotic plants and trees, a duck pond, various sculptures, a children's playground, and many cultural events going on throughout the year, including outdoor cinema, markets, and music festivals.\nParque das Na\u00e7\u00f5es.\n The Parque das Na\u00e7\u00f5es district was initially built for the Lisbon World Expo.\nParque das Na\u00e7\u00f5es (Park of Nations) is the newest district in Lisbon; it emerged from an urban renewal program to host the 1998 World Exhibition of Lisbon, also known as Expo'98. The area suffered massive changes giving Parque das Na\u00e7\u00f5es a futuristic look. A long-lasting legacy of the same, the area has become another commercial and higher-end residential area for the city.\nCentral in the area is the Gare do Oriente (Orient railway station), one of the main transport hubs of Lisbon for trains, buses, taxis, and the metro. Its glass and steel columns are inspired by Gothic architecture, lending the whole structure a visual fascination (especially in sunlight or when illuminated at night). It was designed by the architect Santiago Calatrava from Valencia, Spain. The Parque das Na\u00e7\u00f5es is across the street.\nThe area is pedestrian-friendly with new buildings, restaurants, gardens, the Casino Lisbon, the FIL building (International Exhibition and Fair), the Cam\u00f5es Theatre and the \"Ocean\u00e1rio de Lisboa\" (Lisbon Oceanarium), which is the second-largest in the world. The district's Altice Arena has become Lisbon's \"jack-of-all-trades\" performance arena. With seating for 20,000, it has staged events ranging from concerts to basketball tournaments.\nPolitics.\nCarlos Moedas (PSD) is the 78th and current Mayor of Lisbon since 18 October 2021, following the 2021 local elections. He was reelected for a second term following the 2025 local elections.\nLocal election results 1976\u20132025.\nParties are listed from left-wing to right-wing.\nCulture.\nThe city of Lisbon is rich in architecture; Romanesque, Gothic, Manueline, Baroque, Modern and Postmodern constructions can be found all over Lisbon. The city is also crossed by historical boulevards and monuments along the main thoroughfares, particularly in the upper districts; notable among these are the \"Avenida da Liberdade\" (Avenue of Liberty), \"Avenida Fontes Pereira de Melo\", \"Avenida Almirante Reis\" and \"Avenida da Rep\u00fablica\" (Avenue of the Republic).\nLisbon is home to numerous prominent museums and art collections, from all around the world. The National Museum of Ancient Art, which has one of the largest art collections in the world, and the National Coach Museum, which has the world's largest collection of royal coaches and carriages, are the two most visited museums in the city. Other notable national museums include the National Museum of Archaeology, the Museum of Lisbon, the National Azulejo Museum, the National Museum of Contemporary Art, and the National Museum of Natural History &amp; Science.\nProminent private museums and galleries include the Gulbenkian Museum (run by the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, one of the wealthiest foundations in the world), which houses one of the largest private collections of antiquities and art in the world, the Contemporary Art Museum - Centro Cultural de Bel\u00e9m, the Museum of Art, Architecture and Technology, and the Museum of the Orient. Other popular museums include the Electricity Museum, the Ephemeral Museum, the Museu da \u00c1gua, and the Museu Benfica, among many others.\nLisbon's Opera House, the \"Teatro Nacional de S\u00e3o Carlos\", hosts a relatively active cultural agenda, mainly in autumn and winter. Other important theatres and musical houses are the \"Centro Cultural de Bel\u00e9m\", the \"Teatro Nacional D. Maria II\", the Gulbenkian Foundation, and the \"Teatro Cam\u00f5es\".\nThe monument to \"Christ the King\" (Cristo-Rei) stands on the southern bank of the Tagus River, in Almada. With open arms, overlooking the whole city, it resembles the Corcovado monument in Rio de Janeiro, and was built after World War II, as a memorial of thanksgiving for Portugal's being spared the horrors and destruction of the war.\nLisbon's holiday in honour of the city's saint, Anthony of Lisbon (), is 13 June. Saint Anthony, also known as \"Saint Anthony of Padua\", was a wealthy Portuguese bohemian who was canonised and made Doctor of the Church after a life preaching to the poor. Although Lisbon's patron saint is Saint Vincent of Saragossa, whose remains are housed in the S\u00e9 Cathedral, there are no festivities associated with this saint.\nEduardo VII Park, the second-largest park in the city following the \"Parque Florestal de Monsanto\" (Monsanto Forest Park), extends down the main avenue (Avenida da Liberdade), with many flowering plants and green spaces, and includes the permanent collection of subtropical and tropical plants in the winter garden (). Originally named \"Parque da Liberdade\", it was renamed in honour of Edward VII who visited Lisbon in 1903.\nLisbon hosts many annual festivals, including the Lisbon Gay &amp; Lesbian Film Festival, the Lisboarte, the DocLisboa \u2013 Lisbon International Documentary Film Festival, the Festival Internacional de M\u00e1scaras e Comediantes, the Lisboa M\u00e1gica \u2013 Street Magic World Festival, the Monstra \u2013 Animated Film Festival, the Lisbon Book Fair, the Peixe em Lisboa \u2013 Lisbon Fish and Flavours, among others.\nLisbon has two sites listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site: Bel\u00e9m Tower and Jer\u00f3nimos Monastery. Furthermore, in 1994, Lisbon was the European Capital of Culture and, in 1998, organised the Expo '98 (\"1998 Lisbon World Exposition\").\nLisbon is also home to the Lisbon Architecture Triennial, the Moda Lisboa (Fashion Lisbon), ExperimentaDesign \u2013 Biennial of Design, and LuzBoa \u2013 Biennial of Light.\nLisbon hosts many fine examples of Portuguese azulejo tile art, a use of ceramic tile as an architectural finish for both building interiors and exteriors dating from the 15th century. This art form is celebrated in Lisbon's National Museum of the Azulejo and as a station feature in the Lisbon metro. In addition, the mosaic Portuguese pavement (\"Cal\u00e7ada Portuguesa\") was born in Lisbon, in the mid-1800s. The art has since spread to the rest of the Portuguese Speaking world. The city remains one of the most expansive examples of the technique, nearly all walkways and even many streets being created and maintained in this style.\nIn May 2018, the city hosted the 63rd edition of the Eurovision Song Contest, after the victory of Salvador Sobral with the song \"Amar pelos dois\" in Kyiv on 13 May 2017.\nWorld Youth Day 2023 was hosted in August of that year in Lisbon, attracting hundreds of thousands of young Catholics from over 140 countries.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe historical population of the city was around 35,000 in 1300. This number went up to 60,000 in 1400, and raised to 70,000 by 1500. Between 1528 and 1590 the population went from 70,000 to 120,000. The population was about 150,000 in 1600, and almost 200,000 in 1700.\nLisbon has 575,739 inhabitants within the administrative center on the area of only 100.05\u00a0km2 The population density of the city itself is .\nThe Lisbon metropolitan area incorporates two NUTS III (European statistical subdivisions): \"Grande Lisboa\" (Greater Lisbon), along the northern bank of the Tagus River, and \"Pen\u00ednsula de Set\u00fabal\" (Set\u00fabal Peninsula), along the southern bank. These two subdivisions make for the \"Regi\u00e3o de Lisboa\" (Lisbon Region).\nAdministratively defined cities that exist in the vicinity of the capital are in fact part of the metropolitan perimeter of Lisbon. The urban area has, according to Government data, a population of approximately 3.01 million inhabitants and is the eleventh largest urban area in the European Union. Other sources also show similar figures: according to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development the area had 2,797,612 inhabitants; according to the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations 2,890,000; according to the European Statistical Office Eurostat 2,839,908 and according to the Brookings Institution 2,968,600.\nLisbon's population has steadily dropped over the years due to people searching better accommodations for lower prices elsewhere in Greater Lisbon. A reverse trend has been observed in recent years, with the population increasing to 575,739 people in 2024, an all-time high since 1991 census and a 1.96% increase since the 2021 census.\nIn addition, a plurality of the houses in the city centre have become tourist facilities, exacerbating the low supply of housing in Lisbon.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe largest religion is, according to the 2021 Portuguese Census, Roman Catholicism. The proportion of Catholics in Lisbon city proper (around 66%) is significantly higher than in the city's metropolitan area (55%). This may be due to the fact that Lisbon city's age structure is older than the one found in the surrounding areas and, in general, younger generations tend to be less religious.\nImmigration.\nIn 2019 around 17.48% of the population residing within the city's boundaries held a foreign nationality, a share that stood at 8.87% in 2014. In general, the increase in Lisbon's population is essentially attributable to the influx of people coming from abroad, who have more than tripled since 2017. Around 5.89% of Lisbon's population was constituted by Brazilians as of 2023, not including those also holding Portuguese nationality.\nEconomy.\nThe Lisbon region is the wealthiest region in Portugal, with a GDP per capita of nearly \u20ac40,000, and it is well above the European Union's GDP per capita average \u2013 it produces more than 31% of Portuguese GDP by 2023.\nThe Lisbon region is rapidly growing, with GDP (PPP) per capita calculated for each year as follows: \u20ac22,745 (2004) \u2013 \u20ac23,816 (2005) \u2013 \u20ac25,200 (2006) \u2013 \u20ac26,100 (2007). The Lisbon metropolitan area had a GDP amounting to $110.4 billion, and $32,434 per capita.\nLisbon's economy is based primarily on the tertiary sector. Most of the headquarters of multinationals operating in Portugal are concentrated in the Grande Lisboa Subregion, especially in the Oeiras municipality. The Lisbon metropolitan area is heavily industrialized, especially the south bank of the Tagus river (Rio Tejo). The lisbonite industry has very large sectors in oil, as refineries are found just across the Tagus, textile mills, shipyards and fishing.\nThe country's chief seaport is in Lisbon and its heavily populated surroundings are also developing as an important financial centre and a dynamic technological hub. Automobile manufacturers have erected factories in the suburbs, like AutoEuropa.\nLisbon has the largest and most developed mass media sector of Portugal and is home to several related companies ranging from leading television networks and radio stations to major newspapers. Based in Lisbon, Euronext Lisbon is a stock exchange which is part of the pan-European Euronext system of stock exchanges and market infrastructure.\nBefore Portugal's sovereign debt crisis and an EU-IMF rescue plan, for the decade of 2010 Lisbon was expecting to receive many state-funded investments, including building a new airport, a new bridge, an expansion of the Lisbon Metro underground, the construction of a mega-hospital (or central hospital), the creation of two lines of a TGV to join Madrid, Porto, Vigo and the rest of Europe, the restoration of the main part of the town (between the Marqu\u00eas de Pombal roundabout and Terreiro do Pa\u00e7o), the creation of a large number of bike lanes, as well as modernization and renovation of various facilities.\nThe sovereign debt crisis exacerbated poor labor conditions and low purchasing power. Although the city modernized its infrastructure and experienced significant tourism growth and income, this reality was not proportionally reflected in the average living conditions. Prices generally increased, but wages did not follow this trend. Labor conditions remain far below the standards of the rest of the European Union (EU).\nTherefore, Lisbon is still the European capital with some of the lowest wages and purchasing power within the EU. Energy, electricity, gas, and fuel, as well as supermarkets and housing, are among the most expensive, even compared to the richest countries in Europe. The gap between the highest and lowest wages is the largest within the eurozone. The minimum wage can be as low as 6-7 euros per hour. Due to these reasons, Lisbon has a high level of youth emigration, mostly to other European countries such as France, the UK, Luxembourg, Switzerland, and Belgium.\nLisbon was the 7th most \"livable city\" in the world in 2021 according to lifestyle magazine \"Monocle.\"\nTourism is also a significant industry. The city is the ninth-most-visited city in Southern Europe, after Istanbul, Rome, Barcelona, Milan, Athens, Venice, Madrid and Florence with 3,639,900 tourists in 2019. In 2022 there were around 6 tourists for every resident. The city is popular for both leisure and business tourism. Around 7.7 million tourists visited Lisbon region in 2022 alone, with 71.1% of them being international tourists. It is estimated that tourist receipts will stand at 17.4 billion euros (\u20ac) in 2023.\nTransport.\nMetro.\nThe Lisbon Metro connects the city centre with the upper and eastern districts, and also reaches some suburbs that are part of the Lisbon metropolitan area, such as Amadora and Loures. It is the fastest way to get around the city and it provides a good number of interchanging stations with other types of transportation. From the Lisbon Airport station to the city centre it may take roughly 25 mins. In 2019, the Lisbon Metro served around 173 million passengers (and 475.000 daily). As of 2018, the Lisbon Metro comprises four lines, identified by individual colours (blue, yellow, green and red) and 56 stations, with a total length of 44.2\u00a0km. Several expansion projects have been proposed, the most recent being the transformation of the Green Line into a circular line and the creation of two more stations (Santos and Estrela).\nTrams.\nThe tram is a traditional form of public transport in Lisbon. Introduced in 1901, electric trams were originally imported from the US, and thus called the \"americanos\" (Portuguese for \"American\"). Today these trams are called \"el\u00e9tricos\" (literally meaning electric ones).\nOther than on the modern Line 15, the Lisbon tramway system still employs small (four-wheel) vehicles of a design dating from the early twentieth century. These distinctive yellow trams are one of the tourist icons of modern Lisbon, and their size is well suited to the steep hills and narrow streets of the central city.\nThe earliest trams can still be seen in the Museu da Carris (the Lisbon Public Transport Museum).\nThe line has now a total length of 31 kilometers operating on 6 lines, down from a maximum of 76 kilometers for 27 lines. The slow decline of the network began with the construction of the Lisbon Metro and the expansion of the bus system. Starting in 2017 the system has been expanded and new vehicles are being progressively added, aiming at expanding significantly the current tramway system. There are currently 64 trams in operation in Lisbon and, during 2023-2026, 35 more will be added (Of which 10 will be \"Historical models\").\nTrains.\nThere are four commuter train lines departing from Lisbon: the Sintra, Azambuja, Cascais and Sado lines (operated by CP \u2013 Comboios de Portugal), as well as a fifth line to Set\u00fabal (operated by Fertagus), which crosses the Tagus river via the 25 de Abril Bridge. The major railway stations are Santa Apol\u00f3nia, Rossio, Gare do Oriente, Entrecampos, and Cais do Sodr\u00e9.\nBuses.\nThe local bus service within Lisbon is operated by Carris. Carris' fleet includes 741 buses and, in the period 2023-2026, other 342 buses will be added so as to increase the public transportation system reach. The bus network has a length of 748\u00a0km comprising 99 bus routes. Major investments have been made in recent years: for instance, in 2017 there were 600 buses operating on 674\u00a0km and 75 routes: 141 buses, 74 kilometers and 24 bus routes were added in 2018-2022.\nOutside Lisbon, there are two main commuter bus services connecting the cities outside Lisbon amongst them and to Lisbon: Carris Metropolitana, a brand operated by 4 companies, all operating inside the Lisbon Metropolitan Area, and Barraqueiro Transportes (with 4 brands operating outside the Metropolitan Area with services to Lisbon), which operate from different terminals in the city.\nBridges.\nThe city is connected to the far side of the Tagus by two important bridges:\nThe foundations for a third bridge across the Tagus have already been laid, but the overall project has been postponed due to economic crisis that affected Portugal, and other bureaucratic and political reasons.\nFerries.\nAnother way of crossing the river is by taking the ferry. The operator Transtejo &amp; Soflusa, runs to different locations from within the city: Cacilhas, Seixal, Montijo, Porto Brand\u00e3o and Trafaria under the brand Transtejo and to Barreiro under the brand Soflusa. Ferry stations in Lisbon include , and .\nAir travel.\nHumberto Delgado Airport is located within the city limits.\nIt is the headquarters and hub for TAP Portugal as well as a hub for EasyJet, Azores Airlines, Ryanair, EuroAtlantic Airways, White Airways, and Hi Fly. Having served 35.1 million passengers in 2024, it is by far the busiest airport in Portugal, the third busiest in the Iberian Peninsula and the 12th busiest in Europe.\nA second airport has been proposed and the project was initially put on hold because of the Portuguese and European economic crisis, and also because of the long discussion on whether a new airport is needed. In 2023 there were still 9 possible sites who are thought to be able to host the future New Lisbon airport. Finally, in 2024, the new government announced that the new international airport would be located in Alcochete, just across the Tagus from Lisbon.\nCascais Municipal Aerodrome, 20\u00a0km west of the city centre in Cascais and hub for Sevenair, offers commercial domestic flights to Bragan\u00e7a, Portim\u00e3o, Viseu and Vila Real. This location is where many of the country's aviation schools are concentrated.\nCycling.\nFollowing the Covid-19 pandemic, Lisbon saw a significant increase in cycling and planned to expand the current Gira bike hire system from 1,600 bikes to 2,600 by the end of 2023. Many of these bicycles are electric to deal with Lisbon's hills. The city also plans to expand the number of bike recharging stations, now standing at 146. Gira service is integrated in the public transportation system, as youth up to 23 years old and seniors over 65 years old can use the service for free, while for other residents bikes are included in the Navegante card.\nIn 2023 there were over 200 kilometers of bike lanes within the city's administrative area and the city plans to expand its network of cycle paths in the coming years.\nPublic transportation statistics.\nThe average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Lisbon on a weekday is 59 minutes. 11.5% of public transit riders ride for more than 2 hours every day. The average amount of time spent waiting at a stop or station for public transit is 14 min, while 23.1% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 6\u00a0km, while 10% travel for over 12\u00a0km in a single direction.\nCar.\nLisbon is connected to its suburbs and throughout Portugal by an extensive motorway network. There are three circular motorways around the city; the 2\u00aa Circular, the IC17 (CRIL), and the A9 (CREL).\nEducation.\nInternational schools.\nIn Greater Lisbon area, particularly in the Portuguese Riviera, an area popular with expats and foreign nationals, there are numerous international schools, including the Carlucci American International School of Lisbon (the only American school in Portugal), Saint Julian's School (British), Saint Dominic's International School (British), (German), Instituto Espa\u00f1ol Giner de los R\u00edos (Spanish), Oerias Internacional School (IB), and Lyc\u00e9e Fran\u00e7ais Charles Lepierre (French).\nHigher education.\nIn the city, there are three public universities and a university institute. The University of Lisbon, which is the largest university in Portugal, was created in 2013 with the union of the Technical University of Lisbon and the Classical University of Lisbon (which was known as the University of Lisbon). The New University of Lisbon, founded in 1973, is another public university in Lisbon and is known internationally by its Nova School of Business and Economics (Nova SBE), its economics and management faculty. The third public university is Universidade Aberta. Additionally, there's ISCTE - Lisbon University Institute (founded in 1972), a university institute that provides degrees in all academic disciplines.\nMajor private institutions of higher education include the Portuguese Catholic University, focused on law and management, as well as the Lus\u00edada University, the Universidade Lus\u00f3fona, and the Universidade Aut\u00f3noma de Lisboa, among others.\nThe total number of enrolled students in higher education in Lisbon was, for the 2019\u20132020 school year, nearly 153,000 students, of which 18,000 were of foreign nationality.\nLibraries.\nLisbon is home to Biblioteca Nacional de Portugal, the Portuguese national library, which has over 3 million books and manuscripts. The library has some rare books and manuscripts, such as an original Gutenberg Bible and original books by Erasmus, Christophe Platin and Aldus Manutius. Torre do Tombo, the national archive, is one of the most important archives in the world, with over 600 years and one of the oldest active Portuguese institutions. There are, among several others, the Arquivo Hist\u00f3rico Ultramarino and the Arquivo Hist\u00f3rico Militar.\nSports.\nLisbon has a long tradition in sports. It hosted several matches, including the final, of the UEFA Euro 2004 championship. The city also played host to the final of the 2001 IAAF World Indoor Championships and the European Fencing Championships in 1983 and 1992, as well as the 2003 World Men's Handball Championship, and the 2008 European Judo Championships. From 2006 to 2008, Lisbon was the starting point for the Dakar Rally. The city hosted the 2014 and 2020 UEFA Champions League finals. In 2008 and 2016, the city hosted the European Triathlon Championships. Lisbon has a leg at the Volvo Ocean Race. It is one of the potential host cities for the 2030 FIFA World Cup.\nFootball.\nThe city hosts three association football clubs in Portugal's highest league, the Primeira Liga. Sport Lisboa e Benfica, commonly known as simply \"Benfica\", has won 38 league titles in addition to two European Cups. Lisbon's second-most successful club is Sporting Clube de Portugal (commonly known as \"Sporting\" and often referred to as \"Sporting Lisbon\" abroad to prevent confusion with other teams with the same name), winner of 20 league titles and the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup. A third club, C.F. Os Belenenses (commonly \"Belenenses\" or \"Belenenses Lisbon\"), based in the Bel\u00e9m quarter, has solely won one league title. Other major clubs in Lisbon include Atl\u00e9tico, Casa Pia, and Oriental.\nLisbon has two UEFA category four stadiums; Benfica's Est\u00e1dio da Luz (\"Stadium of Light\"), with a capacity of over 65,000 and Sporting's Est\u00e1dio Jos\u00e9 Alvalade, with a capacity of over 50,000. The Est\u00e1dio da Luz held both the 2014 and 2020 UEFA Champions League Final. There is also Belenenses' Est\u00e1dio do Restelo, with a capacity of over 19,000. The Est\u00e1dio Nacional, in nearby Oeiras, has a capacity of 37,000 and was used exclusively for Portuguese international football matches and cup finals until the construction of larger stadia in the city. It held the 1967 European Cup Final.\nOther sports.\nOther sports, such as basketball, futsal, handball, roller hockey, rugby union and volleyball are also popular; the latter's national stadium is in Lisbon. There are many other sports facilities in Lisbon, ranging from athletics, sailing, golfing to mountain-biking. Lisboa and Troia golf course are two of many stunning golf courses located in Lisbon. Every March the city hosts the Lisbon Half Marathon, while in September the Portugal Half Marathon.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nLisbon is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCooperation agreements.\nLisbon has additional cooperation agreements with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMembership in organizations.\nLisbon has been part of the Union of Ibero-American Capital Cities since the union's founding on 12 October 1982.\nSince 28 June 1985, Lisbon has been part of the Union of Capital Cities of Portuguese Language, along with 22 other cities from Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, China, East Timor, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal, and S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18093", "revid": "2102840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18093", "title": "Local Group", "text": "Group of galaxies that includes the Milky Way\nThe Local Group is the galaxy group that includes the Milky Way, where Earth is located. It consists of two collections of galaxies in a \"dumbbell\" shape; the Milky Way and its satellites form one lobe, and the Andromeda Galaxy and its satellites constitute the other. The two collections are separated by about and are moving toward one another with a velocity of . The center of the group is located at about away from the Milky Way, placing it slightly closer to the Andromeda Galaxy by roughly , in which the latter may be more massive than the former in terms of mass.\nThe Local Group has a total mass of the order of , and also a total diameter of based on density matching and the potential surface of its parent structure, Local Sheet. It is itself a part of the Local Volume and the larger Virgo Supercluster, which is a part of the even greater Laniakea Supercluster along with the Pisces\u2013Cetus Supercluster Complex. The exact number of galaxies in the Local Group is unknown, as the Milky Way obscures some; however, a current total of 134 members is known within 1 megaparsec from the center, most of which are dwarf galaxies. The Local Group was thought to have been more spread in the early universe with by 700 million years after the Big Bang.\nThe two largest members, the Andromeda and the Milky Way galaxies, are both spiral galaxies with masses of about solar masses each. Each has its own system of satellite galaxies:\nThe Triangulum Galaxy (M33) is the third-largest member of the Local Group, with a mass of approximately , and is the third spiral galaxy. It is unclear whether the Triangulum Galaxy is a companion of the Andromeda Galaxy; the two galaxies are 750,000 light years apart, and experienced a close passage 2\u20134\u00a0billion years ago which triggered star formation across Andromeda's disk. The Pisces Dwarf Galaxy is equidistant from the Andromeda Galaxy and the Triangulum Galaxy, so it may be a satellite of either.\nThe other members of the group are likely gravitationally secluded from these large subgroups: IC 10, IC 1613, Phoenix Dwarf Galaxy, Leo A, Tucana Dwarf Galaxy, Cetus Dwarf Galaxy, Pegasus Dwarf Irregular Galaxy, Wolf\u2013Lundmark\u2013Melotte, Aquarius Dwarf Galaxy, and Sagittarius Dwarf Irregular Galaxy.\nThe membership of NGC 3109, with its companions Sextans A and the Antlia Dwarf Galaxy as well as Sextans B, Leo P, Antlia B and possibly Leo A, is uncertain due to extreme distances from the center of the Local Group. The Antlia-Sextans Group is unlikely to be gravitationally bound to the Local Group due to probably lying outside the Local Group's zero-velocity surface\u2014which would make it a true galaxy group of its own rather than a subgroup within the Local Group. This possible independence may, however, disappear as the Milky Way continues coalescing with Andromeda due to the increased mass, and density thereof, plausibly widening the radius of the zero-velocity surface of the Local Group. \nHistory.\nThe term \"The Local Group\" was introduced by Edwin Hubble in Chapter VI of his 1936 book \"The Realm of the Nebulae\". There, he described it as \"a typical small group of nebulae which is isolated in the general field\" and delineated, by decreasing luminosity, its members to be M31, Milky Way, M33, Large Magellanic Cloud, Small Magellanic Cloud, M32, NGC 205, NGC 6822, NGC 185, IC 1613 and NGC 147. He also identified IC 10 as a possible part of the Local Group.\nFuture.\nThe galaxies of the Local Group are likely to merge together under their own mutual gravitational attractions over a timescale of tens of billions of years into a single elliptical galaxy, with the coalescence of Andromeda and the Milky Way being the predominant event in this process.\nThere is debate over whether ellipticity might be the immediate structure of the combined galaxy right after the collision or whether ellipticity might only emerge after a theoretical intermediate period of retaining a spiraling structure directly following the collision. Some even theorize a permanent superspiral or a transition toward a more lenticular galaxy, rather than a more elliptical or spiraled distribution, as the future of the Local Group's galactic merger.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18094", "revid": "29146395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18094", "title": "Litre", "text": "Unit of volume\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe litre (Commonwealth spelling) or liter (American spelling) (SI symbols L and l, other symbol used: \u2113) is a metric unit of volume. It is equal to 1 cubic decimetre (dm3), 1000 cubic centimetres (cm3) or 0.001 cubic metres (m3). A cubic decimetre (or litre) occupies a volume of 10 cm \u00d7 10\u00a0cm \u00d7 10\u00a0cm (see figure) and is thus equal to one-thousandth of a cubic metre.\nThe original French metric system used the litre as a base unit. The word \"litre\" is derived from an older French unit, the \"litron\", whose name came from Byzantine Greek\u2014where it was a unit of weight, not volume\u2014via Late Medieval Latin, and which equalled approximately 0.831\u00a0litres. The litre was also used in several subsequent versions of the metric system and is accepted for use with the SI, despite it not being an SI unit. The SI unit of volume is the cubic metre (m3). The spelling used by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures is \"litre\", a spelling which is shared by most English-speaking countries. The spelling \"liter\" is predominantly used in American English.\nOne litre of liquid water has a mass of almost exactly one kilogram, because the kilogram was originally defined in 1795 as the mass of one cubic decimetre of water at the temperature of melting ice (). Subsequent redefinitions of the metre and kilogram mean that this relationship is no longer exact.\nDefinition.\nA litre is a cubic decimetre, which is the volume of a cube 10 centimetres \u00d7 10 centimetres \u00d7 10 centimetres (1\u00a0L \u2261 1\u00a0dm3 \u2261 1000\u00a0cm3). Hence 1\u00a0L \u2261 0.001\u00a0m3 \u2261 1000\u00a0cm3; and 1\u00a0m3 (i.e. a cubic metre, which is the SI unit for volume) is exactly 1000\u00a0L.\nFrom 1901 to 1964, the litre was defined as the volume of one kilogram of pure water at maximum density (+3.98\u00a0\u00b0C) and standard pressure. The kilogram was in turn specified as the mass of the International Prototype of the Kilogram (a specific platinum/iridium cylinder) and was intended to be of the same mass as the 1\u00a0litre of water referred to above. It was subsequently discovered that the cylinder was around 28 parts per million too large and thus, during this time, a litre was about . Additionally, the mass\u2013volume relationship of water (as with any fluid) depends on temperature, pressure, purity and isotopic uniformity. In 1964, the definition relating the litre to mass was superseded by the current one. Although the litre is not an SI unit, it is accepted by the CGPM (the standards body that defines the SI) for use with the SI. CGPM defines the litre and its acceptable symbols.\nA litre is equal in volume to the millistere, an obsolete non-SI metric unit formerly customarily used for dry measure.\nExplanation.\nLitres are most commonly used for items (such as fluids and solids that can be poured) which are measured by the capacity or size of their container, whereas cubic metres (and derived units) are most commonly used for items measured either by their dimensions or their displacements. The litre is often also used in some calculated measurements, such as density (kg/L), allowing an easy comparison with the density of water.\nOne litre of water has a mass of almost exactly one kilogram when measured at its maximal density, which occurs at 3.984\u00a0\u00b0C. It follows, therefore, that of a litre, known as one millilitre (1 mL), of water has a mass of about 1\u00a0g, while 1000\u00a0litres of water has a mass of about 1000\u00a0kg (1\u00a0tonne or megagram).\nThis relationship holds because the gram was originally defined as the mass of 1\u00a0mL of water; however, this definition was abandoned in 1799 because the density of water changes with temperature and, very slightly, with pressure.\nIt is now known that the density of water also depends on the isotopic ratios of the oxygen and hydrogen atoms in a particular sample. Modern measurements of Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water, which is pure distilled water with an isotopic composition representative of the average of the world's oceans, show that it has a density of at its point of maximum density (3.984\u00a0\u00b0C) under one standard atmosphere (101.325\u00a0kPa) of pressure.\nSI prefixes applied to the litre.\nThe litre, though not an official SI unit, may be used with SI prefixes. The most commonly used derived unit is the millilitre, defined as one-thousandth of a litre, and also often referred to by the SI derived unit name \"cubic centimetre\". It is a commonly used measure, especially in medicine, cooking and automotive engineering. Other units may be found in the table below, where the more often used terms are in bold. However, some authorities advise against some of them; for example, in the United States, NIST advocates using the millilitre or litre instead of the centilitre. There are two international standard symbols for the litre: L and l. In the United States the former is preferred because of the risk that (in some fonts) the letter and the digit may be confused.\nNon-metric conversions.\nSee also Imperial units and US customary units.\nRough conversions.\nOne litre is about larger than a US liquid quart, and about smaller than an imperial quart.\nA mnemonic for its volume relative to an imperial pint is \"a litre of water's a pint and three-quarters\"; this is very close, as a litre is about 1.760\u00a0imperial pints.\nA cubic foot has a volume of exactly .\nSymbol.\nOriginally, the only symbol for the litre was l (lowercase letter L), following the SI convention that only those unit symbols that abbreviate the name of a person start with a capital letter. In many English-speaking countries, however, the most common shape of a handwritten Arabic digit 1 is just a vertical stroke; that is, it lacks the upstroke added in many other cultures. Therefore, the digit \"1\" may easily be confused with the letter \"l\". In some computer typefaces, the two characters are barely distinguishable. As a result, L (uppercase letter L) was adopted by the CGPM as an alternative symbol for litre in 1979. The United States National Institute of Standards and Technology now recommends the use of the uppercase letter L, a practice that is also widely followed in Canada and Australia. In these countries, the symbol L is also used with prefixes, as in mL and \u03bcL, instead of the traditional ml and \u03bcl used in Europe. In the UK and Ireland, as well as the rest of Europe, lowercase \"l\" is used with prefixes, though whole litres are often written in full (so, \"750\u00a0ml\" on a wine bottle, but often \"1 litre\" on a juice carton). In 1990, the International Committee for Weights and Measures stated that it was too early to choose a single symbol for the litre.\nScript l and Unicode.\nPrior to 1979, the symbol \u2113 came into common use in some countries; for example, it was recommended by South African Bureau of Standards publication M33 and Canada in the 1970s. This symbol can still be encountered occasionally in some English-speaking and European countries, and its use is ubiquitous in Japan and South Korea.\nFonts covering the CJK characters usually include not only the script small \u2113 but also four precomposed characters: \u3395, \u3396, \u3397, and \u3398 for the microlitre, millilitre, decilitre and kilolitre to allow correct rendering for vertically written scripts. These have Unicode equivalents for compatibility, which are not recommended for use with new documents:\nThe CJK Compatibility block also includes corresponding to , Japanese for 'litre'.\nHistory.\nThe first name of the litre was \"Cadil\"; standards are shown at the Mus\u00e9e des Arts et M\u00e9tiers in Paris.\nThe litre was introduced in France in 1795 as one of the new \"republican units of measurement\" and defined as one cubic decimetre.\nOne litre of liquid water has a mass of almost exactly one kilogram, due to the gram being defined in 1795 as one cubic centimetre of water at the temperature of melting ice.\nThe original decimetre length was 44.344 \"lignes\", which was revised in 1798 to 44.3296 \"lignes\". This made the original litre of today's cubic decimetre. It was against this litre that the kilogram was constructed.\nIn 1879, the CIPM adopted the definition of the litre, with the symbol l (lowercase letter L).\nIn 1901, at the 3rd CGPM conference, the litre was redefined as the space occupied by 1\u00a0kg of pure water at the temperature of its maximum density (3.98\u00a0\u00b0C) under a pressure of 1\u00a0atm. This made the litre equal to about (earlier reference works usually put it at ).\nIn 1964, at the 12th CGPM conference, the original definition was reverted to, and thus the litre was once again defined in exact relation to the metre, as another name for the cubic decimetre, that is, exactly 1\u00a0dm3.\nIn 1979, at the 16th CGPM conference, the alternative symbol L (uppercase letter L) was adopted. It also expressed a preference that in the future only one of these two symbols should be retained, but in 1990 said it was still too early to do so.\nEveryday usage.\nIn spoken English, the symbol \"mL\" (for millilitre) can be pronounced as \"mil\". This can potentially cause confusion with some other measurement words such as:\nThe abbreviation \"cc\" (for cubic centimetre, equal to a millilitre or mL) is a unit of the cgs system, which preceded the MKS system, which later evolved into the SI system. The abbreviation \"cc\" is still commonly used in many fields, including medical dosage and sizing for combustion engine displacement.\nThe microlitre (\u03bcL) has been known in the past as the lambda (\u03bb), but this usage is now discouraged. In the medical field the microlitre is sometimes abbreviated as mcL on test results.\nIn the SI system, apart from prefixes for powers of 1000, use of the \"centi\" (10\u22122), \"deci\" (10\u22121), \"deca\" (10+1) and \"hecto\" (10+2) prefixes with litres is common. For example, in many European countries, the hectolitre is the typical unit for production and export volumes of beverages (milk, beer, soft drinks, wine, etc.) and for measuring the size of the catch and quotas for fishing boats; decilitres are common in Croatia, Switzerland and Scandinavia and often found in cookbooks, and restaurant and caf\u00e9 menus; centilitres indicate the capacity of drinking glasses and of small bottles. In colloquial Dutch in Belgium, a \" and a \" (literally \"twenty-fiver\" and \"thirty-threer\") are the common beer glasses, the corresponding bottles mention 25 cL and 33 cL. Bottles may also be 75 cL or half size at 37.5 cL for \"artisanal\" brews or 70 cL for wines or spirits. Cans come in 25 cL, 33 cL and 50 cL. Similarly, alcohol shots are often marked in cL in restaurant menus, typically .\nIn countries where the metric system was adopted as the official measuring system after the SI standard was established, common usage eschews prefixes that are not powers of 1000. For example, in Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, consumer beverages are labelled almost exclusively using litres and millilitres. An exception is in pathology, where for instance blood lead level and blood sugar level may be measured in micrograms/milligrams per decilitre.\nFor larger volumes, kilolitres, megalitres, and gigalitres, have been used by the Northern Territory Government for measuring water consumption, reservoir capacities and river flows, although cubic metres are also used. Cubic metres are generally used for non-liquid commodities, such as sand and gravel, or storage space.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18095", "revid": "38056903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18095", "title": "Linguist (disambiguation)", "text": "A linguist is an academic who studies human language scientifically.\nLinguist may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18096", "revid": "26257881", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18096", "title": "Lavr Kornilov", "text": "Imperial Russian Army general (1870\u20131918)\nLavr Georgiyevich Kornilov (, ; 30 August\u00a0[O.S. 18 August]\u00a01870 \u2013 13 April 1918) was a Russian military intelligence officer, explorer, and general in the Imperial Russian Army during World War I. He served as Supreme Commander of the Russian Army and as the military leader of the Whites in the Russian Civil War. He is particularly remembered for the Kornilov affair, an unsuccessful coup d\u2019etat against the Provisional Government led by Alexander Kerensky. The event became a significant turning point in the Russian Revolution, strengthening the Bolsheviks' position and influence.\nBorn in Ust-Kamenogorsk, Kornilov began his military career after graduating from the Mikhailovsky Artillery School and the General Staff Academy. He distinguished himself during the Russo-Japanese War and later served as a military attach\u00e9 in Qing China. During World War I, Kornilov commanded the 48th Infantry Division and gained recognition for his daring escape from Austrian captivity in 1915. His successes on the Eastern Front elevated him to prominence, leading to his appointment as Supreme Commander during the revolutionary upheaval of 1917.\nAfter the Bolshevik seizure of power in November 1917, Kornilov emerged as a key figure in the White movement. Following his escape from detention after the Kornilov Affair, he co-founded the Volunteer Army and led its forces in southern Russia during the early stages of the Russian Civil War. Kornilov was killed in 1918 during the siege of Yekaterinodar. His legacy remains deeply contested, viewed by some as a patriot fighting for Russia's unity and by others as a reactionary figure whose actions exacerbated the nation\u2019s descent into chaos.\nPre-revolutionary career.\nOne story relates how Kornilov was originally born as a Don Cossack Kalmyk named Lavga Deldinov and adopted in Ust-Kamenogorsk, Russian Turkestan (now Kazakhstan) by the family of his mother's brother, the Russian Cossack Khorunzhiy Georgy Nikolayevich Kornilov, whose wife was of Kazakh origin. But his sister wrote that he had not been adopted, had not been a Don Cossack, and that their mother had Polish and Altai Oirot descent. (Though their language was not a Kalmyk/Mongolian one, but because of their Asian race and their history in the Jungar Oirot (Kalmyk) state, Altai Oirots were called Altai Kalmyks by Russians. They were not Muslims or Kazakhs.) But Boris Shaposhnikov, who served with Pyotr Kornilov, the brother of Lavr, in 1903, mentioned the \"Kyrgyz\" ancestry of their mother\u2014this name was usually used in reference to Kazakhs in 1903. Kornilov's Siberian Cossack father was a friend of Potanin (1835\u20131920), a prominent figure in the Siberian autonomy movement.\nKornilov entered military school in Omsk in 1885 and went on to study at the Mikhailovsky Artillery School in St. Petersburg in 1889. In August 1892 he was assigned as a lieutenant to the Turkestan Military District, where he led several exploration missions in Eastern Turkestan, Afghanistan and Persia, learned several Central Asian languages, and wrote detailed reports about his observations.\nKornilov returned to St. Petersburg to attend the Nikolayev General Staff Academy and graduated as a captain in 1897. Again refusing a posting at St. Peterburg, he returned to the Turkestan Military District, where he resumed his duties as a military intelligence officer. Among his missions at this post was an attempt at traveling incognito to British India in 1904, though he was quickly discovered and subsequently kept under close surveillance.\nDuring the Russo-Japanese War of 1904\u20131905 Kornilov became the chief of staff of the 1st Infantry Brigade, and was heavily involved in the Battle of Sandepu (January 1905) and the Battle of Mukden (February/March 1905). He was awarded the Order of St. George (4th class) for bravery and promoted to the rank of colonel.\nFollowing the end of the war, Kornilov served as military attache in China from 1907 to 1911. He studied the Chinese language, travelled extensively (researching data on the history, traditions and customs of the Chinese, which he intended to use as material for a book about life in contemporary China), and regularly sent detailed reports to the General Staff and Foreign Ministry. Kornilov paid much attention to the prospects of cooperation between Russia and China in the Far East and met with the future president of China, Chiang Kai-shek. In 1910 Kornilov was recalled from Beijing but remained in St. Petersburg for only five months before departing for western Mongolia and Kashgar to examine the military situation along China's border with Russia. On 2 February 1911 he became Commander of the 8th Infantry Regiment of Estonia and was later appointed commander of the 9th Siberian Rifle Division, stationed in Vladivostok.\nIn 1914, at the start of World War I, Kornilov was appointed commander of the 48th Infantry Division, which saw combat in Galicia and the Carpathians. In 1915, he was promoted to the rank of major general. During heavy fighting, he was captured by the Austrians in April 1915, when his division became isolated from the rest of the Russian forces. After his capture, Field Marshal Conrad von H\u00f6tzendorf, the commander of the Austro-Hungarian Army, made a point of meeting him in person. As a major general, he was a high-value prisoner of war, but in July 1916 Kornilov managed to escape back to Russia and return to duty.\nAfter the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II, he was given command of the Petrograd Military District in March 1917. On 8 March, Kornilov placed the Empress Alexandra and her children under house arrest at the Alexander Palace (Nicholas was still held at Stavka), replacing the Tsar's Escort and Combined Regiments of the Imperial Guard with 300 revolutionary troops. On 21 April, when the Provisional Government declined to give him the authority he sought to deal with protestors in Petrograd, he resigned as commander of the Petrograd district and was transferred at his request to command the Russian Eighth Army. During the Kerensky Offensive, his army inflicted a spectacular defeat on the Austrians, taking 10,000 prisoners\u2014Russia's only notable military success in the year 1917\u2014though after five days, was forced to retreat. On 24 July, he was appointed commander of the southern front. A week later, he replaced Aleksei Brusilov as Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Provisional Government's armed forces.\nKornilov Affair.\nIn the mass discontent following the July Days, the Russian populace grew highly skeptical about the Provisional Government's abilities to alleviate the economic distress and social resentment among the lower classes. Pavel Milyukov, the Kadet leader, describes the situation in Russia in late July as, \"Chaos in the army, chaos in foreign policy, chaos in industry and chaos in the nationalist questions\".Kornilov, appointed commander-in-chief of the Russian army in July 1917, considered the Petrograd Soviet responsible for the breakdown in the military in recent times and believed that the Provisional Government lacked the power and confidence to dissolve the Petrograd Soviet. Following several ambiguous correspondences between Kornilov and Alexander Kerensky, Kornilov commanded an assault on the Petrograd Soviet.\nBecause the Petrograd Soviet was able to quickly gather a powerful army of workers and soldiers in defence of the Revolution, Kornilov's coup was an abysmal failure, and he was placed under arrest. The Kornilov Affair resulted in significantly increased distrust among Russians towards the Provisional Government.\nRussian Civil War.\nAfter the coup collapsed as his troops disintegrated, Kornilov and his fellow conspirators were placed under arrest in the Bykhov jail. On 19 November, a few weeks after the proclamation of Soviet power in Petrograd, they escaped from their confinement (eased by the fact that the jail was guarded by Kornilov's supporters) and made their way to the Don region, which was controlled by the Don Cossacks. Here they linked up with General Mikhail Alekseev. Kornilov became the military commander of the anti-Bolshevik Volunteer Army with Alekseev as the political chief.\nThe Kornilov Shock Detachment of the 8th Army was the most famous and longest-lived volunteer unit in the Russian Imperial Army. It was also the last regiment of the Russian Imperial Army and the first of the Volunteer Army. In late 1917, the Kornilov Shock Regiment, one of the crack units of the Volunteer Army, was named after him, as well as many other autonomous White Army formations, such as the Kuban Cossack Kornilov Horse Regiment. Kornilov's forces became recognizable for their Totenkopf insignia, which appeared on the regiment's flags, pennants, and soldiers' sleeve patches.\nEven before the Red Army was formed, Kornilov promised, \"the greater the terror, the greater our victories.\" He vowed that the goals of his forces must be fulfilled even if it was needed \"to set fire to half the country and shed the blood of three-quarters of all Russians.\" In the Don region village of Lezhanka alone, bands of Kornilov's officers killed more than 500 people. On the other hand, Kornilov's adjutant recalled that the general \"loved only the [Russia] itself\" and served it for all his life, having no time to think about political systems. The Bolsheviks for him were dangerous traitors, who ruined Russia's unity and had to be stopped.\nOn 24 February 1918, as Rostov and the Don Cossack capital of Novocherkassk fell to the Bolsheviks, Kornilov led the Volunteer Army on the 'Ice March' into the empty steppe towards the Kuban. Although badly outnumbered, he escaped destruction from the pursuing Bolshevik forces and laid siege to Ekaterinodar, the capital of the Kuban Soviet Republic, on 10 April. However, in the early morning of 13 April, a Soviet shell landed on his farmhouse headquarters and killed him. He was quietly buried in nearby Gnadau (modern day Dolinovskoe).\nA few days later, when the Bolsheviks gained control of the village, they unearthed Kornilov's coffin, dragged his corpse to the main square and burnt his remains on the local rubbish dump.\nMemorials.\nOn 13 April 2013, a monument to Kornilov was erected in Krasnodar. Commemoration ceremonies took place with local cossacks, along with Cossacks from Don, Stavropol and Taman.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18100", "revid": "612538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18100", "title": "L. L. Zamenhof", "text": "Creator of Esperanto (1859\u20131917)\nL. L. Zamenhof (15 December 1859\u00a0\u2013 14 April 1917) was the creator of Esperanto, the most widely used constructed international auxiliary language.\nZamenhof published Esperanto in 1887, although his initial ideas date back as far as 1873. He grew up fascinated by the idea of a world without war and believed that this could happen with the help of a new international auxiliary language (IAL). The language was intended as a tool to gather people together through neutral, fair, equitable communication. He successfully formed a community which has survived to this day, despite the World Wars of the 20th century and various attempts to reform the language or create more modern IALs (Esperanto itself had displaced another similarly-motivated language, Volap\u00fck). Additionally, Esperanto has developed like other languages: through the interaction and creativity of its users.\nIn light of his achievements, and his support of intercultural dialogue, UNESCO selected Zamenhof as one of its eminent personalities of 2017, on the 100th anniversary of his death. According to Esperanto communities, as of 2019 there are approximately 2 million people speaking Esperanto, including approximately 1,000 native speakers, although evidence to that has been heavily disputed, and the last major effort to improve the estimate occurred in 2004.\nName.\nZamenhof came from a multilingual area. His name is transliterated as follows:\nBorn into an Ashkenazi family, at his birth Zamenhof was given the common Hebrew name \"Eliezer\" by his parents, which is translated into English as \"Lazarus\". However, as the area was a part of the Russian Empire at the time, his name was recorded on his birth certificate as , using the Yiddish form of the forename and a russified version of his surname; many later Russian language documents also include the patronymic \u00ab son of Mark \u00bb (in reference to his father, Markus), as is the custom in the language. His family name is of German origin and was originally written \"Samenhof\"; this was later transcribed into Yiddish as , then re-romanized back as \"Zamenhof\". The change of the initial letter from \u00abS\u00bb to \u00abZ\u00bb is not unusual, as in German an initial \u00abs\u00bb is pronounced .\nIn his adolescence, he used both the Yiddish \"Leyzer\" and the Russian \"Lazar\" when writing his first name. While at university, Zamenhof began using the Russian name \"Lyudovik\" (also transcribed \"Ludovic\" or translated as \"Ludwig\") in place of \"Lazar\", possibly in honour of Francis Lodwick, who in 1652 had published an early conlang proposal. When his brother Leon became a doctor and started signing his name \"Dr L. Zamenhof\", Zamenhof reclaimed his birth name \"Lazar\" and from 1901 signed his name \"Dr L. L. Zamenhof\" to avoid confusion with his brother. The two Ls do not seem to have specifically represented either name and the order \"Ludwik Lejzer\" is a modern convention.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nZamenhof was born on 15 December 1859, the son of Mark and (n\u00e9e\u00a0Sofer), in the multi-ethnic city of Belostok (now Bia\u0142ystok in Poland). At that time, the city was in the Grodno Governorate of the Russian Empire. His parents were of Litvak descent and were Jewish. He appears to have been natively bilingual in Yiddish and Russian, however according to Zamenhof himself he used to speak mainly in Polish. His father was a teacher of French and German. From him, Zamenhof learned both languages, as well as Hebrew. He also spoke Belarusian, which was popular in Bia\u0142ystok. Polish became the native language of his children in Warsaw. In school, he studied the classical languages Latin, Greek, and Aramaic. He later learned some English, though in his own words not very well. He had an interest in Italian and Lithuanian and learned Volap\u00fck when it came out in 1880. By that time, his international language project was already well-developed.\nIn addition to the Jewish Yiddish-speaking minority, the population of Bia\u0142ystok included Polish Catholics and the Russian Orthodox (the latter of whom were mainly government officials), with smaller groups of Belarusians, Germans and other ethnicities. Zamenhof was saddened and frustrated by the many quarrels among these groups. He supposed that the main reason for the hate and prejudice lay in the mutual misunderstanding caused by the lack of a common language. If such a language existed, Zamenhof postulated, it could play the role of a neutral communication tool between people of different ethnic and linguistic backgrounds.\nAs a student at secondary school in Warsaw, Zamenhof attempted to create an international language with a grammar that was rich, but complex. When he later studied English, he decided that the international language must have simpler grammar. Apart from his parents' native languages Russian and Yiddish and his adopted language Polish, his projects were also aided by his mastery of German, a good passive understanding of Latin, Hebrew and French, and a basic knowledge of Greek, English and Italian.\nBy 1878, his project \"Lingwe uniwersala\" was finished. However, Zamenhof was too young then to publish his work. Soon after graduation, he began to study medicine, first in Moscow, and later in Warsaw. In 1885, Zamenhof graduated from university and began his practice as a doctor in Veisiejai. After 1886, he worked as an ophthalmologist in P\u0142ock and Vienna. While healing people there, he continued to work on his project of an international language.\nFor two years, he tried to raise funds to publish a booklet describing the language, until he received financial help from his future wife's father. In 1887, the book titled \"\u041c\u0435\u0436\u0434\u0443\u043d\u0430\u0440\u043e\u0434\u043d\u044b\u0439 \u044f\u0437\u044b\u043a. \u041f\u0440\u0435\u0434\u0438\u0441\u043b\u043e\u0432\u0438\u0435 \u0438 \u043f\u043e\u043b\u043d\u044b\u0439 \u0443\u0447\u0435\u0431\u043d\u0438\u043a\u044a\" (International language: Introduction and complete textbook) was published in Russian under the pseudonym \"Doktoro Esperanto\" (Doctor Hoper, or literally \"Doctor One Who Hopes\"). Zamenhof initially called his language \"Lingvo internacia\" (international language), but those who learned it began to call it \"Esperanto\" after his pseudonym, and this soon became the official name for the language. For Zamenhof, this language, far from being merely a communication tool, was a way to promote peaceful coexistence between people of different cultures.\nWork on Yiddish language and Jewish issues.\nIn 1879, Zamenhof wrote the first grammar of Yiddish. It was partly published years later in the Yiddish magazine . The complete original Russian text of this manuscript was only published in 1982, with parallel Esperanto translation by Adolf Holzhaus, in (An attempt at a grammar of neo-Jewish language), Helsinki, pp. 9\u201336. In this work, not only does he provide a review of Yiddish grammar, but also proposes its transition to the Latin script and other orthographic innovations. In the same period, Zamenhof wrote some other works in Yiddish, including perhaps the first survey of Yiddish poetics (see p. 50 in the above-cited book).\nA wave of pogroms within the Russian Empire in 1882, including Congress Poland, motivated Zamenhof to take part in the Hibbat Zion, and to found a Zionist student society in Warsaw. He left the movement following the publication of Unua Libro in 1887, and in 1901 published a statement in Russian with the title \"Hillelism\", in which he argued that the Zionist project would fail due to Jews not having a common language.\nIn 1914, he declined an invitation to join a new organization of Jewish Esperantists, the TEHA. In his letter to the organizers, he said, \"I am profoundly convinced that every nationalism offers humanity only the greatest unhappiness\u00a0... It is true that the nationalism of oppressed peoples \u2013 as a natural self-defensive reaction \u2013 is much more excusable than the nationalism of peoples who oppress; but, if the nationalism of the strong is ignoble, the nationalism of the weak is imprudent; both give birth to and support each other\". The Hebrew Bible is among the many works that Zamenhof translated into Esperanto.\nDeath.\nZamenhof died in Warsaw on 14 April 1917, possibly of a heart attack, and was buried at the Okopowa Street Jewish Cemetery. The farewell speech was delivered by the chief rabbi and preacher of the Great Synagogue in Warsaw, Samuel Abraham Pozna\u0144ski, who said: \"There will be a time where the Polish soil and nation will understand what fame gave this great son of God to his homeland.\"\nFamily.\nZamenhof and his wife Klara Silbernik raised three children, a son, Adam, and two daughters, Zofia and Lidia. All three were murdered by the Nazis.\nLidia Zamenhof in particular took a keen interest in Esperanto, and as an adult became a teacher of the language, travelling through Europe and to America to teach classes in it. Through her friendship with Martha Root, Lidia accepted Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h and became a member of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith. As one of its social principles, the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith teaches that an auxiliary world language should be selected by the representatives of all the world's nations.\nZamenhof's grandson, Louis-Christophe Zaleski-Zamenhof (Adam's son), lived in France from the 1960s until his death in 2019. As of 2020, Louis-Christophe's daughter, Margaret Zaleski-Zamenhof, is active in the Esperanto movement.\nReligious philosophy.\nBesides his linguistic work, Zamenhof published a religious philosophy he called \"Homaranismo\" (the term in Esperanto, usually rendered as \"humanitism\" in English, sometimes rendered loosely as humanitarianism or humanism), based on the principles and teachings of Hillel the Elder. He said of Homaranismo: \"It is indeed the object of my whole life. I would give up everything for it.\"\nHonours and namesakes.\nIn 1905, Zamenhof received the L\u00e9gion d'honneur for creating Esperanto. In 1910, Zamenhof was first nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize, by four British Members of Parliament (including James O'Grady and Philip Snowden) and Professor Stanley Lane Poole. (The Prize was instead awarded to the International Peace Bureau.) Ultimately Zamenhof was nominated 12 times for the Nobel Peace Prize. On the occasion of the fifth Universala Kongreso de Esperanto in Barcelona, Zamenhof was made a Commander of the Order of Isabella the Catholic by King Alfonso XIII of Spain.\nA monument or place linked to Zamenhof or Esperanto is known as a Zamenhof-Esperanto object (or ZEO).\nThe minor planet 1462 Zamenhof is named in his honour. It was discovered on 6 February 1938 by Yrj\u00f6 V\u00e4is\u00e4l\u00e4. There is also a minor planet named in honour of Esperanto (1421 Esperanto).\nHundreds of city streets, parks, and bridges worldwide have also been named after Zamenhof. In Lithuania, the best-known Zamenhof Street is in Kaunas, where he lived and owned a house for some time. There are others in Poland, the United Kingdom, France, Hungary, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Spain (mostly in Catalonia), Italy, Israel, Belgium, the Netherlands and Brazil. There are Zamenhof Hills in Hungary and Brazil, and a Zamenhof Island in the Danube.\nIn some Israeli cities, street signs identify Esperanto's creator and give his birth and death dates, but refer to him solely by his Jewish name Eliezer, his original birth name. Zamenhof is honoured as a deity by the Japanese religion Oomoto, which encourages the use of Esperanto among its followers. A genus of lichen has been named \"Zamenhofia\" in his honour, as well as the species \"Heteroplacidium zamenhofianum\".\nRussian writer , who lived in Odessa, together with , founded a branch of the first official Esperanto society Esrero in Russia. In the years 1896\u201397 N. A. Borovko became its chairman. A monument to L. Zamenhof was installed in Odessa in an ordinary residential courtyard. Esperantist sculptor Nikolai Vasilyevich Blazhkov lived in this house, who in the early 1960s brought a sculptural portrait into the courtyard because the customs authorities did not allow the sculpture to be sent to the Esperanto Congress in Vienna.\nA public square in Gothenburg, Sweden is named Esperantoplatsen, where a caf\u00e9 named Zamenhof opened in 2018.\nIn Italy, a few streets are named after Esperanto, including Largo Esperanto in Pisa.\nIn 1959, UNESCO honoured Zamenhof on the occasion of his centenary. In 2015, it decided to support the celebration of the 100th anniversary of his death.\nHis birthday, 15 December, is celebrated annually as Zamenhof Day by users of Esperanto. On 15 December 2009, Esperanto's green-starred flag flew on the Google homepage to commemorate Zamenhof's 150th birthday.\nThe house of the Zamenhof family and a monument to Zamenhof are sites on the Jewish Heritage Trail in Bia\u0142ystok, which was opened in June 2008 by volunteers at The University of Bia\u0142ystok Foundation. Bia\u0142ystok is also home to the Ludwik Zamenhof Centre.\nIn 1960, Esperanto summer schools were established in Stoke-on-Trent in the United Kingdom by the Esperanto Association of Britain (EAB), which began to provide lessons and promote the language locally. There is a road named after Zamenhof in the city: Zamenhof Grove.\nAs Zamenhof was born on 15 December 1859, the Esperanto Society of New York gathers every December to celebrate Zamenhofa Tago (Zamenhof Day in Esperanto).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18102", "revid": "35594621", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18102", "title": "Linear map", "text": "Mathematical function, in linear algebra\nIn mathematics, and more specifically in linear algebra, a linear map (or linear mapping) is a particular kind of function between vector spaces, which respects the basic operations of vector addition and scalar multiplication. A standard example of a linear map is an formula_1 matrix, which takes vectors in formula_2-dimensions into vectors in formula_3-dimensions in a way that is compatible with addition of vectors, and multiplication of vectors by scalars.\nA linear map is a homomorphism of vector spaces. Thus, a linear map formula_4 satisfies formula_5, where formula_6 and formula_7 are scalars, and formula_8 and formula_9 are vectors (elements of the vector space formula_10.). A linear mapping always maps the origin of formula_10 to the origin of formula_12; and linear subspaces of formula_10 onto linear subspaces in formula_12 (possibly of a lower dimension); for example, it maps a plane through the origin in formula_10 to a plane through the origin in formula_12, a line through the origin in formula_12, or just the origin in formula_12. Linear maps can often be represented as matrices, and simple examples include rotation and reflection linear transformations.\nDefinition and first consequences.\nLet formula_10 and formula_12 be vector spaces over the same field formula_21, such as the real or complex numbers.\nA function formula_22 is said to be a \"linear map\" if for any two vectors formula_23 and any scalar formula_24 the following two conditions are satisfied:\nThus, a linear map is said to be \"operation preserving\". In other words, it does not matter whether the linear map is applied before (the right hand sides of the above examples) or after (the left hand sides of the examples) the operations of addition and scalar multiplication.\nBy the associativity of the addition operation denoted as +, for any vectors formula_27 and scalars formula_28 the following equality holds:\nformula_29 Thus a linear map is one which preserves linear combinations.\nDenoting the zero elements of the vector spaces formula_10 and formula_12 by formula_32 and formula_33 respectively, it follows that formula_34 Let formula_35 and formula_36 in the equation for homogeneity of degree 1:\nformula_37\nA linear map formula_38 with formula_21 viewed as a one-dimensional vector space over itself is called a linear functional.\nThese statements generalize to any left-module formula_40 over a ring formula_41 without modification, and to any right-module upon reversing of the scalar multiplication.\nExamples.\nLinear endomorphisms and isomorphisms.\nIf a linear map is a bijection then it is called a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;linear isomorphism. In the case where formula_70, a linear map is called a linear endomorphism. Sometimes the term &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;linear operator refers to this case, but the term \"linear operator\" can have different meanings for different conventions.\nLinear extensions.\nOften, a linear map is constructed by defining it on a subset of a vector space and then to the linear span of the domain. \nSuppose formula_65 and formula_66 are vector spaces and formula_73 is a function defined on some subset formula_74 \nThen a \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;linear extension of formula_56 to formula_76\" if it exists, is a linear map formula_77 defined on formula_65 that extends formula_56 (meaning that formula_80 for all formula_81) and takes its values from the codomain of formula_82 \nWhen the subset formula_83 is a vector subspace of formula_65 then a (formula_66-valued) linear extension of formula_56 to all of formula_65 is guaranteed to exist if (and only if) formula_73 is a linear map. In particular, if formula_56 has a linear extension to formula_90 then it has a linear extension to all of formula_91\nThe map formula_73 can be extended to a linear map formula_93 if and only if whenever formula_94 is an integer, formula_95 are scalars, and formula_96 are vectors such that formula_97 then necessarily formula_98 \nIf a linear extension of formula_73 exists then the linear extension formula_93 is unique and\nformula_101\nholds for all formula_102 and formula_103 as above. \nIf formula_83 is linearly independent then every function formula_73 into any vector space has a linear extension to a (linear) map formula_106 (the converse is also true).\nFor example, if formula_107 and formula_108 then the assignment formula_109 and formula_110 can be linearly extended from the linearly independent set of vectors formula_111 to a linear map on formula_112 The unique linear extension formula_113 is the map that sends formula_114 to\nformula_115\nEvery (scalar-valued) linear functional formula_56 defined on a vector subspace of a real or complex vector space formula_65 has a linear extension to all of formula_91 \nIndeed, the Hahn\u2013Banach dominated extension theorem even guarantees that when this linear functional formula_56 is dominated by some given seminorm formula_120 (meaning that formula_121 holds for all formula_3 in the domain of formula_56) then there exists a linear extension to formula_65 that is also dominated by formula_125\nMatrices.\nIf formula_10 and formula_12 are finite-dimensional vector spaces and a basis is defined for each vector space, then every linear map from formula_10 to formula_12 can be represented by a matrix. This is useful because it allows concrete calculations. Matrices yield examples of linear maps: if formula_47 is a real formula_48 matrix, then formula_132 describes a linear map formula_133 (see Euclidean space).\nLet formula_134 be a basis for formula_10. Then every vector formula_136 is uniquely determined by the coefficients formula_137 in the field formula_58:\nformula_139\nIf formula_54 is a linear map,\nformula_141\nwhich implies that the function \"f\" is entirely determined by the vectors formula_142. Now let formula_143 be a basis for formula_12. Then we can represent each vector formula_145 as\nformula_146\nThus, the function formula_56 is entirely determined by the values of formula_148. If we put these values into an formula_48 matrix formula_150, then we can conveniently use it to compute the vector output of formula_56 for any vector in formula_10. To get formula_150, every column formula_154 of formula_150 is a vector\nformula_156\ncorresponding to formula_145 as defined above. To define it more clearly, for some column formula_154 that corresponds to the mapping formula_145,\nformula_160\nwhere formula_150 is the matrix of formula_56. In other words, every column formula_163 has a corresponding vector formula_145 whose coordinates formula_165 are the elements of column formula_154. A single linear map may be represented by many matrices. This is because the values of the elements of a matrix depend on the bases chosen.\nThe matrices of a linear transformation can be represented visually:\nSuch that starting in the bottom left corner formula_179 and looking for the bottom right corner formula_180, one would left-multiply\u2014that is, formula_181. The equivalent method would be the \"longer\" method going clockwise from the same point such that formula_179 is left-multiplied with formula_183, or formula_184.\nExamples in two dimensions.\nIn two-dimensional space R2 linear maps are described by 2 \u00d7 2 matrices. These are some examples:\nIf a linear map is only composed of rotation, reflection, and/or uniform scaling, then the linear map is a conformal linear transformation.\nVector space of linear maps.\nThe composition of linear maps is linear: if formula_22 and formula_196 are linear, then so is their composition formula_197. It follows from this that the class of all vector spaces over a given field \"K\", together with \"K\"-linear maps as morphisms, forms a category.\nThe inverse of a linear map, when defined, is again a linear map.\nIf formula_198 and formula_199 are linear, then so is their pointwise sum formula_200, which is defined by formula_201.\nIf formula_54 is linear and formula_203 is an element of the ground field formula_204, then the map formula_205, defined by formula_206, is also linear.\nThus the set formula_207 of linear maps from formula_208 to formula_209 itself forms a vector space over formula_204, sometimes denoted formula_211. Furthermore, in the case that formula_212, this vector space, denoted formula_213, is an associative algebra under composition of maps, since the composition of two linear maps is again a linear map, and the composition of maps is always associative. This case is discussed in more detail below.\nGiven again the finite-dimensional case, if bases have been chosen, then the composition of linear maps corresponds to the matrix multiplication, the addition of linear maps corresponds to the matrix addition, and the multiplication of linear maps with scalars corresponds to the multiplication of matrices with scalars.\nEndomorphisms and automorphisms.\nA linear transformation formula_214 is an endomorphism of formula_208; the set of all such endomorphisms formula_216 together with addition, composition and scalar multiplication as defined above forms an associative algebra with identity element over the field formula_204 (and in particular a ring). The multiplicative identity element of this algebra is the identity map formula_218.\nAn endomorphism of formula_208 that is also an isomorphism is called an automorphism of formula_208. The composition of two automorphisms is again an automorphism, and the set of all automorphisms of formula_208 forms a group, the automorphism group of formula_208 which is denoted by formula_223 or formula_224. Since the automorphisms are precisely those endomorphisms which possess inverses under composition, formula_223 is the group of units in the ring formula_216.\nIf formula_208 has finite dimension formula_228, then formula_213 is isomorphic to the associative algebra of all formula_230 matrices with entries in formula_204. The automorphism group of formula_208 is isomorphic to the general linear group formula_233 of all formula_230 invertible matrices with entries in formula_204.\nKernel, image and the rank\u2013nullity theorem.\nIf formula_54 is linear, we define the kernel and the image or range of formula_237 by\nformula_238\nformula_239 is a subspace of formula_208 and formula_241 is a subspace of formula_209. The following dimension formula is known as the rank\u2013nullity theorem:\nformula_243\nThe number formula_244 is also called the rank of formula_237 and written as formula_246, or sometimes, formula_247; the number formula_248 is called the nullity of formula_237 and written as formula_250 or formula_251. If formula_208 and formula_209 are finite-dimensional, bases have been chosen and formula_237 is represented by the matrix formula_169, then the rank and nullity of formula_237 are equal to the rank and nullity of the matrix formula_169, respectively.\nCokernel.\nA subtler invariant of a linear transformation formula_54 is the \"co\"kernel, which is defined as\nformula_259\nThis is the \"dual\" notion to the kernel: just as the kernel is a \"sub\"space of the \"domain,\" the co-kernel is a \"quotient\" space of the \"target.\" Formally, one has the exact sequence\nformula_260\nThese can be interpreted thus: given a linear equation \"f\"(v) = w to solve,\nThe dimension of the co-kernel and the dimension of the image (the rank) add up to the dimension of the target space. For finite dimensions, this means that the dimension of the quotient space \"W\"/\"f\"(\"V\") is the dimension of the target space minus the dimension of the image.\nAs a simple example, consider the map \"f\": R2 \u2192 R2, given by \"f\"(\"x\", \"y\") = (0, \"y\"). Then for an equation \"f\"(\"x\", \"y\") = (\"a\", \"b\") to have a solution, we must have \"a\" = 0 (one constraint), and in that case the solution space is (\"x\", \"b\") or equivalently stated, (0, \"b\") + (\"x\", 0), (one degree of freedom). The kernel may be expressed as the subspace (\"x\", 0) &lt; \"V\": the value of \"x\" is the freedom in a solution \u2013 while the cokernel may be expressed via the map \"W\" \u2192 R, formula_261: given a vector (\"a\", \"b\"), the value of \"a\" is the \"obstruction\" to there being a solution.\nAn example illustrating the infinite-dimensional case is afforded by the map \"f\": R\u221e \u2192 R\u221e, formula_262 with \"b\"1 = 0 and \"b\"\"n\" + 1 = \"an\" for \"n\" &gt; 0. Its image consists of all sequences with first element 0, and thus its cokernel consists of the classes of sequences with identical first element. Thus, whereas its kernel has dimension 0 (it maps only the zero sequence to the zero sequence), its co-kernel has dimension 1. Since the domain and the target space are the same, the rank and the dimension of the kernel add up to the same sum as the rank and the dimension of the co-kernel (formula_263), but in the infinite-dimensional case it cannot be inferred that the kernel and the co-kernel of an endomorphism have the same dimension (0 \u2260 1). The reverse situation obtains for the map \"h\": R\u221e \u2192 R\u221e, formula_264 with \"cn\" = \"a\"\"n\" + 1. Its image is the entire target space, and hence its co-kernel has dimension 0, but since it maps all sequences in which only the first element is non-zero to the zero sequence, its kernel has dimension 1.\nIndex.\nFor a linear operator with finite-dimensional kernel and co-kernel, one may define \"index\" as:\nformula_265\nnamely the degrees of freedom minus the number of constraints.\nFor a transformation between finite-dimensional vector spaces, this is just the difference dim(\"V\") \u2212 dim(\"W\"), by rank\u2013nullity. This gives an indication of how many solutions or how many constraints one has: if mapping from a larger space to a smaller one, the map may be onto, and thus will have degrees of freedom even without constraints. Conversely, if mapping from a smaller space to a larger one, the map cannot be onto, and thus one will have constraints even without degrees of freedom.\nThe index of an operator is precisely the Euler characteristic of the 2-term complex 0 \u2192 \"V\" \u2192 \"W\" \u2192 0. In operator theory, the index of Fredholm operators is an object of study, with a major result being the Atiyah\u2013Singer index theorem.\nAlgebraic classifications of linear transformations.\nNo classification of linear maps could be exhaustive. The following incomplete list enumerates some important classifications that do not require any additional structure on the vector space.\nLet V and W denote vector spaces over a field F and let \"T\": \"V\" \u2192 \"W\" be a linear map.\nMonomorphism.\nT is said to be \"injective\" or a \"monomorphism\" if any of the following equivalent conditions are true:\nEpimorphism.\nT is said to be \"surjective\" or an \"epimorphism\" if any of the following equivalent conditions are true:\nIsomorphism.\nT is said to be an \"isomorphism\" if it is both left- and right-invertible. This is equivalent to T being both one-to-one and onto (a bijection of sets) or also to T being both epic and monic, and so being a bimorphism.\nIf \"T\": \"V\" \u2192 \"V\" is an endomorphism, then:\nChange of basis.\nGiven a linear map which is an endomorphism whose matrix is \"A\", in the basis \"B\" of the space it transforms vector coordinates [u] as [v] = \"A\"[u]. As vectors change with the inverse of \"B\" (vectors coordinates are contravariant) its inverse transformation is [v] = \"B\"[v'].\nSubstituting this in the first expression\nformula_266\nhence\nformula_267\nTherefore, the matrix in the new basis is \"A\u2032\" = \"B\"\u22121\"AB\", being \"B\" the matrix of the given basis.\nTherefore, linear maps are said to be 1-co- 1-contra-variant objects, or type (1, 1) tensors.\nContinuity.\nA \"linear transformation\" between topological vector spaces, for example normed spaces, may be continuous. If its domain and codomain are the same, it will then be a continuous linear operator. A linear operator on a normed linear space is continuous if and only if it is bounded, for example, when the domain is finite-dimensional. An infinite-dimensional domain may have discontinuous linear operators.\nAn example of an unbounded, hence discontinuous, linear transformation is differentiation on the space of smooth functions equipped with the supremum norm (a function with small values can have a derivative with large values, while the derivative of 0 is 0). For a specific example, sin(\"nx\")/\"n\" converges to 0, but its derivative cos(\"nx\") does not, so differentiation is not continuous at 0 (and by a variation of this argument, it is not continuous anywhere).\nApplications.\nA specific application of linear maps is for geometric transformations, such as those performed in computer graphics, where the translation, rotation and scaling of 2D or 3D objects is performed by the use of a transformation matrix. Linear mappings also are used as a mechanism for describing change: for example in calculus correspond to derivatives; or in relativity, used as a device to keep track of the local transformations of reference frames.\nAnother application of these transformations is in compiler optimizations of nested-loop code, and in parallelizing compiler techniques.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18103", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18103", "title": "Leyden jar", "text": "Antique electrical device that stores a high-voltage electric charge\nA Leyden jar (or Leiden jar, or archaically, Kleistian jar) is an electrical component that stores a high-voltage electric charge (from an external source) between electrical conductors on the inside and outside of a glass jar. It typically comprises a glass jar with metal foil cemented to the inside and the outside surfaces, and a metal terminal projecting vertically through the jar lid to make contact with the inner foil. It was the original form of the capacitor (also called a \"condenser\").\nIts invention was a discovery made independently by German cleric Ewald Georg von Kleist on 11 October 1745 and by Dutch scientist Pieter van Musschenbroek of Leiden (Leyden), Netherlands, in 1745\u20131746.\nThe Leyden jar was used to conduct many early experiments in electricity, and its discovery was of fundamental importance in the study of electrostatics. It was the first means of accumulating and preserving electric charge in large quantities that could be discharged at the experimenter's will, thus overcoming a significant limit to early research into electrical conduction. Leyden jars are still used in education to demonstrate the principles of electrostatics.\nPrevious work.\nThe Ancient Greeks already knew that pieces of amber could attract lightweight particles after being rubbed. The amber becomes electrified by the triboelectric effect, mechanical separation of charge in a dielectric material. The Greek word for amber is () and is the origin of the word \"electricity\". Thales of Miletus, a pre-Socratic philosopher, is thought to have accidentally commented on the phenomenon of electrostatic charging, due to his belief that even lifeless things have a soul in them, hence the popular analogy of the spark. Around 1650, Otto von Guericke built a crude electrostatic generator: a sulphur ball that rotated on a shaft. When Guericke held his hand against the ball and turned the shaft quickly, a static electric charge built up. This experiment inspired the development of several forms of \"friction machines\", which greatly helped in the study of electricity.\nGeorg Matthias Bose (22 September 1710 \u2013 17 September 1761) was a famous electrical experimenter in the early days of the development of electrostatics. He is credited with being the first to develop a way of temporarily storing static charges by using an insulated conductor (called a prime conductor). His demonstrations and experiments raised the interests of the German scientific community and the public in the development of electrical research.\nDiscovery.\nThe Leyden jar was effectively discovered independently by two parties: German dean Ewald Georg von Kleist, who made the first discovery, and Dutch scientists Pieter van Musschenbroek and Andreas Cunaeus, who figured out why it only worked when held in the hand.\nVon Kleist.\nEwald Georg von Kleist was the dean at the cathedral of Cammin in Pomerania, a region now divided between Germany and Poland. Von Kleist is credited with first using the fluid analogy for electricity and demonstrated this to Bose by drawing sparks from water with his finger. He discovered the immense storage capability of the Leyden jar while attempting to demonstrate that a glass jar filled with alcohol would \"capture\" this fluid.\nIn October 1745, von Kleist tried to accumulate electricity in a small medicine bottle filled with alcohol with a nail inserted in the cork. He was following up on an experiment developed by Georg Matthias Bose where electricity had been sent through water to set alcoholic spirits alight. He attempted to charge the bottle from a large prime conductor (invented by Bose) suspended above his friction machine.\nVon Kleist knew that the glass would provide an obstacle to the escape of the \"fluid\", and so was convinced that a substantial electric charge could be collected and held within it. He received a significant shock from the device when he accidentally touched the nail through the cork while still cradling the bottle in his other hand. He communicated his results to at least five different electrical experimenters, in several letters from November 1745 to March 1746, but did not receive any confirmation that they had repeated his results, until April 1746. Polish-Lithuanian physicist Daniel Gralath learned about von Kleist's experiment from seeing von Kleist's letter to Paul Swietlicki, written in November 1745. After Gralath's failed first attempt to reproduce the experiment in December 1745, he wrote to von Kleist for more information (and was told that the experiment would work better if the tube half-filled with alcohol was used). Gralath (in collaboration with Gottfried Reyger) succeeded in getting the intended effect on 5 March 1746, holding a small glass medicine bottle with a nail inside in one hand, moving it close to an electrostatic generator, and then moving the other hand close to the nail. Von Kleist didn't understand the significance of his conducting hand holding the bottle\u2014and both he and his correspondents were loath to hold the device when told that the shock could throw them across the room. It took some time before von Kleist's student associates at Leyden worked out that the hand provided an essential element.\nMusschenbroek and Cunaeus.\nThe Leyden jar's invention was long credited to Pieter van Musschenbroek, the physics professor at Leiden University, who also ran a family foundry which cast brass cannonettes, and a small business (\"De Oosterse Lamp\" \u2013 \"The Eastern Lamp\") which made scientific and medical instruments for the new university courses in physics and for scientific gentlemen keen to establish their own 'cabinets' of curiosities and instruments.\nLike von Kleist, Musschenbroek was also interested in, and attempting to repeat, Bose's experiment. During this time, Andreas Cunaeus, a lawyer, learned about this experiment from Musschenbroek, and attempted to duplicate the experiment at home with household items. Unaware of the \"Rule of Dufay\", that the experimental apparatus should be insulated, Cunaeus held his jar in his hand while charging it, and was thus the first to discover that such an experimental setup could deliver a severe shock. He reported his procedure and experience to Swiss-Dutch natural philosopher Jean-Nicolas-Sebastian Allamand, Musschenbroek's colleague. Allamand and Musschenbroek also received severe shocks. Musschenbroek communicated the experiment in a letter from 20 January 1746 to French entomologist Ren\u00e9 Antoine Ferchault de R\u00e9aumur, who was Musschenbroek's appointed correspondent at the Paris Academy. Abb\u00e9 Jean-Antoine Nollet read this report, confirmed the experiment, and then read Musschenbroek's letter in a public meeting of the Paris Academy in April 1746 (translating from Latin to French).\nMusschenbroek's outlet in France for the sale of his company's 'cabinet' devices was the Abb\u00e9 Nollet (who started building and selling duplicate instruments in 1735). Nollet then gave the electrical storage device the name \"Leyden jar\" and promoted it as a special type of flask to his market of wealthy men with scientific curiosity. The \"Kleistian jar\" was therefore promoted as the \"Leyden jar\", and as having been discovered by Pieter van Musschenbroek and his acquaintance Andreas Cunaeus. Musschenbroek, however, never claimed that he had invented it, and some think that Cunaeus was mentioned only to diminish credit to him.\nFurther developments.\nWithin months after Musschenbroek's report about how to reliably create a Leyden jar, other electrical researchers were making and experimenting with their own Leyden jars. One of his expressed original interests was to see if the total possible charge could be increased.\nJohann Heinrich Winckler, whose first experience with a single Leyden jar was reported in a letter to the Royal Society on 29 May 1746, had connected three Leyden jars together in a kind of electrostatic battery on 28 July 1746. In 1746, Abb\u00e9 Nollet performed two experiments for the edification of King Louis XV of France, in the first of which he discharged a Leyden jar through 180 royal guardsmen, and in the second through a larger number of Carthusian monks; all of whom sprang into the air more or less simultaneously. The opinions of neither the king nor the experimental subjects have been recorded.\nDaniel Gralath reported in 1747 that in 1746 he had conducted experiments with connecting two or three jars, probably in series.\nIn 1746\u20131748, Benjamin Franklin experimented with charging Leyden jars in series, and developed a system involving 11 panes of glass with thin lead plates glued on each side, and then connected together. He used the term \"electrical battery\" to describe his electrostatic battery in a 1749 letter about his electrical research in 1748. It is possible that Franklin's choice of the word \"battery\" was inspired by the humorous wordplay at the conclusion of his letter, where he wrote, among other things, about a salute to electrical researchers from a battery of guns. This is the first recorded use of the term \"electrical battery\". The multiple and rapid developments for connecting Leyden jars during the period 1746\u20131748 resulted in a variety of divergent accounts in secondary literature about who made the first \"battery\" by connecting Leyden jars, whether they were in series or parallel, and who first used the term \"battery\". The term was later used for combinations of multiple electrochemical cells, the modern meaning of the term \"battery\".\nThe Swedish physicist, chemist, and meteorologist Torbern Bergman translated much of Benjamin Franklin's writings on electricity into German and continued to study electrostatic properties.\nStarting in late 1756, Franz Aepinus, in a complicated combination of independent work and collaboration with Johan Wilcke, developed an \"air condenser\", a variation on the Leyden jar, by using air rather than glass as the dielectric. This functioning apparatus, without glass, created a problem for Benjamin Franklin's explanation of the Leyden jar, which maintained that the charge was located in the glass.\nDesign.\nA typical design consists of a glass jar with conducting tin foil coating the inner and outer surfaces. The foil coatings stop short of the mouth of the jar, to prevent the charge from arcing between the foils. A metal rod electrode projects through the nonconductive stopper at the mouth of the jar, electrically connected by some means (usually a hanging chain) to the inner foil, to allow it to be charged. The jar is charged by an electrostatic generator, or other source of electric charge, connected to the inner electrode while the outer foil is grounded. The inner and outer surfaces of the jar store equal but opposite charges.\nThe original form of the device is just a glass bottle partially filled with water, with a metal wire passing through a cork closing it. The role of the outer plate is provided by the hand of the experimenter. Soon John Bevis found (in 1747) that it was possible to coat the exterior of the jar with metal foil, and he also found that he could achieve the same effect by using a plate of glass with metal foil on both sides. These developments inspired William Watson in the same year to have a jar made with a metal foil lining both inside and outside, dropping the use of water.\nEarly experimenters (such as Benjamin Wilson in 1746) reported that the thinner the dielectric and the greater the surface, the greater the charge that could be accumulated.\nFurther developments in electrostatics revealed that the dielectric material was not essential, but increased the storage capability (capacitance) and prevented arcing between the plates. Two plates separated by a small distance also act as a capacitor, even in a vacuum.\nStorage of the charge.\nIt was initially believed that the charge was stored in the water in early Leyden jars. In the 1700s American statesman and scientist Benjamin Franklin performed extensive investigations of both water-filled and foil Leyden jars, which led him to conclude that the charge was stored in the glass, not in the water. A popular experiment, due to Franklin, which seems to demonstrate this involves taking a jar apart after it has been charged and showing that little charge can be found on the metal plates, and therefore it must be in the dielectric. The first documented instance of this demonstration is in a 1749 letter by Franklin. Franklin designed a \"dissectible\" Leyden jar \"(right)\", which was widely used in demonstrations. The jar is constructed out of a glass cup nested between two fairly snugly fitting metal cups. When the jar is charged with a high voltage and carefully dismantled, it is discovered that all the parts may be freely handled without discharging the jar. If the pieces are re-assembled, a large spark may still be obtained from it.\nThis demonstration appears to suggest that capacitors store their charge inside their dielectric. This theory was taught throughout the 1800s. However, this phenomenon is a special effect caused by the high voltage on the Leyden jar. In the dissectible Leyden jar, charge is transferred to the surface of the glass cup by corona discharge when the jar is disassembled; this is the source of the residual charge after the jar is reassembled. Handling the cup while disassembled does not provide enough contact to remove all the surface charge. Soda glass is hygroscopic and forms a partially conductive coating on its surface, which holds the charge. Addenbrooke (1922) found that in a dissectible jar made of paraffin wax, or glass baked to remove moisture, the charge remained on the metal plates. Zeleny (1944) confirmed these results and observed the corona charge transfer.\nIf a charged Leyden jar is discharged by shorting the inner and outer coatings and left to sit for a few minutes, the jar will recover some of its previous charge, and a second spark can be obtained from it. Often this can be repeated, and a series of 4 or 5 sparks, decreasing in length, can be obtained at intervals. This effect is caused by dielectric absorption.\nCapacity.\nThe Leyden jar is a high-voltage device; it is estimated that at a maximum the early Leyden jars could be charged to 20,000 to 60,000 volts. The center rod electrode has a metal ball on the end to prevent leakage of the charge into the air by corona discharge. It was first used in electrostatics experiments, and later in high-voltage equipment such as spark-gap radio transmitters and electrotherapy machines.\nOriginally, the amount of capacitance was measured in number of 'jars' of a given size, or through the total coated area, assuming reasonably standard thickness and composition of the glass. A typical Leyden jar of one pint size has a capacitance of about 1 nF.\nUses.\nBeginning in the late 18th century it was used in the medical field of electrotherapy to treat a variety of diseases by electric shock. By the middle of the 19th century, the Leyden jar had become common enough for writers to assume their readers knew of and understood its basic operation. Around the turn of the century it began to be widely used in spark-gap transmitters and medical electrotherapy equipment.\nThe development of the new technology of radio in the early 20th century encouraged the reduction in the size of Leyden jars as well as the reduction of undesired inductance and resistance. These improvements along with improved dielectrics caused the Leyden jar to evolve into the modern compact form of capacitor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18105", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18105", "title": "Large-scale structure of the Cosmos", "text": ""}
{"id": "18107", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18107", "title": "Lords Supper", "text": ""}
{"id": "18109", "revid": "50574395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18109", "title": "Lennon Wall", "text": "Wall in Prague, Czech Republic\nThe Lennon Wall (\u200a) or John Lennon Wall (Czech: \"Ze\u010f Johna Lennona\"), located at \"Velkop\u0159evorsk\u00e9 n\u00e1m\u011bst\u00ed\" (Grand Priory Square), Mal\u00e1 Strana, is a historic legal graffiti wall in Prague, Czechia. After the 1980 murder of John Lennon a mural of Lennon was painted by an unknown artist onto the wall and as more people expanded upon it, the wall slowly became a place for free expression of then communist Czechoslovakia. It has historically been used for demonstrations and carries a central theme of John Lennon, but it also features designs relating to local and global causes such as global warming. The wall has also inspired other walls across the globe, such as the Hong Kong Lennon wall.\nThe wall is owned by the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, which until 2019 allowed all graffiti. As of the latest reconstruction, the wall exists as a semi-legal graffiti wall; spray painting has been banned and only some areas of the wall are allowed to be used by the public.\nHistory.\nUnder communist Czechoslovakia.\nLocated in a secluded square across from the French Embassy, the wall had love poems and short messages against the communist Czechoslovak government since the 1960s, but the first message connected to John Lennon was painted following the 1980 assassination of Lennon, when an unknown artist painted a single image of the singer-songwriter and some lyrics onto a stone slab foundation of a former public fountain. Following this, a small memorial was created with candles, flowers, photographs and newspaper clippings talking about the murder. Western media was banned in the country at the time, therefore the image and memorial was seen by the authorities as representative of western culture and political resistance, thus in April 1981 it was painted over with green paint and removed by the Czechoslovak secret police who saw it as a protest against the government. The day after the wall was repainted it was filled with political messages, such as \"Palach would cry\", and poems once again. The wall would be repainted and re-graffiti-ed after that, with cameras and over-night guards being stationed at the wall to prevent further attempts, but this was ultimately fruitless as the wall would always end up being marked anyway.\nIn 1988, the wall was a source of irritation for Gust\u00e1v Hus\u00e1k's Marxist\u2013Leninist government. Following a short-lived era of democratization and political liberalization known as the Prague Spring, the newly installed communist government dismantled the reforms, inspiring anger and resistance. Young Czechs wrote their grievances on the wall and, according to a report of the time, this led to a clash between hundreds of students and security police on the nearby Charles Bridge. The liberalization movement these students followed was described as Lennonism (not to be confused with Leninism), and Czech authorities described participants variously as alcoholic, mentally deranged, sociopathic, and agents of Western free market capitalism.\nPost velvet revolution and contemporary developments.\nAfter the fall of the iron curtain and replacement of the communist government the wall continuously underwent change and the original portrait of Lennon was long lost under layers of new paint and graffiti.\nOn 17 November 2014, the 25th anniversary of the Velvet Revolution, a group of art students called Pr\u00e1\u017esk\u00e1 Slu\u017eba repainted the wall to white leaving a single line of black text, \u201cwall is over\u201d [\"sic\"]. The Knights of Malta initially filed a criminal complaint for vandalism against the students, which they later retracted after contacting them.\nOn 22 April 2019, Earth Day, the environmentalist group Extinction Rebellion repainted the wall as a demand for the Czech government to act on climate change. The wall was almost entirely painted white, with the unpainted parts of the wall reading in large, negative space, block print letters \"Klimatick\u00e1 Nouze\" (lit.\u2009'Climate Emergency'). Members of the public were encouraged to add their messages, resulting in calls for action painted in several languages. A large image of a skull was also painted. The repaint was carried out in a manner which allowed some of the existing artwork to be included on the new wall.\nIn July 2019, artists painted a memorial on the wall for Hong Kong democracy activist Marco Leung Ling-kit, who became known as a martyr and a symbol of hope for the 2019 anti-extradition bill protest movement. The image on the wall depicts the yellow raincoat he was wearing during the banner drop that eventually led to a fall from the building, along with some words of solidarity: \u201cHong Kong, Add oil.\u201d\nIn October 2019, the Sovereign Military Order of Malta and the administrative district of Prague 1 started a reconstruction of the Lennon Wall. A representative of the Order of Malta, Johannes Lobkowicz, in regards to why the wall would be renovated, said \"Our goal was to stop the wall from being a cheap tourist attraction, where anyone could draw nonsense or vulgarisms. It wasn't a dignified state [for the wall]\". Under the direction of Czech designer Pavel \u0160\u0165astn\u00fd over 30 Czech and foreign professional artists painted the wall with new designs. During the renovation a central piece made of reflective metal with a black outline of John Lennon was also installed. The wall opened to the public on the 30th anniversary of the Velvet Revolution, 7 November 2019, as an open-air gallery with new rules - busking and spraying was banned, marking the wall was now only allowed in the designated white zones and in impermanent materials e.g. pencils, markers, or chalk. Police and cameras were stationed at the wall to deter further spray painting and rule breaking.\nAt the same time as the wall was being renovated the wall was also declared a memorial site, this being the first time the wall was given an officially recognized status as an important landmark.\nIn July 2021, a new museum about the history of the Lennon Wall, the Lennon Wall Story, was opened on Prokopsk\u00e1 Street 8. The museum features varying objects related to the wall, such as photos, historic objects and Beatles memorabilia.\nOn 15 May 2024 the Romani artist Maxim Muchow added a portrait of the late Romani singer V\u011bra B\u00edl\u00e1 to the wall.\nLennon Walls in Hong Kong.\nDuring the 2014 democracy protests in Hong Kong, a similar Lennon Wall appeared along the staircase outside of the Hong Kong Central Government Offices. Inspired by the original in Prague, many thousands of people posted colourful post-it notes expressing democratic wishes for Hong Kong. The wall was one of the major arts of the Umbrella Movement. Throughout several months of occupation and protest, many efforts were made by different groups to ensure physical and digital preservation of the Hong Kong Lennon Wall.\nFive years later, during the 2019\u201320 Hong Kong protests, the same wall was created again, with new post-it notes. Within days, dozens of post-it note Lennon Walls had \"blossomed everywhere\" (\u904d\u5730\u958b\u82b1) throughout Hong Kong, including on Hong Kong Island itself, Kowloon, the New Territories, and on the many outlying islands. There are even some Lennon Walls located inside government offices, including RTHK and the Policy Innovation and Co-ordination Office. According to a crowd-sourced map of Hong Kong, there are over 150 Lennon Walls throughout the region.\nOn 21 September 2019, police in Hong Kong began tearing down Lennon Walls across the city to remove anti-government statements.\nLennon Walls have also appeared outside of Hong Kong in Toronto, Vancouver, Calgary, Seoul, Tokyo, Berlin, London, Sydney, Manchester, Melbourne, Taipei, and Auckland.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18110", "revid": "49031152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18110", "title": "Los Angeles", "text": "Most populous city in California, United States\nLos Angeles (LA) is the most populous city in the U.S. state of California, and the commercial, financial, and cultural center of Southern California. With an estimated 3.88 million residents within the city limits as of 2024[ [update]], it is the second-most populous city in the United States, behind New York City. Los Angeles has an ethnically and culturally diverse population, and is the principal city of a metropolitan area of 12.9 million people (2024). Greater Los Angeles, a combined statistical area that includes the Los Angeles and Riverside\u2013San Bernardino metropolitan areas, is a sprawling metropolis of over 18.5 million residents.\nThe majority of the city proper lies in the Los Angeles Basin adjacent to the Pacific Ocean in the west and extending partly through the Santa Monica Mountains and north into the San Fernando Valley, with the city bordering the San Gabriel Valley to its east. It covers about , and is the county seat and most populated city of Los Angeles County, which is the most populous county in the United States with an estimated 9.86 million residents as of 2022[ [update]]. It is the third-most visited city in the U.S. with over 2.7 million visitors as of 2023.\nThe area that became Los Angeles was originally inhabited by the indigenous Tongva people and later claimed by Juan Rodr\u00edguez Cabrillo for Spain in 1542. The city was founded on September 4, 1781, under Spanish governor Felipe de Neve, on the village of Yaanga. It became a part of the First Mexican Empire in 1821 following the Mexican War of Independence. In 1848, at the end of the Mexican\u2013American War, Los Angeles and the rest of California were purchased as part of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo and became part of the United States. Los Angeles was incorporated as a municipality on April 4, 1850, five months before California achieved statehood. The discovery of oil in the 1890s brought rapid growth to the city. The city was further expanded with the completion of the Los Angeles Aqueduct in 1913, which delivers water from Eastern California.\nLos Angeles has a diverse economy with a broad range of industries. Despite a steep exodus of film and television production since the COVID-19 pandemic, Los Angeles is still one of the largest hubs of American film production, and is the world's largest by revenue; the city is also an important site in the history of film. It has one of the busiest container ports in the Americas, and despite a business exodus from downtown Los Angeles, the city's urban core is evolving as a cultural center with the world's largest showcase of architecture designed by Frank Gehry. In 2018, the Los Angeles metropolitan area had a gross metropolitan product of over $1.0\u00a0trillion, making it the city with the third-largest GDP in the world, after New York and Tokyo. Los Angeles hosted the Summer Olympics in 1932 and 1984, and will also host in 2028.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nToponymy.\nOn September 4, 1781, a group of 44 settlers known as \"Los Pobladores\" founded the (town) they called . The original name of the settlement is disputed; the Guinness Book of World Records rendered it as \"El Pueblo de Nuestra Se\u00f1ora la Reina de los \u00c1ngeles del R\u00edo Porci\u00fancula\"; other sources have shortened or alternate versions of the longer name.\nThe local English pronunciation of the name of the city has varied over time. A 1953 article in the journal of the American Name Society asserts that the pronunciation was established following the 1850 incorporation of the city and that since the 1880s the pronunciation emerged from a trend in California to give places Spanish, or Spanish-sounding, names and pronunciations. In 1908, librarian Charles Fletcher Lummis, who argued for the name's pronunciation with a hard \"g\" (), reported that there were at least 12 pronunciation variants. In the early 1900s, the \"Los Angeles Times\" advocated for pronouncing it \"Loce AHNG-hayl-ais\" (), approximating Spanish , by printing the respelling under its masthead for several years. This did not find favor.\nSince the 1930s, has been most common. In 1934, the United States Board on Geographic Names decreed that this pronunciation be used by the federal government. This was also endorsed in 1952 by a \"jury\" appointed by Mayor Fletcher Bowron to devise an official pronunciation.\nCommon pronunciations in the United Kingdom include . Phonetician Jack Windsor Lewis described the most common one, , as a spelling pronunciation based on analogy to Greek words ending in \"-\u200des\", \"reflecting a time when the classics were familiar if Spanish was not\".\nHistory.\nIndigenous history.\nThe settlement of Indigenous Californians in the modern Los Angeles Basin and the San Fernando Valley was dominated by the Tongva (now also known as the \"Gabriele\u00f1o\" since the era of Spanish colonization). The historic center of Tongva power in the region was the settlement of Yaanga (Tongva: \"Iy\u00e1ang\u1e9a\"), meaning \"place of the poison oak\", which would one day be the site where the Spanish founded the Pueblo de Los \u00c1ngeles. \"Iy\u00e1ang\u1e9a\" has also been translated as \"the valley of smoke\".\nSpanish rule.\nMaritime explorer Juan Rodr\u00edguez Cabrillo claimed the area of southern California for the Spanish Empire in 1542, while on an official military exploring expedition, as he was moving northward along the Pacific coast from earlier colonizing bases of New Spain in Central and South America. Gaspar de Portol\u00e0 and Franciscan missionary Juan Cresp\u00ed reached the present site of Los Angeles on August 2, 1769.\nIn 1771, Franciscan friar Jun\u00edpero Serra directed the building of the Mission San Gabriel Arc\u00e1ngel, the first mission in the area. On September 4, 1781, a group of 44 settlers known as \"Los Pobladores\" founded the (town) they called . The present-day city has the largest Roman Catholic archdiocese in the United States. Two-thirds of the Mexican or (New Spain) settlers were mestizo or mulatto, a mixture of African, indigenous, and European ancestry. The settlement remained a small ranch town for decades, but by 1820, the population had increased to about 650 residents. Today, the pueblo is commemorated in the historic district of Los Angeles Pueblo Plaza and Olvera Street, the oldest part of Los Angeles.\nMexican rule.\nNew Spain achieved its independence from the Spanish Empire in 1821, and the pueblo now existed within the new Mexican Republic. During Mexican rule, Governor P\u00edo Pico made Los Angeles the regional capital of Alta California. By this time, the new republic introduced more secularization acts within the Los Angeles region. In 1846, during the wider Mexican\u2013American War, marines from the United States occupied the pueblo. This resulted in the siege of Los Angeles, where 150 Mexican militias fought the occupiers, who eventually surrendered.\nMexican rule ended following the American Conquest of California, part of the larger Mexican-American War. Americans took control from the Californios after a series of battles, culminating with the signing of the Treaty of Cahuenga on January 13, 1847. The Mexican Cession was formalized in the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848, which ceded Los Angeles and the rest of Alta California to the United States.\nPost-Conquest era.\nRailroads arrived with the completion of the transcontinental Southern Pacific line from New Orleans to Los Angeles in 1876 and the Santa Fe Railroad in 1885. Petroleum was discovered in the city and surrounding area in 1892, and by 1923, the discoveries had helped California become the country's largest oil producer, accounting for about one-quarter of the world's petroleum output.\nBy 1900, the population had grown to more than 102,000, putting pressure on the city's water supply. The completion of the Los Angeles Aqueduct in 1913, under the supervision of William Mulholland, ensured the continued growth of the city. Because of clauses in the city's charter that prevented the City of Los Angeles from selling or providing water from the aqueduct to any area outside its borders, many adjacent cities and communities felt compelled to join Los Angeles.\nLos Angeles created the first municipal zoning ordinance in the United States. On September 14, 1908, the Los Angeles City Council promulgated residential and industrial land use zones. The new ordinance established three residential zones of a single type, where industrial uses were prohibited. The proscriptions included barns, lumber yards, and any industrial land use employing machine-powered equipment. These laws were enforced against industrial properties after the fact. These prohibitions were in addition to existing activities that were already regulated as nuisances. These included explosives warehousing, gas works, oil drilling, slaughterhouses, and tanneries. The Los Angeles City Council also designated seven industrial zones within the city. However, between 1908 and 1915, the Los Angeles City Council created various exceptions to the broad proscriptions that applied to these three residential zones, and as a consequence, some industrial uses emerged within them. There are two differences between the 1908 Residence District Ordinance and later zoning laws in the United States. First, the 1908 laws did not establish a comprehensive zoning map as the 1916 New York City Zoning Ordinance did. Second, the residential zones did not distinguish types of housing; they treated apartments, hotels, and detached single-family housing equally.\nIn 1910, Hollywood merged into Los Angeles, with 10 movie companies already operating in the city at the time. By 1921, more than 80 percent of the world's film industry was concentrated in L.A. The money generated by the industry kept the city insulated from much of the economic loss suffered by the rest of the country during the Great Depression.\nBy 1930, the population surpassed one million. In 1932, the city hosted the Summer Olympics.\nPost-WWII.\nDuring World War II, Los Angeles was a major center of wartime manufacturing, such as shipbuilding and aircraft. Calship built hundreds of Liberty Ships and Victory Ships on Terminal Island, and the Los Angeles area was the headquarters of six of the country's major aircraft manufacturers (Douglas Aircraft Company, Hughes Aircraft, Lockheed, North American Aviation, Northrop Corporation, and Vultee). During the war, more aircraft were produced in one year than in all the pre-war years since the Wright brothers flew the first airplane in 1903, combined. Manufacturing in Los Angeles skyrocketed, and as William S. Knudsen, of the National Defense Advisory Commission, put it, \"We won because we smothered the enemy in an avalanche of production, the like of which he had never seen, nor dreamed possible.\"\nAfter the end of World War II Los Angeles grew more rapidly than ever, sprawling into the San Fernando Valley. The expansion of the state owned Interstate Highway System during the 1950s and 1960s helped propel suburban growth and signaled the demise of the city's privately owned electrified rail system, once the world's largest.\nAs a consequence of World War II, suburban growth, and population density, many amusement parks were built and operated in this area. An example is Beverly Park, which was located at the corner of Beverly Boulevard and La Cienega before being closed and substituted by the Beverly Center.\nIn the second half of the 20th century, Los Angeles substantially reduced the amount of housing that could be built by drastically downzoning the city. In 1960, the city had a total zoned capacity for approximately 10 million people. By 1990, that capacity had fallen to 4.5 million as a result of policy decisions to ban housing through zoning.\nRacial tensions led to the Watts riots in 1965, resulting in 34 deaths and over 1,000 injuries.\nIn 1969, California became the birthplace of the Internet, as the first ARPANET transmission was sent from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) to the Stanford Research Institute in Menlo Park.\nIn 1973, Tom Bradley was elected as the city's first African American mayor, serving for five terms until retiring in 1993. Other events in the city during the 1970s included the Symbionese Liberation Army's South Central standoff in 1974 and the Hillside Stranglers murder cases in 1977\u20131978.\nIn early 1984, the city surpassed Chicago in population, thus becoming the second-largest city in the United States.\nIn 1984, the city hosted the Summer Olympic Games for the second time. Despite being boycotted by 14 Communist countries, the 1984 Olympics became more financially successful than any previous, and the second Olympics to turn a profit; the other, according to an analysis of contemporary newspaper reports, was the 1932 Summer Olympics, also held in Los Angeles.\nRacial tensions erupted on April 29, 1992, with the acquittal by a Simi Valley jury of four Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) officers captured on videotape beating Rodney King, culminating in large-scale riots.\nIn 1994, the magnitude 6.7 Northridge earthquake shook the city, causing $12.5\u00a0billion in damage and 72 deaths. The century ended with the Rampart scandal, one of the most extensive documented cases of police misconduct in American history.\n21st century.\nIn 2002, Mayor James Hahn led the campaign against secession, resulting in voters defeating efforts by the San Fernando Valley and Hollywood to secede from the city.\nIn 2022, Karen Bass became the city's first female mayor, making Los Angeles the largest U.S. city to have ever had a woman as mayor.\nIn January 2025, a series of devastating wildfires caused by severe winds swept through Southern California, with the Pacific Palisades fire causing widespread destruction in Los Angeles's northwestern community of Pacific Palisades, with many calling it the most destructive in the history of the city of Los Angeles.\nIn June 2025, the city experienced protests and riots following raids by Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). Los Angeles is being targeted by the Trump administration over its sanctuary city status sending in hundred of federal agents to target the immigrant community of the city. Trump sent in the Army National Guard and US Marines without the consent of local governments.\nLos Angeles will host the 2028 Summer Olympics and Paralympic Games, making Los Angeles the third city to host the Olympics three times.\nGeography.\nTopography.\nThe city of Los Angeles covers a total area of , comprising of land and of water. The city extends for from north to south and for from east to west. The perimeter of the city is .\nLos Angeles is both flat and hilly. The highest point in the city proper is Mount Lukens at , located in the foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains at the north extent of the Crescenta Valley. The eastern end of the Santa Monica Mountains stretches from Downtown to the Pacific Ocean and separates the Los Angeles Basin from the San Fernando Valley. Other hilly parts of Los Angeles include the Mt. Washington area north of Downtown, eastern parts such as Boyle Heights, the Crenshaw district around the Baldwin Hills, and the San Pedro district.\nSurrounding the city are much higher mountains. Immediately to the north lie the San Gabriel Mountains, which is a popular recreation area for Angelenos. Its high point is Mount San Antonio, locally known as Mount Baldy, which reaches . Further afield, the highest point in southern California is San Gorgonio Mountain, east of downtown Los Angeles, with a height of .\nThe Los Angeles River, which is largely seasonal, is the primary drainage channel. It was straightened and lined in of concrete by the Army Corps of Engineers to act as a flood control channel. The river begins in the Canoga Park district of the city, flows east from the San Fernando Valley along the north edge of the Santa Monica Mountains, and turns south through the city center, flowing to its mouth in the Port of Long Beach at the Pacific Ocean. The smaller Ballona Creek flows into the Santa Monica Bay at Playa del Rey.\nVegetation.\nLos Angeles is rich in native plant species partly because of its diversity of habitats, including beaches, wetlands, and mountains. The most prevalent plant communities are coastal sage scrub, chaparral shrubland, and riparian woodland. Native plants include: the California poppy, matilija poppy, toyon, Ceanothus, Chamise, Coast Live Oak, sycamore, willow and Giant Wildrye. Many of these native species, such as the Los Angeles sunflower, have become so rare as to be considered endangered. Mexican Fan Palms, Canary Island Palms, Queen Palms, Date Palms, and California Fan Palms are common in the Los Angeles area, although only the last is native to California, though still not native to the City of Los Angeles.\nLos Angeles has several official flora:\nFauna.\nThe city has an urban population of bobcats (\"Lynx rufus\"). Mange is a common problem in this population. Although Serieys \"et al.\" 2014 find selection of immune genetics at several loci they do not demonstrate that this produces a real difference which helps the bobcats to survive future mange outbreaks.\nBats, coyotes, raccoons, opossums, skunks, snakes, and squirrels are wild animals commonly found in the Los Angeles area. Mountain lions, mule deer, and other wild animals are also commonly spotted in Southern California.\nGeology.\nLos Angeles is subject to earthquakes because of its location on the Pacific Ring of Fire. The geologic instability has produced numerous faults, which cause approximately 10,000 earthquakes annually in Southern California, though most of them are too small to be felt. The strike-slip San Andreas Fault system, which sits at the boundary between the Pacific Plate and the North American Plate, passes through the Los Angeles metropolitan area. The segment of the fault passing through Southern California experiences a major earthquake roughly every 110 to 140 years, and seismologists have warned about the next \"big one\", as the last major earthquake was the 1857 Fort Tejon earthquake. The Los Angeles basin and metropolitan area are also at risk from blind thrust earthquakes. Major earthquakes that have hit the Los Angeles area include the 1933 Long Beach, 1971 San Fernando, 1987 Whittier Narrows, and the 1994 Northridge events. All but a few are of low intensity and are not felt. The USGS has released the UCERF California earthquake forecast, which models earthquake occurrence in California. Parts of the city are also vulnerable to tsunamis; harbor areas were damaged by waves from Aleutian Islands earthquake in 1946, Valdivia earthquake in 1960, Alaska earthquake in 1964, Chile earthquake in 2010 and Japan earthquake in 2011.\nCityscape.\nThe city is divided into many different districts and neighborhoods, some of which had been separately incorporated cities that eventually merged with Los Angeles. These neighborhoods were developed piecemeal, and are well-defined enough that the city has signage which marks nearly all of them.\nOverview.\nThe city's street patterns generally follow a grid plan, with uniform block lengths and occasional roads that cut across blocks. However, this is complicated by rugged terrain, which has necessitated having different grids for each of the valleys that Los Angeles covers. Major streets are designed to move large volumes of traffic through many parts of the city, many of which are extremely long; Sepulveda Boulevard is long, while Foothill Boulevard is over long, reaching as far east as San Bernardino. Drivers in Los Angeles suffer from one of the worst rush hour periods in the world, according to an annual traffic index by navigation system maker, TomTom. LA drivers spend an additional 92 hours in traffic each year. During the peak rush hour, there is 80% congestion, according to the index.\nLos Angeles is often characterized by the presence of low-rise buildings, in contrast to New York City. Outside of a few centers such as downtown, Warner Center, Century City, Koreatown, Miracle Mile, Hollywood, and Westwood, skyscrapers and high-rise buildings are not common in Los Angeles. However, downtown Los Angeles has many buildings over 30 stories, with fourteen over 50 stories, and two over 70 stories, the tallest of which is the Wilshire Grand Center.\nClimate.\nLos Angeles has a two-season semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"BSh\") with dry summers and very mild winters, but it receives more annual precipitation than most semi-arid climates, narrowly missing the boundary of a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csb\" on the coast, \"Csa\" otherwise). Daytime temperatures are generally temperate all year round. In winter, they average around . Autumn months tend to be hot, with major heat waves a common occurrence in September and October, while the spring months tend to be cooler and experience more precipitation. Los Angeles has plenty of sunshine throughout the year, with an average of only 35 days with measurable precipitation annually.\nTemperatures in the coastal basin exceed on a dozen or so days in the year, from one day a month in April, May, June and November to three days a month in July, August, October and to five days in September. Temperatures in the San Fernando and San Gabriel Valleys are considerably warmer. Temperatures are subject to substantial daily swings; in inland areas, the difference between the average daily low and the average daily high is over . The average annual temperature of the sea is , from in January to in August. Hours of sunshine total more than 3,000 per year, from an average of 7 hours of sunshine per day in December to an average of 12 in July.\nDue to the mountainous terrain of the surrounding region, the Los Angeles area contains a large number of distinct microclimates, causing extreme variations in temperature in close physical proximity to each other. For example, the average July maximum temperature at the Santa Monica Pier is whereas it is in Canoga Park, away. The city, like much of the Southern Californian coast, is subject to a late spring/early summer weather phenomenon called \"June Gloom\". This involves overcast or foggy skies in the morning that yield to sun by early afternoon.\nMore recently, statewide droughts in California have further strained the city's water security. Downtown Los Angeles averages of precipitation annually, mainly occurring between November and March, generally in the form of moderate rain showers, but sometimes as heavy rainfall during winter storms. Rainfall is usually higher in the hills and coastal slopes of the mountains because of orographic uplift. Summer days are usually rainless. Rarely, an incursion of moist air from the south or east can bring brief thunderstorms in late summer, especially to the mountains. The coast gets slightly less rainfall, while the inland and mountain areas get considerably more. Years of average rainfall are rare. The usual pattern is a year-to-year variability, with a short string of dry years of rainfall, followed by one or two wet years with more than . Wet years are usually associated with warm water El Ni\u00f1o conditions in the Pacific, dry years with cooler water La Ni\u00f1a episodes. A series of rainy days can bring floods to the lowlands and mudslides to the hills, especially after wildfires have denuded the slopes.\nBoth freezing temperatures and snowfall are extremely rare in the city basin and along the coast, with the last occurrence of a reading at the downtown station being January 29, 1979; freezing temperatures occur nearly every year in valley locations, while the mountains within city limits typically receive snowfall every winter. The greatest snowfall recorded in downtown Los Angeles was on January 15, 1932. While the most recent snowfall occurred in February 2019, the first snowfall since 1962, with snow falling in areas adjacent to Los Angeles as recently as January 2021. Brief, localized instances of hail can occur on rare occasions, but are more common than snowfall. At the official downtown station, the highest recorded temperature is on September 27, 2010, while the lowest is , on January 4, 1949. Within the City of Los Angeles, the highest temperature ever officially recorded is , on September 6, 2020, at the weather station at Pierce College in the San Fernando Valley neighborhood of Woodland Hills. During autumn and winter, Santa Ana winds sometimes bring much warmer and drier conditions to Los Angeles, and raise wildfire risk.\nEnvironmental issues.\nOwing to geography, heavy reliance on automobiles, and the Los Angeles/Long Beach port complex, Los Angeles suffers from air pollution in the form of smog. The Los Angeles Basin and the San Fernando Valley are susceptible to atmospheric inversion, which holds in the exhaust from road vehicles, airplanes, locomotives, shipping, manufacturing, and other sources.\nThe smog season lasts from approximately May to October. While other large cities rely on rain to clear smog, Los Angeles gets only of rain each year: pollution accumulates over many consecutive days. Issues of air quality in Los Angeles and other major cities led to the passage of early national environmental legislation, including the Clean Air Act. When the act was passed, California was unable to create a State Implementation Plan that would enable it to meet the new air quality standards, largely because of the level of pollution in Los Angeles generated by older vehicles. More recently, the state of California has led the nation in working to limit pollution by mandating low-emission vehicles. Smog is expected to continue to drop in the coming years because of aggressive steps to reduce it, which include electric and hybrid cars, improvements in mass transit, and other measures.\nThe number of Stage 1 smog alerts in Los Angeles has declined from over 100 per year in the 1970s to almost zero in the new millennium. Despite improvement, the 2006 and 2007 annual reports of the American Lung Association ranked the city as the most polluted in the country with short-term particle pollution and year-round particle pollution. In 2008, the city was ranked the second most polluted and again had the highest year-round particulate pollution. The city met its goal of providing 20 percent of the city's power from renewable sources in 2010. The American Lung Association's 2013 survey ranks the metro area as having the nation's worst smog, and fourth in both short-term and year-round pollution amounts.\nLos Angeles is also home to the nation's largest urban oil field. There are more than 700 active oil wells within of homes, churches, schools, and hospitals in the city, a situation about which the EPA has voiced serious concerns.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTotal population, age, and sex.\nThe 2020 U.S. census reported Los Angeles had a population of 3,898,747. The population density was 8,304.2 people per square mile (3,168 people per square kilometer). 5.2% of the total population is under 5 years old, 19.5% under 18 and 13.8% 65 years old and over. Females make up 50.2% of the total population.\nHousing and families.\nOwner-occupied housing units make up 36.3% of the total Los Angeles housing units, and they cost $879,500 on average. (2019\u20132023) With a mortgage, the median selected monthly owner costs are $3,399, and without a mortgage $950. (2019\u20132023) Median gross rent is $1,879. (2019\u20132023) There are 1,419,663 households in Los Angeles, with an average of 2.64 people being part of them. (2019\u20132023).\nEconomy.\n66.5% of the total population aged 16 and over make up Los Angeles in civilian labor force, while among female residents aged 16 and over the percentage is 61.0%. In 2022, accommodation and food services made $17,366,966, health care and social assistance sectors made $46,297,839, transportation and warehousing $25,410,257, and the retail sector $81,351,523, with residents spending an average of $21,281 in retail purchases throughout the year. From 2019 to 2023, the median household income in Los Angeles was $80,366 (2023 dollars), while the per capita income in the past 12 months was $46,270. 16.5% of Los Angeles inhabitants live in poverty.\nRace and ethnicity.\nAccording to data in 2023 from the United States Census Bureau Los Angeles's population is 47.2% Hispanic or Latino, 28.3% non-Hispanic White, 8.5% Black, 12.0% Asian, 1.2% Native American and 0.1% Pacific Islander. Ethnic enclaves like Chinatown, Historic Filipinotown, Koreatown, Little Armenia, Little Ethiopia, Tehrangeles, Little Tokyo, Little Bangladesh, and Thai Town provide examples of the polyglot character of Los Angeles.\nMexican ancestry makes up the largest origin among descendants of American countries other than the United States at 31.9% of the city's population, followed by those of Salvadoran (6.0%) and Guatemalan (3.6%) heritage. Descendants of Mexicans and Central Americans have long-established communities in Los Angeles and are spread throughout the entire city and its metropolitan area. It is most heavily concentrated in regions around Downtown, such as East Los Angeles, Northeast Los Angeles and Westlake.\nThe largest Asian ethnic groups are Filipinos (3.2%) and Koreans (2.9%), which have their own established ethnic enclaves\u2014Koreatown in the Wilshire Center and Historic Filipinotown. Chinese people, which make up 1.8% of Los Angeles's population, reside mostly outside of Los Angeles city limits, in the San Gabriel Valley of eastern Los Angeles County, but make a sizable presence in the city, notably in Chinatown. Chinatown and Thaitown are also home to many Thais and Cambodians, which make up 0.3% and 0.1% of Los Angeles's population, respectively. The Japanese comprise 0.9% of the city's population and have an established Little Tokyo in the city's downtown, and another significant community of Japanese Americans is in the Sawtelle district of West Los Angeles. Indians make up 0.9% of the city's population. Vietnamese make up 0.5% of Los Angeles's population.\nLos Angeles is also home to Caucasian and Middle Eastern communities, such as Armenians, Assyrians, and Iranians, many of whom live in enclaves like Little Armenia and Tehrangeles.\nAfrican Americans have been the predominant ethnic group in South Los Angeles, which has emerged as the largest African-American community in the western United States since the 1960s. The neighborhoods of South Los Angeles with highest concentration of African Americans include Crenshaw, Baldwin Hills, Leimert Park, Hyde Park, Gramercy Park, Manchester Square and Watts. Since the 1990s, the growing cost of living in the city has most impacted the African American population. African Americans are the fastest declining population in the city, and many of the formerly predominantly African American neighborhoods have become much more diverse. There is also a sizable Eritrean and Ethiopian community in the Fairfax region.\nLos Angeles has the second-largest Mexican, Armenian, Salvadoran, Filipino, and Guatemalan populations by city in the world, the third-largest Canadian population in the world, and has the largest Japanese, Iranian/Persian, Cambodian, and Romani (Gypsy) populations in the country. The Italian community is concentrated in San Pedro.\nMost of Los Angeles's foreign-born population were born in Mexico, El Salvador, Guatemala, the Philippines and South Korea.\nReligion.\nAccording to a 2014 study by the Pew Research Center, Christianity is the most prevalently practiced religion in Los Angeles (65%). The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles is the largest archdiocese in the country. Cardinal Roger Mahony, as the archbishop, oversaw construction of the Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels, which opened in September 2002 in downtown Los Angeles.\nIn 2011, the once common, but ultimately lapsed, custom of conducting a procession and Mass in honor of Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de los \u00c1ngeles, in commemoration of the founding of the City of Los Angeles in 1781, was revived by the Queen of Angels Foundation and its founder Mark Albert, with the support of the Archdiocese of Los Angeles as well as several civic leaders. The recently revived custom is a continuation of the original processions and Masses that commenced on the first anniversary of the founding of Los Angeles in 1782 and continued for nearly a century thereafter.\nWith 621,000 Jews in the metropolitan area, the region has the second-largest population of Jews in the United States, after New York City. Many of Los Angeles's Jews now live on the Westside and in the San Fernando Valley, though Boyle Heights once had a large Jewish population before World War II due to restrictive housing covenants. Major Orthodox Jewish neighborhoods include Hancock Park, Pico-Robertson, and Valley Village, while Jewish Israelis are well represented in the Encino and Tarzana neighborhoods, and Persian Jews in Beverly Hills. Many varieties of Judaism are represented in the greater Los Angeles area, including Reform, Conservative, Orthodox, and Reconstructionist. The Breed Street Shul in East Los Angeles, built in 1923, was the largest synagogue west of Chicago in its early decades; it is no longer in daily use as a synagogue and is being converted to a museum and community center. The Kabbalah Centre also has a presence in the city.\nThe International Church of the Foursquare Gospel was founded in Los Angeles by Aimee Semple McPherson in 1923 and remains headquartered there to this day. For many years, the church convened at Angelus Temple, which, at its construction, was one of the largest churches in the country.\nLos Angeles has had a rich and influential Protestant tradition. The first Protestant service in Los Angeles was a Methodist meeting held in a private home in 1850, and the oldest Protestant church still operating, First Congregational Church, was founded in 1867. In the early 1900s the Bible Institute Of Los Angeles published the founding documents of the Christian Fundamentalist movement and the Azusa Street Revival launched Pentecostalism. The Metropolitan Community Church also had its origins in the Los Angeles area. Important churches in the city include First Presbyterian Church of Hollywood, Bel Air Presbyterian Church, First African Methodist Episcopal Church of Los Angeles, West Angeles Church of God in Christ, Second Baptist Church, Crenshaw Christian Center, McCarty Memorial Christian Church, and First Congregational Church.\nThe Hollywood region of Los Angeles also has several significant headquarters, churches, including the Celebrity Center of the Church of Scientology.\nBecause of Los Angeles's large multi-ethnic population, a wide variety of faiths are practiced, including Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Zoroastrianism, Sikhism, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed, various Eastern Orthodox Churches, Sufism, Shintoism, Taoism, Confucianism, Chinese folk religion and countless others. Immigrants from Asia, for example, have formed several significant Buddhist congregations, making the city home to the greatest variety of Buddhists in the world. The first Buddhist joss house was founded in the city in 1875. Atheism and other secular beliefs are also common, as the city is the largest in the Western U.S. Unchurched Belt.\nHomelessness.\nAs of January 2024, there are 45,252 homeless people in the City of Los Angeles, comprising roughly 60% of the homeless population of LA County. This is a 2.2% decrease from the previous year (with a 0.3% decrease in the overall homeless population of LA County). The epicenter of homelessness in Los Angeles is the Skid Row neighborhood, which contains 8,000 homeless people, one of the largest stable populations of homeless people in the United States. The increased homeless population in Los Angeles has been attributed to lack of housing affordability and to substance abuse. Almost 60 percent of the 82,955 people who became newly homeless in 2019 said their homelessness was because of economic hardship. In Los Angeles, black people are roughly four times more likely to experience homelessness.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Los Angeles is driven by international trade, entertainment (television, motion pictures, video games, music recording, and production), aerospace, technology, petroleum, fashion, apparel, and tourism. Other significant industries include finance, telecommunications, law, healthcare, and transportation. In the 2017 Global Financial Centres Index, Los Angeles was ranked the 19th most competitive financial center in the world and sixth most competitive in the U.S. after New York City, San Francisco, Chicago, Boston, and Washington, D.C. Although many businesses have left downtown Los Angeles following the COVID-19 pandemic, efforts are underway to re-invent the neighborhood as a cultural center with a large architectural showcase in Bunker Hill designed by Frank Gehry.\nOf the five major film studios, only Paramount Pictures is within Los Angeles's city limits; it is located in the so-called Thirty-Mile Zone of entertainment headquarters in Southern California. Their parent company Paramount Skydance Corporation has had its corporate headquarters in Los Angeles since 2025.\nLos Angeles is still the largest manufacturing center in the United States by employment, but now second after the New York metropolitan area by dollar value of goods manufactured. Disadvantages of manufacturing production in Los Angeles are its relative geographical isolation from most major North American markets, lack of a reliable water supply, and lack of an adequate skilled labor force, in addition to a significantly complex regulatory environment. The contiguous ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach together comprise the busiest port in the United States by some measures and the fifth busiest port in the world, vital to trade within the Pacific Rim.\nThe Los Angeles metropolitan area has a gross metropolitan product of over $1.0 trillion (as of 2018[ [update]]), making it the third-largest economic metropolitan area in the world, after New York and Tokyo. Los Angeles has been classified an \"alpha world city\" according to a 2012 study by a group at Loughborough University.\nAs of 2018[ [update]], Los Angeles is home to three Fortune 500 companies: AECOM, CBRE Group, and Reliance Steel &amp; Aluminum Co. Other companies headquartered in Los Angeles and the surrounding metropolitan area include The Aerospace Corporation, California Pizza Kitchen, Capital Group Companies, Deluxe Entertainment Services Group, Dine Brands Global, DreamWorks Animation, Dollar Shave Club, Fandango Media, Farmers Insurance Group, Forever 21, Hulu, Panda Express, SpaceX, Ubisoft Film &amp; Television, The Walt Disney Company, Universal Pictures, Warner Bros., Warner Music Group, and Trader Joe's.\nAt the end of the second quarter of 2024, Los Angeles saw an office space vacancy rate of 31.5%, a 33.5% increase year-over-year Retail vacancy stood at 8.6%, a 15% increase year-over-year.\nArts and culture.\nLos Angeles is often billed as the creative capital of the world because one in every six of its residents works in a creative industry and there are more artists, writers, filmmakers, actors, dancers and musicians living and working in Los Angeles than any other city at any other time in world history. Los Angeles is strongly influenced by Mexican American culture due to California formerly being part of Mexico and, previously, the Spanish Empire. The city is also known for its prolific murals.\nLandmarks.\nThe architecture of Los Angeles is influenced by its Spanish, Mexican, and American roots. Popular styles in the city include Spanish Colonial Revival style, Mission Revival style, California Churrigueresque style, Mediterranean Revival style, Art Deco style, and Mid-Century Modern style, among others.\nImportant landmarks in Los Angeles include the Hollywood Sign, Walt Disney Concert Hall, Capitol Records Building, the Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels, Angels Flight, Grauman's Chinese Theatre, Dolby Theatre, Griffith Observatory, Getty Center, Getty Villa, Stahl House, the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, L.A. Live, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, the Venice Canal Historic District and boardwalk, Theme Building, Bradbury Building, U.S. Bank Tower, Wilshire Grand Center, Hollywood Boulevard, Los Angeles City Hall, Hollywood Bowl, battleship , Watts Towers, Crypto.com Arena, Dodger Stadium, and Olvera Street.\nMovies and the performing arts.\nThe performing arts play a major role in Los Angeles's cultural identity. According to the USC Stevens Institute for Innovation, \"there are more than 1,100 annual theatrical productions and 21 openings every week.\" The Los Angeles Music Center is \"one of the three largest performing arts centers in the nation\", with more than 1.3\u00a0million visitors per year. The Walt Disney Concert Hall, centerpiece of the Music Center, is home to the prestigious Los Angeles Philharmonic. Notable organizations such as Center Theatre Group, the Los Angeles Master Chorale, and the Los Angeles Opera are also resident companies of the Music Center. Talent is locally cultivated at premier institutions such as the Colburn School and the USC Thornton School of Music.\nThe city's Hollywood neighborhood has been recognized as the center of the motion picture industry, having held this distinction since the early 20th century, and the Los Angeles area is also associated with being the center of the television industry. The city is home to major film studios as well as major record labels. Los Angeles plays host to the annual Academy Awards, the Primetime Emmy Awards, the Grammy Awards, as well as many other entertainment industry awards shows. Los Angeles is the site of the USC School of Cinematic Arts which is the oldest film school in the United States.\nMuseums and galleries.\nThere are 841 museums and art galleries in Los Angeles County, including many in the city of Los Angeles, more museums per capita than any other city in the U.S. Some of the notable museums are the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (the largest art museum in the Western United States), the Getty Center (part of the J. Paul Getty Trust, the world's wealthiest art institution), the Petersen Automotive Museum, the Huntington Library, the Natural History Museum, the Battleship Iowa, The Broad, which houses over 2,000 works of contemporary art and the Museum of Contemporary Art. A significant number of art galleries are on Gallery Row, and tens of thousands attend the monthly Downtown Art Walk there.\nLibraries.\nThe Los Angeles Public Library system operates 72 public libraries in the city. Enclaves of unincorporated areas are served by branches of the County of Los Angeles Public Library, many of which are within walking distance to residents.\nCuisine.\nLos Angeles's food culture is a fusion of global cuisine brought on by the city's rich immigrant history and population. As of 2025, the Michelin Guide recognized 20 starred restaurants including 2 restaurants Providence and Somni which earned 3 Michelin stars.\nLatin American immigrants, particularly Mexican immigrants, brought tacos, burritos, quesadillas, tortas, tamales, and enchiladas served from food trucks and stands, taquerias, and caf\u00e9s. Asian restaurants, many immigrant-owned, exist throughout the city with hotspots in Chinatown, Koreatown, and Little Tokyo. Los Angeles also carries an outsized offering of vegan, vegetarian, and plant-based options.\nSports.\nLos Angeles and its metropolitan area are the home of eleven top-level professional sports teams, several of which play in neighboring communities but use Los Angeles in their name. These teams include the Los Angeles Dodgers and Los Angeles Angels of Major League Baseball (MLB), the Los Angeles Rams and Los Angeles Chargers of the National Football League (NFL), the Los Angeles Lakers and Los Angeles Clippers of the National Basketball Association (NBA), the Los Angeles Kings and Anaheim Ducks of the National Hockey League (NHL), the Los Angeles Galaxy and Los Angeles FC of Major League Soccer (MLS), the Los Angeles Sparks of the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA), the SoCal Lashings of Minor League Cricket (MiLC) and the Los Angeles Knight Riders of Major League Cricket (MLC).\nOther notable sports teams include the UCLA Bruins and the USC Trojans in the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), both of which are Division I teams in the Big Ten Conference.\nLos Angeles is the second-largest city in the United States but hosted no NFL team between 1995 and 2015. At one time, the Los Angeles area hosted two NFL teams: the Rams and the Raiders. Both left the city in 1995, with the Rams moving to St. Louis, and the Raiders moving back to their original home of Oakland. After 21 seasons in St. Louis, on January 12, 2016, the NFL announced the Rams would be moving back to Los Angeles for the 2016 NFL season with its home games played at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum for four seasons. Before 1995, the Rams played their home games in the Coliseum from 1946 to 1979 which made them the first professional sports team to play in Los Angeles, and then moved to Anaheim Stadium from 1980 until 1994. The San Diego Chargers announced on January 12, 2017, that they would also relocate back to Los Angeles (the first since its inaugural season in 1960) and become the Los Angeles Chargers beginning in the 2017 NFL season and played at Dignity Health Sports Park in Carson, California, for three seasons. The Rams and the Chargers would soon move to the newly built SoFi Stadium, located in nearby Inglewood during the 2020 season.\nLos Angeles boasts a number of sports venues, including Dodger Stadium, the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, BMO Stadium and Crypto.com Arena. The Kia Forum, SoFi Stadium, Dignity Health Sports Park, the Rose Bowl, Angel Stadium, Honda Center, and Intuit Dome are also in adjacent cities and cities in Los Angeles's metropolitan area.\nLos Angeles has twice hosted the Summer Olympic Games: in 1932 and in 1984, and will host the games for a third time in 2028. Los Angeles will be the third city after London (1908, 1948 and 2012) and Paris (1900, 1924 and 2024) to host the Olympic Games three times. Los Angeles has submitted 10 bids to host Olympic events to the International Olympic Committee, more than any other city in the world. When the tenth Olympic Games were hosted in 1932, the former 10th Street was renamed Olympic Blvd. Los Angeles also hosted the Deaflympics in 1985 and Special Olympics World Summer Games in 2015.\nEight NFL Super Bowls have also been held in the city and its surrounding areas - two at the Memorial Coliseum (the first Super Bowl, I and VII), five at the Rose Bowl in suburban Pasadena (XI, XIV, XVII, XXI, and XXVII), and one at the suburban Inglewood (LVI). The Rose Bowl also hosts an annual and highly prestigious NCAA college football game called the Rose Bowl, which happens every New Year's Day.\nLos Angeles also hosted eight FIFA World Cup soccer games at the Rose Bowl in 1994, including the final, where Brazil won. The Rose Bowl also hosted four matches in the 1999 FIFA Women's World Cup, including the final, where the United States won against China on penalty kicks. This was the game where Brandi Chastain took her shirt off after she scored the tournament-winning penalty kick, creating an iconic image. Los Angeles will be one of eleven U.S. host cities for the 2026 FIFA World Cup with matches set to be held at SoFi Stadium.\nLos Angeles is one of six North American cities to have won championships in all five of its major leagues (MLB, NFL, NHL, NBA, and MLS), having completed the feat with the Kings' 2012 Stanley Cup title.\nGovernment.\nLos Angeles is a charter city as opposed to a general law city. The current charter was adopted on June 8, 1999, and has been amended many times. The elected government consists of the Los Angeles City Council and the mayor of Los Angeles, which operate under a mayor\u2013council government, as well as the city attorney (not to be confused with the district attorney, a county office) and controller. The mayor is Karen Bass. There are 15 city council districts.\nThe city has many departments and appointed officers, including the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD), the Los Angeles Board of Police Commissioners, the Los Angeles Fire Department (LAFD), the Housing Authority of the City of Los Angeles (HACLA), the Los Angeles Department of Transportation (LADOT), and the Los Angeles Public Library (LAPL).\nThe charter of the City of Los Angeles, ratified by voters in 1999, created a system of advisory neighborhood councils that would represent the diversity of stakeholders, defined as those who live, work, or own property in the neighborhood. The neighborhood councils are relatively autonomous and spontaneous in that they identify their own boundaries, establish their own bylaws, and elect their own officers. There are about 90 neighborhood councils.\nResidents of Los Angeles elect supervisors for the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th supervisorial districts.\nFederal and state representation.\nIn the California State Assembly, Los Angeles is split between fourteen districts. In the California State Senate, the city is split between eight districts. In the United States House of Representatives, it is split among nine congressional districts.\nPolitics.\nLos Angeles City Presidential Election Results\nCrime.\nIn 1992, the city of Los Angeles recorded 1,092 murders. Los Angeles experienced a significant decline in crime in the 1990s and late 2000s and reached a 50-year low in 2009 with 314 homicides. This is a rate of 7.8 per 100,000\u2014down from 1980, when it was 34.2. In 2021, murders rose to their highest rate (8.5) since 2008, although by 2024 (6.1), the spike had receded.\nIn 2015, it was revealed that the LAPD had been under-reporting a category of crime between 2005 and 2012, making the rate in the city appear lower than it was for that period.\nThe Dragna crime family and Mickey Cohen dominated organized crime in the city during the Prohibition era and reached its peak during the 1940s and 1950s with the \"Battle of Sunset Strip\" as part of the American Mafia, but has gradually declined since then with the rise of various black and Hispanic gangs in the late 1960s and early 1970s.\nAccording to the Los Angeles Police Department, the city is home to 45,000 gang members, organized into 450 gangs. Among them are the Crips and Bloods, which are both African American street gangs that originated in the South Los Angeles region. Latino street gangs such as the Sure\u00f1os, a Mexican American street gang, and Mara Salvatrucha, which has mainly members of Salvadoran descent, as well as other Central American descendants, all originated in Los Angeles. This has led to the city being referred to as the \"Gang Capital of America\".\nEducation.\nColleges and universities.\nThere are three public universities within the city limits: California State University, Los Angeles (CSULA), California State University, Northridge (CSUN) and University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA).\nPrivate colleges in the city include:\nThe community college system consists of nine campuses governed by the trustees of the Los Angeles Community College District:\nThere are numerous additional colleges and universities outside the city limits in the Greater Los Angeles area, including the Claremont Colleges consortium, which includes the most selective liberal arts colleges in the U.S., and the California Institute of Technology (Caltech), one of the top STEM-focused research institutions in the world.\nSchools.\nLos Angeles Unified School District serves almost all of the city of Los Angeles, as well as several surrounding communities, with a student population of around 800,000. After Proposition 13 was approved in 1978, urban school districts had considerable trouble with funding. LAUSD has become known for its underfunded, overcrowded, and poorly maintained campuses, although its 162 Magnet schools help compete with local private schools.\nSeveral small sections of Los Angeles are in the Inglewood Unified School District, and the Las Virgenes Unified School District. The Los Angeles County Office of Education operates the Los Angeles County High School for the Arts.\nMedia.\nThe Los Angeles metro area is the second-largest broadcast designated market area in the U.S. (after New York) with 5,431,140 homes (4.956% of the U.S.), which is served by a wide variety of local AM and FM radio and television stations. Los Angeles and New York City are the only two media markets to have seven VHF allocations assigned to them.\nThe major daily English-language newspaper in the area is the \"Los Angeles Times\". \"La Opini\u00f3n\" is the city's major daily Spanish-language paper. \"The Korea Times\" is the city's major daily Korean-language paper while \"The World Journal\" is the city and county's major Chinese newspaper. The \"Los Angeles Sentinel\" is the city's major African-American weekly paper, boasting the largest African-American readership in the Western United States. \"Investor's Business Daily\" is distributed from its LA corporate offices, which are headquartered in Playa del Rey.\nAs part of the region's aforementioned creative industry, the Big Five major broadcast television networks, ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, and The CW, all have production facilities and offices throughout various areas of Los Angeles. All four major broadcast television networks, plus major Spanish-language networks Telemundo and Univision, also own and operate stations that both serve the Los Angeles market and serve as each network's West Coast flagship station: ABC's KABC-TV (Channel 7), CBS's KCBS-TV (Channel 2), Fox's KTTV-TV (Channel 11), NBC's KNBC-TV (Channel 4), The CW's KTLA-TV (Channel 5), MyNetworkTV's KCOP-TV (Channel 13), Telemundo's KVEA-TV (Channel 52), and Univision's KMEX-TV (Channel 34). The region also has four PBS member stations, with KCET re-joining the network as a secondary affiliate in August 2019, after spending the previous eight years as the nation's largest independent public television station. KTBN (Channel 40) is the flagship station of the religious Trinity Broadcasting Network, based out of Santa Ana. A variety of independent television stations, such as KCAL-TV (Channel 9), also operate in the area.\nThere are also a number of smaller regional newspapers, alternative weeklies and magazines, including the \"Los Angeles Register\", Los Angeles Community News, (which focuses on coverage of the greater Los Angeles area), \"Los Angeles Daily News\" (which focuses coverage on the San Fernando Valley), \"LA Weekly\", \"L.A. Record\" (which focuses coverage on the music scene in the Greater Los Angeles Area), \"Los Angeles Magazine\", the \"Los Angeles Business Journal\", the \"Los Angeles Daily Journal\" (legal industry paper), \"The Hollywood Reporter\", \"Variety\" (both entertainment industry papers), and \"Los Angeles Downtown News\". In addition to the major papers, numerous local periodicals serve immigrant communities in their native languages, including Armenian, English, Korean, Persian, Russian, Chinese, Japanese, Hebrew, and Arabic. Many cities adjacent to Los Angeles also have their own daily newspapers whose coverage and availability overlap with certain Los Angeles neighborhoods. Examples include \"The Daily Breeze\" (serving the South Bay), and \"The Long Beach Press-Telegram\".\nLos Angeles arts, culture and nightlife news is also covered by a number of local and national online guides, including \"Time Out Los Angeles\", \"Thrillist\", \"Kristin's List\", \"DailyCandy\", \"Diversity News Magazine\", \"LAist\", and \"Flavorpill\".\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nFreeways.\nThe city and the rest of the Los Angeles metropolitan area are served by an extensive network of freeways and highways. Texas Transportation Institute's annual Urban Mobility Report ranked Los Angeles area roads the most congested in the United States in 2019, as measured by annual delay per traveler, area residents experiencing a cumulative average of 119 hours waiting in traffic that year. Los Angeles was followed by San Francisco/Oakland, Washington, D.C., and Miami. Despite the congestion in the city, the mean daily travel time for commuters in Los Angeles is shorter than in other major cities, including New York City, Philadelphia, and Chicago. Los Angeles's mean travel time for work commutes in 2006 was 29.2 minutes, similar to those of San Francisco and Washington, D.C.\nThe major highways that connect LA to the rest of the nation include Interstate 5, which runs south through San Diego to Tijuana in Mexico and north through Sacramento, Portland, and Seattle to the Canada\u2013US border; Interstate 10, the southernmost east\u2013west, coast-to-coast Interstate Highway in the United States, going to Jacksonville, Florida; and U.S. Route 101, which heads to the California Central Coast, San Francisco, the Redwood Empire, and the Oregon and Washington coasts.\nBuses.\nThe Los Angeles Metro and other regional agencies provide a comprehensive bus system that covers Los Angeles County. While the Los Angeles Department of Transportation is responsible for contracting local and commuter bus services primarily within the city limits of Los Angeles and several immediate neighboring municipalities in southwest Los Angeles County, the largest bus system in the city is operated by Metro. Called Los Angeles Metro Bus, the system consists of 117 routes (excluding Metro Busway) throughout Los Angeles and neighboring cities primarily in southwestern Los Angeles County, with most routes following along a particular street in the city's street grid and run to or through downtown Los Angeles. As of the third quarter of 2023, the system had an average ridership of approximately 692,500 per weekday, with a total of 197,950,700 riders in 2022. Metro also runs two Metro Busway lines, the G and J lines, which are bus rapid transit lines with stops and frequencies similar to those of Los Angeles's light rail system.\nThere are also smaller regional public transit systems that mainly serve specific cities or regions in Los Angeles County. For example, the Big Blue Bus provides extensive bus service in Santa Monica and western Los Angeles County, while Foothill Transit focuses on routes in the San Gabriel Valley in southeast Los Angeles County, with one express route going into downtown Los Angeles. Los Angeles World Airports also runs two frequent FlyAway express bus routes (via freeways) from Los Angeles Union Station and Van Nuys to Los Angeles International Airport.\nWhile cash is accepted on all buses, the primary payment method for Los Angeles Metro Bus, Metro Busway, and 27 other regional bus agencies is a TAP card, a contactless stored-value card. According to the 2016 American Community Survey, 9.2% of working Los Angeles (city) residents made the journey to work via public transportation.\nRail.\nThe Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority also operates a subway and light rail system across Los Angeles and its county. The system is called Los Angeles Metro Rail and consists of the B and D subway lines, as well as the A, C, E, and K light rail lines. TAP cards are required for all Metro Rail trips. As of the third quarter of 2023, the city's subway system is the ninth busiest in the United States, and its light rail system is the country's second busiest. In 2022, the system had a ridership of 57,299,800, or about 189,200 per weekday, in the third quarter of 2023.\nSince the opening of the first line, the A Line, in 1990, the system has been extended significantly, with more extensions currently in progress. Today, the system serves numerous areas across the county on of rail, including Long Beach, Pasadena, Santa Monica, Norwalk, El Segundo, North Hollywood, Inglewood, and downtown Los Angeles. As of 2023, there are 101 stations in the Metro Rail system.\nLos Angeles is also the center of its county's commuter rail system, Metrolink, which links Los Angeles to Ventura, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, and San Diego Counties. The system consists of eight lines and 69 stations operating on of track. Metrolink averages 42,600 trips per weekday, the busiest line being the San Bernardino Line. Apart from Metrolink, Los Angeles is also connected to other cities by intercity passenger trains from Amtrak on five different lines. One of the lines is the Pacific Surfliner route which operates multiple daily round trips between San Diego and San Luis Obispo, California through Union Station. It is Amtrak's busiest line outside the Northeast Corridor.The main rail station in the city is Union Station which opened in 1939, and it is the largest passenger rail terminal in the Western United States. The station is a major regional train station for Amtrak, Metrolink and Metro Rail. The station is Amtrak's fifth busiest station, having 1.4 million Amtrak boardings and de-boardings in 2019. Union Station also offers access to Metro Bus, Greyhound, LAX FlyAway, and other buses from different agencies.\nAirports.\nThe main international and domestic airport serving Los Angeles is Los Angeles International Airport, commonly referred to by its airport code, LAX. It is located on the Westside of Los Angeles near the Sofi Stadium in Inglewood.\nOther major nearby commercial airports include:\nOne of the world's busiest general-aviation airports is also in Los Angeles: Van Nuys Airport.\nSeaports.\nThe Port of Los Angeles is in San Pedro Bay in the San Pedro neighborhood, approximately south of downtown. Also called Los Angeles Harbor and WORLDPORT LA, the port complex occupies of land and water along of waterfront. It adjoins the separate Port of Long Beach.\nThe sea ports of the Port of Los Angeles and Port of Long Beach together make up the \"Los Angeles/Long Beach Harbor\". Together, both ports are the fifth busiest container port in the world, with a trade volume of over 14.2\u00a0million TEU's in 2008. Singly, the Port of Los Angeles is the busiest container port in the United States and the largest cruise ship center on the West Coast of the United States\u00a0\u2013 The Port of Los Angeles's World Cruise Center served about 590,000 passengers in 2014.\nThere are also smaller, non-industrial harbors along Los Angeles's coastline. The port includes four bridges: the Vincent Thomas Bridge, Henry Ford Bridge, Long Beach International Gateway Bridge, and Commodore Schuyler F. Heim Bridge. Passenger ferry service from San Pedro to the city of Avalon (and Two Harbors) on Santa Catalina Island is provided by Catalina Express.\nSister cities.\nLos Angeles has 25 sister cities, listed chronologically by year joined:\nIn addition, Los Angeles has the following \"friendship cities\":\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18111", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18111", "title": "Lepus (constellation)", "text": "Constellation in the southern celestial hemisphere\nLepus is a constellation lying just south of the celestial equator. Its name is Latin for hare. It is located below\u2014immediately south\u2014of Orion (the hunter), and is sometimes represented as a hare being chased by Orion or by Orion's hunting dogs.\nAlthough the hare does not represent any particular figure in Greek mythology, Lepus was one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd-century astronomer Ptolemy, and it remains one of the 88 modern constellations.\nHistory and mythology.\nLepus is most often represented as a hare being hunted by Orion, whose hunting dogs (Canis Major and Canis Minor) pursue it. The constellation is also associated with the Moon rabbit.\nFour stars of this constellation (\u03b1, \u03b2, \u03b3, \u03b4 Lep) form a quadrilateral and are known as \"\u2018Arsh al-Jawz\u0101\"', \"the Throne of Jawz\u0101'\" or \"Kursiyy al-Jawz\u0101' al-Mu'akhkhar\", \"the Hindmost Chair of Jawz\u0101'\" and \"al-Nih\u0101l\", \"the Camels Quenching Their Thirst\" in Arabic.\nFeatures.\nStars.\nThere are a fair number of bright stars, both single and double, in Lepus. Alpha Leporis, the brightest star of Lepus, is a white supergiant of magnitude 2.6, 1300 light-years from Earth. Its traditional name, Arneb (\"\u0623\u0631\u0646\u0628\" \"\u2019arnab\"), means \"hare\" in Arabic. Beta Leporis, traditionally known as Nihal (Arabic for \"quenching their thirst\"), is a yellow giant of magnitude 2.8, 159 light-years from Earth. Gamma Leporis is a double star divisible in binoculars. The primary is a yellow star of magnitude 3.6, 29 light-years from Earth. The secondary is an orange star of magnitude 6.2. Delta Leporis is a yellow giant of magnitude 3.8, 112 light-years from Earth. Epsilon Leporis is an orange giant of magnitude 3.2, 227 light-years from Earth. Kappa Leporis is a double star divisible in medium aperture amateur telescopes, 560 light-years from Earth. The primary is a blue-white star of magnitude 4.4 and the secondary is a star of magnitude 7.4.\nThere are several variable stars in Lepus. R Leporis is a Mira variable star. It is also called \"Hind's Crimson Star\" for its striking red color and because it was named for John Russell Hind. It varies in magnitude from a minimum of 9.8 to a maximum of 7.3, with a period of 420 days. R Leporis is at a distance of 1500 light-years. The color intensifies as the star brightens. It can be as dim as magnitude 12 and as bright as magnitude 5.5. T Leporis is also a Mira variable observed in detail by ESO's Very Large Telescope Interferometer. RX Leporis is a semi-regular red giant that has a period of 2 months. It has a minimum magnitude of 7.4 and a maximum magnitude of 5.0.\nDeep-sky objects.\nThere is one Messier object in Lepus, M79. It is a globular cluster of magnitude 8.0, 42,000 light-years from Earth. One of the few globular clusters visible in the Northern Celestial Hemisphere's winter, it is a Shapley class V cluster, which means that it has an intermediate concentration towards its center. It is often described as having a \"starfish\" shape.\nM79 was discovered in 1780 by Pierre M\u00e9chain.\nReferences.\nInline citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18112", "revid": "50459348", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18112", "title": "Lupus (constellation)", "text": "Constellation in the southern celestial hemisphere\nLupus is a constellation of the mid-Southern Sky. Its name is Latin for wolf. Lupus was one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd-century astronomer Ptolemy, and it remains one of the 88 modern constellations but was mostly considered an asterism associated with the nearby constellation Centaurus.\nHistory and mythology.\nIn ancient times, the constellation was considered an asterism within Centaurus, and was considered to have been an arbitrary animal, killed, or about to be killed, on behalf of, or for, Centaurus. An alternative visualization, attested by Eratosthenes, saw this constellation as a wineskin held by Centaurus. It was not separated from Centaurus until Hipparchus of Bithynia named it ( meaning \"beast\") in the 2nd century BC. \nThe Greek constellation is probably based on the Babylonian figure known as the Mad Dog (UR.IDIM). This was a strange hybrid creature that combined the head and torso of a man with the legs and tail of a lion (the cuneiform sign 'UR' simply refers to a large carnivore; lions, wolves and dogs are all included). It is often found in association with the sun god and another mythical being called the Bison-man, which is supposedly related to the Greek constellation of Centaurus.\nIn Arab folk astronomy, Lupus, together with Centaurus were collectively called \u0627\u0644\u0634\u0645\u0627\u0631\u064a\u062e , meaning the dense branches of the date palm's fruit.\nLater, in Islamic Medieval astronomy, it was named \u0627\u0644\u0633\u0628\u0639 , which is a term used for any predatory wild beast (same as the Greek ), as a separate constellation, but drawn together with Centaurus. In some manuscripts of Al-Sufi's Book of Fixed Stars and celestial globes, it was drawn as a lion; in others, it is drawn as a wolf, both conforming to the \"Sab\"' name.\nIn Europe, no particular animal was associated with it until the Latin translation of Ptolemy's work identified it with the wolf.\nCharacteristics.\nLupus is bordered by six different constellations, although one of them (Hydra) merely touches at the corner. The other five are Scorpius (the scorpion), Norma (the right angle), Circinus (the compass), Libra (the balance scale), and Centaurus (the centaur). Covering 333.7\u00a0square degrees and 0.809% of the night sky, it ranks 46th of the 88 modern constellations. The three-letter abbreviation for the constellation, as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922, is \"Lup\". The official constellation boundaries are defined by a twelve-sided polygon (\"illustrated in infobox\"). In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between14h 17m 48.0635s and16h 08m 36.6735s, while the declination coordinates are between \u221229.83\u00b0 and \u221255.58\u00b0. The whole constellation is visible to observers south of latitude 34\u00b0N.\nFeatures.\nStars.\nOverall, there are 127 stars within the constellation's borders brighter than or equal to apparent magnitude 6.5.. Alpha Lupi has the proper name Uridim since 12 September 2024. The name \"Uridim\" was from a Babylonian constellation named UR.IDIM (\"Uridimmu\" in the Akkadian language). Previously, in his book \"Star Names and Their Meanings\", R. H. Allen gave the names Yang Mun for Alpha Lupi, the brightest star in Lupus, and KeKwan for the blue giant Beta Lupi, both from Chinese. However, the first name is in error; both stars were part of a large Chinese constellation known in modern transliteration as Q\u00edgu\u0101n, the Imperial Guards.\nMost of the brightest stars in Lupus are massive members of the nearest OB association, Scorpius\u2013Centaurus.\nAlpha Lupi is an ageing blue giant star of spectral type B1.5\u00a0III that is 460 \u00b1 10 light-years distant from Earth. It is a Beta Cephei variable, pulsating in brightness by 0.03 of a magnitude every 7 hours and 6 minutes.\nDeep-sky objects.\nTowards the north of the constellation are globular clusters NGC 5824 and NGC 5986, and close by the dark nebula B 228. To the south are two open clusters, NGC 5822 and NGC 5749, as well as globular cluster NGC 5927 on the eastern border with Norma. On the western border are two spiral galaxies and the Wolf\u2013Rayet planetary nebula IC 4406, containing some of the hottest stars in existence. IC 4406, also called the Retina Nebula, is a cylindrical nebula at a distance of 5,000 light-years. It has dust lanes throughout its center. Another planetary nebula, NGC 5882, is towards the center of the constellation. The transiting exoplanet Lupus-TR-3b lies in this constellation. The historic supernova SN 1006 is described by various sources as appearing on April 30 to May 1, 1006, in the constellation of Lupus.\nESO 274-1 is a spiral galaxy seen from edge-on that requires an amateur telescope with at least 12 inches of aperture to view. It can be found by using Lambda Lupi and Mu Lupi as markers, and can only be seen under very dark skies. It is 9 arcminutes by 0.7 arcminutes with a small, elliptical nucleus.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18113", "revid": "2051880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18113", "title": "Lyra", "text": "Constellation in the northern celestial hemisphere\n, from ; pronounced: ) is a small constellation. It is one of the 48 listed by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy, and is one of the modern 88 constellations recognized by the International Astronomical Union. Lyra was often represented on star maps as a vulture or an eagle carrying a lyre, and hence is sometimes referred to as Vultur Cadens or Aquila Cadens (\"Falling Vulture\" or \"Falling Eagle\"), respectively. Beginning at the north, Lyra is bordered by Draco, Hercules, Vulpecula, and Cygnus. Lyra is nearly overhead in temperate northern latitudes shortly after midnight at the start of summer. From the equator to about the 40th parallel south it is visible low in the northern sky during the same (thus winter) months.\nVega, Lyra's brightest star, is one of the brightest stars in the night sky, and forms a corner of the famed Summer Triangle asterism. Beta Lyrae is the prototype of a class of binary stars known as Beta Lyrae variables. These binary stars are so close to each other that they become egg-shaped and material flows from one to the other. Epsilon Lyrae, known informally as the Double Double, is a complex multiple star system. Lyra also hosts the Ring Nebula, the second-discovered and best-known planetary nebula.\nHistory.\nIn Greek mythology, Lyra represents the lyre of Orpheus. Orpheus's music was said to be so great that even inanimate objects such as rocks could be charmed. Joining Jason and the Argonauts, his music was able to quell the voices of the dangerous Sirens, who sang tempting songs to the Argonauts.\nAt one point, Orpheus married Eurydice, a nymph. While fleeing from an attack by Aristaeus, she stepped on a snake that bit her, killing her. To reclaim her, Orpheus entered the Underworld, where the music from his lyre charmed Hades, the god of the Underworld. Hades relented and let Orpheus bring Eurydice back, on the condition that he never once look back until outside. Unfortunately, near the very end, Orpheus faltered and looked back, causing Eurydice to be left in the Underworld forever. Orpheus spent the rest of his life strumming his lyre while wandering aimlessly through the land, rejecting all marriage offers from women.\nThere are two main competing myths relating to the death of Orpheus. According to Eratosthenes, Orpheus failed to make a necessary sacrifice to Dionysus due to his regard for Apollo as the supreme deity instead. Dionysus then sent his followers to rip Orpheus apart. Ovid tells a rather different story, saying that women, in retribution for Orpheus's rejection of marriage offers, ganged up and threw stones and spears. At first, his music charmed them as well, but eventually their numbers and clamor overwhelmed his music and he was hit by the spears. Both myths then state that his lyre was placed in the sky by Zeus and Orpheus's bones were buried by the muses. In a third myth, he was killed by the Thracian women because he looked on the rites of Father Liber (Dionysus).\nThe Roman book , attributed to Hyginus, also records another myth about Lyra, which said that it belonged to Theseus \"for he was skilful in all the arts and seems to have learned the lyre as well\". The book reports that the neighbouring constellation now known as Hercules was said to depict many different mythical figures, including Theseus, Orpheus, or the musician Thamyris. The proximity of these two constellations and Corona Borealis (perhaps a symbol of Theseus' royalty) could indicate that the three constellations were invented as a group.\nVega and its surrounding stars are also treated as a constellation in other cultures. The area corresponding to Lyra was seen by the Arabs as a vulture or an eagle diving with folded wings. In Wales, Lyra is known as King Arthur's Harp (\"Talyn Arthur\"), and King David's harp. The Persian Hafiz called it the Lyre of Zurah.\nIt has been called the Manger of the Infant Saviour, Praesepe Salvatoris. In Australian Aboriginal astronomy, Lyra is known by the Boorong people in Victoria as the Malleefowl constellation. Lyra was known as Urcuchillay by the Incas and was worshipped as an animal deity.\nCharacteristics.\nLyra is bordered by Vulpecula to the south, Hercules to the west, Draco to the north, and Cygnus to the east. Covering 286.5 square degrees, it ranks 52nd of the 88 modern constellations in size. It appears prominently in the northern sky during the Northern Hemisphere's summer, and the whole constellation is visible for at least part of the year to observers north of latitude 42\u00b0S. Its main asterism consists of six stars, and 73 stars in total are brighter than magnitude 6.5. The constellation's boundaries, as set by Belgian astronomer Eug\u00e8ne Delporte in 1930, are defined by a 17-sided polygon. In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 18h 14m and 19h 28m, while the declination coordinates are between \u00b0 and \u00b0. The International Astronomical Union (IAU) adopted the three-letter abbreviation \"Lyr\" for the constellation in 1922.\nFeatures.\nStars.\nGerman cartographer Johann Bayer used the Greek letters alpha through nu to label the most prominent stars in the constellation. English astronomer John Flamsteed observed and labelled two stars each as delta, epsilon, zeta and nu. He added pi and rho, not using xi and omicron as Bayer used these letters to denote Cygnus and Hercules on his map.\nThe brightest star in the constellation is Vega (Alpha Lyrae), a main-sequence star of spectral type A0Va. Only 7.7 parsecs distant, Vega is a Delta Scuti variable, varying between magnitudes \u22120.02 and 0.07 over 0.2 days. On average, it is the second-brightest star of the northern hemisphere (after Arcturus) and the fifth-brightest star in all, surpassed only by Arcturus, Alpha Centauri, Canopus, and Sirius. Vega was the pole star in the year 12,000 BCE, and will again become the pole star around 14,000 CE.\nVega is one of the most magnificent of all stars, and has been called \"arguably the next most important star in the sky after the Sun\". Vega was the first star other than the Sun to be photographed, as well as the first to have a clear spectrum recorded, showing absorption lines for the first time. The star was the first single main-sequence star other than the Sun to be known to emit X-rays, and is surrounded by a circumstellar debris disk, similar to the Kuiper Belt. Vega forms one corner of the famous Summer Triangle asterism; along with Altair and Deneb, these three stars form a prominent triangle during the northern hemisphere summer.\nVega also forms one vertex of a much smaller triangle, along with Epsilon and Zeta Lyrae. Zeta forms a wide binary star visible in binoculars, consisting of an Am star and an F-type subgiant. The Am star has an additional close companion, bringing the total number of stars in the system to three. Epsilon is a more famous wide binary that can even be separated by the naked eye under excellent conditions. Both components are themselves close binaries which can be seen with telescopes to consist of A- and F-type stars, and a faint star was recently found to orbit component C as well, for a total of five stars.\nIn contrast to Zeta and Epsilon Lyrae, Delta Lyrae is an optical double, with the two stars simply lying along the same line of sight east of Zeta. The brighter and closer of the two, Delta2 Lyrae, is a 4th-magnitude red bright giant that varies semiregularly by around 0.2 magnitudes with a dominant period of 79 days, while the fainter Delta1 Lyrae is a spectroscopic binary consisting of a B-type primary and an unknown secondary. Both systems, however, have very similar radial velocities, and are the two brightest members of a sparse open cluster known as the Delta Lyrae cluster.\nSouth of Delta is Sulafat (Gamma Lyrae), a blue giant and the second-brightest star in the constellation. Around 190 parsecs distant, it has been referred to as a \"superficially normal\" star.\nThe final star forming the lyre's figure is Sheliak (Beta Lyrae), also a binary composed of a blue bright giant and an early B-type star. In this case, the stars are so close together that the larger giant is overflowing its Roche lobe and transferring material to the secondary, forming a semidetached system. The secondary, originally the less massive of the two, has accreted so much mass that it is now substantially more massive, albeit smaller, than the primary, and is surrounded by a thick accretion disk. The plane of the orbit is aligned with Earth and the system thus shows eclipses, dropping nearly a full magnitude from its 3rd-magnitude baseline every 13 days, although its period is increasing by around 19 seconds per year. It is the prototype of the Beta Lyrae variables, eclipsing semidetached binaries of early spectral types in which there are no exact onsets of eclipses, but rather continuous changes in brightness.\nAnother easy-to-spot variable is the bright R Lyrae, north of the main asterism. Also known as 13 Lyrae, it is a 4th-magnitude red giant semiregular variable that varies by several tenths of a magnitude. Its periodicity is complex, with several different periods of varying lengths, most notably one of 46 days and one of 64 days. Even further north is FL Lyrae, a much fainter 9th-magnitude Algol variable that drops by half a magnitude every 2.18 days during the primary eclipse. Both components are main-sequence stars, the primary being late F-type and the secondary late G-type. The system was one of the first main-sequence eclipsing binaries containing G-type star to have its properties known as well as the better-studied early-type eclipsing binaries.\nAt the very northernmost edge of the constellation is the even fainter V361 Lyrae, an eclipsing binary that does not easily fall into one of the traditional classes, with features of Beta Lyrae, W Ursae Majoris, and cataclysmic variables. It may be a representative of a very brief phase in which the system is transitioning into a contact binary. It can be found less than a degree away from the naked-eye star 16 Lyrae, a 5th-magnitude A-type subgiant located around 37 parsecs distant.\nThe brightest star not included in the asterism and the westernmost cataloged by Bayer or Flamsteed is Kappa Lyrae, a typical red giant around 73 parsecs distant. Similar bright orange or red giants include the 4th-magnitude Theta Lyrae, Lambda Lyrae, and HD 173780. Lambda is located just south of Gamma, Theta is positioned in the east, and HD 173780, the brightest star in the constellation with no Bayer or Flamsteed designation, is more southernly. Just north of Theta and of almost exactly the same magnitude is Eta Lyrae, a blue subgiant with a near-solar metal abundance. Also nearby is the faint HP Lyrae, a post-asymptotic giant branch (AGB) star that shows variability. The reason for its variability is still a mystery: first cataloged as an eclipsing binary, it was theorized to be an RV Tauri variable in 2002, but if so, it would be by far the hottest such variable discovered.\nIn the extreme east is RR Lyrae, the prototype of the large class of variables known as RR Lyrae variables, which are pulsating variables similar to Cepheids, but are evolved population II stars of spectral types A and F. Such stars are usually not found in a galaxy's thin disk, but rather in the galactic halo. Such stars serve as standard candles, and thus are a reliable way to calculate distances to the globular clusters in which they reside. RR Lyrae itself varies between magnitudes 7 and 8 while exhibiting the Blazhko effect. The easternmost star designated by Flamsteed, 19 Lyrae, is also a small-amplitude variable, an Alpha2 Canum Venaticorum variable with a period of just over one day.\nAnother evolved star is the naked-eye variable XY Lyrae, a red bright giant just north of Vega that varies between 6th and 7th magnitudes over a period of 120 days. Also just visible to the naked eye is the peculiar classical Cepheid V473 Lyrae. It is unique in that it is the only known Cepheid in the Milky Way to undergo periodic phase and amplitude changes, analogous to the Blazhko effect in RR Lyrae stars. At 1.5 days, its period was the shortest known for a classical Cepheid at the time of its discovery. W and S Lyrae are two of the many Mira variables in Lyra. W varies between 7th and 12th magnitudes over approximately 200 days, while S, slightly fainter, is a silicate carbon star, likely of the J-type. Another evolved star is EP Lyrae, a faint RV Tauri variable and an \"extreme example\" of a post-AGB star. It and a likely companion are surrounded by a circumstellar disk of material.\nRather close to Earth at a distance of only is Gliese 758. The sunlike primary star has a brown dwarf companion, the coldest to have been imaged around a sunlike star in thermal light when it was discovered in 2009. Only slightly farther away is V478 Lyrae, an eclipsing RS Canum Venaticorum variable whose primary star shows active starspot activity.\nOne of the most peculiar systems in Lyra is MV Lyrae, a nova-like star consisting of a red dwarf and a white dwarf. Originally classified as a VY Sculptoris star due to spending most time at maximum brightness, since around 1979 the system has been dominantly at minimum brightness, with periodic outbursts. Its nature is still not fully understood. Another outbursting star is AY Lyrae, an SU Ursae Majoris-type dwarf nova that has undergone several superoutbursts. Of the same type is V344 Lyrae, notable for an extremely short period between superoutbursts coupled with one of the highest amplitudes for such a period. The true nova HR Lyrae flared in 1919 to a maximum magnitude of 6.5, over 9.5 magnitudes higher than in quiescence. Some of its characteristics are similar to those of recurring novae.\nDeep-sky objects.\nM57, also known as the \"Ring Nebula\" and NGC 6720, at a distance of 2,550 light-years from Earth is one of the best known planetary nebulae and the second to be discovered; its integrated magnitude is 8.8. It was discovered in 1779 by Antoine Darquier, 15 years after Charles Messier discovered the Dumbbell Nebula. Astronomers have determined that it is between 6,000 and 8,000 years old; it is approximately one light-year in diameter. The outer part of the nebula appears red in photographs because of emission from ionized hydrogen. The middle region is colored green; doubly ionized oxygen emits greenish-blue light. The hottest region, closest to the central star, appears blue because of emission from helium. The central star itself is a white dwarf with a temperature of 120,000 kelvins. In telescopes, the nebula appears as a visible ring with a green tinge; it is slightly elliptical because its three-dimensional shape is a torus or cylinder seen from a slight angle. It can be found halfway between Gamma Lyrae and Beta Lyrae.\nAnother planetary nebula in Lyra is Abell 46. The central star, V477 Lyrae, is an eclipsing post-common-envelope binary, consisting of a white dwarf primary and an oversized secondary component due to recent accretion. The nebula itself is of relatively low surface brightness compared to the central star, and is undersized for the primary's mass for reasons not yet fully understood.\nNGC 6791 is a cluster of stars in Lyra. It contains three age groups of stars: 4 billion year-old white dwarfs, 6 billion year-old white dwarfs and 8 billion year-old normal stars.\nNGC 6745 is an irregular spiral galaxy in Lyra that is at a distance of 208 million light-years. Several million years ago, it collided with a smaller galaxy, which created a region filled with young, hot, blue stars. Astronomers do not know if the collision was simply a glancing blow or a prelude to a full-on merger, which would end with the two galaxies incorporated into one larger, probably elliptical galaxy.\nA remarkable long-duration gamma-ray burst was GRB 050525A, which flared in 2005. The afterglow re-brightened at 33 minutes after the original burst, only the third found to exhibit such an effect in the timeframe, and unable to be completely explained by known phenomena. The light curve observed over the next 100\u00a0days was consistent with that of a supernova or even a hypernova, dubbed SN 2005nc. The host galaxy proved elusive to find at first, although it was subsequently identified.\nExoplanets.\nIn orbit around the orange subgiant star HD 177830 is one of the earliest exoplanets to be detected. A jovian-mass planet, it orbits in an eccentric orbit with a period of 390 days. A second planet closer to the star was discovered in 2011. Visible to the naked eye are HD 173416, a yellow giant hosting a planet over twice the mass of Jupiter discovered in 2009; and HD 176051, a low-mass binary star containing another high-mass planet. Just short of naked-eye visibility is HD 178911, a triple system consisting of a close binary and a visually separable sunlike star. The sunlike star has a planet with over 6 Jupiter masses discovered in 2001, the second found in a triple system after that of 16 Cygni.\nOne of the most-studied exoplanets in the night sky is TrES-1b, in orbit around the star GSC 02652-01324. Detected from a transit of its parent star, the planet has around 3/4 the mass of Jupiter, yet orbits its parent star in only three days. The transits have been reported to have anomalies multiple times. Originally thought to be possibly due to the presence of an Earth-like planet, it is now accepted that the irregularities are due to a large starspot. Also discovered by the transit method is WASP-3b, with 1.75 times the mass of Jupiter. At the time of its discovery, it was one of the hottest known exoplanets, in orbit around the F-type main-sequence star WASP-3. Similar to TrES-1b, irregularities in the transits had left open the possibility of a second planet, although this now appears unlikely as well.\nLyra is one of three constellations (along with neighboring Cygnus and Draco) to be in the Kepler Mission's field of view, and as such it contains many more known exoplanets than most constellations. One of the first discovered by the mission is Kepler-7b, an extremely low-density exoplanet with less than half the mass of Jupiter, yet nearly 1.5 times the radius. Almost as sparse is Kepler-8b, only slightly more massive and of a similar radius. The Kepler-20 system contains five known planets; three of them are only slightly smaller than Neptune, while the other two are some of the first Earth-sized exoplanets to be discovered. Kepler-37 is another star with an exoplanet discovered by Kepler; the planet is the smallest known extrasolar planet known as of February 2013.\nIn April 2013, it was announced that of the five planets orbiting Kepler-62, at least two\u2014Kepler-62e and Kepler-62f\u2014are within the boundaries of the habitable zone of that star, where scientists think liquid water could exist, and are both candidates for being a solid, rocky, earth-like planet. The exoplanets are 1.6 and 1.4 times the diameter of Earth respectively, with their star Kepler-62 at a distance of 1,200 light-years.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18114", "revid": "69358688", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18114", "title": "Laura Welch Bush", "text": ""}
{"id": "18115", "revid": "50510009", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18115", "title": "Legnica", "text": "City in Lower Silesian Voivodeship, Poland\nLegnica (; , ; ; ) is a city in southwestern Poland, in the central part of Lower Silesia, on the Kaczawa River and the Czarna Woda. As well as being the seat of the county, since 1992 the city has been the seat of the Diocese of Legnica. As of 2023,[ [update]] Legnica had a population of 97,300 inhabitants.\nThe city was first referenced in chronicles dating from the year 1004, although previous settlements could be traced back to the 7th century. The name \"Legnica\" was mentioned in 1149 under High Duke of Poland Boles\u0142aw IV the Curly. Legnica was most likely the seat of Boles\u0142aw and it became the residence of the dukes of Legnica from 1248 until 1675. Legnica is a city over which the Piast dynasty reigned the longest, for about 700 years, from the time of ruler Mieszko I of Poland after the creation of the Polish state in the 10th century, until 1675 and the death of the last Piast duke George William. Legnica is one of the historical burial sites of Polish monarchs and consorts.\nLegnica became renowned for the fierce battle that took place at Legnickie Pole near the city on 9 April 1241 during the first Mongol invasion of Poland, which ended in the defeat of the Polish-led Christian coalition by the Mongols.\nLegnica is an economic, cultural and academic centre in Lower Silesia, together with Wroc\u0142aw. The city is renowned for its varied architecture, spanning from early medieval to modern period, and its preserved Old Town with the Piast Castle, one of the largest in Poland. According to the Foreign direct investment ranking (FDI) from 2016, Legnica is one of the most progressive high-income cities in the Silesian region.\nPopulation.\nAs of 2012[ [update]] Legnica has 102,708 inhabitants and is the third largest city in the voivodeship (after Wroc\u0142aw and Wa\u0142brzych) and 38th in Poland. It also constitutes the southernmost and the largest urban center of a copper deposit (\"Legnicko-G\u0142ogowski Okr\u0119g Miedziowy\") with agglomeration of 448,617 inhabitants. Legnica is the largest city of the conurbation and is a member of the Association of Polish Cities.\nHistory.\nPre-history.\nArchaeological research conducted in eastern Legnica in the late 1970s, showed the existence of a bronze foundry and the graves of three metallurgists. The find indicates a time interval about year 1000 BC.\nA settlement of the Lusatian culture people existed in the 8th century B.C. After invasions of Celts beyond upper Danube basin, the area of Legnica and north foothills of Sudetes was infiltrated by Celtic settlers and traders.\nTacitus and Ptolemy recorded the ancient nation of Lugii (Lygii) in the area, and mentioned their town of Lugidunum, which has been attributed to both Legnica and G\u0142og\u00f3w.\nEarly Poland.\nSlavic Lechitic tribes moved into the area in the 8th century.\nThe city was first officially mentioned in chronicles from 1004, although settlement dates to the 7th century. Dendrochronological research proves that during the reign of Mieszko I of Poland, a new fortified settlement was built here in a style typical of the early Piast dynasty. \nAt the beginning of the 12th century, Legnica was an important castellany stronghold in Silesia, strategically located within rivers Czarna/Kaczawa marshland. After the death of Boles\u0142aw III Wrymouth in 1138, which began a period of feudal fragmentation of Poland (1138\u20131320), Legnica and all of Silesia first fell under the rule of W\u0142adys\u0142aw II the Exile. Then, after W\u0142adys\u0142aw's expulsion in 1146, it came under the control of Boles\u0142aw IV the Curly, who already was the Senior Duke of Poland.\nDuring this time, Legnica essentially became Boles\u0142aw the Curly's important residence, especially in his dyplomatic activity context. His frequent sometimes long-lasting presence here helped the settlement at the foot of the stronghold grow quickly. It began to take on the characteristics of a proto-city, developing as a natural support center for the ducal court. Here, merchants and artisans thrived, serving the needs of the duke, his retinue, and the local population. The court's demand for goods and services boosted the settlement's growth. Although it wasn't formally a city under municipal charter yet, it increasingly resembled an urban economic hub.\nEvidence of its early urban development also includes the construction of the Church of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Its initial building phases, likely dating back to the 12th century, show the settlement's growing importance and its residents' spiritual needs.It is known that High Duke Boles\u0142aw IV the Curly funded here at the St. Benedict monastery chapel in year 1149. Also archaeological discoveries, such as a 13th-century mosaic found near this church in Legnica's Old Town, further illustrate the increasing cultural and urban significance of this place in the later Middle Ages, continuing trends that began in the 12th century. Based on fields as medieval economic history, historical demography, medieval urbanisation, historical analogy its logical to assume that around 1160 Legnica reached circa 2,500-2,700 inhabitants (including the main groups: craftsmen, fishers, servants, traders, clergy, retinue, knights, and the garrison).\nBoles\u0142aw's period in Legnica, as the Poland senior's residence, lasted until around the mid-1160s, when Boles\u0142aw the Tall, son of W\u0142adys\u0142aw the Exile, returned to Silesia. In 1163, Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, through diplomatic channels (the treaty was signed in Nuremberg), forced Boles\u0142aw the Curly to return the sons of W\u0142adys\u0142aw the Exile to their father's district. The reason Boles\u0142aw the Curly agreed to accept the exiles this time was that after W\u0142adys\u0142aw's death, his sons, being younger than him and lacking support in Poland, did not pose a direct threat to his Senior position, and Boles\u0142aw's return to Silesia ultimately neutralized the threat of Imperial intervention. Boles\u0142aw the Curly adequately secured his position by retaining military garrisons in the main strongholds of the Silesian province (Legnica, as well as G\u0142og\u00f3w, Wroc\u0142aw, Opole, and Racib\u00f3rz).\nLater Legnica became famous for the battle that took place at Legnickie Pole near the city on 9 April 1241 during the First Mongol invasion of Poland. The Christian army of the Polish duke Henry II the Pious of Silesia, supported by feudal nobility, which included in addition to Poles, Bavarian miners and military orders and Czech troops, was decisively defeated by the Mongols. The Mongols killed Henry and destroyed his forces, then turned south to rejoin the rest of the Mongol armies, which were massing at the Plain of Mohi in Hungary via Moravia against a coalition of King Bela IV and his armies, and Bela's Kipchak allies.\nDuchy of Legnica.\nLegnica was the seat of an eponymous principality that lasted from 1248 until 1675.\nAfter the war, nonetheless, the city was developing rapidly. In 1258 at the church of St. Peter, a parish school was established, probably the first of its kind in Poland. Around 1278 a Dominican monastery was founded by Boles\u0142aw II the Horned, who was buried there as the only monarch of Poland to be buried in Legnica. Already by 1300 there was a city council in Legnica. Duke Boles\u0142aw III the Generous granted new trade privileges in 1314 and 1318 and allowed the construction of a town hall, and in 1337 the first waterworks were built. In the years 1327\u20131380 a new Gothic church of Saint Peter (today's Cathedral) was erected in place of the old one, and is one of Legnica's landmarks since. Also by the 14th century the city walls were erected. In 1345 the first coins were produced in the local mint. In 1374, the potters' guild was founded, as one of the oldest in Silesia. Queen consort of Poland Hedwig of Sagan died in Legnica in 1390 and was buried in the local collegiate church, which has not survived to this day.\nAs the capital of the Duchy of Legnica at the beginning of the 14th century, Legnica was one of the most important cities of Central Europe, having a population of nearly 16,000 residents. The city began to expand quickly after the discovery of gold in the Kaczawa River between Legnica and Z\u0142otoryja (Goldberg). Unfortunately, such a growth rate can not be maintained long. Shortly after the city reached its maximum population increase, wooden buildings which had been erected during this period of rapid growth were devastated by a huge fire. The fire decreased the number of inhabitants in the city and halted any significant further development for many decades.\nLegnica, along with other Silesian duchies, became a vassal of the Kingdom of Bohemia during the 14th century and was included within the multi-ethnic Holy Roman Empire, however remained ruled by local dukes of the Polish Piast dynasty. In 1454, a local rebellion prevented Legnica from falling under direct rule of the Bohemian kings. In 1505, Duke Frederick II of Legnica met in Legnica with the duke of nearby G\u0142og\u00f3w, Sigismund I the Old, the future king of Poland.\nThe Protestant Reformation was introduced in the duchy as early as 1522 and the population became Lutheran. In 1526, a Protestant university was established in Legnica, which, however, was closed in 1529. In 1528 the first printing house in Legnica was established. After the death of King Louis II of Hungary and Bohemia at Moh\u00e1cs in 1526, Legnica became a fief of the Habsburg monarchy of Austria. The first map of Silesia was made by native son Martin Helwig. The city suffered during the Thirty Years' War. In 1633 a plague epidemic broke out, and in 1634 the Austrian army destroyed the suburbs.\nIn 1668 Duke of Legnica Christian presented his candidacy to the Polish throne, however, in the 1669 Polish\u2013Lithuanian royal election he wasn't chosen as King. In 1676, Legnica passed to direct Habsburg rule after the death of the last Silesian Piast duke and the last Piast duke overall, George William (son of Duke Christian), despite the earlier inheritance pact by Brandenburg and Silesia, by which it was to go to Brandenburg. The last Piast duke was buried in the St. John's church in Legnica in 1676.\n18th and 19th centuries.\nSilesian aristocracy was trained at the Liegnitz Ritter-Akademie, established in the early 18th century. One of two main routes connecting Warsaw and Dresden ran through the city in the 18th century and Kings Augustus II the Strong and Augustus III of Poland traveled that route many times. The postal milestone of King Augustus II comes from that period.\nIn 1742 most of Silesia, including Liegnitz, became part of the Kingdom of Prussia after King Frederick the Great's defeat of Austria in the War of the Austrian Succession. In 1760 during the Seven Years' War, Liegnitz was the site of the Battle of Liegnitz when Frederick's army defeated an Austrian army led by Laudon.\nDuring the Napoleonic Wars and Polish national liberation fights, in 1807 Polish uhlans were stationed in the city, and in 1813, the Prussians, under Field Marshal Bl\u00fccher, defeated the French forces of MacDonald in the Battle of Katzbach (Kaczawa) nearby. After the administrative reorganization of the Prussian state following the Congress of Vienna, Liegnitz and the surrounding territory (\"Landkreis Liegnitz\") were incorporated into the Regierungsbezirk (administrative district) of Liegnitz, within the Province of Silesia on 1 May 1816. Along with the rest of Prussia, the town became part of the German Empire in 1871 during the unification of Germany. On 1 January 1874 Liegnitz became the third city in Lower Silesia (after Breslau and G\u00f6rlitz) to be raised to an urban district, although the district administrator of the surrounding \"Landkreis\" of Liegnitz continued to have his seat in the city. Its military garrison was home to K\u00f6nigsgrenadier-Regiment Nr. 7 a military unit formed almost exclusively out of Polish soldiers.\nThe 20th century.\nThe census of 1910 gave Liegnitz's population as 95.86% German, 0.15% German and Polish, 1.27% Polish, 2.26% Wendish, and 0.19% Czech. On 1 April 1937 parts of the \"Landkreis\" of Liegnitz communities of Alt Beckern (Piekary), Gro\u00df Beckern (Piekary Wielkie), Hummel, Liegnitzer Vorwerke, Pfaffendorf (Pi\u0105tnica) und Prinkendorf (Przybk\u00f3w) were incorporated into the city limits. After the Treaty of Versailles following World War I, Liegnitz was part of the newly created Province of Lower Silesia from 1919 to 1938, then of the Province of Silesia from 1938 to 1941, and again of the province of Lower Silesia from 1941 to 1945. After the Nazi Party came to power in Germany, as early as 1933, a boycott of local Jewish premises was ordered, during the \"Kristallnacht\" in 1938 the synagogue was burned down, and in 1939 the local Polish population was terrorized and persecuted. A Nazi court prison was operated in the city with a forced labour subcamp. During World War II, several members of the Polish resistance movement were imprisoned and sentenced to death there. The Germans also established two forced labour camps in the city, as well as two prisoner of war labor subcamps of the POW camp located in \u017baga\u0144 (then \"Sagan\"), and one labor subcamp of the Stalag VIII-A POW camp in Zgorzelec (then \"G\u00f6rlitz\").\nAfter the defeat of Nazi Germany during World War II, Liegnitz and all of Silesia east of the Neisse was preliminarily transferred to Poland following the Potsdam Conference in 1945. The majority of the German population was either expelled in accordance with the Potsdam Agreement or fled from the city.\nThe city was repopulated with Poles, including expellees from pre-war eastern Poland after its annexation by the Soviet Union. Also Greeks, refugees of the Greek Civil War, settled in Legnica in 1950. As the medieval Polish name \"Lignica\" was considered archaic, the town was renamed Legnica. The transfer to Poland decided at Potsdam in 1945 was officially recognized by East Germany in 1950, by West Germany under Chancellor Willy Brandt in the 1970 Treaty of Warsaw, and finally by the reunited Germany by the Two Plus Four Agreement in 1990. By 1990 only a handful of Polonized Germans, prewar citizens of Liegnitz, remained of the pre-1945 German population. In 2010 the city celebrated the 65th anniversary of the return of Legnica to Poland and its liberation from Nazi Germany.\nThe city was only partly damaged in World War II. In June 1945 Legnica was briefly the capital of the Lower Silesian (Wroc\u0142aw) Voivodship, after the administration was moved there from Trzebnica and before it was finally moved to Wroc\u0142aw. In 1947, the Municipal Library was opened, in 1948 a piano factory was founded, and in the years 1951-1959 Poland's first copper smelter was built in Legnica. After 1965 most parts of the preserved old town with its town houses were demolished, the historical layout was abolished, and the city was rebuilt in modern form.\nFrom 1945 to 1990, during the Cold War, the headquarters of the Soviet forces in Poland, the so-called Northern Group of Forces, was located in the city. This fact had a strong influence on the life of the city. For much of the period, the city was divided into Polish and Soviet areas, with the latter closed to the public. These were first established in July 1945, when the Soviets forcibly ejected newly arrived Polish inhabitants from the parts of the city they wanted for their own use. The ejection was perceived by some as a particularly brutal action, and rumours circulated exaggerating its severity, though no evidence of anyone being killed in the course of it has come to light. In April 1946 city officials estimated that there were 16,700 Poles, 12,800 Germans, and 60,000 Soviets in Legnica. In October 1956, the largest anti-Soviet demonstrations in Lower Silesia took place in Legnica. The last Soviet units left the city in 1993.\nBetween 1 June 1975 and 31 December 1998 Legnica was the capital of the Legnica Voivodeship. In 1992 the Roman Catholic Diocese of Legnica was established, Tadeusz Rybak became the first bishop of Legnica. New local newspapers and a radio station were founded in the 1990s. In 1997, Legnica was visited by Pope John Paul II. The city suffered in the 1997 Central European flood.\nClimate.\nLegnica has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Cfb\").\nSights.\nLegnica is a city with rich historical architecture, ranging from Romanesque and Gothic through the Renaissance and Baroque to Historicist styles. Among the landmarks of Legnica are:\nThere is also a monument of Pope John Paul II and a postal milestone of King Augustus II the Strong from 1725 in Legnica.\nEconomy.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, the local copper and nickel industries became a major factor in the economic development of the area. Legnica houses industrial plants belonging to KGHM Polska Mied\u017a, one of the largest producers of copper and silver in the world. The company owns a large copper mill on the western outskirts of town. Legnica Special Economic Zone was established in 1997.\nEducation.\nLegnica is a regional academic center with seven universities enrolling approximately 16,000 students.\nEnvironment.\nLegnica is noted for its parks and gardens, and has seven hundred hectares of green space, mostly along the banks of the Kaczawa; the Tarninow district is particularly attractive.\nRoads.\nTo the south of Legnica is the A4 motorway. Legnica has also a district, which is a part of national road no 3. The express road S3 building has been planned nearby.\nPublic transport.\nIn the city there are 20 regular bus lines, 1 belt-line, 2 night lines and 3 suburban.\nThe town has an airport (airport code EPLE) with a 1600-metre runway, the remains of a former Soviet air base, but it is (as of 2007[ [update]]) in a poor state and not used for commercial flights.\nFilms produced in Legnica.\nIn recent years Legnica has been frequently used as a film set for the following films as a result of its well preserved Old Town, proximity to Germany and low costs:\nPolitics.\nMunicipal politics.\nLegnica tends to be a left-of-center town with a considerable influence of workers' unions. The Municipal Council of Legnica (\"Rada miejska miasta Legnica\") is the legislative branch of the local government and is composed of 25 members elected in local elections every five years. The mayor or town president (\"Prezydent miasta\") is the executive branch of the local government and is directly elected in the same municipal elections.\nLegnica \u2013 Jelenia G\u00f3ra constituency.\nMembers of Parliament (Sejm) elected from Legnica-Jelenia Gora constituency:\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nLegnica is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn fiction.\nLegnica and its then ruler Count Conrad figure prominently in the alternate history series \"The Crosstime Engineer\", set in the period of 1230 to 1270, by Leo Frankowski.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18116", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18116", "title": "Linkoping", "text": ""}
{"id": "18117", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18117", "title": "Lagrangian Point", "text": ""}
{"id": "18119", "revid": "31696229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18119", "title": "Liverpool F.C.", "text": "Association football club in England\nFootball club\nLiverpool Football Club is a professional football club based in Liverpool, England. The club competes in the Premier League, the top tier of English football. Founded in 1892, the club joined the Football League the following year and has played its home games at Anfield since its formation. Liverpool is one of the most valuable and widely supported clubs in the world.\nDomestically, the club has won a joint-record twenty league titles, eight FA Cups, a record ten League Cups and sixteen FA Community Shields. In international competitions, the club has won six European Cups, three UEFA Cups, four UEFA Super Cups\u2014all English records\u2014and one FIFA Club World Cup. Liverpool established itself as a major force in domestic football in the 1960s under Bill Shankly, before becoming perennial title challengers at home and abroad under Bob Paisley, Joe Fagan and Kenny Dalglish who led the club to a combined eleven league titles and four European Cups through the 1970s and 80s. Liverpool won two further European Cups in 2005 and 2019 under the management of Rafael Ben\u00edtez and J\u00fcrgen Klopp, respectively; the latter led Liverpool to a nineteenth league title in 2020, the club's first during the Premier League era. Following Klopp's departure in 2024, Arne Slot guided Liverpool to a twentieth league title in 2025.\nAlready nicknamed \"the Reds\", it was under Shankly that the team first adopted the distinctive all-red home strip which has been used ever since. Also adopted under Shankly's tenure was the club's anthem \"You'll Never Walk Alone\". \"The Reds\" compete in the local Merseyside derby against Everton, often referred as \"the Blues\". As the two most decorated clubs in England, and inter-city rivals, Liverpool also has a long-standing rivalry with Manchester United.\nThe club's supporters have been involved in two major tragedies. At the 1985 European Cup final in Brussels, the Heysel Stadium disaster saw 39 fans \u2013 mainly Italian supporters of opponents Juventus \u2013 die after they were crushed between onrushing Liverpool fans and a concrete wall that subsequently collapsed. As a result of persistent hooliganism, English teams were banned from European club competitions initially indefinitely, but ultimately for five years, and Liverpool for an additional year. In 1989, the Hillsborough disaster claimed the lives of 97 Liverpool supporters after grossly negligent policing led to a crowd crush; the disaster led to the elimination of fenced standing terraces in favour of all-seater stadiums in the top two tiers of English football. A decades-long campaign for justice in the case of Hillsborough saw further coroner's inquests, commissions and independent panels that ultimately exonerated the fans of all blame.\nHistory.\nLiverpool were founded following a dispute between the Everton committee and John Houlding, club president and owner of the land at Anfield. After eight years at the stadium, Everton relocated across Stanley Park to their new stadium of Goodison Park in 1892, and Houlding founded Liverpool F.C. to play at Anfield. Originally named \"Everton F.C. and Athletic Grounds Ltd\" (Everton Athletic for short), the club became Liverpool F.C. in March 1892 and gained official recognition three months later, after The Football Association refused to recognise the club as Everton.\nLiverpool played their first match on 1 September 1892: a pre-season friendly match against Rotherham Town which they won 7\u20131. The team Liverpool fielded against Rotherham was composed entirely of Scottish players; the players who came from Scotland to play in England in those days were known as the Scotch Professors. Manager John McKenna had recruited the players after a scouting trip to Scotland\u2014so they became known as the \"team of Macs\". The team won the Lancashire League in its debut season and joined the Football League Second Division at the start of the 1893\u201394 season. After the club was promoted to the First Division in 1896, Tom Watson was appointed manager. He led Liverpool to its first league title in 1901, and won the league again in 1906.\nLiverpool reached their first FA Cup final in 1914, losing 1\u20130 to Burnley. It won consecutive league championships in 1922 and 1923, but did not win another trophy until the 1946\u201347 season, when the club won the First Division for a fifth time under the control of ex-West Ham United centre half George Kay. Liverpool suffered its second Cup Final defeat in 1950, playing against Arsenal. The club was relegated to the Second Division in the 1953\u201354 season. Soon after Liverpool lost 2\u20131 to non-league Worcester City in the 1958\u201359 FA Cup, Bill Shankly was appointed manager. Upon his arrival he released 24\u00a0players and converted a boot storage room at Anfield into a room where the coaches could discuss strategy; here, Shankly and other \"Boot Room\" members Joe Fagan, Reuben Bennett, and Bob Paisley began reshaping the team.\nThe club was promoted back into the First Division in 1962 and won it in 1964, for the first time in 17 years. In 1965, the club won its first FA Cup. The following year, the club won the First Division but lost to Borussia Dortmund in the European Cup Winners' Cup final. Liverpool won both the League and the UEFA Cup during the 1972\u201373 season, and the FA Cup again a year later. Shankly retired soon afterwards and was replaced by his assistant, Bob Paisley. In 1976, Paisley's second season as manager, the club won another League and UEFA Cup double. The following season, the club retained the League title and won the European Cup for the first time, but it lost in the 1977 FA Cup final. Liverpool retained the European Cup in 1978 and regained the First Division title in 1979. During Paisley's nine seasons as manager Liverpool won 20 trophies, including three European Cups, a UEFA Cup, six League titles and three consecutive League Cups; the only domestic trophy he did not win was the FA Cup.\nPaisley retired in 1983 and was replaced by his assistant, Joe Fagan. Liverpool won the League, League Cup and European Cup in Fagan's first season, becoming the first English side to win three trophies in a season. Liverpool reached the European Cup final again in 1985, against Juventus at the Heysel Stadium. Before kick-off, Liverpool fans breached a fence that separated the two groups of supporters and charged the Juventus fans. The resulting weight of people caused a retaining wall to collapse, killing 39 fans, mostly Italians. The incident became known as the Heysel Stadium disaster. The match was played in spite of protests by both managers, and Liverpool lost 1\u20130 to Juventus. As a result of the tragedy, English clubs were banned from participating in European competition for five years; Liverpool received a ten-year ban, which was later reduced to six years. Fourteen Liverpool fans received convictions for involuntary manslaughter.\nFagan had announced his retirement just before the disaster and Kenny Dalglish was appointed as player-manager. During his tenure, the club won another three league titles and two FA Cups, including a League and Cup \"Double\" in the 1985\u201386 season. Liverpool's success was overshadowed by the Hillsborough disaster: in an FA Cup semi-final against Nottingham Forest on 15 April 1989, hundreds of Liverpool fans were crushed against perimeter fencing. Ninety-four fans died that day; the 95th victim died in hospital from his injuries four days later, the 96th died nearly four years later, without regaining consciousness, and the 97th, Andrew Devine, died in 2021 of injuries sustained in the disaster. After the Hillsborough disaster there was a government review of stadium safety. The resulting Taylor Report paved the way for legislation that required top-division teams to have all-seater stadiums. The report ruled that the main reason for the disaster was overcrowding due to a failure of police control.\nLiverpool was involved in the closest finish to a league season during the 1988\u201389 season, finishing equal with Arsenal on both points and goal difference, but lost the title on total goals scored when Arsenal scored the final goal in the last minute of the season.\nDalglish cited the Hillsborough disaster and its repercussions as the reason for his resignation in 1991; he was replaced by former player Graeme Souness. Under his leadership Liverpool won the 1992 FA Cup final, but their league performances slumped, with two consecutive sixth-place finishes, eventually resulting in his dismissal in January 1994. Souness was replaced by Roy Evans, and Liverpool went on to win the 1995 Football League Cup final. While they made some title challenges under Evans, third-place finishes in 1996 and 1998 were the best they could manage, and so G\u00e9rard Houllier was appointed co-manager in the 1998\u201399 season, and became the sole manager in November 1998 after Evans resigned. In 2001, Houllier's second full season in charge, Liverpool won a \"treble\": the FA Cup, League Cup and UEFA Cup. Houllier underwent major heart surgery during the 2001\u201302 season and Liverpool finished second in the League, behind Arsenal. They won a further League Cup in 2003, but failed to mount a title challenge in the two seasons that followed.\nHoullier was replaced by Rafael Ben\u00edtez in June 2004. Despite finishing fifth in Ben\u00edtez's first season, Liverpool won the 2004\u201305 UEFA Champions League, beating AC Milan 3\u20132 in a penalty shootout after the match ended with a score of 3\u20133. The following season, Liverpool finished third in the Premier League and won the FA Cup, beating West Ham United in a penalty shootout after the match finished 3\u20133. American businessmen George Gillett and Tom Hicks became the owners of the club during the 2006\u201307 season, in a deal which valued the club and its outstanding debts at \u00a3218.9\u00a0million. The club reached the 2007 UEFA Champions League final against Milan, as it had in 2005, but lost 2\u20131. During the 2008\u201309 season Liverpool achieved 86 points, its then-highest Premier League points total, prior to the record-breaking 2018\u201319 season, and finished as runners up to Manchester United.\nIn the 2009\u201310 season, Liverpool finished seventh in the Premier League and failed to qualify for the Champions League. Ben\u00edtez subsequently left by mutual consent and was replaced by Fulham manager Roy Hodgson. At the start of the 2010\u201311 season Liverpool was on the verge of bankruptcy and the club's creditors asked the High Court to allow the sale of the club, overruling the wishes of Hicks and Gillett. John W. Henry, owner of the Boston Red Sox and Fenway Sports Group, bid successfully for the club and took ownership in October 2010. Poor results during the start of that season led to Hodgson leaving the club by mutual consent and former player and manager Kenny Dalglish taking over. In the 2011\u201312 season, Liverpool secured a record eighth League Cup success and reached the FA Cup final, but finished eighth in the Premier League, their worst league finish in 18 years; this led to the sacking of Dalglish. He was replaced by Brendan Rodgers, whose Liverpool team in the 2013\u201314 season mounted an unexpected title charge to finish second behind champions Manchester City and subsequently return to the Champions League, scoring 101 goals in the process, the most since the 106 scored in the 1895\u201396 season. Following a disappointing 2014\u201315 season, where Liverpool finished sixth in the league, and a poor start to the following campaign, Rodgers was sacked in October 2015.\nRodgers was replaced by J\u00fcrgen Klopp. Liverpool reached the finals of the Football League Cup and UEFA Europa League in Klopp's first season, finishing as runner-up in both competitions. The club finished second in the 2018\u201319 season with 97 points \u2013 surpassing the 86 points gained during the 2008\u201309 season and a points record for a non-title winning side \u2013 and only one loss. Klopp took Liverpool to successive UEFA Champions League finals in 2018 and 2019, with the club defeating Tottenham Hotspur 2\u20130 to win the latter. Liverpool beat Flamengo of Brazil in the final 1\u20130 to win the FIFA Club World Cup for the first time. The following season, Liverpool won their first top-flight league title in thirty years. The club set multiple records in the season; they won the league with seven games remaining, the earliest any team has ever won the title, reaching a club record 99 points, and won a joint-record 32 games in a top-flight season. The 2021\u201322 season saw the club win the domestic cup double, the FA Cup and the League Cup. In January 2024, Klopp announced that he would leave the club at the end of the season, and he won his final trophy with the club, the League Cup, the following month.\nArne Slot was announced as Klopp's successor in May 2024, and the club won a record-equalling twentieth top-flight league title in his first season in charge.\nColours and badge.\nFor much of Liverpool's history, its home colours have been all red. When the club was founded in 1892, blue and white quartered shirts were used until the club adopted the city's colour of red in 1896. The city's symbol of the liver bird was adopted as the club's badge (or crest, as it is sometimes known) in 1901, although it was not incorporated into the kit until 1955. Liverpool continued to wear red shirts and white shorts until 1964 when manager Bill Shankly decided to change to an all-red strip. Liverpool played in all red for the first time against Anderlecht, as Ian St John recalled in his autobiography:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He [Shankly] thought the colour scheme would carry psychological impact \u2013 red for danger, red for power. He came into the dressing room one day and threw a pair of red shorts to Ronnie Yeats. \"Get into those shorts and let's see how you look\", he said. \"Christ, Ronnie, you look awesome, terrifying. You look 7 ft tall.\" \"Why not go the whole hog, boss?\" I suggested. \"Why not wear red socks? Let's go out all in red.\" Shankly approved and an iconic kit was born.\nThe Liverpool away strip has more often than not been all yellow or white shirts and black shorts, but there have been several exceptions. An all grey kit was introduced in 1987, which was used until the 1991\u201392 centenary season when it was replaced by a combination of green shirts and white shorts. After various colour combinations in the 1990s, including gold and navy, bright yellow, black and grey, and ecru, the club alternated between yellow and white away kits until the 2008\u201309 season, when it re-introduced the grey kit. A third kit is designed for European away matches, though it is also worn in domestic away matches on occasions when the current away kit clashes with a team's home kit. Between 2012 and 2015, the kits were designed by Warrior Sports, who became the club's kit providers at the start of the 2012\u201313 season. In February 2015, Warrior's parent company New Balance announced it would be entering the global football market, with teams sponsored by Warrior now being outfitted by New Balance. The only other branded shirts worn by the club were made by Umbro until 1985, when they were replaced by Adidas, who produced the kits until 1996 when Reebok took over. They produced the kits for 10 years before Adidas made the kits from 2006 to 2012. Nike became the club's official kit supplier at the start of the 2020\u201321 season. In 2025, the club reunited with Adidas in a new 10-year partnership.\nLiverpool was the first English professional club to have a sponsor's logo on its shirts, after agreeing a deal with Hitachi in 1979. However, for the first few years of the deal, broadcasting rules meant that sponsors logos could not be shown on shirts for televised matches.\nSince then, the club has been sponsored by Crown Paints, Candy, Carlsberg and Standard Chartered. The contract with Carlsberg, which was signed in 1992, was the longest-lasting agreement in English top-flight football. The association with Carlsberg ended at the start of the 2010\u201311 season, when Standard Chartered Bank became the club's sponsor.\nThe Liverpool badge is based on the city's liver bird symbol, which in the past had been placed inside a shield. In 1977, a red liver bird standing on a football (blazoned as \"Statant upon a football a Liver Bird wings elevated and addorsed holding in the beak a piece of seaweed gules\") was granted as a heraldic badge by the College of Arms to the English Football League intended for use by Liverpool. However, Liverpool never made use of this badge. In 1992, to commemorate the centennial of the club, a new badge was commissioned, including a representation of the Shankly Gates. The next year twin flames were added at either side, symbolic of the Hillsborough memorial outside Anfield, where an eternal flame burns in memory of those who died in the Hillsborough disaster. In 2012, Warrior Sports' first Liverpool kit removed the shield and gates, returning the badge to what had adorned Liverpool shirts in the 1970s; the flames were moved to the back collar of the shirt, surrounding the number 96 for the number who died at Hillsborough. Following the death of Andrew Devine, and the subsequent ruling by a coroner that he was also unlawfully killed, the number 97 has been worn in this place since the beginning of the 2022\u201323 season.\nStadium.\nLiverpool's home stadium is Anfield, which was built in 1884 on land adjacent to Stanley Park. Situated from Liverpool city centre, it was originally used by Everton before the latter moved to Goodison Park after a dispute over rent with Anfield owner John Houlding. Left with an empty ground, Houlding founded Liverpool in 1892 and the club has played at Anfield ever since. The capacity of the stadium at the time was 20,000, although only 100 spectators attended Liverpool's first match at Anfield.\nThe Kop is the stadium section where Liverpool's most vocal supporters, often referred to as \"Kopites,\" have traditionally gathered. Historically, the Kop was a terraced stand before it was converted to seating, and it has long been recognized as the heart of Anfield's fan base. It was originally built in 1906 due to the high turnout for matches and was called the Oakfield Road Embankment. Its first game was on 1 September 1906 when the home side beat Stoke City 1\u20130. In 1906, the banked stand at one end of the ground was formally renamed the Spion Kop after a hill in KwaZulu-Natal. The hill was the site of the Battle of Spion Kop in the Second Boer War, where over 300 men of the Lancashire Regiment died, many of them from Liverpool. At its peak, the stand could hold 28,000 spectators and was one of the largest single-tier stands in the world. Many stadiums in England had stands named after Spion Kop, but Anfield's was the largest of them at the time; it could hold more supporters than some entire football grounds.\nAnfield could accommodate more than 60,000 supporters at its peak and had a capacity of 55,000 until the 1990s, when, following recommendations from the Taylor Report, all clubs in the Premier League were obliged to convert to all-seater stadiums in time for the 1993\u201394 season, reducing its capacity to 45,276. The findings of the report precipitated the redevelopment of the Kemlyn Road Stand, which was rebuilt in 1992, coinciding with the centenary of the club, and was known as the Centenary Stand until 2017 when it was renamed the Sir Kenny Dalglish Stand. An extra tier was added to the Anfield Road end in 1998, which further increased the capacity of the ground but gave rise to problems when it was opened. A series of support poles and stanchions were inserted to give extra stability to the top tier of the stand after movement of the tier was reported at the start of the 1999\u20132000 season.\nBecause of restrictions on expanding the capacity at Anfield, Liverpool announced plans to move to the proposed Stanley Park Stadium in May 2002. Planning permission was granted in July 2004, and in September 2006, Liverpool City Council agreed to grant Liverpool a 999-year lease on the proposed site. Following the takeover of the club by George Gillett and Tom Hicks in February 2007, the proposed stadium was redesigned. The new design was approved by the Council in November 2007. The stadium was scheduled to open in August 2011 and would hold 60,000 spectators, with HKS, Inc. contracted to build the stadium. Construction was halted in August 2008, as Gillett and Hicks had difficulty in financing the \u00a3300\u00a0million needed for the development. In October 2012, BBC Sport reported that Fenway Sports Group, the new owners of Liverpool, had decided to redevelop their current home at Anfield rather than building a new stadium in Stanley Park. As part of the redevelopment, the capacity of Anfield was to increase from 45,276 to approximately 60,000 and would cost approximately \u00a3150 million. When construction was completed on the new Main stand, the capacity of Anfield was increased to 54,074. This \u00a3100\u00a0million expansion added a third tier to the stand. This was all part of a \u00a3260\u00a0million project to improve the Anfield area. J\u00fcrgen Klopp the manager at the time described the stand as \"impressive\".\nIn June 2021, it was reported that Liverpool City Council had given planning permission for the club to renovate and expand the Anfield Road stand, boosting the capacity by around 7,000 and taking the overall capacity at Anfield to 61,276. The expansion, which is estimated to cost \u00a360 million, was described as \"a huge milestone\" by managing director Andy Hughes, and would also see rail seating being trialled in the Kop for the 2021\u201322 Premier League season. The first league game to feature an attendance of over 60,000 at Anfield, following the near completion of the Anfield Road stand redevelopment, was a Premier League match against Brighton &amp; Hove Albion on 31 March 2024.\nSupport.\nLiverpool is one of the best supported clubs in the world. The club states that its worldwide fan base includes 300\u00a0officially recognised Supporters Clubs in 100 countries. Notable groups include Spirit of Shankly. The club takes advantage of this support through its worldwide summer tours, which has included playing in front of 95,000 in Melbourne, Australia, and 101,000 in Michigan, United States. The club also has a significant following on social media, and in 2024, it became the first Premier League club (and the third sports team in the world, after Barcelona and Real Madrid) to amass 10 million subscribers on YouTube. In 2025, the club received orders from more than 150 countries for the team's replica shirts. Liverpool fans often refer to themselves as Kopites, a reference to the fans who once stood, and now sit, on the Kop at Anfield. In 2008, a group of fans formed a splinter club, A.F.C. Liverpool, to play matches for fans who had been priced out of watching Premier League football.\nThe song \"You'll Never Walk Alone\", originally from the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical \"Carousel\" and later recorded by Liverpool musicians Gerry and the Pacemakers, is the club's anthem and has been sung by the Anfield crowd since the early 1960s. Simon Hart of \"The Independent\" wrote: \"The pre-match, scarfs-raised, sing-it-loud ritual is as much a part of Liverpool's fabric as their red shirts.\" The song's title adorns the top of the Shankly Gates, which were unveiled on 2 August 1982 in memory of former manager Bill Shankly. The \"You'll Never Walk Alone\" portion of the Shankly Gates is also reproduced on the club's badge.\nThe club's supporters have been involved in two stadium disasters. The first was the 1985 Heysel Stadium disaster, in which 39 people, mostly Italians and Juventus supporters, were killed. They were confined to a corner by Liverpool fans who had charged in their direction; the weight of the cornered fans caused a wall to collapse. UEFA laid the blame for the incident solely on the Liverpool supporters, and banned all English clubs from European competition for five years. Liverpool was banned for an additional year, preventing it from participating in the 1990\u201391 European Cup, despite winning the league in 1990. Twenty-seven fans were arrested on suspicion of manslaughter and were extradited to Belgium in 1987 to face trial. In 1989, after a five-month trial in Belgium, 14\u00a0Liverpool fans were given three-year sentences for involuntary manslaughter; half of the terms were suspended.\nThe second disaster took place during an FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, on 15 April 1989. Ninety-seven Liverpool fans died as a consequence of overcrowding at the Leppings Lane end, in what became known as the Hillsborough disaster. In the following days, \"The Sun\"'s coverage of the event spread falsehoods, particularly an article entitled \"The Truth\" that claimed that Liverpool fans had robbed the dead and had urinated on and attacked the police. Subsequent investigations proved the allegations false, leading to a boycott of the newspaper by Liverpool fans across the city and elsewhere; many still refuse to buy \"The Sun\" 30\u00a0years later. Many support organisations were set up in the wake of the disaster, such as the Hillsborough Justice Campaign, which represents bereaved families, survivors and supporters in their efforts to secure justice.\nRivalries.\nLiverpool's longest-established rivalry is with fellow Liverpool team Everton, against whom they contest the Merseyside derby. The rivalry stems from Liverpool's formation and the dispute with Everton officials and the then owners of Anfield. The Merseyside derby is one of the few local derbies which do not enforce fan segregation, and hence has been known as the \"friendly derby\". Since the mid-1980s, the rivalry has intensified both on and off the field and, since the inception of the Premier League in 1992, the Merseyside derby has had more players sent off than any other Premier League game. It has been referred to as \"the most ill-disciplined and explosive fixture in the Premier League\". In terms of support within the city, the number of Liverpool fans outweighs Everton supporters by a ratio of 2:1.\nLiverpool's rivalry with Manchester United stems from the cities' competition in the Industrial Revolution of the 19th century. Connected by the world's first inter-city railway, by road Liverpool and Manchester are separated by approximately 30 miles (48\u00a0km) along the East Lancs Road. Ranked the two biggest clubs in England by \"France Football\" magazine, Liverpool and Manchester United are the most successful English teams in both domestic and international competitions, and both clubs have a global fanbase. Viewed as one of the biggest rivalries in world football, it is considered the most famous fixture in English football. The two clubs alternated as champions between 1964 and 1967, and Manchester United became the first English team to win the European Cup in 1968, followed by Liverpool's four European Cup victories. Despite the 40 league titles and nine European Cups between them, the two rivals have rarely been successful at the same time\u00a0\u2013 Liverpool's run of titles in the 1970s and 1980s coincided with Manchester United's 26-year title drought while United's success in the Premier League era coincided with Liverpool's 30-year title drought, with the two clubs having finished first and second in the league only five times. Such is the rivalry between the clubs that they rarely do transfer business with each other. The last player to be transferred between the two clubs was Phil Chisnall, who moved to Liverpool from Manchester United in 1964.\nOwnership and finances.\nAs the owner of Anfield and founder of Liverpool, John Houlding was the club's first chairman, a position he held from its founding in 1892 until 1904. John McKenna took over as chairman after Houlding's departure. McKenna subsequently became President of the Football League. The chairmanship changed hands many times before John Smith, whose father was a shareholder of the club, took up the role in 1973. He oversaw the most successful period in Liverpool's history before stepping down in 1990. His successor was Noel White who became chairman in 1990. In August 1991 David Moores, whose family had owned the club for more than 50 years, became chairman. His uncle John Moores was also a shareholder at Liverpool and was chairman of Everton from 1961 to 1973. Moores owned 51\u00a0percent of the club, and in 2004 expressed his willingness to consider a bid for his shares in Liverpool.\nMoores eventually sold the club to American businessmen George Gillett and Tom Hicks on 6 February 2007. The deal valued the club and its outstanding debts at \u00a3218.9\u00a0million. The pair paid \u00a35,000\u00a0per share, or \u00a3174.1 million for the total shareholding and \u00a344.8 million to cover the club's debts. Disagreements between Gillett and Hicks, and the fans' lack of support for them, resulted in the pair looking to sell the club. Martin Broughton was appointed chairman of the club on 16 April 2010 to oversee its sale. In May 2010, accounts were released showing the holding company of the club to be \u00a3350 million in debt (due to leveraged takeover) with losses of \u00a355m, causing auditor KPMG to qualify its audit opinion. The group's creditors, including the Royal Bank of Scotland, took Gillett and Hicks to court to force them to allow the board to proceed with the sale of the club, the major asset of the holding company. A High Court judge, Mr Justice Floyd, ruled in favour of the creditors and paved the way for the sale of the club to John W. Henry's Fenway Sports Group (formerly New England Sports Ventures), although Gillett and Hicks still had the option to appeal. Liverpool was sold to Fenway Sports Group on 15 October 2010 for \u00a3300 million.\nLiverpool has been described as a global brand; a 2010 report valued the club's trademarks and associated intellectual property at \u00a3141 million, an increase of \u00a35 million on the previous year. The club was given a brand rating of AA (Very Strong). In May 2024, business magazine \"Forbes\" ranked Liverpool as the fourth-most valuable football club in the world, behind Real Madrid, Manchester United, and Barcelona; they valued the club at $5.37 billion. According to a 2018 report by accountants Deloitte, the club had an annual revenue of \u20ac424.2\u00a0million for the previous year, and \"Forbes\" valued the club at $1.944\u00a0billion. In 2018, annual revenue increased to \u20ac513.7\u00a0million, and \"Forbes\" valued the club at $2.183\u00a0billion. In 2019, revenue increased to \u20ac604\u00a0million (\u00a3533\u00a0million) according to Deloitte, with the club breaching the half a billion pounds mark.\nIn April 2020, the owners of the club came under fire from fans and the media for deciding to furlough all non-playing staff during the COVID-19 pandemic. In response to this, the club made a U-turn on the decision and apologised for their initial decision. In April 2021, \"Forbes\" valued the club at $4.1\u00a0billion, a two-year increase of 88%, making it the world's fifth-most-valuable football club. With Liverpool being ranked as the fourth-most valuable football club in the world in May 2024, at $5.37 billion, this was an increase of roughly 21% from 2022.\nLiverpool in the media.\nLiverpool featured in the first edition of BBC's \"Match of the Day\", which screened highlights of their match against Arsenal at Anfield on 22 August 1964. The first football match to be televised in colour was between Liverpool and West Ham United, broadcast live in March 1967. Liverpool fans featured in the Pink Floyd song \"Fearless\", in which they sang excerpts from \"You'll Never Walk Alone\". To mark the club's appearance in the 1988 FA Cup Final, Liverpool released the \"Anfield Rap\", a song featuring John Barnes and other members of the squad.\nA docudrama on the Hillsborough disaster, written by Jimmy McGovern, was screened in 1996. It featured Christopher Eccleston as Trevor Hicks, who lost two teenage daughters in the disaster, went on to campaign for safer stadiums, and helped to form the Hillsborough Families Support Group. Liverpool featured in the 2001 film \"The 51st State\", in which ex-hitman Felix DeSouza (Robert Carlyle) is a keen supporter of the team and the last scene takes place at a match between Liverpool and Manchester United. The club also featured in the 1984 children's television show \"Scully\", about a young boy who tries to gain a trial with Liverpool. The \"Doctor Who\" episode \"The Halloween Apocalypse\", aired in October 2021, features The Doctor (played by Jodie Whittaker) exiting the TARDIS outside Anfield, as she exclaims: \"Liverpool? Anfield! Klopp era, classic!\".\nIn 2024, Liverpool was named the most-watched club in world football across the last five seasons by media analytics firm Nielsen with an average per season global broadcast audience of more than 724 million across league and cup fixtures.\n \"As of 1 September 2025\"\nPlayers.\nFirst-team squad.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOut on loan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRetired numbers.\nSince 11 July 2025, Liverpool have not issued the number 20 to any men's, women's, academy, or foundation squad. It was retired in memory of Diogo Jota, who died in a car crash with his brother, Andr\u00e9 Silva in Cernadilla, Spain on 3 July 2025.\nClub captains.\nSince the establishment of the club in 1892, 46 players have been club captain of Liverpool F.C. Andrew Hannah became the first captain of the club after Liverpool separated from Everton and formed its own club. Alex Raisbeck, who was club captain from 1899 to 1909, was the longest serving captain before being overtaken by Steven Gerrard who served 12 seasons starting from the 2003\u201304 season. The present captain is Virgil van Dijk, who has served since the 2023\u201324 season.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nClub officials.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHonours.\nIn terms of the number of trophies won, Liverpool is regarded as the most successful club in English football. Liverpool's first trophy was the Lancashire League, which it won in the club's first season. In 1901, the club won its first League title, while the record-equalling twentieth and most recent was in 2025. Meanwhile, the club\u2019s first success in the FA Cup came in 1965. In the 1980s, Liverpool had its most successful decade, when the club won six League titles, two FA Cups, four League Cups, one Football League Super Cup, five Charity Shields (one shared) and two European Cups. In 2020, Liverpool became the first English club to have won a League title in eight different decades.\nThe club has accumulated more top-flight wins and points than any other English team. Liverpool also has the highest average league finishing position (3.3) for the 50-year period from 1965 to 2015, and second-highest average league finishing position for the period 1900\u20131999 after Arsenal, with an average league placing of 8.7.\nLiverpool is the most successful British club in international football with fourteen trophies, having won the European Cup/UEFA Champions League (UEFA's premier club competition) six times, an English record that is only surpassed by Real Madrid and AC Milan. Liverpool's fifth European Cup win, in 2005, meant that the club was awarded the trophy permanently and was also awarded a multiple-winner badge. Liverpool also hold the English record of three wins in the UEFA Cup, UEFA's secondary club competition. Liverpool also hold the English record of four wins in the UEFA Super Cup. In 2019, the club won the FIFA Club World Cup for the first time, and also became the first English club to win the international treble of the Champions League, UEFA Super Cup and Club World Cup.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18120", "revid": "18174831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18120", "title": "Lysosome", "text": "Cell membrane organelle\nA lysosome () is a membrane-bound organelle that is found in all animal cells, (except red blood cells), and rarely in plant cells. There are normally hundreds of lysosomes in the cytosol, where they function as the cell's degradation center. Their primary responsibility is catabolic degradation of proteins, polysaccharides and lipids into their respective building-block molecules: amino acids, monosaccharides, and free fatty acids. The breakdown is done by various enzymes, for example proteases, glycosidases and lipases.\nWith an acidic lumen limited by a single-bilayer lipid membrane, the lysosome holds an environment isolated from the rest of the cell. The lower pH creates optimal conditions for the over 60 different hydrolases inside.\nLysosomes receive extracellular particles through endocytosis, and intracellular components through autophagy. They can also fuse with the plasma membrane and secrete their contents, a process called lysosomal exocytosis. After degradation lysosomal products are transported out of the lysosome through specific membrane proteins or via vesicular membrane trafficking to be recycled or to be utilized for energy.\nAside from cellular clearance and secretion, lysosomes mediate biological processes like plasma membrane repair, cell homeostasis, energy metabolism, cell signaling, and the immune response.\nDiscovery.\nChristian de Duve, a Belgian scientist at the Laboratory of Physiological Chemistry at the Catholic University of Louvain, is credited with discovering lysosomes in the 1950s. De Duve and his team were studying the distribution of hydrolytic enzymes such as acid phosphatase within cells, using cell fractionation methods to isolate subcellular components. De Duve and his team identified an unknown organelle that was rich in acid phosphatase. This led them to propose the existence of lysosomes as membrane bound organelles containing digestive enzymes capable of breaking down a variety of biological molecules.\nUsing differential centrifugation and enzyme activity assays, the team confirmed the hypothesis and understood that these organelles play a crucial role in intracellular digestion processes, such as phagocytosis and autophagy. The presence of digestive enzymes was further validated using electron microscopy. De Duve's discovery laid the foundation for new research into lysosomal functions and understanding disorders which could lead to undigested materials accumulating in the cell. De Duve was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1974.\nFunction and structure.\nLysosomes vary in shape and size depending on their state, what they are digesting, and the cell type they are in. Their shape can differ from spherical and ovoid to occasionally tubular. The size of lysosomes ranges from 0.1-1.2 \u03bcm, with some tubular ones reaching up to 15 \u03bcm in phagocytes. Several hundred lysosomes can be found within a single cell. However, upon nutrient deprivation or induced autophagy, their numbers can drop below 50 in a cell.\nLysosomes contain a variety of enzymes that enable the cell to break down various biomolecules it engulfs, including peptides, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, and lipids. The enzymes responsible for this hydrolysis require an acidic environment for optimal activity, with a pH ranging from ~4.5\u20135.0. The interior of the lysosome is acidic compared to the slightly basic cytosol (pH 7.2).\nThe lysosomal membrane is a phospholipid bilayer with high carbohydrate content from heavily glycosylated membrane proteins. This forms a glycocalyx that protects the cell from the degradative enzymes held within the lysosome. Lysosomal hydrolases are pH-sensitive and do not function properly in the alkaline environment of the cytosol, ensuring that molecules and organelles in the cytosol are not degraded if there is leakage of hydrolytic enzymes from the lysosome.\nIn addition to breaking down polymers, lysosomes are capable of killing and digesting microbes, cells, or cellular debris. Through cooperation with phagosomes, lysosomes conduct autophagy, clearing out damaged structures and forming simple compounds, which are then used as new building materials. Similarly, lysosomes break down virus particles or bacteria during phagocytosis in macrophages.\nLysosomes also help detect pathogens through toll-like receptors (TLRs), like TLR7 and TLR9. Microbes can be degraded into antigens, which are then loaded onto MHC molecules and presented to T-cells, a critical part of immune defense. Additionally, lysosomal enzymes can trigger lysosomal-mediated programmed cell death (LM-PCD) if released into the cytoplasm.\nTo maintain their acidic environment, lysosomes pump protons (H\u207a ions) from the cytosol into the lysosomal lumen via a proton pump in the lysosomal membrane. Vacuolar-ATPases are responsible for the transport of protons, while the counter transport of chloride ions is performed by ClC-7 Cl\u207b/H\u207a antiporter. This mechanism helps maintain a steady acidic environment, as well as ionic homeostasis, within the lysosome.\nLysosomes also help balance cellular metabolism by sensing nutrient availability. When nutrients are plentiful, they activate mTOR signaling to support anabolic (biosynthetic) processes. During starvation, lysosomes degrade autophagic material, recycling components to maintain cell survival.\nLysosomal degradation pathways.\nThe lysosome is delivered material for degradation via transient interactions or complete fusion, forming endolysosomes and autolysosomes respectively. This way, the lysosomes act as reservoirs for acidic hydrolases, cycling through fusion and fission events with late endosomes and autophagosomes. The actual breakdown of endocytic and autophagic cargo primarily happens within these transient structures\u2014endolysosomes and autolysosomes\u2014under normal physiological conditions.\nEndocytosed materials \u2013 such as complex lipids, membrane proteins, and polysaccharides \u2013 enter the endocytic pathway; moving first in early endosomes, then in late endosomes containing intraluminal vesicles (also referred to as multivesicular bodies, MVBs). Then they interact with lysosomes, either via full fusion, or via \"kiss-and-run\" events where brief membrane contact allows content exchange before the organelles separate. The resulting hybrid structure is called an endolysosome.\nIntracellular materials \u2013 like damaged organelles or misfolded proteins \u2013 are processed through the autophagic pathway. Autophagy, or \"self-eating,\" is a continuous cellular process that delivers cytosolic components to lysosomes for degradation. There are three main types of autophagy: macroautophagy, microautophagy, and chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA)\u2014each differing in how cargo is delivered to the lysosome. After merging with lysosomes they create hybrid organelles called autolysosomes.\nThe resulting catabolites serve as building-block molecules for synthesizing complex macromolecules. These are exported from lysosomes via specific transporters or through vesicle trafficking. Once released into the cytosol or delivered to the Golgi apparatus, these catabolites are either further metabolized to generate energy or reused in biosynthetic pathways to form new complex molecules. Alternatively, some degradation products can be secreted out of the lysosomes through exocytosis.\nBecause catabolic (degradative) and anabolic (biosynthetic) pathways are interconnected and tightly regulated, the flow of cargo through the endocytic and autophagic systems is modulated by cellular signaling and nutrient availability. Nutrient deprivation, for example, activates autophagy, which is then halted once lysosomal degradation is complete. Lysosomes themselves play a direct role in sensing nutrient levels through the lysosomal nutrient-sensing (LYNUS) system, which includes components such as V-ATPase, Rag GTPases, and the mTOR complex.\nFormation.\nThe formation of lysosomes begins in the endoplasmic reticulum, where hydrolytic enzymes are synthesized. These enzymes are then transported to the Golgi apparatus (Golgi body), where they undergo modifications to ensure proper targeting and function. The enzymes are tagged with mannose-6-phosphate, allowing them to be sorted into vesicles. These vesicles then bud off from the trans-Golgi network and fuse with early endosomes.\nEarly endosomes degrade cargo from the extracellular environment, and as they mature into late endosomes, proton pumps are activated, causing the internal environment to become acidic. This acidic environment activates the hydrolytic enzymes, which further mature the endosome into a lysosome. The lysosome then breaks down and recycles cellular waste.\nDisruptions in lysosomal formation can lead to dysfunctional lysosomes and the accumulation of undigested molecules, contributing to various lysosomal storage disorders.\nPathogen entry.\nLysosomes are a crucial component of the innate immune system and play an important role in defending the cell against pathogens such as viruses or bacteria. When a pathogen enters the cell, it is often enclosed in a phagosome, which then fuses with a lysosome to form a phagolysosome where the hydrolytic enzymes break down the pathogen. \nLysosomes also play a big role in the adaptive immune system. Fragments of pathogens that have been broken down by phagolysosomes are sent to the major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC II) and presented on the surface of antigen presenting cells (APCs). This then activates helper T cells, which causes an adaptive immune response.\nJust like other pathogens, viruses entering the cell via endocytosis are degraded in lysosomes. However, some viruses have evolved strategies to escape degradation by lysosomes, and are able to escape the lysosome before complete degradation and spread viral material into the cytoplasm which then spreads viral infection in the cell. Poor lysosomal activity and failure by lysosomes to properly degrade all biomolecules from pathogens results in higher viral infections by viruses such as HIV. \nClinical significance.\nLysosomal storage disorders are a group of metabolic disorders that stem from inherited genetic mutations that disrupt normal lysosomal function and homeostasis. Most frequently, the mutations are located in the acidic hydrolases, but can also be found in non-enzymatic lysosomal proteins (soluble and membrane-bound) and non-lysosomal factors controlling lysosomal function. This leads to defective degradation, which induces abnormal accumulations of undigested or partially digested macromolecules within lysosomes. Lysosomal dysfunction also affects transport across the lysosomal membrane, vesicle trafficking, lysosome reformation and autophagy.\nThe stress of accumulated lysosomal substrates can lead to lysosomal membrane permeabilization, allowing hydrolytic enzymes to leak into the cytosol and initiate cell death. This cell loss particularly affects post-mitotic tissues such as the brain, liver, eyes, muscles, and spleen\u2014resulting in the hallmark symptoms of lysosomal storage disorders, including neurodegeneration, cognitive impairment, and motor dysfunction.\nThe age of onset and the specific symptoms in lysosomal storage disorders differ depending on the severity of the mutations, the cell types affected and what substrates accumulate. However, the clinical presentation is typically a neurodegenerative disease at childhood, with more variations presenting themselves in adulthood. In most cases, the central nervous system (CNS) is affected, causing the brain to experience global neurodegeneration, inflammation, activation of the innate immune system and astrogliosis.\nSeveral therapeutic strategies have been developed to address lysosomal storage disorders. These include substrate reduction therapy, bone marrow transplantation, gene therapy, and enzyme replacement therapy. Currently, enzyme replacement therapy and substrate reduction are the most widely used. However, despite these advancements, most lysosomal storage disorders still lack effective treatments as the existing ones are limited by poor efficacy and are typically disease specific.\nLysosomotropism.\nLysosomotropism refers to the tendency of lipophilic weak bases to accumulate in acidic organelles like lysosomes. While neutral forms of these compounds cross membranes easily, their protonated (charged) forms become trapped inside lysosomes, leading to concentrations up to 1000 times higher than outside the cell. This \"acid trapping\" or \"proton pump\" effect can be predicted using mathematical models.\nMany approved drugs, including haloperidol, levomepromazine, and amantadine, exhibit lysosomotropic behavior. This helps explain their high tissue-to-blood concentration ratios and prolonged tissue retention, though fat solubility also contributes.\nSome lysosomotropic drugs can interfere with lysosomal enzymes like acid sphingomyelinase. Ambroxol, a mucolytic, promotes lysosomal exocytosis by neutralizing lysosomal pH and releasing stored calcium. This action may underlie its observed benefits in diseases linked to lysosomal dysfunction, including Parkinson's disease and lysosomal storage disorders.\nSystemic lupus erythematosus (Lupus).\nSystemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) otherwise known as Lupus is an autoimmune disease where the immune system attacks healthy cells. Lupus is prominent in systemic lupus erythematosus preventing macrophages and monocytes from degrading neutrophil extracellular traps and immune complexes. The failure to degrade internalized immune complexes rises from irregularly extended activity of mTORC2, which impairs lysosome acidification. As a result, immune complexes in the lysosome recycle to the surface of macrophages causing an accumulation of DNA fragments and nuclear complexes which triggers an immune response from the body which is leads to the multiple lupus-associated pathologies.\nDifferent types of enzymes present in lysosomes.\nThere are over 50 different types of hydrolytic enzymes in lysosomes, the table below shows a few of the main types and their substrates. It is important to keep in mind that each category below has multiple different types of enzymes. "}
{"id": "18121", "revid": "7609619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18121", "title": "Leg spin", "text": "Type of spin bowling in cricket\nLeg spin is a type of spin bowling in cricket. A bowler who uses this technique is called a leg spinner. Leg spinners bowl with their right-arm and a wrist spin action. The leg spinner's normal delivery is called a leg break, which spins from right to left (from the bowler's perspective) when the ball bounces on the pitch. For a right-handed batter, the ball breaks towards them from the leg side, hence the name 'leg break'.\nLeg spinners bowl mostly leg breaks, varying them by adjusting the line and length, and amount of side spin versus topspin of the deliveries. Leg spinners also typically use variations of flight by sometimes looping the ball in the air, allowing any cross-breeze and the aerodynamic effects of the spinning ball to cause the ball to dip and drift before bouncing and spinning or \"turning\", sharply. Leg spinners also bowl other types of delivery, which spin differently, such as the googly.\nThe terms 'leg spin', 'leg spinner', 'leg break' and 'leggie' are used in slightly different ways by different sources.\nThe bowlers with the second- and fourth-highest number of wickets in the history of Test cricket, Shane Warne and Anil Kumble, respectively, were leg spinners.\nHistory.\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, it was thought that leg spin would disappear from the game due to the success of West Indian, and later Australian teams, exclusively using fast bowlers. During this time Abdul Qadir of Pakistan was the highest-profile leg spinner in the world and is sometimes credited with \"keeping the art alive\". However, leg spin become popular again with cricket fans and a successful part of cricket teams, driven largely by the success of Shane Warne, beginning with his spectacular Ball of the Century to Mike Gatting in 1993.\nComparison with other types of bowling.\nA left-handed bowler who bowls with the same (wrist spin) action as a leg spinner is known as a left-arm unorthodox spin bowler. The ball itself spins in the opposite direction.\nThe same kind of trajectory, which spins from right to left on pitching, when performed by a left-arm bowler is known as left-arm orthodox spin bowling.\nAs with all spinners, leg spinners bowl the ball far more slowly (70\u201390\u00a0km/h or 45\u201355\u00a0mph) than fast bowlers. The fastest leg spinners will sometimes top 100\u00a0km/h (60\u00a0mph). While very difficult to bowl accurately, good leg spin is considered one of the most threatening types of bowling to bat against for a right-handed batter, since the flight and sharp turn make the ball's movement extremely hard to read, and the turn away from the right-handed batter is more dangerous than the turn into the right-handed batter generated by an off spinner. Any miscalculation can result in an outside edge off the bat and a catch going to the wicket-keeper or slip fielders. Alternatively, for a ball aimed outside the leg stump, the breaking may be so sharp that the ball goes behind a right-handed batter and hits the stumps \u2013 the batter is then said (informally) to be \"bowled around their legs\". A left-handed batter has less difficulty facing leg spin bowling, because the ball moves in towards the batter's body, meaning the batter's legs are usually in the path of the ball if it misses the bat or takes an edge. This makes it difficult for the bowler to get the batter out bowled or caught from a leg break.\nLeg spin: Some sources make the term 'leg spin' synonymous with leg break, implying that other deliveries bowled by a leg spinner do not count as 'leg spin'. However, other sources use the term 'leg spin' more widely, to include all deliveries bowled by a leg spinner, including non-leg break deliveries. \nLeg break: In the definition of a leg break, some sources actually include the bowler being a leg spinner, which implies that only leg spinners can bowl leg breaks; all leg breaks are bowled by leg spinners. Other sources do not include the bowler being a leg spinner in the definition of a leg break, and say a leg break is simply a delivery that spins from the legside to the offside, and so can also be bowled by other types of bowler. In this case, leg breaks are (only) mostly bowled by leg spinners.\nLeg spinner: The term leg spinner can be used to mean either the bowler or the leg break delivery.\nLeggie: The term leggie can also be used to mean either the bowler or the leg break delivery.\nTechnique.\nA leg break is bowled by holding the cricket ball in the palm of the hand with the seam running across under all the fingers. As the ball is released, the wrist is rotated to the left and the ball flicked by the ring finger, giving the ball an anti-clockwise spin as seen from behind.\nTo grip the ball for a leg-spinning delivery, the ball is placed into the palm with the seam parallel to the palm. The first two fingers then spread and grip the ball, and the third and fourth fingers close together and rest against the side of the ball. The first bend of the third finger should grasp the seam. The thumb resting against the side is up to the bowler but should impart no pressure. When the ball is bowled, the third finger will apply most of the spin. The wrist is cocked as it comes down by the hip, and the wrist moves sharply from right to left as the ball is released, adding more spin. The ball is tossed up to provide flight. The batter will see the hand with the palm facing towards them when the ball is released.\nNotable leg spin bowlers.\nPlayers listed below have been included as they meet specific criteria which the general cricketing public would recognise as having achieved significant success in the art of leg spin bowling. For example: leading wicket-takers, and inventors of new deliveries.\nOther deliveries bowled by leg spin bowlers.\nHighly skilled leg spin bowlers are also able to bowl deliveries that behave unexpectedly, including the googly, which turns the opposite way to a normal leg break and the top spinner, which does not turn but dips sharply and bounces higher than other deliveries. A few leg spinners such as Abdul Qadir, Anil Kumble, Shane Warne and Mushtaq Ahmed have also mastered the flipper, a delivery that, like a top spinner, goes straight on landing; but having floated through the air it skids and keeps low, often dismissing batters leg before wicket or bowled. Another variation in the arsenal of some leg spinners is the slider, which travels more straight on.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18123", "revid": "50951493", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18123", "title": "Lisp machine", "text": "Computer specialized in running Lisp\nLisp machines are general-purpose computers designed to efficiently run Lisp as their main software and programming language, usually via hardware support. They are an example of a high-level language computer architecture. In a sense, they were the first commercial single-user workstations. Despite being modest in number (perhaps 7,000 units total as of 1988) Lisp machines commercially pioneered many now-commonplace technologies, including windowing systems, computer mice, high-resolution bit-mapped raster graphics, computer graphic rendering, laser printing, networking innovations such as Chaosnet, and effective garbage collection. Several firms built and sold Lisp machines in the 1980s: Symbolics (3600, 3640, XL1200, MacIvory, and other models), Lisp Machines Incorporated (LMI Lambda), Texas Instruments (Explorer, MicroExplorer), and Xerox (Interlisp-D workstations). The operating systems were written in Lisp Machine Lisp, Interlisp (Xerox), and later partly in Common Lisp.\nHistory.\nHistorical context.\nArtificial intelligence (AI) computer programs of the 1960s and 1970s intrinsically required what was then considered a huge amount of computer power, as measured in processor time and memory space. The power requirements of AI research were exacerbated by the Lisp symbolic programming language, when commercial hardware was designed and optimized for assembly- and Fortran-like programming languages. At first, the cost of such computer hardware meant that it had to be shared among many users. As integrated circuit technology shrank the size and cost of computers in the 1960s and early 1970s, and the memory needs of AI programs began to exceed the address space of the most common research computer, the Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) PDP-10, researchers considered a new approach: a computer designed specifically to develop and run large artificial intelligence programs, and tailored to the semantics of the Lisp language. To provide consistent performance for interactive programs, these machines would often not be shared, but would be dedicated to a single user at a time.\nInitial development.\nIn 1973, Richard Greenblatt and Thomas Knight, programmers at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (AI Lab), began what would become the MIT Lisp Machine Project when they first began building a computer hardwired to run certain basic Lisp operations, rather than run them in software, in a 24-bit tagged architecture. The machine also did incremental (or \"Arena\") garbage collection. More specifically, since Lisp variables are typed at runtime rather than compile time, a simple addition of two variables could take five times as long on conventional hardware, due to test and branch instructions. Lisp Machines ran the tests in parallel with the more conventional single instruction additions. If the simultaneous tests failed, then the result was discarded and recomputed; this meant in many cases a speed increase by several factors. This simultaneous checking approach was used as well in testing the bounds of arrays when referenced, and other memory management necessities (not merely garbage collection or arrays).\nType checking was further improved and automated when the conventional byte word of 32\u00a0bits was lengthened to 36\u00a0bits for Symbolics 3600-model Lisp machines and eventually to 40\u00a0bits or more (usually, the excess bits not accounted for by the following were used for error-correcting codes). The first group of extra bits were used to hold type data, making the machine a tagged architecture, and the remaining bits were used to implement compressed data representation (CDR) coding (wherein the usual linked list elements are compressed to occupy roughly half the space), aiding garbage collection by reportedly an order of magnitude. A further improvement was two microcode instructions which specifically supported Lisp functions, reducing the cost of calling a function to as little as 20 clock cycles, in some Symbolics implementations.\nThe first machine was called the CONS machine (named after the list construction operator codice_1 in Lisp). Often it was affectionately referred to as the \"Knight machine\", perhaps since Knight wrote his master's thesis on the subject; it was extremely well received. It was subsequently improved into a version called CADR (a pun; in Lisp, the codice_2 function, which returns the second item of a list, is pronounced or , as some pronounce the word \"cadre\") which was based on essentially the same architecture. About 25 of what were essentially prototype CADRs were sold within and without MIT for ~$50,000; it quickly became the favorite machine for hacking\u00a0\u2013 many of the most favored software tools were quickly ported to it (e.g. Emacs was ported from ITS in 1975). It was so well received at an AI conference held at MIT in 1978 that Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) began funding its development.\nCommercializing MIT Lisp machine technology.\nIn 1979, Russell Noftsker, being convinced that Lisp machines had a bright commercial future due to the strength of the Lisp language and the enabling factor of hardware acceleration, proposed to Greenblatt that they commercialize the technology. In a counter-intuitive move for an AI Lab hacker, Greenblatt acquiesced, hoping perhaps that he could recreate the informal and productive atmosphere of the Lab in a real business. These ideas and goals were considerably different from those of Noftsker. The two negotiated at length, but neither would compromise. As the proposed firm could succeed only with the full and undivided assistance of the AI Lab hackers as a group, Noftsker and Greenblatt decided that the fate of the enterprise was up to them, and so the choice should be left to the hackers.\nThe ensuing discussions of the choice divided the lab into two factions. In February 1979, matters came to a head. The hackers sided with Noftsker, believing that a commercial venture-fund-backed firm had a better chance of surviving and commercializing Lisp machines than Greenblatt's proposed self-sustaining start-up. Greenblatt lost the battle.\nIt was at this juncture that Symbolics, Noftsker's enterprise, slowly came together. While Noftsker was paying his staff a salary, he had no building or any equipment for the hackers to work on. He bargained with Patrick Winston that, in exchange for allowing Symbolics' staff to keep working out of MIT, Symbolics would let MIT use internally and freely all the software Symbolics developed. A consultant from CDC, who was trying to put together a natural language computer application with a group of West-coast programmers, came to Greenblatt, seeking a Lisp machine for his group to work with, about eight months after the disastrous conference with Noftsker. Greenblatt had decided to start his own rival Lisp machine firm, but he had done nothing. The consultant, Alexander Jacobson, decided that the only way Greenblatt was going to start the firm and build the Lisp machines that Jacobson desperately needed was if Jacobson pushed and otherwise helped Greenblatt launch the firm. Jacobson pulled together business plans, a board, a partner for Greenblatt (one F. Stephen Wyle). The newfound firm was named \"LISP Machine, Inc.\" (LMI), and was funded by CDC orders, via Jacobson.\nAround this time Symbolics (Noftsker's firm) began operating. It had been hindered by Noftsker's promise to give Greenblatt a year's head start, and by severe delays in procuring venture capital. Symbolics still had the major advantage that while 3 or 4 of the AI Lab hackers had gone to work for Greenblatt, 14 other hackers had signed onto Symbolics. Two AI Lab people were not hired by either: Richard Stallman and Marvin Minsky. Stallman, however, blamed Symbolics for the decline of the hacker community that had centered around the AI lab. For two years, from 1982 to the end of 1983, Stallman worked by himself to clone the output of the Symbolics programmers, with the aim of preventing them from gaining a monopoly on the lab's computers.\nRegardless, after a series of internal battles, Symbolics did get off the ground in 1980/1981, selling the CADR as the LM-2, while Lisp Machines, Inc. sold it as the LMI-CADR. Symbolics did not intend to produce many LM-2s, since the 3600 family of Lisp machines was supposed to ship quickly, but the 3600s were repeatedly delayed, and Symbolics ended up producing ~100 LM-2s, each of which sold for $70,000. Both firms developed second-generation products based on the CADR: the Symbolics 3600 and the LMI-LAMBDA (of which LMI managed to sell ~200). The 3600, which shipped a year late, expanded on the CADR by widening the machine word to 36-bits, expanding the address space to 28-bits, and adding hardware to accelerate certain common functions that were implemented in microcode on the CADR. The LMI-LAMBDA, which came out a year after the 3600, in 1983, was compatible with the CADR (it could run CADR microcode), but hardware differences existed. Texas Instruments (TI) joined the fray when it licensed the LMI-LAMBDA design and produced its own variant, the TI Explorer. Some of the LMI-LAMBDAs and the TI Explorer were dual systems with both a Lisp and a Unix processor. TI also developed a 32-bit microprocessor version of its Lisp CPU for the TI Explorer. This Lisp chip also was used for the MicroExplorer \u2013 a NuBus board for the Apple Macintosh II (NuBus was initially developed at MIT for use in Lisp machines).\nSymbolics continued to develop the 3600 family and its operating system, Genera, and produced the Ivory, a VLSI implementation of the Symbolics architecture. Starting in 1987, several machines based on the Ivory processor were developed: boards for Suns and Macs, stand-alone workstations and even embedded systems (I-Machine Custom LSI, 32 bit address, Symbolics XL-400, UX-400, MacIvory II; in 1989 available platforms were Symbolics XL-1200, MacIvory III, UX-1200, Zora, NXP1000 \"pizza box\"). Texas Instruments shrank the Explorer into silicon as the MicroExplorer which was offered as a card for the Apple Mac II. LMI abandoned the CADR architecture and developed its own K-Machine, but LMI went bankrupt before the machine could be brought to market. Before its demise, LMI was working on a distributed system for the LAMBDA using Moby space.\nThese machines had hardware support for various primitive Lisp operations (data type testing, CDR coding) and also hardware support for incremental garbage collection. They ran large Lisp programs very efficiently. The Symbolics machine was competitive against many commercial super minicomputers, but was never adapted for conventional purposes. The Symbolics Lisp Machines were also sold to some non-AI markets like computer graphics, modeling, and animation.\nThe MIT-derived Lisp machines ran a Lisp dialect named Lisp Machine Lisp, descended from MIT's Maclisp. The operating systems were written from the ground up in Lisp, often using object-oriented extensions. Later, these Lisp machines also supported various versions of Common Lisp (with Flavors, New Flavors, and Common Lisp Object System (CLOS)).\nInterlisp, BBN, and Xerox.\nBolt, Beranek and Newman (BBN) developed its own Lisp machine, named Jericho, which ran a version of Interlisp. It was never marketed. Frustrated, the whole AI group resigned, and were hired mostly by Xerox. So, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center had, simultaneously with Greenblatt's own development at MIT, developed their own Lisp machines which were designed to run InterLisp (and later Common Lisp). The same hardware was used with different software also as Smalltalk machines and as the Xerox Star office system. These included the Xerox 1100, \"Dolphin\" (1979); the Xerox 1132, \"Dorado\"; the Xerox 1108, \"Dandelion\" (1981); the Xerox 1109, \"Dandetiger\"; and the Xerox 1186/6085, \"Daybreak\". The operating system of the Xerox Lisp machines has also been ported to a virtual machine and is available for several platforms as a product named \"Medley\". The Xerox machine was well known for its advanced development environment (InterLisp-D), the ROOMS window manager, for its early graphical user interface and for novel applications like NoteCards (one of the first hypertext applications).\nXerox also worked on a Lisp machine based on reduced instruction set computing (RISC), using the 'Xerox Common Lisp Processor' and planned to bring it to market by 1987, which did not occur.\nIntegrated Inference Machines.\nIn the mid-1980s, Integrated Inference Machines (IIM) built prototypes of Lisp machines named Inferstar.\nDevelopments of Lisp machines outside the United States.\nIn 1984\u201385 a UK firm, Racal-Norsk, a joint subsidiary of Racal and Norsk Data, attempted to repurpose Norsk Data's ND-500 supermini as a microcoded Lisp machine, running CADR software: the Knowledge Processing System (KPS).\nThere were several attempts by Japanese manufacturers to enter the Lisp machine market: the Fujitsu Facom-alpha mainframe co-processor, NTT's Elis, Toshiba's AI processor (AIP) and NEC's LIME. Several university research efforts produced working prototypes, among them are Kobe University's TAKITAC-7, RIKEN's FLATS, and Osaka University's EVLIS.\nIn France, two Lisp Machine projects arose: M3L at Toulouse Paul Sabatier University and later MAIA.\nIn Germany Siemens designed the RISC-based Lisp co-processor COLIBRI.\nEnd of the Lisp machines.\nWith the onset of an \"AI winter\" and the early beginnings of the microcomputer revolution, which would sweep away the minicomputer and workstation makers, cheaper desktop PCs soon could run Lisp programs even faster than Lisp machines, with no use of special purpose hardware. Their high profit margin hardware business eliminated, most Lisp machine makers had gone out of business by the early 90s, leaving only software based firms like Lucid Inc. or hardware makers who had switched to software and services to avoid the crash. As of \u00a02015[ [update]], besides Xerox and TI, Symbolics is the only Lisp machine firm still operating, selling the Open Genera Lisp machine software environment and the Macsyma computer algebra system.\nLegacy.\nSeveral attempts to write open-source emulators for various Lisp Machines have been made: CADR Emulation, Symbolics L Lisp Machine Emulation, the E3 Project (TI Explorer II Emulation), Meroko (TI Explorer I), and Nevermore (TI Explorer I). On 3 October 2005, the MIT released the CADR Lisp Machine source code as open source.\nIn September 2014, Alexander Burger, developer of PicoLisp, announced PilMCU, an implementation of PicoLisp in hardware.\nThe Bitsavers' PDF Document Archive has PDF versions of the extensive documentation for the Symbolics Lisp Machines, the TI Explorer and MicroExplorer Lisp Machines and the Xerox Interlisp-D Lisp Machines.\nApplications.\nDomains using the Lisp machines were mostly in the wide field of artificial intelligence applications, but also in computer graphics, medical image processing, and many others.\nThe main commercial expert systems of the 80s were available: Intellicorp's Knowledge Engineering Environment (KEE), Knowledge Craft, from The Carnegie Group Inc., and ART (Automated Reasoning Tool) from Inference Corporation.\nTechnical overview.\nInitially the Lisp machines were designed as personal workstations for software development in Lisp. They were used by one person and offered no multi-user mode. The machines provided a large, black and white, bitmap display, keyboard and mouse, network adapter, local hard disks, more than 1 MB RAM, serial interfaces, and a local bus for extension cards. Color graphics cards, tape drives, and laser printers were optional.\nThe processor did not run Lisp directly, but was a stack machine with instructions optimized for compiled Lisp. The early Lisp machines used microcode to provide the instruction set. For several operations, type checking and dispatching was done in hardware at runtime. For example, one addition operation could be used with various numeric types (integer, float, rational, and complex numbers). The result was a very compact compiled representation of Lisp code.\nThe following example uses a function that counts the number of elements of a list for which a predicate returns codice_3.\n (let ((count 0))\n (dolist (i list count)\n (when (funcall predicate i)\n (incf count)))))\nThe disassembled machine code for above function (for the Ivory microprocessor from Symbolics):\nCommand: (disassemble (compile #'example-count))\n 0 ENTRY: 2 REQUIRED, 0 OPTIONAL ;Creating PREDICATE and LIST\n 2 PUSH 0 ;Creating COUNT\n 3 PUSH FP|3 ;LIST\n 4 PUSH NIL ;Creating I\n 5 BRANCH 15\n 6 SET-TO-CDR-PUSH-CAR FP|5\n 7 SET-SP-TO-ADDRESS-SAVE-TOS SP|-1\n 10 START-CALL FP|2 ;PREDICATE\n 11 PUSH FP|6 ;I\n 12 FINISH-CALL-1-VALUE\n 13 BRANCH-FALSE 15\n 14 INCREMENT FP|4 ;COUNT\n 15 ENDP FP|5\n 16 BRANCH-FALSE 6\n 17 SET-SP-TO-ADDRESS SP|-2\n 20 RETURN-SINGLE-STACK\nThe operating system used virtual memory to provide a large address space. Memory management was done with garbage collection. All code shared a single address space. All data objects were stored with a tag in memory, so that the type could be determined at runtime. Multiple execution threads were supported and termed \"processes\". All processes ran in the one address space.\nAll operating system software was written in Lisp. Xerox used Interlisp. Symbolics, LMI, and TI used Lisp Machine Lisp (descendant of MacLisp). With the appearance of Common Lisp, Common Lisp was supported on the Lisp Machines and some system software was ported to Common Lisp or later written in Common Lisp.\nSome later Lisp machines (like the TI MicroExplorer, the Symbolics MacIvory or the Symbolics UX400/1200) were no longer complete workstations, but boards designed to be embedded in host computers: Apple Macintosh II and Sun-3 or Sun-4.\nSome Lisp machines, such as the Symbolics XL1200, had extensive graphics abilities using special graphics boards. These machines were used in domains like medical image processing, 3D animation, and CAD.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18124", "revid": "49943", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18124", "title": "Les Fauvres", "text": ""}
{"id": "18125", "revid": "46951350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18125", "title": "Links (web browser)", "text": "Web browser\nLinks is a free software text and graphical web browser with a pull-down menu system. It renders complex pages, has partial HTML 4.0 support (including tables, frames, and support for UTF-8), supports color and monochrome terminals, and allows horizontal scrolling.\nIt is intended for users who want to retain many typical elements of graphical user interfaces (pop-up windows, menus, etc.) in a text-only environment.\nThe original version of Links was developed by Mikul\u00e1\u0161 Pato\u010dka in the Czech Republic. His group, \"\"Twibright Labs\",\" later developed version 2 of the Links browser, which displays graphics, and renders fonts in different sizes (with spatial anti-aliasing), but no longer supports JavaScript (it used to, up to version 2.1pre28). The resulting browser is very fast, but does not display many pages as intended. The graphical mode works even on Unix systems without the X Window System or any other window environment, using either SVGAlib or the framebuffer of the system's graphics card.\nForks.\nELinks.\n\"Experimental/Enhanced Links\" (ELinks) is a fork of Links led by Petr Baudis. It is based on Links 0.9. It has a more open development and incorporates patches from other Links versions (such as additional extension scripting in Lua) and from Internet users.\nHacked Links.\n\"Hacked Links\" is another version of the Links browser which has merged some of Elinks' features into Links 2.\nAndrey Mirtchovski has ported it to Plan 9 from Bell Labs. It is considered a good browser on that operating system, though some users have complained about its inability to cut and paste with the Plan 9 snarf buffer.\nAs of \u00a02016[ [update]], the last release of Hacked Links is that of July 9, 2003, with some further changes unreleased.\nOther.\nLinks was also ported to run on the Sony PSP platform as PSPRadio by Rafael Cabezas with the last version (2.1pre23_PSP_r1261) released on February 6, 2007.\nThe BeOS port was updated by Fran\u00e7ois Revol who also added GUI support. It also runs on Haiku.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18126", "revid": "36452830", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18126", "title": "Learning object", "text": "A learning object is \"a collection of content items, practice items, and assessment items that are combined based on a single learning objective\". The term is credited to Wayne Hodgins, and dates from a working group in 1994 bearing the name. The concept encompassed by 'Learning Objects' is known by numerous other terms, including: content objects, chunks, educational objects, information objects, intelligent objects, knowledge bits, knowledge objects, learning components, media objects, reusable curriculum components, nuggets, reusable information objects, reusable learning objects, testable reusable units of cognition, training components, and units of learning.\nThe core idea of the use of learning objects is characterized by the following: discoverability, reusability, and interoperability. To support discoverability, learning objects are described by Learning Object Metadata, formalized as IEEE 1484.12 Learning object metadata. To support reusability, the IMS Consortium proposed a series of specifications such as the IMS Content package. And to support interoperability, the U.S. military's Advanced Distributed Learning organization created the Sharable Content Object Reference Model. Learning objects were designed in order to reduce the cost of learning, standardize learning content, and to enable the use and reuse of learning content by learning management systems.\nDefinitions.\nThe Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) defines a learning object as \"any entity, digital or non-digital, that may be used for learning, education or training\".\nChiappe defined Learning Objects as: \"A digital self-contained and reusable entity, with a clear educational purpose, with at least three internal and editable components: content, learning activities and elements of context. The learning objects must have an external structure of information to facilitate their identification, storage and retrieval: the metadata.\"\nThe following definitions focus on the relation between learning object and digital media. RLO-CETL, a British inter-university Learning Objects Center, defines \"reusable learning objects\" as \"web-based interactive chunks of e-learning designed to explain a stand-alone learning objective\". Daniel Rehak and Robin Mason define it as \"a digitized entity which can be used, reused or referenced during technology supported learning\".\nAdapting a definition from the Wisconsin Online Resource Center, Robert J. Beck suggests that learning objects have the following key characteristics:\nComponents.\nThe following is a list of some of the types of information that may be included in a learning object and its metadata:\nMetadata.\nOne of the key issues in using learning objects is their identification by search engines or content management systems. This is usually facilitated by assigning descriptive learning object metadata. Just as a book in a library has a record in the card catalog, learning objects must also be tagged with metadata. The most important pieces of metadata typically associated with a learning object include:\nMutability.\nA mutated learning object is, according to Michael S. Shaw, MSc (2003), a learning object that has been \"re-purposed and/or re-engineered, changed or simply re-used in some way different from its original intended design\". In other words, educational content or learning materials, initially designed for a specific domain, may be intentionally or unintentionally, repurposed or applied, or become relevant in some significant way to the learner or situation, even though it is from a totally different domain. This interpretation aligns with the idea that the inherent properties of the learning objects remain constant, but their application becomes beneficial and adaptable across diverse domains. Shaw's speculative interpretation suggests an intrinsic stimulation of cognitive flexibility and creative reuse of learning resources for the learner. Shaw also introduces the term \"contextual learning object\", to describe a learning object with high specificity, that has been \"designed to have specific meaning and purpose to an intended learner\". This may be useful if the intent involves just-in-time learning and the individual needs of individual learners.\nPortability.\nBefore any institution invests a great deal of time and energy into building high-quality e-learning content (which can cost over $10,000 per classroom hour), it needs to consider how this content can be easily loaded into a Learning Management System. It is possible for example, to package learning objects with SCORM specification and load it in Moodle Learning Management System or Desire2Learn Learning Environment.\nSenthil &amp; Srivatsa write: \"If all of the properties of a course can be precisely defined in a common format, the content can be serialized into a standard format such as XML and loaded into other systems. When it is considered that some e-learning courses need to include video, mathematical equations using MathML, chemistry equations using CML and other complex structures, the issues become very complex, especially if the systems needs to understand and validate each structure and then place it correctly in a database.\"\nCriticism.\nIn 2001, David Wiley criticized learning object theory in his paper, The Reusability Paradox which is summarized by D'Arcy Norman as, \"If a learning object is useful in a particular context, by definition it is not reusable in a different context. If a learning object is reusable in many contexts, it isn\u2019t particularly useful in any.\" \nIn Three Objections to Learning Objects and E-learning Standards\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18129", "revid": "1812441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18129", "title": "List of Labour parties", "text": "The name \"Labour Party\" (or \"Labor Party\") is used by political parties around the world, particularly in Commonwealth nations. Historically, these parties are associated with democratic socialism, although not exclusively. Over time, most have evolved into social democratic parties. They are traditionally allied with trade unions and the broader labour movement. Many Labour parties are also members of the Socialist International or participants in the Progressive Alliance.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "18130", "revid": "51059816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18130", "title": "Louisiana", "text": "U.S. state\nLouisiana ( ; ; ) is a state in the Deep South and South Central regions of the United States. It borders Texas to the west, Arkansas to the north, and Mississippi to the east. Of the 50 U.S. states, it ranks 31st in area and 25th in population, with roughly 4.6 million residents. Reflecting its French heritage, Louisiana is the only U.S. state with political subdivisions termed parishes, which are equivalent to counties, making it one of only two U.S. states not subdivided into counties (the other being Alaska and its boroughs). Baton Rouge is the state's capital, and New Orleans, a French Louisiana region, is its most populous city with a population of about 363,000 people. Louisiana has a coastline with the Gulf of Mexico to the south; a large part of its eastern boundary is demarcated by the Mississippi River and the mouth of the Mississippi or delta defines much of its lower topography.\nMuch of Louisiana's lands were formed from sediment washed down the Mississippi River, leaving enormous deltas and vast areas of coastal marsh and swamp. These contain a rich southern biota, including birds such as ibises and egrets, many species of tree frogs\u2014such as the state-recognized American green tree frog\u2014and fish such as sturgeon and paddlefish. More elevated areas, particularly in the north, contain a wide variety of ecosystems such as tallgrass prairie, longleaf pine forest and wet savannas; these support an exceptionally large number of plant species, including many species of terrestrial orchids and carnivorous plants. Over half the state is forested.\nLouisiana is situated at the confluence of the Mississippi river system and the Gulf of Mexico. Its location and biodiversity attracted various indigenous groups thousands of years before Europeans arrived in the 17th century. Louisiana has eighteen Native American tribes\u2014the most of any southern state\u2014of which four are federally recognized and ten are state-recognized. The French claimed the territory in 1682, and it became the political, commercial, and population center of the larger colony of New France. From 1762 to 1801 Louisiana was under Spanish rule, briefly returning to French rule before being sold by Napoleon to the U.S. in 1803. It was admitted to the Union in 1812 as the 18th state. Following statehood, Louisiana saw an influx of settlers from the eastern U.S. as well as immigrants from the West Indies, Germany, and Ireland. It experienced an agricultural boom, particularly in cotton and sugarcane, which were cultivated primarily by slaves from Africa. As a slave state, Louisiana was one of the original seven members of the Confederate States of America during the American Civil War.\nLouisiana's unique French heritage is reflected in its toponyms, dialects, culture, demographics, and legal system. Relative to the rest of the southern U.S., Louisiana is multilingual and multicultural, reflecting an admixture of Louisiana French (Cajun, Creole), Spanish, French Canadian, Acadian, Saint-Domingue Creole, Native American, and West African cultures (generally the descendants of slaves stolen in the 18th century); more recent migrants include Filipinos and Vietnamese. In the post\u2013Civil War environment, Anglo-Americans increased the pressure for Anglicization, and in 1921, English was shortly made the sole language of instruction in Louisiana schools before a policy of multilingualism was revived in 1974. Louisiana has never had an official language, and the state constitution enumerates \"the right of the people to preserve, foster, and promote their respective historic, linguistic, and cultural origins.\"\nBased on national averages, Louisiana frequently ranks low among U.S. states in terms of health, education, and development, with high rates of poverty and homicide. In 2018, Louisiana was ranked as the least healthy state in the country, with high levels of drug-related deaths. It also has had the highest homicide rate in the United States since at least the 1990s.\nEtymology.\nLouisiana was named after Louis XIV, King of France from 1643 to 1715. When Ren\u00e9-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle claimed the territory drained by the Mississippi River for France, he named it . The suffix \u2013ana (or \u2013ane) is a Latin suffix that can refer to \"information relating to a particular individual, subject, or place.\" Thus, roughly, Louis + ana carries the idea of \"related to Louis.\" Once part of the French colonial empire, the Louisiana Territory stretched from present-day Mobile Bay to just north of the present-day Canada\u2013United States border, including a small part of what are now the Canadian provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan.\nHistory.\nPre\u2013colonial history.\nThe area of Louisiana is the place of origin of the Mound Builders culture during the Middle Archaic period, in the 4th millennium BC. The sites of Caney and Frenchman's Bend have been securely dated to 5600\u20135000 BP (about 3700\u20133100 BC), demonstrating that seasonal hunter-gatherers from around this time organized to build complex earthwork constructions in what is now northern Louisiana. The Watson Brake site near present-day Monroe has an eleven-mound complex; it was built about 5400 BP (3500 BC). These discoveries overturned previous assumptions in archaeology that such complex mounds were built only by cultures of more settled peoples who were dependent on maize cultivation. The Hedgepeth Site in Lincoln Parish is more recent, dated to 5200\u20134500 BP (3300\u20132600 BC).\nNearly 2,000 years later, Poverty Point was built; it is the largest and best-known Late Archaic site in the state. The city of modern\u2013day Epps developed near it. The Poverty Point culture may have reached its peak around 1500 BC, making it the first complex culture, and possibly the first tribal culture in North America. It lasted until approximately 700 BC.\nThe Poverty Point culture was followed by the Tchefuncte and Lake Cormorant cultures of the Tchula period, local manifestations of Early Woodland period. The Tchefuncte culture were the first people in the area of Louisiana to make large amounts of pottery. These cultures lasted until 200 AD. The Middle Woodland period started in Louisiana with the Marksville culture in the southern and eastern part of the state, reaching across the Mississippi River to the east around Natchez, and the Fourche Maline culture in the northwestern part of the state. The Marksville culture was named after the Marksville Prehistoric Indian Site in Avoyelles Parish.\nThese cultures were contemporaneous with the Hopewell cultures of present-day Ohio and Illinois, and participated in the Hopewell Exchange Network. Trade with peoples to the southwest brought the bow and arrow. The first burial mounds were built at this time. Political power began to be consolidated, as the first platform mounds at ritual centers were constructed for the developing hereditary political and religious leadership.\nBy 400 the Late Woodland period had begun with the Baytown culture, Troyville culture, and Coastal Troyville during the Baytown period and were succeeded by the Coles Creek cultures. Where the Baytown peoples built dispersed settlements, the Troyville people instead continued building major earthwork centers. Population increased dramatically and there is strong evidence of a growing cultural and political complexity. Many Coles Creek sites were erected over earlier Woodland period mortuary mounds. Scholars have speculated that emerging elites were symbolically and physically appropriating dead ancestors to emphasize and project their own authority.\nThe Mississippian period in Louisiana was when the Plaquemine and the Caddoan Mississippian cultures developed, and the peoples adopted extensive maize agriculture, cultivating different strains of the plant by saving seeds, selecting for certain characteristics, etc. The Plaquemine culture in the lower Mississippi River Valley in western Mississippi and eastern Louisiana began in 1200 and continued to about 1600. Examples in Louisiana include the Medora site, the archaeological type site for the culture in West Baton Rouge Parish whose characteristics helped define the culture, the Atchafalaya Basin Mounds in St. Mary Parish, the Fitzhugh Mounds in Madison Parish, the Scott Place Mounds in Union Parish, and the Sims site in St. Charles Parish.\nPlaquemine culture was contemporaneous with the Middle Mississippian culture that is represented by its largest settlement, the Cahokia site in Illinois east of St. Louis, Missouri. At its peak Cahokia is estimated to have had a population of more than 20,000. The Plaquemine culture is considered ancestral to the historic Natchez and Taensa peoples, whose descendants encountered Europeans in the colonial era.\nBy 1000 in the northwestern part of the state, the Fourche Maline culture had evolved into the Caddoan Mississippian culture. The Caddoan Mississippians occupied a large territory, including what is now eastern Oklahoma, western Arkansas, northeast Texas, and northwest Louisiana. Archaeological evidence has demonstrated that the cultural continuity is unbroken from prehistory to the present. The Caddo and related Caddo-language speakers in prehistoric times and at first European contact were the direct ancestors of the modern Caddo Nation of Oklahoma of today. Significant Caddoan Mississippian archaeological sites in Louisiana include Belcher Mound Site in Caddo Parish and Gahagan Mounds Site in Red River Parish.\nMany current place names in Louisiana, including Atchafalaya, Natchitouches (now spelled Natchitoches), Caddo, Houma, Tangipahoa, and Avoyel (as Avoyelles), are transliterations of those used in various Native American languages.\nExploration and colonization by Europeans.\nThe first European explorers to visit Louisiana came in 1528 when a Spanish expedition led by P\u00e1nfilo de Narv\u00e1ez located the mouth of the Mississippi River. In 1542, Hernando de Soto's expedition skirted to the north and west of the state (encountering Caddo and Tunica groups) and then followed the Mississippi River down to the Gulf of Mexico in 1543. Spanish interest in Louisiana faded away for a century and a half.\nIn the late 17th century, French and French Canadian expeditions, which included sovereign, religious and commercial aims, established a foothold on the Mississippi River and Gulf Coast. With its first settlements, France laid claim to a vast region of North America and set out to establish a commercial empire and French nation stretching from the Gulf of Mexico to Canada.\nIn 1682, the French explorer Robert Cavelier de La Salle named the region Louisiana to honor King Louis XIV of France. The first permanent settlement, Fort Maurepas (now Ocean Springs, Mississippi), was founded in 1699 by Pierre Le Moyne d'Iberville, a French military officer from New France. By then the French had also built a small fort at the mouth of the Mississippi at a settlement they named La Balise (or La Balize), \"seamark\" in French. By 1721, they built a wooden lighthouse-type structure here to guide ships on the river.\nA royal ordinance of 1722\u2014following the Crown's transfer of the Illinois Country's governance from Canada to Louisiana\u2014may have featured the broadest definition of Louisiana: all land claimed by France south of the Great Lakes between the Rocky Mountains and the Alleghenies. A generation later, trade conflicts between Canada and Louisiana led to a more defined boundary between the French colonies; in 1745, Louisiana governor general Vaudreuil set the northern and eastern bounds of his domain as the Wabash valley up to the mouth of the Vermilion River (near present-day Danville, Illinois); from there, northwest to \"le Rocher\" on the Illinois River, and from there west to the mouth of the Rock River (at present day Rock Island, Illinois). Thus, Vincennes and Peoria were the limit of Louisiana's reach; the outposts at Ouiatenon (on the upper Wabash near present-day Lafayette, Indiana), Chicago, Fort Miamis (near present-day Fort Wayne, Indiana), and Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin, operated as dependencies of Canada.\nThe settlement of Natchitoches (along the Red River in present-day northwest Louisiana) was established in 1714 by Louis Juchereau de St. Denis, making it the oldest permanent European settlement in the modern state of Louisiana. The French settlement had two purposes: to establish trade with the Spanish in Texas via the Old San Antonio Road, and to deter Spanish advances into Louisiana. The settlement soon became a flourishing river port and crossroads, giving rise to vast cotton kingdoms along the river that were worked by imported African slaves. Over time, planters developed large plantations and built fine homes in a growing town. This became a pattern repeated in New Orleans and other places, although the commodity crop in the south was primarily sugar cane.\nLouisiana's French settlements contributed to further exploration and outposts, concentrated along the banks of the Mississippi and its major tributaries, from Louisiana to as far north as the region called the Illinois Country, around present-day St. Louis, Missouri. The latter was settled by French colonists from Illinois.\nInitially, Mobile and then Biloxi served as the capital of La Louisiane. Recognizing the importance of the Mississippi River to trade and military interests, and wanting to protect the capital from severe coastal storms, France developed New Orleans from 1722 as the seat of civilian and military authority south of the Great Lakes. From then until the United States acquired the territory in the Louisiana Purchase of 1803, France and Spain jockeyed for control of New Orleans and the lands west of the Mississippi.\nIn the 1720s, German immigrants settled along the Mississippi River, in a region referred to as the German Coast.\nFrance ceded most of its territory east of the Mississippi to Great Britain in 1763, in the aftermath of Britain's victory in the Seven Years' War (generally referred to in North America as the French and Indian War). This included the lands along the Gulf Coast and north of Lake Pontchartrain to the Mississippi River, which became known as British West Florida. The rest of Louisiana west of the Mississippi, as well as the \"isle of New Orleans\", had become a colony of Spain by the Treaty of Fontainebleau (1762). The transfer of power on either side of the river would be delayed until later in the decade.\nIn 1765, during Spanish rule, several thousand Acadians from the French colony of Acadia (now Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward Island) made their way to Louisiana after having been expelled from Acadia by the British government after the French and Indian War. They settled chiefly in the southwestern Louisiana region now called Acadiana. The governor Luis de Unzaga y Am\u00e9zaga, eager to gain more settlers, welcomed the Acadians, who became the ancestors of Louisiana's Cajuns.\nSpanish Canary Islanders, called Isle\u00f1os, emigrated from the Canary Islands of Spain to Louisiana under the Spanish crown between 1778 and 1783. In 1800, France's Napoleon Bonaparte reacquired Louisiana from Spain in the Treaty of San Ildefonso, an arrangement kept secret for two years.\nExpansion of slavery.\nJean-Baptiste Le Moyne, Sieur de Bienville brought the first two African slaves to Louisiana in 1708, transporting them from a French colony in the West Indies. In 1709, French financier Antoine Crozat obtained a monopoly of commerce in La Louisiane, which extended from the Gulf of Mexico to what is now Illinois. According to historian Hugh Thomas, \"that concession allowed him to bring in a cargo of blacks from Africa every year\".\nStarting in 1719, traders began to import slaves in higher numbers; two French ships, the \"Du Maine\" and the \"Aurore\", arrived in New Orleans carrying more than 500 black slaves coming from Africa. Previous slaves in Louisiana had been transported from French colonies in the West Indies. By the end of 1721, New Orleans counted 1,256 inhabitants, of whom about half were slaves.\nIn 1724, the French government issued a law called the Code Noir (\"Black Code\" in English) which regulated the interaction of whites (blancs) and blacks (noirs) in its colony of Louisiana (which was much larger than the current state of Louisiana). After the Sale of Louisiana, French Law survived in the Louisiana, such as the prohibition and outlaw of any cruel punishment.\nFugitive slaves, called maroons, could easily hide in the backcountry of the bayous and survive in small settlements. The word \"maroon\" comes from the Spanish \"cimarron\", which means \"fierce\" or \"unruly.\"\nIn the late 18th century, the last Spanish governor of the Louisiana territory wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen the United States purchased Louisiana in 1803, it was soon accepted that slaves could be brought to Louisiana as easily as they were brought to neighboring Mississippi, though it violated U.S. law to do so. Despite demands by United States Rep. James Hillhouse and by the pamphleteer Thomas Paine to enforce existing federal law against slavery in the newly acquired territory, slavery prevailed because it was the source of great profits and the lowest-cost labor.\nAt the start of the 19th century, Louisiana was a small producer of sugar with a relatively small number of slaves, compared to Saint-Domingue and the West Indies. It soon thereafter became a major sugar producer as new settlers arrived to develop plantations. William C. C. Claiborne, Louisiana's first United States governor, said African slave labor was needed because white laborers \"cannot be had in this unhealthy climate.\" Hugh Thomas wrote that Claiborne was unable to enforce the abolition of the Atlantic slave trade, which the U.S. and Great Britain enacted in 1807. The United States continued to protect the domestic slave trade, including the coastwise trade\u2014the transport of slaves by ship along the Atlantic Coast and to New Orleans and other Gulf ports.\nBy 1840, New Orleans had the biggest slave market in the United States, which contributed greatly to the economy of the city and of the state. New Orleans had become one of the wealthiest cities, and the third largest city, in the nation. The ban on the African slave trade and importation of slaves had increased demand in the domestic market. During the decades after the American Revolutionary War, more than one million enslaved African Americans underwent forced migration from the Upper South to the Deep South, two thirds of them in the slave trade. Others were transported by their owners as slaveholders moved west for new lands.\nWith changing agriculture in the Upper South as planters shifted from tobacco to less labor-intensive mixed agriculture, planters had excess laborers. Many sold slaves to traders to take to the Deep South. Slaves were driven by traders overland from the Upper South or transported to New Orleans and other coastal markets by ship in the coastwise slave trade. After sales in New Orleans, steamboats operating on the Mississippi transported slaves upstream to markets or plantation destinations at Natchez and Memphis.\nUnusually for a slave-state, Louisiana harbored escaped Filipino slaves from the Manila Galleons. The members of the Filipino community were then commonly referred to as \"Manila men,\" or \"Manilamen,\" and later \"Tagalas\", as they were free when they created the oldest settlement of Asians in the United States in the village of Saint Malo, Louisiana, the inhabitants of which, even joined the United States in the War of 1812 against the British Empire while they were being led by the French-American Jean Lafitte.\nAsylum and influence of Creoles from Saint-Domingue.\nSpanish occupation of Louisiana lasted from 1769 to 1800. Beginning in the 1790s, waves of immigration took place from Saint-Domingue as refugees poured over following a slave rebellion that started during the French Revolution of Saint-Domingue in 1791. Over the next decade, thousands of refugees landed in Louisiana from the island, including Europeans, Creoles, and Africans, some of the latter brought in by each free group. They greatly increased the French-speaking population in New Orleans and Louisiana, as well as the number of Africans, and the slaves reinforced African culture in the city.\nAnglo-American officials initially made attempts to keep out the additional Creoles of color, but the Louisiana Creoles wanted to increase the Creole population: more than half of the refugees eventually settled in Louisiana, and the majority remained in New Orleans.\nPierre Cl\u00e9ment de Laussat (Governor, 1803) said: \"Saint-Domingue was, of all our colonies in the Antilles, the one whose mentality and customs influenced Louisiana the most.\"\nPurchase by the United States.\nWhen the United States won its independence from Great Britain in 1783, one of its major concerns was having a European power on its western boundary, and the need for unrestricted access to the Mississippi River. As American settlers pushed west, they found that the Appalachian Mountains provided a barrier to shipping goods eastward. The easiest way to ship produce was to use a flatboat to float it down the Ohio and Mississippi rivers to the port of New Orleans, where goods could be put on ocean-going vessels. The problem with this route was that the Spanish owned both sides of the Mississippi below Natchez.\nNapoleon's ambitions in Louisiana involved the creation of a new empire centered on the Caribbean sugar trade. By the terms of the Treaty of Amiens of 1802, Great Britain returned control of the islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe to the French. Napoleon looked upon Louisiana as a depot for these sugar islands, and as a buffer to U.S. settlement. In October 1801 he sent a large military force to take back Saint-Domingue, then under control of Toussaint Louverture after the Haitian Revolution. When the army led by Napoleon's brother-in-law Leclerc was defeated, Napoleon decided to sell Louisiana.\nThomas Jefferson, third president of the United States, was disturbed by Napoleon's plans to re-establish French colonies in North America. With the possession of New Orleans, Napoleon could close the Mississippi to U.S. commerce at any time. Jefferson authorized Robert R. Livingston, U.S. minister to France, to negotiate for the purchase of the city of New Orleans, portions of the east bank of the Mississippi, and free navigation of the river for U.S. commerce. Livingston was authorized to pay up to $2million.\nAn official transfer of Louisiana to French ownership had not yet taken place, and Napoleon's deal with the Spanish was a poorly kept secret on the frontier. On October 18, 1802, however, Juan Ventura Morales, acting intendant of Louisiana, made public the intention of Spain to revoke the right of deposit at New Orleans for all cargo from the United States. The closure of this vital port to the United States caused anger and consternation. Commerce in the west was virtually blockaded. Historians believe the revocation of the right of deposit was prompted by abuses by the Americans, particularly smuggling, and not by French intrigues as was believed at the time. President Jefferson ignored public pressure for war with France, and appointed James Monroe a special envoy to Napoleon, to assist in obtaining New Orleans for the United States. Jefferson also raised the authorized expenditure to $10million.\nHowever, on April 11, 1803, French foreign minister Talleyrand surprised Livingston by asking how much the United States was prepared to pay for the entirety of Louisiana, not just New Orleans and the surrounding area (as Livingston's instructions covered). Monroe agreed with Livingston that Napoleon might withdraw this offer at any time (leaving them with no ability to obtain the desired New Orleans area), and that approval from President Jefferson might take months, so Livingston and Monroe decided to open negotiations immediately. By April 30, they closed a deal for the purchase of the entire Louisiana territory of for sixty million Francs (approximately $15million).\nPart of this sum, $3.5million, was used to forgive debts owed by France to the United States. The payment was made in United States bonds, which Napoleon sold at face value to the Dutch firm of Hope and Company, and the British banking house of Baring, at a discount of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;87+1\u20442 per each $100 unit. As a result, France received only $8,831,250 in cash for Louisiana. English banker Alexander Baring conferred with Marbois in Paris, shuttled to the United States to pick up the bonds, took them to Britain, and returned to France with the money\u2014which Napoleon used to wage war against Baring's own country.\nWhen news of the purchase reached the United States, Jefferson was surprised. He had authorized the expenditure of $10million for a port city, and instead received treaties committing the government to spend $15million on a land package which would double the size of the country. Jefferson's political opponents in the Federalist Party argued the Louisiana purchase was a worthless desert, and that the U.S. constitution did not provide for the acquisition of new land or negotiating treaties without the consent of the federal legislature. What really worried the opposition was the new states which would inevitably be carved from the Louisiana territory, strengthening western and southern interests in U.S. Congress, and further reducing the influence of New England Federalists in national affairs. President Jefferson was an enthusiastic supporter of westward expansion, and held firm in his support for the treaty. Despite Federalist objections, the U.S. Senate ratified the Louisiana treaty on October 20, 1803.\nBy statute enacted on October 31, 1803, President Thomas Jefferson was authorized to take possession of the territories ceded by France and provide for initial governance. A transfer ceremony was held in New Orleans on November 29, 1803. Since the Louisiana territory had never officially been turned over to the French, the Spanish took down their flag, and the French raised theirs. The following day, General James Wilkinson accepted possession of New Orleans for the United States. The Louisiana Territory, purchased for less than three cents an acre, doubled the size of the United States overnight, without a war or the loss of a single American life, and set a precedent for the purchase of territory. It opened the way for the eventual expansion of the United States across the continent to the Pacific Ocean.\nShortly after the United States took possession, the area was divided into two territories along the 33rd parallel north on March 26, 1804, thereby organizing the Territory of Orleans to the south and the District of Louisiana (subsequently formed as the Louisiana Territory) to the north.\nStatehood.\nLouisiana became the eighteenth U.S. state on April 30, 1812; the Territory of Orleans became the State of Louisiana and the Louisiana Territory was simultaneously renamed the Missouri Territory.\nAt its creation, the state of Louisiana did not include the area north and east of the Mississippi River known as the Florida Parishes. On April 14, 1812, Congress had authorized Louisiana to expand its borders to include the Florida Parishes, but the border change required approval of the state legislature, which it did not give until August 4. For the roughly three months in between, the northern border of eastern Louisiana was the course of Bayou Manchac and the middle of Lake Maurepas and Lake Pontchartrain.\nFrom 1824 to 1861, Louisiana moved from a political system based on personality and ethnicity to a distinct two-party system, with Democrats competing first against Whigs, then Know Nothings, and finally only other Democrats.\nSecession and the Civil War.\nAccording to the 1860 census, 331,726 people were enslaved, nearly 47% of the state's total population of 708,002. The strong economic interest of elite whites in maintaining the slave society contributed to Louisiana's decision to secede from the Union on January 26, 1861. It followed other U.S. states in seceding after the election of Abraham Lincoln as president of the United States. Louisiana's secession was announced on January 26, 1861, and it became part of the Confederate States of America.\nThe state was quickly defeated in the Civil War, a result of Union strategy to cut the Confederacy in two by controlling the Mississippi River. Federal troops captured New Orleans on April 25, 1862. Because a large part of the population had Union sympathies (or compatible commercial interests), the federal government took the unusual step of designating the areas of Louisiana under federal control as a state within the Union, with its own elected representatives to the U.S. Congress.\nPost\u2013Civil War to mid\u201320th century.\nFollowing the American Civil War and emancipation of slaves, violence rose in the southern U.S. as the war was carried on by insurgent private and paramilitary groups. During the initial period after the war, there was a massive rise in black participation in terms of voting and holding political office. Louisiana saw the United States' first and second black governors with Oscar Dunn and P.B.S. Pinchback, with 125 black members of the state legislature being elected during this time, while Charles E. Nash was elected to represent the state's 6th Congressional District in the U.S. House of Representatives. Eventually former Confederates came to dominate the state legislature after the end of Reconstruction and federal occupation in the late 1870s, and black codes were implemented to regulate freedmen and increasingly restricted the right to vote. They refused to extend voting rights to African Americans who had been free before the war and had sometimes obtained education and property (as in New Orleans).\nFollowing the Memphis riots of 1866 and the New Orleans riot the same year, the Fourteenth Amendment was passed that provided suffrage and full citizenship for freedmen. Congress passed the Reconstruction Act, establishing military districts for those states where conditions were considered the worst, including Louisiana. It was grouped with Texas in what was administered as the Fifth Military District.\nAfrican Americans began to live as citizens with some measure of equality before the law. Both freedmen and people of color who had been free before the war began to make more advances in education, family stability and jobs. At the same time, there was tremendous social volatility in the aftermath of war, with many whites actively resisting defeat and the free labor market. White insurgents mobilized to enforce white supremacy, first in Ku Klux Klan chapters.\nBy 1877, when federal forces were withdrawn, white Democrats in Louisiana and other states had regained control of state legislatures, often by paramilitary groups such as the White League, which suppressed black voting through intimidation and violence. Following Mississippi's example in 1890, in 1898, the white Democratic, planter-dominated legislature passed a new constitution that effectively disfranchised people of color by raising barriers to voter registration, such as poll taxes, residency requirements and literacy tests. The effect was immediate and long lasting. In 1896, there were 130,334 black voters on the rolls and about the same number of white voters, in proportion to the state population, which was evenly divided.\nThe state population in 1900 was 47% African American: a total of 652,013 citizens. Many in New Orleans were descendants of Creoles of color, the sizeable population of free people of color before the Civil War. By 1900, two years after the new constitution, only 5,320 black voters were registered in the state. Because of disfranchisement, by 1910 there were only 730 black voters (less than 0.5 percent of eligible African-American men), despite advances in education and literacy among blacks and people of color. Blacks were excluded from the political system and also unable to serve on juries. White Democrats had established one-party Democratic rule, which they maintained in the state for decades deep into the 20th century until after congressional passage of the 1965 Voting Rights Act provided federal oversight and enforcement of the constitutional right to vote.\nIn the early decades of the 20th century, thousands of African Americans left Louisiana in the Great Migration north to industrial cities for jobs and education, and to escape Jim Crow society and lynchings. The boll weevil infestation and agricultural problems cost many sharecroppers and farmers their jobs. The mechanization of agriculture also reduced the need for laborers. Beginning in the 1940s, blacks went west to California for jobs in its expanding defense industries.\nIn 1920 the state had no continuous paved roads running east to west or north to south which traversed the entire state.\nDuring some of the Great Depression, Louisiana was led by Governor Huey Long. He was elected to office on populist appeal. His public works projects provided thousands of jobs to people in need, and he supported education and increased suffrage for poor whites, but Long was criticized for his allegedly demagogic and autocratic style. He extended patronage control through every branch of Louisiana's state government. Especially controversial were his plans for wealth redistribution in the state. Long's rule ended abruptly when he was assassinated in the state capitol in 1935.\nMid\u201320th century to present.\nMobilization for World War II created jobs in the state. But thousands of other workers, black and white alike, migrated to California for better jobs in its burgeoning defense industry. Many African Americans left the state in the Second Great Migration, from the 1940s through the 1960s to escape social oppression and seek better jobs. The mechanization of agriculture in the 1930s had sharply cut the need for laborers. They sought skilled jobs in the defense industry in California, better education for their children, and living in communities where they could vote.\nOn November 26, 1958, at Chennault Air Force Base, a USAF B-47 bomber with a nuclear weapon on board developed a fire while on the ground. The aircraft wreckage and the site of the accident were contaminated after a limited explosion of non-nuclear material.\nIn the 1950s the state created new requirements for a citizenship test for voter registration. Despite opposition by the States' Rights Party (Dixiecrats), downstate black voters had begun to increase their rate of registration, which also reflected the growth of their middle classes. In 1960 the state established the Louisiana State Sovereignty Commission, to investigate civil rights activists and maintain segregation.\nDespite this, gradually black voter registration and turnout increased to 20% and more, and it was 32% by 1964, when the first national civil rights legislation of the era was passed. The percentage of black voters ranged widely in the state during these years, from 93.8% in Evangeline Parish to 1.7% in Tensas Parish, for instance, where there were intense white efforts to suppress the vote in the black-majority parish.\nViolent attacks on civil rights activists in two mill towns were catalysts to the founding of the first two chapters of the Deacons for Defense and Justice in late 1964 and early 1965, in Jonesboro and Bogalusa, respectively. Made up of veterans of World War II and the Korean War, they were armed self-defense groups established to protect activists and their families. Continued violent white resistance in Bogalusa to blacks trying to use public facilities in 1965, following passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, caused the federal government to order local police to protect the activists. Other chapters were formed in Mississippi and Alabama.\nBy 1960 the proportion of African Americans in Louisiana had dropped to 32%. The 1,039,207 black citizens were still suppressed by segregation and disfranchisement. African Americans continued to suffer disproportionate discriminatory application of the state's voter registration rules. Because of better opportunities elsewhere, from 1965 to 1970, blacks continued to migrate out of Louisiana, for a net loss of more than 37,000 people. Based on official census figures, the African American population in 1970 stood at 1,085,109, a net gain of more than 46,000 people compared to 1960. During the latter period, some people began to migrate to cities of the New South for opportunities. Since that period, blacks entered the political system and began to be elected to office, as well as having other opportunities.\nOn May 21, 1919, the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, giving women full rights to vote, was passed at a national level, and was made the law throughout the United States on August 18, 1920. Louisiana finally ratified the amendment on June 11, 1970.\nDue to its location on the Gulf Coast, Louisiana has regularly suffered the effects of tropical storms and damaging hurricanes. On August 29, 2005, New Orleans and many other low-lying parts of the state along the Gulf of Mexico were hit by the catastrophic Hurricane Katrina. It caused widespread damage due to breaching of levees and large-scale flooding of more than 80% of the city. Officials had issued warnings to evacuate the city and nearby areas, but tens of thousands of people, mostly African Americans, stayed behind, many of them stranded. Many people died and survivors suffered through the damage of the widespread floodwaters.\nIn July 2016 the shooting of Alton Sterling sparked protests throughout the state capital of Baton Rouge. In August 2016, an unnamed storm dumped trillions of gallons of rain on southern Louisiana, including the cities of Denham Springs, Baton Rouge, Gonzales, St. Amant and Lafayette, causing catastrophic flooding. An estimated 110,000 homes were damaged and thousands of residents were displaced. In 2019, three Louisiana black churches were destroyed by arson.\nThe first case of COVID-19 in Louisiana was announced on March 9, 2020. As of October 27, 2020, there had been 180,069 confirmed cases; 5,854 people have died of COVID-19.\nGeography.\nLouisiana is bordered to the west by Texas; to the north by Arkansas; to the east by Mississippi; and to the south by the Gulf of Mexico. The state may properly be divided into two parts, the uplands of the north (the region of North Louisiana), and the alluvial along the coast (the Central Louisiana, Acadiana, Florida Parishes, and Greater New Orleans regions). The alluvial region includes low swamp lands, coastal marshlands and beaches, and barrier islands that cover about . This area lies principally along the Gulf of Mexico and the Mississippi River, which traverses the state from north to south for a distance of about and empties into the Gulf of Mexico; also in the state are the Red River; the Ouachita River and its branches; and other minor streams (some of which are called bayous).\nThe breadth of the alluvial region along the Mississippi is , and along the other rivers, the alluvial region averages about across. The Mississippi River flows along a ridge formed by its natural deposits (known as a levee), from which the lands decline toward a river beyond at an average fall of six feet per mile (1m/km). The alluvial lands along other streams present similar features.\nThe higher and contiguous hill lands of the north and northwestern part of the state have an area of more than . They consist of prairie and woodlands. The elevations above sea level range from 10 feet (3m) at the coast and swamp lands to 50\u201360 feet (15\u201318m) at the prairie and alluvial lands. In the uplands and hills, the elevations rise to Driskill Mountain, the highest point in the state only 535 feet (163m) above sea level. From 1932 to 2010 the state lost 1,800 square miles due to rises in sea level and erosion. The Louisiana Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority (CPRA) spends around $1billion per year to help shore up and protect Louisiana shoreline and land in both federal and state funding.\nBesides the waterways named, there are the Sabine, forming the western boundary; and the Pearl, the eastern boundary; the Calcasieu, the Mermentau, the Vermilion, Bayou Teche, the Atchafalaya, the Boeuf, Bayou Lafourche, the Courtableau River, Bayou D'Arbonne, the Macon River, the Tensas, Amite River, the Tchefuncte, the Tickfaw, the Natalbany River, and a number of other smaller streams, constituting a natural system of navigable waterways, aggregating over long.\nThe state also has political jurisdiction over the approximately -wide portion of subsea land of the inner continental shelf in the Gulf of Mexico. Through a peculiarity of the political geography of the United States, this is substantially less than the -wide jurisdiction of nearby states Texas and Florida, which, like Louisiana, have extensive Gulf coastlines.\nThe southern coast of Louisiana in the United States is among the fastest-disappearing areas in the world. This has largely resulted from human mismanagement of the coast (see Wetlands of Louisiana). At one time, the land was added to when spring floods from the Mississippi River added sediment and stimulated marsh growth; the land is now shrinking. There are multiple causes.\nArtificial levees block spring flood water that would bring fresh water and sediment to marshes. Swamps have been extensively logged, leaving canals and ditches that allow salt water to move inland. Canals dug for the oil and gas industry also allow storms to move sea water inland, where it damages swamps and marshes. Rising sea waters have exacerbated the problem. Some researchers estimate that the state is losing a landmass equivalent to 30 football fields every day. There are many proposals to save coastal areas by reducing human damage, including restoring natural floods from the Mississippi. Without such restoration, coastal communities will continue to disappear. And as the communities disappear, more and more people are leaving the region. Since the coastal wetlands support an economically important coastal fishery, the loss of wetlands is adversely affecting this industry.\nThe Gulf of Mexico 'dead zone' off the coast of Louisiana is the largest recurring hypoxic zone in the United States. It was in 2017, the largest ever recorded.\nGeology.\nThe oldest rocks in Louisiana are exposed in the north, in areas such as the Kisatchie National Forest. The oldest rocks date back to the early Cenozoic Era, some 60 million years ago. The youngest parts of the state were formed during the last 12,000 years as successive deltas of the Mississippi River: the Maringouin, Teche, St. Bernard, Lafourche, the modern Mississippi, and now the Atchafalaya. The sediments were carried from north to south by the Mississippi River.\nBetween the tertiary rocks of the north, and the relatively new sediments along the coast, is a vast belt known as the Pleistocene Terraces. Their age and distribution can be largely related to the rise and fall of sea levels during past ice ages. The northern terraces have had sufficient time for rivers to cut deep channels, while the newer terraces tend to be much flatter.\nSalt domes are also found in Louisiana. Their origin can be traced back to the early Gulf of Mexico when the shallow ocean had high rates of evaporation. There are several hundred salt domes in the state; one of the most familiar is Avery Island, Louisiana. Salt domes are important not only as a source of salt; they also serve as underground traps for oil and gas.\nClimate.\nLouisiana has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfa\"), with long, hot, humid summers and short, mild winters. The subtropical characteristics of the state are due to its low latitude, low lying topography, and the influence of the Gulf of Mexico, which at its farthest point is no more than away.\nRain is frequent throughout the year, although from April to September is slightly wetter than the rest of the year, which is the state's wet season. There is a dip in precipitation in October. In summer, thunderstorms build during the heat of the day and bring intense but brief, tropical downpours. In winter, rainfall is more frontal and less intense.\nSummers in southern Louisiana have high temperatures from June through September averaging or more, and overnight lows averaging above . At times, temperatures in the 90s\u00b0F(), combined with dew points in the upper 70s\u00b0F(), create sensible temperatures over . The humid, thick, jungle-like heat in southern Louisiana is a famous subject of countless stories and movies.\nTemperatures are generally warm in the winter in the southern part of the state, with highs around New Orleans, Baton Rouge, the rest of southern Louisiana, and the Gulf of Mexico averaging . The northern part of the state is mildly cool in the winter, with highs averaging . The overnight lows in the winter average well above freezing throughout the state, with the average near the Gulf and an average low of in the winter in the northern part of the state.\nOn occasion, cold fronts from low-pressure centers to the north, reach Louisiana in winter. Low temperatures near occur on occasion in the northern part of the state but rarely do so in the southern part of the state. Snow is rare near the Gulf of Mexico, although residents in the northern parts of the state might receive a dusting of snow a few times each decade. Louisiana's highest recorded temperature is in Plain Dealing on August 10, 1936, while the coldest recorded temperature is at Minden on February 13, 1899.\nLouisiana is often affected by tropical cyclones and is very vulnerable to strikes by major hurricanes, particularly the lowlands around and in the New Orleans area. The unique geography of the region, with the many bayous, marshes and inlets, can result in water damage across a wide area from major hurricanes. The area is also prone to frequent thunderstorms, especially in the summer.\nThe entire state averages over 60 days of thunderstorms a year, more than any other state except Florida. Louisiana averages 27 tornadoes annually. The entire state is vulnerable to a tornado strike, with the extreme southern portion of the state slightly less so than the rest of the state. Tornadoes are more common from January to March in the southern part of the state, and from February through March in the northern part of the state. Louisiana is partially within the area of tornado activity called Dixie Alley, and the state has tornadoes which tend to be unpredictable but localized.\nPublicly owned land.\nOwing to its location and geology, the state has high biological diversity. Some vital areas, such as southwestern prairie, have experienced a loss in excess of 98 percent. The pine flatwoods are also at great risk, mostly from fire suppression and urban sprawl. There is not yet a properly organized system of natural areas to represent and protect Louisiana's biological diversity. Such a system would consist of a protected system of core areas linked by biological corridors, such as Florida is planning.\nLouisiana contains a number of areas which, to varying degrees, prevent people from using them. In addition to National Park Service areas and a United States National Forest, Louisiana operates a system of state parks, state historic sites, one state preservation area, one state forest, and many Wildlife Management Areas.\nOne of Louisiana's largest government-owned areas is Kisatchie National Forest. It is some 600,000 acres in area, more than half of which is flatwoods vegetation, which supports many rare plant and animal species. These include the Louisiana pinesnake and red-cockaded woodpecker. The system of government-owned cypress swamps around Lake Pontchartrain is another large area, with southern wetland species including egrets, alligators, and sturgeon. At least 12 core areas would be needed to build a \"protected areas system\" for the state; these would range from southwestern prairies, to the Pearl River Floodplain in the east, to the Mississippi River alluvial swamps in the north. Additionally, the state operates a system of 22 state parks, 17 state historic sites and one state preservation area; in these lands, Louisiana maintains a diversity of fauna and flora.\nNational Park Service.\nHistoric or scenic areas managed, protected, or recognized by the National Park Service include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMajor cities.\nLouisiana contains 308 incorporated municipalities, consisting of four consolidated city-parishes, and 304 cities, towns, and villages. Louisiana's municipalities cover only 7.9% of the state's land mass but are home to 45.3% of its population. The majority of urban Louisianians live along the coast or in northern Louisiana. The oldest permanent settlement in the state is Nachitoches. Baton Rouge, the state capital, is the second-largest city in the state. The most populous city is New Orleans. As defined by the U.S. Census Bureau, Louisiana contains 10 metropolitan statistical areas. Major areas include Greater New Orleans, Greater Baton Rouge, Lafayette, Shreveport\u2013Bossier City, and Slidell.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe majority of the state's population lives in southern Louisiana, spread throughout Greater New Orleans, the Florida Parishes, and Acadiana, while Central and North Louisiana have been stagnating and losing population. From the 2020 U.S. census, Louisiana had an apportioned population of 4,661,468. Its resident population was 4,657,757 as of 2020. In 2010, the state of Louisiana had a population of 4,533,372, up from 76,556 in 1810.\nDespite historically positive trends of population growth leading up to the 2020 census, Louisiana began to experience population decline and stagnation since 2021, with Southwest Louisiana's Calcasieu and Cameron parishes losing more than 5% of their populations individually. Experiencing decline due to deaths and emigration to other states outpacing births and in-migration, Louisiana's 2022 census-estimated population was 4,590,241.\nAccording to immigration statistics in 2019, approximately 4.2% of Louisianians were immigrants, while 2% were native-born U.S. citizens with at least one immigrant parent. The majority of Louisianian immigrants came from Honduras (18.8%), Mexico (13.6%), Vietnam (11.3%), Cuba (5.8%), and India (4.4%); an estimated 29.4% were undocumented immigrants. Its documented and undocumented population collectively paid $1.2 billion in taxes. New Orleans has been defined as a sanctuary city.\nThe population density of the state is 104.9 people per square mile. The center of population of Louisiana is located in Pointe Coupee Parish, in the city of New Roads. According to HUD's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 7,373 homeless people in Louisiana.\nIn 2022, Louisiana had the highest percent of births to unmarried women of any US state, at 54.7 percent.\nRace and ethnicity.\nSeveral American Indian tribes such as the Atakapa and Caddo inhabited Louisiana before European colonization, concentrated along the Red River and Gulf of Mexico. At the beginning of French and Spanish colonization of Louisiana, white and black Americans began to move into the area. From French and Spanish rule in Louisiana, they were joined by Filipinos, Germans, and Spaniards both slave and free, who settled in enclaves within the Greater New Orleans region and Acadiana; some of the Spanish-descended communities became the Isle\u00f1os of St. Bernard Parish.\nBy the 19th and 20th centuries, the state's most-populous racial and ethnic group fluctuated between white and black Americans; 47% of the population was black or African American in 1900. The black Louisianian population declined following migration to states including New York and California in efforts to flee Jim Crow regulations.\nAt the end of the 20th century, Louisiana's population has experienced diversification again, and its non-Hispanic or non-Latino American white population has been declining. Since 2020, the black or African American population have made up the largest non-white share of youths. Hispanic and Latino Americans have also increased as the second-largest racial and ethnic composition in the state, making up nearly 7% of Louisiana's population at the 2020 census. As of 2018, the largest single Hispanic and Latino American ethnicity were Mexican Americans (2.0%), followed by Puerto Ricans (0.3%) and Cuban Americans (0.2%). Other Hispanic and Latino Americans altogether made up 2.6% of Louisiana's Hispanic or Latino American population. The Asian American and multiracial communities have also experienced rapid growth, with many of Louisiana's multiracial population identifying as Cajun or Louisiana Creole.\nAt the 2019 American Community Survey, the largest ancestry groups of Louisiana were African American (31.4%), French (9.6%), German (6.2%), English (4.6%), Italian (4.2%), and Scottish (0.9%). African American and French heritage have been dominant since colonial Louisiana. As of 2011, 49.0% of Louisiana's population younger than age1 were minorities.\nReligion.\nAs an ethnically and culturally diverse state, pre-colonial, colonial and present-day Louisianians have adhered to a variety of religions and spiritual traditions; pre-colonial and colonial Louisianian peoples practiced various Native American religions alongside Christianity through the establishment of Spanish and French missions; and other faiths including Haitian Vodou and Louisiana Voodoo were introduced to the state and are practiced to the present day. In the colonial and present-day U.S. state of Louisiana, Christianity grew to become its predominant religion, representing 84% of the adult population in 2014 and 76.5% in 2020, during two separate studies by the Pew Research Center and Public Religion Research Institute.\nAmong its Christian population\u2014and in common with other southern U.S. states\u2014the majority, particularly in the north of the state, belong to various Protestant denominations. Protestantism was introduced to the state in the 1800s, with Baptists establishing two churches in 1812, followed by Methodists; Episcopalians first entered the state by 1805. Protestant Christians made up 57% of the state's adult population at the 2014 Pew Research Center study, and 53% at the 2020 Public Religion Research Institute's study. Protestants are concentrated in North Louisiana, Central Louisiana, and the northern tier of the Florida Parishes.\nBecause of French and Spanish heritage, and their descendants the Creoles, and later Irish, Italian, Portuguese and German immigrants, southern Louisiana and Greater New Orleans are predominantly Catholic in contrast; according to the 2020 Public Religion Research Institute study, 22% of the adult population were Catholic. Since Creoles were the first settlers, planters and leaders of the territory, they have traditionally been well represented in politics; for instance, most of the early governors were Creole Catholics, instead of Protestants. As Catholics continue to constitute a significant fraction of Louisiana's population, they have continued to be influential in state politics. The high proportion and influence of the Catholic population makes Louisiana distinct among southern states. The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New Orleans, Diocese of Baton Rouge, and Diocese of Lafayette in Louisiana are the largest Catholic jurisdictions in the state, located within the Greater New Orleans, Greater Baton Rouge, and Lafayette metropolitan statistical areas.\nLouisiana was among the southern states with a significant Jewish population before the 20th century; Virginia, South Carolina, and Georgia also had influential Jewish populations in some of their major cities from the 18th and 19th centuries. The earliest Jewish colonists were Sephardic Jews who immigrated to the Thirteen Colonies. Later in the 19th century, German Jews began to immigrate, followed by those from eastern Europe and the Russian Empire in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Jewish communities have been established in the state's larger cities, notably New Orleans and Baton Rouge. The most significant of these is the Jewish community of the New Orleans area. In 2000, before the 2005 Hurricane Katrina, its population was about 12,000. Dominant Jewish movements in the state include Orthodox and Reform Judaism; Reform Judaism was the largest Jewish tradition in the state according to the Association of Religion Data Archives in 2020, representing some 5,891 Jews.\nProminent Jews in Louisiana's political leadership have included Whig (later Democrat) Judah P. Benjamin, who represented Louisiana in the U.S. Senate before the American Civil War and then became the Confederate secretary of state; Democrat-turned-Republican Michael Hahn who was elected as governor, serving 1864\u20131865 when Louisiana was occupied by the Union Army, and later elected in 1884 as a U.S. congressman; Democrat Adolph Meyer, Confederate Army officer who represented the state in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1891 until his death in 1908; Republican secretary of state Jay Dardenne, and Republican (Democrat before 2011) attorney general Buddy Caldwell.\nOther non-Christian and non-Jewish religions with a continuous, historical presence in the state have been Islam, Buddhism and Hinduism. In the Shreveport\u2013Bossier City metropolitan area, Muslims made up an estimated 14% of Louisiana's total Muslim population as of 2014. In 2020, the Association of Religion Data Archives estimated there were 24,732 Muslims living in the state. The largest Islamic denominations in the major metropolises of Louisiana were Sunni Islam, non-denominational Islam and Quranism, Shia Islam, and the Nation of Islam.\nAmong Louisiana's irreligious community, 2% affiliated with atheism and 13% claimed no religion as of 2014; an estimated 10% of the state's population practiced nothing in particular at the 2014 study. According to the Public Religion Research Institute in 2020, 19% were religiously unaffiliated.\nEconomy.\nLouisiana's population, agricultural products, abundance of oil and natural gas, and southern Louisiana's medical and technology corridors have contributed to its growing and diversifying economy. In 2014, Louisiana was ranked as one of the most small business friendly states, based on a study drawing upon data from more than 12,000 small business owners. The state's principal agricultural products include seafood (it is the biggest producer of crawfish in the world, supplying approximately 90%), cotton, soybeans, cattle, sugarcane, poultry and eggs, dairy products, and rice. Among its energy and other industries, chemical products, petroleum and coal products, processed foods, transportation equipment, and paper products have contributed to a significant portion of the state's GSP. Tourism and gaming are also important elements in the economy, especially in Greater New Orleans.\nThe Port of South Louisiana, located on the Mississippi River between New Orleans and Baton Rouge, was the largest volume shipping port in the Western Hemisphere and 4th largest in the world, as well as the largest bulk cargo port in the U.S. in 2004. The Port of South Louisiana continued to be the busiest port by tonnage in the U.S. through 2018. South Louisiana was number 15 among world ports in 2016.\nNew Orleans, Shreveport, and Baton Rouge are home to a thriving film industry. State financial incentives since 2002 and aggressive promotion have given Louisiana the nickname \"Hollywood South\". Because of its distinctive culture within the United States, only Alaska is Louisiana's rival in popularity as a setting for reality television programs. In late 2007 and early 2008, a film studio was scheduled to open in Trem\u00e9, with state-of-the-art production facilities, and a film training institute. Tabasco sauce, which is marketed by one of the United States' biggest producers of hot sauce, the McIlhenny Company, originated on Avery Island.\nFrom 2010 to 2020, Louisiana's gross state product increased from $213.6billion to $253.3billion, the 26th highest in the United States at the time. As of 2020, its GSP is greater than the GDPs of Greece, Peru, and New Zealand. Ranking 41st in the United States with a per capita personal income of $30,952 in 2014, its residents per capita income decreased to $28,662 in 2019. The median household income was $51,073, while the national average was $65,712 at the 2019 American Community Survey. In July 2017, the state's unemployment rate was 5.3%; it decreased to 4.4% in 2019.\nLouisiana has three personal income tax brackets, ranging from 2% to 6%. The state sales tax rate is 4.45%, and parishes can levy additional sales tax on top of this. The state also has a use tax, which includes 4% to be distributed to local governments. Property taxes are assessed and collected at the local level. Louisiana is a subsidized state, and Louisiana taxpayers receive more federal funding per dollar of federal taxes paid compared to the average state. Per dollar of federal tax collected in 2005, Louisiana citizens received approximately $1.78 in the way of federal spending. This ranks the state fourth highest nationally and represents a rise from 1995 when Louisiana received $1.35 per dollar of taxes in federal spending (ranked seventh nationally). Neighboring states and the amount of federal spending received per dollar of federal tax collected were: Texas ($0.94), Arkansas ($1.41), and Mississippi ($2.02). Federal spending in 2005 and subsequent years since has been exceptionally high due to the recovery from Hurricane Katrina. Nearly a third of Louisianans are Medicaid recipients.\nCulture.\nLouisiana is home to many cultures; especially notable are the distinct cultures of the Louisiana Creoles and Cajuns, descendants of French and Spanish settlers in colonial Louisiana.\nAfrican culture.\nThe French colony of \"La Louisiane\" struggled for decades to survive. Conditions were harsh, the climate and soil were unsuitable for certain crops the colonists knew, and they suffered from regional tropical diseases. Both colonists and the slaves they imported had high mortality rates. The settlers kept importing slaves, which resulted in a high proportion of native Africans from West Africa, who continued to practice their culture in new surroundings. As described by historian Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, they developed a marked Afro-Creole culture in the colonial era.\nAt the turn of the 18th century and in the early 1800s, New Orleans received a major influx of White and mixed-race refugees fleeing the violence of the Haitian Revolution, many of whom brought their slaves with them. This added another infusion of African culture to the city, as more slaves in Saint-Domingue were from Africa than in the United States. They strongly influenced the African-American culture of the city in terms of dance, music and religious practices.\nCreole culture.\nCreole culture is an amalgamation of French, African, Spanish (and other European), and Native American cultures. Creole comes from the Portuguese word \"crioulo\"; originally it referred to a colonist of European (specifically French) descent who was born in the New World, in comparison to immigrants from France. The oldest Louisiana manuscript to use the word \"Creole\", from 1782, applied it to a slave born in the French colony. But originally it referred more generally to the French colonists born in Louisiana.\nOver time, there developed in the French colony a relatively large group of Creoles of Color (\"gens de couleur libres\"), who were primarily descended from African slave women and French men (later other Europeans became part of the mix, as well as some Native Americans). Often the French would free their concubines and mixed-race children, and pass on social capital to them. They might educate sons in France, for instance, and help them enter the French Army. They also settled capital or property on their mistresses and children. The free people of color gained more rights in the colony and sometimes education; they generally spoke French and were Roman Catholic. Many became artisans and property owners. Over time, the term \"Creole\" became associated with this class of Creoles of color, many of whom achieved freedom long before the American Civil War.\nWealthy French Creoles generally maintained town houses in New Orleans as well as houses on their large sugar plantations outside town along the Mississippi River. New Orleans had the largest population of free people of color in the region; they could find work there and created their own culture, marrying among themselves for decades.\nAcadian culture.\nThe ancestors of Cajuns immigrated mostly from west central France to New France, where they settled in the Atlantic provinces of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island, known originally as the French colony of Acadia. After the British defeated France in the French and Indian War (Seven Years' War) in 1763, France ceded its territory east of the Mississippi River to Britain. After the Acadians refused to swear an oath of loyalty to the British Crown, they were expelled from Acadia, and made their way to places such as France, Britain, and New England.\nOther Acadians covertly remained in British North America or moved to New Spain. Many Acadians settled in southern Louisiana in the region around Lafayette and the LaFourche Bayou country. They developed a distinct rural culture there, different from the French Creole colonists of New Orleans. Intermarrying with others in the area, they developed what was called Cajun music, cuisine and culture.\nIsle\u00f1o culture.\nA third distinct culture in Louisiana is that of the Isle\u00f1os. Its members are descendants of colonists from the Canary Islands who settled in Spanish Louisiana between 1778 and 1783 and intermarried with other communities such as Frenchmen, Acadians, Creoles, Spaniards, and other groups, mainly through the 19th and early 20th centuries.\nIn Louisiana, the Isle\u00f1os originally settled in four communities which included Galveztown, Valenzuela, Barataria, and San Bernardo. The large migration of Acadian refugees to Bayou Lafourche led to the rapid gallicization of the Valenzuela community while the community of San Bernardo (Saint Bernard) was able to preserve much of its unique culture and language into the 21st century. The transmission of Spanish and other customs has completely halted in St. Bernard with those having competency in Spanish being octogenarians.\nThrough the centuries, the various Isle\u00f1o communities of Louisiana have kept alive different elements of their Canary Islander heritage while also adopting and building upon the customs and traditions of the communities that surround them. Today two heritage associates exist for the communities: Los Isle\u00f1os Heritage and Cultural Society of St. Bernard as well as the Canary Islanders Heritage Society of Louisiana. The Fiesta de los Isle\u00f1os is celebrated annually in St. Bernard Parish which features heritage performances from local groups and the Canary Islands.\nEducation.\nDespite ranking as the third-least educated state as of 2023, preceded by Mississippi and West Virginia, Louisiana is home to over 40 public and private colleges and universities including: Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge; Louisiana Tech University in Ruston, the University of Louisiana at Lafayette in Lafayette; and Tulane University in New Orleans. Louisiana State University is the largest and most comprehensive university in the state. Louisiana Tech University is one the most well regarded public universities in the state. The University of Louisiana at Lafayette, the second-largest institution in the state, became the third university in the state to achieve \"R1: Doctoral universities \u2013 very high research activity\" status in December 2021. Tulane University is a major private research university and the wealthiest university in Louisiana with an endowment over $2billion in 2023. Tulane is also highly regarded for its academics nationwide, consistently ranked in the top 100 on \"U.S. News &amp; World Report's\" list of best national universities.\nLouisiana's two oldest and largest historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs) are Southern University in Baton Rouge and Grambling State University in Grambling. Both these Southwestern Athletic Conference (SWAC) schools compete against each other in football annually in the much anticipated Bayou Classic during Thanksgiving weekend in the Superdome.\nWhile Louisiana has historically struggled to improve its test scores nationwide, recent improvements in policy and practice have led to substantial growth.\nIn 2000, of all of the states, Louisiana had the highest percentage of students in private schools. Danielle Dreilinger of \"The Times Picayune\" wrote in 2014 that \"Louisiana parents have a national reputation for favoring private schools.\" The number of students in enrolled in private schools in Louisiana declined by 9% from c.\u20092000\u20132005 until 2014, due to the proliferation of charter schools, the Great Recession and Hurricane Katrina. Ten parishes in the Baton Rouge and New Orleans area had a combined 17% decline in private school enrollment in that period. This prompted private schools to lobby for school vouchers.\nLouisiana's school voucher program is known as the Louisiana Scholarship Program. It was available in the New Orleans area beginning in 2008 and in the rest of the state beginning in 2012. In 2013, the number of students using school vouchers to attend private schools was 6,751, and for 2014 it was projected to exceed 8,800. As per a ruling from Ivan Lemelle, a U.S. district judge, the federal government has the right to review the charter school placements to ensure they do not further racial segregation.\nTransportation.\nThe Louisiana Department of Transportation and Development is the state government organization in charge of maintaining public transportation, roadways, bridges, canals, select levees, floodplain management, port facilities, commercial vehicles, and aviation which includes 69 airports.\nRoads.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2022, Louisiana ranked 5th highest for fatal crashes in the US with a rate of 19.7 deaths per 100,000 population.\nRail.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSix Class I freight railroads operate in Louisiana: BNSF, Canadian National, CPKC, CSX, Norfolk Southern and Union Pacific. A number of Class II and Class III railroads also carry freight.\nAmtrak, the national passenger railroad, operates three long-distance rail routes through Louisiana. All three originate at New Orleans Union Passenger Terminal. The \"Crescent\" serves then runs northeast to via , , , and The \"City of New Orleans\" stops at before continuing north to by way of and . The \"Sunset Limited\" serves , , , and on its route west to via , , , and . Before Hurricane Katrina, the \"Sunset Limited\" ran as far east as .\nMass transit.\nPredominantly serving New Orleans, the New Orleans Regional Transit Authority is the largest transit agency in the state. Other transit organizations are St. Bernard Urban Rapid Transit, Jefferson Transit, Capital Area Transit System, Lafayette Transit System, Shreveport Area Transit System, and Monroe Transit, among others.\nThe Louisiana Transportation Authority (under the Louisiana Department of Transportation and Development) was created in 2001 to \"promote, plan, finance, develop, construct, control, regulate, operate and maintain any tollway or transitway to be constructed within its jurisdiction. Development, construction, improvement, expansion, and maintenance of an efficient, safe, and well-maintained intermodal transportation system is essential to promote Louisiana's economic growth and the ability of Louisiana's business and industry to compete in regional, national, and global markets and to provide a high quality of life for the people of Louisiana.\"\nAir.\nLouis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport (MSY) is the busiest airport in Louisiana by an order of magnitude. It is also the second lowest-lying international airport in the world, at just above sea level. There are six other primary airports in the state: Baton Rouge Metropolitan, Shreveport Regional, Lafayette Regional, Alexandria International, Monroe Regional, and Lake Charles Regional. A total of 69 public-use airports exist in Louisiana.\nWaterways.\nThe Gulf Intracoastal Waterway is an important means of transporting commercial goods such as petroleum and petroleum products, agricultural produce, building materials and manufactured goods. In 2018, the state sued the federal government to repair erosion along the waterway.\n\nLaw and government.\nIn 1849, the state moved the capital from New Orleans to Baton Rouge. Donaldsonville, Opelousas, and Shreveport have briefly served as the seat of Louisiana state government. The Louisiana State Capitol and the Louisiana Governor's Mansion are both located in Baton Rouge. The Louisiana Supreme Court, however, did not move to Baton Rouge but remains headquartered in New Orleans.\nLouisiana has six congressional districts and is represented in the U.S. House of Representatives by four Republicans and two Democrats. Louisiana had eight votes in the Electoral College for the 2020 election.\nIn a 2020 study, Louisiana was ranked as the 24th hardest state for citizens to vote in. Louisiana has one of the most restrictive abortion laws in the United States.\nThe Louisiana State Penitentiary, Angola is the largest maximum-security prison in the United States.\nAdministrative divisions.\nLouisiana is divided into 64 parishes (the equivalent of counties in most other states).\nMost parishes have an elected government known as the Police Jury, dating from the colonial days. It is the legislative and executive government of the parish, and is elected by the voters. Its members are called Jurors, and together they elect a president as their chairman.\nA more limited number of parishes operate under home rule charters, electing various forms of government. This include mayor\u2013council, council\u2013manager (in which the council hires a professional operating manager for the parish), and others.\nCivil law.\nThe Louisiana political and legal structure has maintained several elements from the times of French and Spanish governance. One is the use of the term \"parish\" (from the French: ) in place of \"county\" for administrative subdivision. Another is the legal system of civil law based on French, German, and Spanish legal codes and ultimately Roman law, as opposed to English common law.\nLouisiana's civil law system is what the majority of sovereign states in the world use, especially in Europe and its former colonies, excluding those that derive their legal systems from the British Empire. However, it is incorrect to equate the Louisiana Civil Code with the Napoleonic Code. Although the Napoleonic Code and Louisiana law draw from common legal roots, the Napoleonic Code was never in force in Louisiana, as it was enacted in 1804, after the United States had purchased and annexed Louisiana in 1803.\nThe Louisiana Civil Code is the controlling authority on civil matters in the state and has been continuously revised and updated since its enactment in 1808. While some of the differences between the legal systems have been bridged due to the strong influence of common law tradition, the civil law tradition is still deeply rooted in most aspects of Louisiana private law. Thus property, contractual, business entities structure, much of civil procedure, and family law, as well as some aspects of criminal law, are based mostly on traditional Roman legal thinking.\nMarriage.\nIn 1997, Louisiana became the first state to offer the option of a traditional marriage or a covenant marriage. In a covenant marriage, the couple waives their right to a \"no-fault\" divorce after six months of separation, which is available in a traditional marriage. To divorce under a covenant marriage, a couple must demonstrate cause. Marriages between ascendants and descendants, and marriages between collaterals within the fourth degree (i.e., siblings, aunt and nephew, uncle and niece, first cousins) are prohibited. Same-sex marriages were prohibited by statute, but the U.S. Supreme Court declared such bans unconstitutional in 2015 in \"Obergefell v. Hodges\". Same-sex marriages are now performed statewide. Louisiana is a community property state.\nElections.\nFrom 1898 to 1965, a period when Louisiana had effectively disfranchised most African Americans and many poor whites by provisions of a new constitution, this was essentially a one-party state dominated by white Democrats. Elites had control in the early 20th century, before populist Huey Long came to power as governor. In multiple acts of resistance, blacks left behind the segregation, violence and oppression of the state and moved out to seek better opportunities in northern and western industrial cities during the Great Migrations of 1910\u20131970, markedly reducing their proportion of population in Louisiana. The franchise for whites was expanded somewhat during these decades, but blacks remained essentially disfranchised until after the civil rights movement of the mid-20th century, gaining enforcement of their constitutional rights through passage by Congress of the Voting Rights Act of 1965.\nSince the 1960s, when civil rights legislation was passed under President Lyndon Johnson to protect voting and civil rights, most African Americans in the state have affiliated with the Democratic Party. In the same years, many white social conservatives have moved to support Republican Party candidates in national, gubernatorial and statewide elections. In 2004, David Vitter was the first Republican in Louisiana to be popularly elected as a U.S. senator. The previous Republican senator, John S. Harris, who took office in 1868 during Reconstruction, was chosen by the state legislature under the rules of the 19th century.\nLouisiana is unique among U.S. states in using a system for its state and local elections similar to that of modern France. All candidates, regardless of party affiliation, run in a nonpartisan blanket primary (or \"jungle primary\") on Election Day. If no candidate has more than 50% of the vote, the two candidates with the highest vote totals compete in a runoff election approximately one month later. This run-off method does not take into account party identification; therefore, it is not uncommon for a Democrat to be in a runoff with a fellow Democrat or a Republican to be in a runoff with a fellow Republican.\nCongressional races have also been held under the jungle primary system. All other states (except Washington, California, and Maine) use single-party primaries followed by a general election between party candidates, each conducted by either a plurality voting system or runoff voting, to elect senators, representatives, and statewide officials. Between 2008 and 2010, federal congressional elections were run under a closed primary system\u2014limited to registered party members. However, on the passage of House Bill 292, Louisiana again adopted a nonpartisan blanket primary for its federal congressional elections.\nLouisiana has six seats in the U.S. House of Representatives, five of which are currently held by Republicans and one by a Democrat. Though the state historically flips between Republican and Democratic governors, Louisiana is not classified as a swing state in presidential elections, and has it has been considered a Republican Party stronghold during the 21st century. Louisiana's incumbent governor is Republican Jeff Landry, and the state's two U.S. senators are Bill Cassidy (R) and John Neely Kennedy (R).\nLaw enforcement.\nLouisiana's statewide police force is the Louisiana State Police. In 1988, the Criminal Investigation Bureau was reorganized. Its troopers have statewide jurisdiction with power to enforce all laws of the state, including city and parish ordinances. Each year, they patrol over of roadway and arrest about 10,000 impaired drivers. The State Police are primarily a traffic enforcement agency, with other sections that delve into trucking safety, narcotics enforcement, and gaming oversight.\nThe elected sheriff in each parish is its chief law enforcement officer. They are the keepers of the local parish prisons, which house felony and misdemeanor prisoners. They are the primary criminal patrol and first responder agency in all matters criminal and civil. They are also the official tax collectors in each parish. The sheriffs are responsible for general law enforcement in their respective parishes, with the exception of Orleans Parish where this falls to the New Orleans Police Department. Before 2010, Orleans Parish was the only parish to have two sheriff's offices, with a different elected sheriff overseeing civil and criminal matters. In 2006, a bill was passed which eventually consolidated the two sheriff's departments into one parish sheriff responsible for both.\nIn 2015, Louisiana had a higher murder rate (10.3 per 100,000) than any other state in the country for the 27th straight year. Louisiana is the only state with an annual average murder rate (13.6 per 100,000) at least twice as high as the U.S. annual average (6.6 per 100,000) during that period, according to Bureau of Justice Statistics from FBI Uniform Crime Reports. In a different kind of criminal activity, the \"Chicago Tribune\" reports that Louisiana is the most corrupt state in the United States.\nAccording to a 2012 article in \"The Times Picayune\", Louisiana is the prison capital of the world. Many for-profit private prisons and sheriff-owned prisons have been built and operate here. Louisiana's incarceration rate is nearly five times Iran's, 13 times China's and 20 times Germany's. Minorities are incarcerated at rates disproportionate to their share of the state's population. There are more people serving life sentences without parole in Louisiana than in Texas, Tennessee, Arkansas, Alabama and Mississippi combined.\nThe New Orleans Police Department began a sanctuary policy to \"no longer cooperate with federal immigration enforcement\" beginning on February 28, 2016.\nOn June 19, 2024, Jeff Landry signed a bill to officially require that the Ten Commandments be displayed in every classroom in public schools and colleges. In November 2024, the law was overturned by a federal court.\nJudiciary.\nThe judiciary of Louisiana is defined under the constitution and law of Louisiana and comprises the Louisiana Supreme Court, the Louisiana Circuit Courts of Appeal, the district courts, the Justice of the Peace courts, the mayor's courts, the city courts, and the parish courts. The chief justice of the Louisiana Supreme Court is the chief administrator of the judiciary. Its administration is aided by the Judiciary Commission of Louisiana, the Louisiana Attorney Disciplinary Board, and the Judicial Council of the Supreme Court of Louisiana.\nNational Guard.\nLouisiana has more than 9,000 soldiers in the Louisiana Army National Guard, including the 225th Engineer Brigade and the 256th Infantry Brigade. Both these units have served overseas during the war on terror. The Louisiana Air National Guard has more than 2,000 airmen, and its 159th Fighter Wing has likewise seen combat.\nTraining sites in the state include Louisiana National Guard Training Center Pineville near Pineville, Camp Villere near Slidell, Camp Minden near Minden, England Air Park (formerly England Air Force Base) near Alexandria, Gillis Long Center near Carville, and Jackson Barracks in New Orleans.\nSports.\nLouisiana is the least populous state with more than one major professional sports league franchise: the National Basketball Association's New Orleans Pelicans and the National Football League's New Orleans Saints.\nLouisiana has 12 collegiate NCAA Division I programs, a high number given its population. The state has no NCAA Division II teams and only two NCAA Division III teams. As of 2019, the LSU Tigers football team has won 12 Southeastern Conference titles, six Sugar Bowls and four national championships.\nEach year New Orleans plays host to the Bayou Classic, and the New Orleans Bowl college football games, while Shreveport hosts the Independence Bowl. New Orleans has hosted the Super Bowl a record eleven times, as well as the BCS National Championship Game, NBA All-Star Game and NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship.\nThe Zurich Classic of New Orleans, is a PGA Tour golf tournament held since 1938. The Rock 'n' Roll Mardi Gras Marathon and Crescent City Classic are two road running competitions held at New Orleans.\nAs of 2016, Louisiana was the birthplace of the most NFL players per capita for the eighth year in a row.\nLouisiana State University, the most famous college campus in Louisiana, has a total of 53 national championships throughout the college, the most championship is college baseball championship in May, 2025.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPronunciation\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18131", "revid": "50799665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18131", "title": "Los Angeles International Airport", "text": "Airport serving Los Angeles, California, United States\nLos Angeles International Airport (), commonly referred to by its IATA code LAX, is the primary international airport serving Los Angeles and its surrounding metropolitan area, in the U.S. state of California. LAX is located in the Westchester neighborhood of the city of Los Angeles, southwest of downtown Los Angeles, with the commercial and residential areas of Westchester to the north, the city of El Segundo to the south, and the city of Inglewood to the east. LAX is the closest airport to the Westside and the South Bay.\nThe airport is operated by Los Angeles World Airports (LAWA), a branch of the Los Angeles city government, that also operates the Van Nuys Airport for general aviation. The airport covers of land and has four parallel runways.\nIn 2023, LAX handled 75,050,875 passengers, making it the world's eleventh-busiest airport, according to the Airports Council International rankings. In 2024, LAX served 76,587,980 passengers, a 2.04% increase from 2023. As the largest and busiest international airport on the West Coast of the United States, LAX is a major international gateway for the country, serving as a connection point for passengers traveling internationally (such as East and Southeast Asia, Australasia, Mexico, and Central America).\nThe airport holds the record for the world's busiest origin and destination airport, because relative to other airports, many more travelers begin or end their trips in Los Angeles than use it as a connection. In 2019, LAWA reported approximately 88% of travelers at LAX were origination and destination passengers, and 12% were connecting. It is also the only airport to rank among the top five U.S. airports for both passenger and cargo traffic. LAX serves as a hub, focus city, or operating base for more passenger airlines than any other airport in the United States.\nAlthough LAX is the busiest airport in the Greater Los Angeles area, several other airports serve the region including Burbank, John Wayne (Orange County), Long Beach, Ontario, and San Bernardino.\nHistory.\nIn 1926, the Los Angeles City Council and the Chamber of Commerce recognized the need for the city to have its own airport to tap into the fledgling, but quickly growing, aviation industry. Several locations were considered, but the final choice was a field in the southern part of Westchester. The location had been promoted by real estate agent William W. Mines, and Mines Field as it was known had already been selected to host the 1928 National Air Races. On August 13, 1928 the city leased the land and the newly formed Department of Airports began converting the fields, once used to grow wheat, barley, and lima beans, into dirt landing strips.\nThe airport opened on October 1, 1928 and the first structure, Hangar No. 1, was erected in 1929. The building still stands at the airport, remaining in active use and listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Over the next year, the airport started to come together: the dirt runway was replaced with an all-weather surface and more hangars, a restaurant, and a control tower were built. On June 7, 1930, the facility was dedicated and renamed Los Angeles Municipal Airport.\nThe airport was used by private pilots and flying schools, but the city\u2019s vision was that Los Angeles would become the main passenger hub for the area. However, the airport failed to entice any carriers away from the established Burbank Airport or the Grand Central Airport in Glendale.\nWorld War II put a pause on any further development of the airport for passenger use. Before the United States entered the war, the aviation manufacturers located around the airport were busy providing aircraft for the Allied powers, while the flying schools found themselves in high demand. In January 1942, the military assumed control of the airport, stationing fighter planes there, and building naval gun batteries in the ocean dunes to the west.\nMeanwhile, airport managers published a master plan for the land and, in early 1943, convinced voters to back a $12.5 million bond for airport improvements. With a plan and funding in place, the airlines were finally convinced to make the move.\nAfter the end of the War, four temporary terminals were quickly erected on the north side of the airport and, on December 9, 1946, American Airlines, Trans World Airlines (TWA), United Airlines, Southwest Airways, and Western Airlines began passenger operations at the airport, with Pan American Airways (Pan Am) joining the next month. The airport was renamed Los Angeles International Airport in 1949.\nThe temporary terminals remained in place for 15 years but quickly became inadequate, especially as air travel entered the \"jet age\" and other cities invested in modern facilities. Airport leaders once again convinced voters to back a $59 million bond on June 5, 1956.\nThe current layout of the passenger facilities was established in 1958 with a plan to build a series of terminals and parking facilities, arranged in the shape of the letter U, in the central portion of the property. The original plan called for the terminal buildings to be connected at the center of the property by a huge steel-and-glass dome. The dome was never built, but a smaller Theme Building, constructed in the central area, became a focal point for people coming to the airport.\nThe first of the new passenger buildings, Terminals 7 and 8, were opened for United Airlines on June 25, 1961, following opening festivities that lasted several days. Terminals 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 opened later that same year.\nThere was a major expansion of the airport in the early 1980s, ahead of the 1984 Summer Olympic Games. In November 1983, a second-level roadway was added, Terminal 1 opened in January 1984 and the Tom Bradley International Terminal opened in June 1984. The original terminals also received expansions and updates in the 1980s.\nSince 2008, the airport has been undergoing another major expansion. All of the terminals are being refurbished, and the Tom Bradley International Terminal was substantially rebuilt, with a West Gates satellite concourse added. Outside of the terminal area, the LAX West Intermodal Transportation Facility with 4,300 parking spaces opened in 2021, replacing the former Lot C. A new LAX/Metro Transit Center and a LAX Consolidated Rent-A-Car Facility (ConRAC) are being built. All will be connected to the terminal area by the LAX Automated People Mover. Altogether, those projects are expected to cost $30 billion and bring LAX's total gates from 146 to 182. Ultra low-cost carriers say project costs have made operations at LAX unsustainable under their low-fare model, with fees hitting around $50 per departing passenger. As a result, Allegiant Air is shutting its LAX crew base and cutting several routes.\nThe \"X\" in LAX.\nBefore the 1930s, US airports used a two-letter abbreviation and \"LA\" served as the designation for Los Angeles Airport. With rapid growth in the aviation industry, in 1947, the identifiers were expanded to three letters, and \"LA\" received an extra letter to become \"LAX\". The \"X\" does not have any specific meaning. \"LAX\" is also used for the Port of Los Angeles in San Pedro and by Amtrak for Union Station in Downtown Los Angeles.\nInfrastructure.\nAirfield.\nRunways 24R/06L and 24L/06R (designated the North Airfield Complex) are north of the airport terminals, while runways 25R/07L and 25L/07R (designated the South Airfield Complex) are south of the airport terminals.\nLAX is located with the Pacific Ocean to the west and residential communities on all other sides. Since 1972, Los Angeles World Airports has adopted a \"Preferential Runway Use Policy\" to minimize noise levels in the communities closest to LAX.\nTypically, the loudest operations at an airport are from departing aircraft, with engines operating at high power, so during daytime hours (6:30am to midnight), LAX prefers to operate under the \"Westerly Operations\" air traffic pattern, named for the prevailing west winds. Under \"Westerly Operations\", departing aircraft take off to the west, over the ocean, and arriving aircraft approach from the east. To reduce noise to areas north and south of the airport, LAX prefers to use the \"inboard\" runways (06R/24L and 07L/25R) for departures, closest to the central terminal area and further from residential areas, and the \"outboard\" runways for arrivals. Historically, over 90% of flights have used the \"inboard\" departures and \"outboard\" arrivals scheme.\nDuring night-time hours, when there are fewer aircraft operations and residential areas tend to be more noise sensitive, additional changes are made to reduce noise. Between 10pm and 7am, air traffic controllers try to use the \"outboard\" runways as little as possible and, between midnight and 6:30am, the air traffic pattern shifts to \"Over-Ocean Operations\", under which departing aircraft continue to take off to the west, but arriving aircraft also approach from the west, over the ocean.\nThere are times when the Over-Ocean and Westerly operations are not possible, particularly when the winds originate from the east, typically during inclement weather and when Santa Ana winds occur. In those cases, the airport shifts to the non-preferred \"Easterly Operations\" air traffic pattern, under which departing aircraft take off to the east, and arriving aircraft approach from the west.\nThe South Airfield Complex tends to see more operations than the North, because there are a larger number of passenger gates and air cargo operations areas on the south side of the airport grounds. In 2007, the southernmost runway (07R/25L) was moved to the south to accommodate a new central taxiway. Runways in the North Airfield Complex are separated by . There were plans to increase the separation by , which would have allowed a central taxiway between runways to have been built, but faced opposition from residents living north of LAX. These plans were scrapped in 2016, in favor of lifting a gate cap at the airport and building a new park on the airport's north side.\nTheme Building.\nThe distinctive Theme Building in the Googie style was built in 1961 and resembles a flying saucer that has landed on its four legs. A restaurant with a sweeping view of the airport is suspended beneath two arches that form the legs. The Los Angeles City Council designated the building a Los Angeles Historic-Cultural Monument in 1992. A $4 million renovation, with retro-futuristic interior and electric lighting designed by Walt Disney Imagineering, was completed before the Encounter Restaurant opened there in 1997. The restaurant is no longer in business. Visitors are able to take the elevator up to the observation deck of the \"Theme Building\", which had previously been closed after the September 11, 2001 attacks for security reasons. A memorial to the victims of the 9/11 attacks is located on the grounds, as three of the four hijacked planes were originally destined for LAX. The Bob Hope USO expanded and relocated to the first floor of the Theme Building in 2018.\nModernization projects.\nIn 2017, LAWA adopted a plan to modernize LAX at a cost of $30 billion. The improvements are included in either the Airfield &amp; Terminal Modernization Project (ATMP) or the Landside Access Modernization Program (LAMP). These include terminal and runway improvements, which will \"enhance the passenger experience, reduce overcrowding, and provide airport access to the latest class of very large passenger aircraft\"; this will bring the number of LAX's total gates from 146 to 182.\nCompleted improvements include:\nFuture improvements include:\nTraffic and statistics.\nIt is the world's eighth-busiest airport by passenger traffic and eleventh-busiest by cargo traffic, serving over 87 million passengers and 2 million tons of freight and mail in 2018. It is the busiest airport in the state of California, and the fifth-busiest (2022) airport by passenger boardings in the United States. In terms of international passengers, the second busiest airport for international traffic in the United States, behind only JFK in New York City.\nThe number of aircraft movements (landings and takeoffs) was 700,362 in 2017, the third most of any airport in the world.\nGround transportation and access.\nTransiting between terminals.\nIn the secure area of the airport, tunnels or above-ground connectors link all the terminals except for the regional terminal.\nLAX Shuttle route A operates in a counter-clockwise loop around the Central Terminal Area, providing frequent service for connecting passengers. However, connecting passengers who use these shuttles must leave and then later re-enter security.\nLAX Shuttle routes.\nLAX operates several shuttle routes to connect passengers and employees around the airport area:\nRoute A \u2013 Terminal Connector operates in a counter-clockwise loop around the Central Terminal Area, providing frequent service for connecting passengers. However, connecting passengers who use these shuttles must leave and then later re-enter security.\nRoute E \u2013 Economy Parking connects the Central Terminal Area and the West Intermodal Transportation Facility, the airport's economy parking garage.\nRoute M \u2013 Metro Connector connects the Central Terminal Area with the LAX/Metro Transit Center on the Metro C and K lines.\nRoute X \u2013 LAX Employee Lots connects the Central Terminal Area and the Employee Parking Lots. The route has three service patterns: the East Lot route only stops at Terminals 1, 2, 3, and B; the West Lot route only stops at Terminals 4, 5, 6, and 7; and the South Lot route stops at all terminals and also stops at the City Bus Center as Route C.\nFlyAway Bus.\nThe FlyAway bus is a nonstop motorcoach/shuttle service run by LAWA, which provides scheduled service between LAX and Union Station in Downtown LA or the FlyAway terminal at the Van Nuys Airport in the San Fernando Valley.\nFlyAway buses stop at every LAX terminal in a counter-clockwise direction, starting at terminal 1. The service hours vary based on the line, with most leaving on or near the top of the hour. Buses use the regional system of high-occupancy vehicle lanes and high-occupancy toll lanes (Metro ExpressLanes) to expedite their trips.\nMetro Rail and the LAX Automated People Mover.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLAX does not currently have a direct connection to the Los Angeles Metro Rail system. LAX Shuttle route M offers free connections between the Central Terminal Area and the LAX/Metro Transit Center on the C and K, about away.\nThe LAX Automated People Mover (APM), currently under construction by LAWA, is a rail line that will connect the terminal area with long- and short-term parking facilities, a connection to the Los Angeles Metro Rail and other transit at the LAX/Metro Transit Center, and a consolidated facility for all airport rental car agencies.\nThe APM project is estimated to cost $5.5 billion and is scheduled to begin operation in 2026.\nFreeways and roads.\nLAX's terminals are immediately west of the interchange between Century Boulevard and Sepulveda Boulevard (State Route 1). Interstate 405 can be reached to the east via Century Boulevard. Interstate 105 is to the south via Sepulveda Boulevard, through the Airport Tunnel that crosses under the airport runways.\nTaxis, ride-share and private shuttles.\nArriving passengers take a shuttle or walk to the LAXit waiting area east of Terminal 1 for taxi or ride-share pickups. Taxi services are operated by nine city-authorized taxi companies and regulated by Authorized Taxicab Supervision Inc. (ATS). ATS queues up taxis at the LAXit waiting area.\nA number of private shuttle companies also offer limousine and bus services to LAX.\nWalk in from nearby areas.\nUnlike many major airports of comparable size, it is easy to walk onto the land side LAX grounds from the abutting neighborhoods including Westchester and the Lennox area of Inglewood. There are several hotels, notably the Hyatt Regency LAX, restaurants and other support services on Sepulveda Blvd that are short walk from the terminals, and adequate sidewalks are provided to allow pedestrians with luggage to easily walk to/from the terminals to the neighborhood.\nOther facilities.\nThe airport has the administrative offices of Los Angeles World Airports.\nContinental Airlines once had its corporate headquarters on the airport property. At a 1962 press conference in the office of Mayor of Los Angeles Sam Yorty, Continental Airlines announced that it planned to move its headquarters to Los Angeles in July 1963. In 1963 Continental Airlines headquarters moved to a two-story, $2.3 million building on the grounds of the airport. The July 2009 \"Continental Magazine\" issue stated that the move \"underlined Continental Airlines western and Pacific orientation\". On July 1, 1983 the airline's headquarters were relocated to the America Tower in the Neartown area of Houston.\nIn addition to Continental Airlines, Western Airlines and Flying Tiger Line also had their headquarters at LAX.\nFlight Path Museum LAX.\nThe Flight Path Museum LAX, formerly known as the Flight Path Learning Center, is a museum located at 6661 Imperial Highway and was formerly known as the \"West Imperial Terminal\". This building used to house some charter flights. It sat empty for 10 years until it was re-opened as a learning center for LAX.\nThe center contains information on the history of aviation, several pictures of the airport, as well as aircraft scale models, flight attendant uniforms, and general airline memorabilia such as playing cards, china, magazines, signs, and a TWA gate information sign.\nThe museum's library contains an extensive collection of rare items such as aircraft manufacturer company newsletters/magazines, technical manuals for both military and civilian aircraft, industry magazines dating back to World War II and before, historic photographs and other invaluable references on aircraft operation and manufacturing.\nThe museum has on display \"The Spirit of Seventy-Six,\" a DC-3 that flew in commercial airline service, before serving as a corporate aircraft for Union 76 Oil Company for 32 years. The plane was built in the Douglas Aircraft Company plant in Santa Monica in January 1941, which was a major producer of both commercial and military aircraft.\nAccidents and incidents.\nDuring its history there have been numerous incidents, but only the most notable are summarized below:\nAircraft spotting.\nThe \"Imperial Hill\" area of El Segundo is a prime location for aircraft spotting, especially for takeoffs. Part of the Imperial Hill area has been set aside as a city park, Clutter's Park.\nAnother popular spotting location sits under the final approach for runways 24 L&amp;R on a lawn next to the Westchester In-N-Out Burger on Sepulveda Boulevard. This is one of the few remaining locations in Southern California from which spotters may watch such a wide variety of low-flying commercial airliners from directly underneath a flight path.\nAnother aircraft spotting location is at a small park in the take-off pattern that normally goes out over the Pacific. The park is on the east side of the street Vista Del Mar, from which it takes its name, Vista Del Mar Park.\nSpace Shuttle \"Endeavour\".\nAt 12:51\u00a0p.m. on Friday, September 21, 2012, a Shuttle Carrier Aircraft carrying the Space Shuttle \"Endeavour\" landed at LAX on runway 25L. An estimated 10,000 people saw the shuttle land. Interstate 105 was backed up for miles at a standstill. Imperial Highway was shut down for spectators. It was quickly taken off the Shuttle Carrier Aircraft, a modified Boeing 747, and was moved to a United Airlines hangar. The shuttle spent about a month in the hangar while it was prepared to be transported to the California Science Center.\nIn popular culture.\nNumerous films and television shows have been set or filmed partially at LAX, at least partly due to the airport's proximity to Hollywood studios and Los Angeles. Film shoots at the Los Angeles airports, including LAX, produced $590 million for the Los Angeles region from 2002 to 2005.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18133", "revid": "35681511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18133", "title": "La T\u00e8ne culture", "text": "Iron Age culture of Europe\nThe La T\u00e8ne culture (; ) was a European Iron Age culture. It developed and flourished during the late Iron Age (from about 450\u00a0BC to the Roman conquest in the 1st century BC), succeeding the early Iron Age Hallstatt culture without any definite cultural break, under considerable Mediterranean influence from the Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul, the Etruscans, and the Golasecca culture, but whose artistic style nevertheless did not depend on those Mediterranean influences.\nLa T\u00e8ne culture's territorial extent corresponded to what is now France, Belgium, Switzerland, Austria, England, Southern Germany, the Czech Republic, Northern Italy and Central Italy, Slovenia, Hungary and Liechtenstein, as well as adjacent parts of the Netherlands, Slovakia, Serbia, Croatia, Transylvania (western Romania), and Transcarpathia (western Ukraine). The Celtiberians of western Iberia shared many aspects of the culture, though not generally the artistic style. To the north extended the contemporary Pre-Roman Iron Age of Northern Europe, including the Jastorf culture of Northern Germany and Denmark and all the way to Galatia in Asia Minor (today Turkey).\nCentered on ancient Gaul, the culture became very widespread, and encompasses a wide variety of local differences. It is often distinguished from earlier and neighbouring cultures mainly by the La T\u00e8ne style of Celtic art, characterized by curving \"swirly\" decoration, especially of metalwork.\nIt is named after the type site of La T\u00e8ne on the north side of Lake Neuch\u00e2tel in Switzerland, where thousands of objects had been deposited in the lake, as was discovered after the water level dropped in 1857 (due to the Jura water correction).\nIn the popular understanding, La T\u00e8ne describes the culture and art of the ancient Celts, a term that is firmly entrenched in the popular understanding, but it is considered controversial by modern scholarship.\nPeriodization.\nExtensive contacts through trade are recognized in foreign objects deposited in elite burials; stylistic influences on La T\u00e8ne material culture can be recognized in Etruscan, Italic, Greek, Dacian and Scythian sources. Datable Greek pottery and analysis employing scientific techniques such as dendrochronology and thermoluminescence help provide date ranges for an absolute chronology at some La T\u00e8ne sites.\nLa T\u00e8ne history was originally divided into \"early\", \"middle\" and \"late\" stages based on the typology of the metal finds (Otto Tischler 1885), with the Roman occupation greatly disrupting the culture, although many elements remain in Gallo-Roman and Romano-British culture. A broad cultural unity was not paralleled by overarching social-political unifying structures, and the extent to which the material culture can be linguistically linked is debated. The art history of La T\u00e8ne culture has various schemes of periodization.\nThe archaeological period is now mostly divided into four sub-periods, following Paul Reinecke.\nHistory.\nThe preceding final phase of the Hallstatt culture, HaD, c. 650\u2013450 BC, was also widespread across Central Europe, and the transition over this area was gradual, being mainly detected through La T\u00e8ne style elite artefacts, which first appear on the western edge of the old Hallstatt region.\nThough there is no agreement on the precise region in which La T\u00e8ne culture first developed, there is a broad consensus that the centre of the culture lay on the northwest edges of Hallstatt culture, north of the Alps, within the region between in the West the valleys of the Marne and Moselle, and the part of the Rhineland nearby. In the east the western end of the old Hallstatt core area in modern Bavaria, the Czech Republic, Austria and Switzerland formed a somewhat separate \"eastern style Province\" in the early La T\u00e8ne, joining with the western area in Alsace. In 1994 a prototypical ensemble of elite grave sites of the early 5th century BCE was excavated at Glauberg in Hesse, northeast of Frankfurt-am-Main, in a region that had formerly been considered peripheral to the La T\u00e8ne sphere. The site at La T\u00e8ne itself was therefore near the southern edge of the original \"core\" area (as is also the case for the Hallstatt site for its core).\nThe establishment of a Greek colony, soon very successful, at Massalia (modern Marseilles) on the Mediterranean coast of France led to great trade with the Hallstatt areas up the Rhone and Saone river systems, and early La T\u00e8ne elite burials like the Vix Grave in Burgundy contain imported luxury goods along with artifacts produced locally. Most areas were probably controlled by tribal chiefs living in hilltop forts, while the bulk of the population lived in small villages or farmsteads in the countryside.\nBy 500\u00a0BCE the Etruscans expanded to border Celts in north Italy, and trade across the Alps began to overhaul trade with the Greeks, and the Rhone route declined. Booming areas included the middle Rhine, with large iron ore deposits, the Marne and Champagne regions, and also Bohemia, although here trade with the Mediterranean area was much less important. Trading connections and wealth no doubt played a part in the origin of the La T\u00e8ne style, though how large a part remains much discussed; specific Mediterranean-derived motifs are evident, but the new style does not depend on them.\nBarry Cunliffe notes localization of La T\u00e8ne culture during the 5th century BCE when there arose \"two zones of power and innovation: a Marne \u2013 Moselle zone in the west with trading links to the Po Valley via the central Alpine passes and the Golasecca culture, and a Bohemian zone in the east with separate links to the Adriatic via the eastern Alpine routes and the Venetic culture\".\nFrom their homeland, La T\u00e8ne culture expanded in the 4th century BCE to more of modern France, Germany, and Central Europe, and beyond to Hispania, northern and central Italy, the Balkans, and even as far as Asia Minor, in the course of several major migrations. La T\u00e8ne style artefacts start to appear in Britain around the same time, and Ireland rather later. The style of \"Insular La T\u00e8ne\" art is somewhat different and the artefacts are initially found in some parts of the islands but not others. Migratory movements seem at best only partly responsible for the diffusion of La T\u00e8ne culture there, and perhaps other parts of Europe.\nBy about 400\u00a0BCE, the evidence for Mediterranean trade becomes sparse; this may be because the expanding Celtic populations began to migrate south and west, coming into violent conflict with the established populations, including the Etruscans and Romans. The settled life in much of the La T\u00e8ne homelands also seems to have become much more unstable and prone to wars. In about 387\u00a0BCE, the Celts under Brennus defeated the Romans and then sacked Rome, establishing themselves as the most prominent threats to the Roman homeland, a status they would retain through a series of Roman-Gallic wars until Julius Caesar's final conquest of Gaul in 58\u201350 BCE. The Romans prevented the Celts from reaching very far south of Rome, but on the other side of the Adriatic Sea groups passed through the Balkans to reach Greece, where Delphi was attacked and sacked in 279\u00a0BCE, and Asia, where Galatia was established as a Celtic area of Anatolia. By this time, the La T\u00e8ne style was spreading to the British Isles, though apparently without any significant movements in population.\nAfter about 275\u00a0BCE, Roman expansion into the La T\u00e8ne area began with the conquest of Gallia Cisalpina. The conquest of Gallia Celtica followed in 121\u00a0BCE and was complete with the Gallic Wars of the 50s BCE. Gaulish culture quickly assimilated to Roman culture, giving rise to the hybrid Gallo-Roman culture of Roman Gaul.\nEthnology.\nThe bearers of the La T\u00e8ne culture were the people known as Celts or Gauls to ancient ethnographers. Ancient Celtic culture had no written literature of its own, but rare examples of epigraphy in the Greek or Latin alphabets exist allowing the fragmentary reconstruction of Continental Celtic.\nCurrent knowledge of this cultural area is derived from three sources comprising archaeological evidence, Greek and Latin literary records, and ethnographical evidence suggesting some La T\u00e8ne artistic and cultural survivals in traditionally Celtic regions of far western Europe. Some of the societies that are archaeologically identified with La T\u00e8ne material culture were identified by Greek and Roman authors from the 5th century onwards as \"Keltoi\" (\"Celts\") and \"Galli\" (\"Gauls\"). Herodotus (iv.49) correctly placed \"Keltoi\" at the source of the Ister/Danube, in the heartland of La T\u00e8ne material culture: \"The Ister flows right across Europe, rising in the country of the Celts\".\nWhether the usage of classical sources means that the whole of La T\u00e8ne culture can be attributed to a unified Celtic people is difficult to assess; archaeologists have repeatedly concluded that language, material culture, and political affiliation do not necessarily run parallel. Frey (2004) notes that in the 5th century, \"burial customs in the Celtic world were not uniform; rather, localised groups had their own beliefs, which, in consequence, also gave rise to distinct artistic expressions\".\nThe archaeologist Miranda Aldhouse-Green describes the material culture of the La T\u00e8ne period as \"the \"floruit\" of Celtic civilisation\". Ancient literary sources, archaeological evidence and (to a lesser extent) language, all combine to present \"a picture of a Celtic world which, in its heyday (the later first millennium BC), stretched from Ireland and Spain in the west and Scotland in the north to Czechoslovakia in the east and northern Italy in the south, and even beyond Europe to Asia Minor.\"\nArtefacts typical of the La T\u00e8ne culture have been discovered in stray finds as far afield as Scandinavia, Northern Germany, Poland and in the Balkans. It is therefore common to also talk of the \"La T\u00e8ne period\" in the context of those regions even though they were never part of the La T\u00e8ne culture proper, but connected to its core area via trade.\nCulture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"In the final phases of the Iron Age, before the expansion of the Roman empire northwards in the first century BC, major changes are apparent in the economy and society of temperate Europe from central France to the Black Sea. The settlement pattern was transformed by the growth of large sites which functioned as towns, and new centres of industrial production distributed standardized wares over larger distances. At the same time, political power was becoming increasingly centralized \u2026 Coinage was introduced\u2026 The use of writing was known, at least for keeping official records. Thus even before the Roman conquest, large parts of Europe were occupied by literate societies with a high degree of social, economic and political development.\"\nSettlements.\nInitially La T\u00e8ne people lived in open settlements that were dominated by the chieftains' hill forts. The development of walled towns and cities\u2014known as \"oppida\"\u2014appears during the mid-La T\u00e8ne culture in the 2nd century BC. The name of \"oppida\" (singular \"oppidum\") was given by Julius Caesar to the Celtic towns and cities that he encountered during the conquest of Gaul, some of which he explicitly described as \"urbs\" (cities). Oppida were characterized by very large surface areas (up to hundreds of hectares) and were defended by often massive ramparts and walls. They are often described as 'the first cities north of the Alps', though this description has also been applied to earlier settlements of the Hallstatt and Urnfield periods. Oppida served as centres of craft production and commerce and were also important political and religious centres, with major oppida functioning as the capitals of Celtic states.\nOppida appeared more or less simultaneously from the Atlantic to central Europe in the second century BC. More than 180 oppida are known today, stretching from France in the west to Hungary in the east, including oppida in Germany, Switzerland, Belgium, Luxembourg, Austria, the Czech Republic and Slovakia. Oppida-like settlements are also known from Britain and northern Spain. \nMany oppida had planned layouts and some had standardised building designs, indicating a high level of central organization. At the oppidum of Manching in Germany all the buildings were constructed with the same standardised measurements, and a metal measuring rod conforming to this standard was found within the settlement. Similar standards have been identified at multiple other oppida. The layout and structure of oppidum buildings demonstrates a knowledge of geometric principles that suggests the role of specialized craftsmen, surveyors or master builders in their construction. Large buildings inside the oppida included temples, assembly spaces and other public buildings. At the oppidum of Bibracte a monumental stone basin was constructed in the centre of the oppidum based on a precise geometric design with an astronomical alignment.\nLa T\u00e8ne buildings were typically built of wood though stone was used in massive quantities for the construction of oppida walls, known as \"Murus Gallicus\". Some oppida walls were several kilometres long. The construction and effectiveness of these walls was described by Julius Caesar in his account of the Gallic Wars.\nMajor oppida were connected by a network of roads. Wooden bridges and causeways are also known from archaeological remains and historical accounts.\nA significant number of oppida developed into Roman cities following the expansion of the Roman empire. These include Vesontio (Besan\u00e7on), Durocororum (Reims), Lutetia (Paris) and Avaricum (Bourges) among others.\nSocial organisation.\nCeltic society in the La T\u00e8ne period was hierarchically structured with different classes including nobles, a priestly class known as Druids, artisans and craftsmen, and farmers. Status within society was partly based on birth and partly on individual achievement. Celtic peoples were divided into tribes usually ruled by kings, with some tribes having dominion over other tribes or patron-client relations with them. Sacral kingship, in which the roles of ruler and priest are combined, may have existed in some cases. War leaders could also be appointed to command alliances of tribes in the face of a common enemy, such as Vercingetorix during the war against Rome, who was chosen as supreme leader by an assembly of Gauls who gathered at Bibracte from all over the country. Women were able able to attain the highest ranks in Celtic society (including rulership as queens, particularly in Britain) and some of the richest graves in central Europe are those of women. Slavery and the trade in slaves also existed within Celtic society at this time.\nIn his account of the Gallic War, Julius Caesar refers to Celtic societies as \"civitates\" or states with three main classes: knights, Druids and commoners. Caesar further describes Celtic societies as being divided into 'parties', headed by individuals with authority recognised by and derived from the people they led and represented: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Gaul, not only in every state and every canton and district, but almost in each several household, there are parties; and the leaders of the parties are men who in the judgment of their fellows are deemed to have the highest authority, men to whose decision and judgment the supreme issue of all cases and counsels may be referred. And this seems to have been an ordinance from ancient days, to the end that no man of the people should lack assistance against a more powerful neighbour; for each man refuses to allow his own folk to be oppressed and defrauded, since otherwise he has no authority among them. \nBy the time of Caesar's account of Celtic society (c. 50 BC), government by elected magistrates (known as \"Vergobrets\") had replaced kingship among certain tribes, similar to the consuls and senate of Rome. Caesar refers to Vergobrets with the Latin terms \"princeps\", \"civitatis\", \"principatus\", and \"magistratus\". He also refers to ruling councils or governments of various Gaulish states as 'senates' and their members as 'senators', such as Diviciacus of the Aedui, who was both a noble, a war leader and a Druid.\nTrade.\nBy the Iron Age, trade operated intensively and extensively throughout Europe. Trade within Celtic lands involved raw materials and manufactured goods, with a large increase in the trade of manufactured goods occurring in the last two centuries BC. Goods were mass produced within the \"oppida\" by specialist industrial workers and craftsmen and distributed to surrounding areas. Items such as pottery, iron weapons, bronze vessels and glass jewellery were produced for export. Goods were transported by merchants with packhorses, wagons and on freight boats along rivers, and tolls were charged on trade routes by local rulers or states. Weighing balances and coins are found in both small and large settlements. Ships of Celtic design were used for trade with the British Isles and along the Atlantic coast. Metal production, mining and textile production were noted by the Greek author Strabo, who writes: \"among the Petrocorii there are fine iron-works, and also among the Bituriges Cubi; among the Cadurci, linen factories; among the Ruteni, silver mines; and the Gabales, also, have silver mines.\" Exports from La T\u00e8ne cultural areas to the Mediterranean cultures included salt, tin, copper, amber, wool, leather, furs and gold, whilst wine, luxury products and materials such as coral were imported northwards from the Mediterranean region.\nWriting.\nSome Celtic-language inscriptions are known from this period, written in Lepontic, Greek and Latin scripts. Writing appears on Celtic coins (such as the names of Celtic rulers or peoples), and writing equipment in the form of wax tablets and styli has also been found within settlements. Markings on pottery have been interpreted as a possible distinct 'La T\u00e8ne alphabet'. Historical accounts by Greek and Roman authors provide descriptions of the use of writing by Celtic peoples at this time, such as the keeping of public records.\nCoinage.\nCeltic coinage originated in the late 4th century BC in a period of intensified contact with Greek states through trade and the employment of Celtic mercenaries in Greek armies. Coins were minted by individual Celtic rulers or states and are found in large quantities in settlements and hoards throughout Europe. Designs on coins include stylized portraits, abstract symbols, mythological imagery (including motifs such as the solar boat), and possibly star constellations such as the Pleiades. Coins were made from gold, silver and bronze and were used for official payments, taxes, tribute, fines, religious offerings, dowries and other customary payments.\nTechnology.\nThe La T\u00e8ne period saw a vast increase in iron production, with huge quantities and varieties of iron objects becoming common on all types of settlements. According to Collis (2010), \"iron industry and coin use were more advanced than in the Mediterranean, and indicate indigenous changes.\" By the second century BC, 200 distinct types of iron tools were in common use, serving a wide range of purposes. Iron nails used in the production of \"Murus Gallicus\" were mass-produced in enormous quantities. The oppidum of Manching is estimated to have used many tons of nails just in the construction of its outer wall. The production of high-carbon steel is also attested from c. 500 BC. By the 1st century BC Noric steel was famous for its quality and was sought after by the Roman military.\nTechnological developments by Celtic craftsmen in this period include the invention of shrunk-on iron tyres for wagons and chariots, the creation of wagons with front-axel steering, and the incorporation of roller-bearings within wheel hubs. Chariots are thought to have incorporated suspension systems made from tightened ropes or leather straps to reduce vibrations during movement on uneven ground. In the 1st century BC the Greek historian Diodorus Siculus noted that \"In their journeyings and when they go into battle the Gauls use chariots drawn by two horses.\" Chariots were used in warfare until the later La T\u00e8ne period, continuing in use in Britain until the late 1st century BC. \nAccording to Julius Caesar trade with the British Isles was dominated by the Veneti from Armorica, who commanded \"a very great number of ships\", which he described as follows: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The ships were built wholly of oak, and designed to endure any force and violence whatever; the benches which were made of planks a foot in breadth, were fastened by iron spikes of the thickness of a man's thumb; the anchors were secured fast by iron chains instead of cables, and for sails they used skins and thin dressed leather. \nClose similarities have been noted between Caesar's description and shipwrecks discovered at Blackfriars in London (dating from the 2nd century AD) and at St Peter Port in Guernsey (dating from the 3rd century AD), which have been described as Romano-Celtic ships built according to a native Celtic tradition, distinct from that of the Mediterranean. McGrail (1995) suggests that the frame-first construction process of these ships represents a specific Celtic ship-building innovation.\nWooden barrels bound with metal hoops were also invented by Celtic craftsmen during the La T\u00e8ne period and gradually replaced the use of amphorae within the Roman empire from the 2nd century AD.\nThe 3rd century BC saw the development of iron chain mail, the invention of which is credited to Celtic armourers by the Roman author Varro. Celtic helmet designs also served as the basis for the design of Roman imperial helmets following Caesar's campaigns in Gaul. The \"spatha\", a long sword of Celtic design, was introduced to the Romans by Celtic mercenaries and auxilaries, gradually becoming a standard heavy infantry weapon within the Roman army by the 2nd century AD and replacing the earlier \"gladius\".\nThe 1st century Roman author Pliny the Elder attributed the invention of soap and mattresses to the Gauls. The 2nd century Greek physician Aretaeus of Cappadocia also attributed the invention of soap to the Gauls.\nAt the site of the oppidum of Paule in Brittany the remains of a wooden structure thought to be a 'machine for drawing water' incorporating a crank and connecting-rod mechanism were discovered at the bottom of a well, dating from 68-27 BC. This is the earliest known evidence for such a mechanism, which is also known from later Roman machines. In his account of the siege of Avaricum Julius Caesar provides a brief glimpse of other devices used by the Gauls:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To the extraordinary valor of our soldiers, devices of every sort were opposed by the Gauls; since they are a nation of consummate ingenuity, and most skillful in imitating and making those things which are imparted by any one; for they turned aside the hooks with nooses, and when they had caught hold of them firmly, drew them on by means of engines, and undermined the mound the more skillfully on this account, because there are in their territories extensive iron mines, and consequently every description of mining operations is known and practiced by them.\nArt and music.\nLa T\u00e8ne metalwork in bronze, iron and gold, developing technologically out of Hallstatt culture, is stylistically characterized by inscribed and inlaid intricate spirals and interlace, on fine bronze vessels, helmets and shields, horse trappings, and elite jewelry, especially the neck rings called torcs and elaborate clasps called \"fibulae\". It is characterized by elegant, stylized curvilinear animal and vegetal forms, allied with the Hallstatt traditions of geometric patterning.\nThe Early Style of La T\u00e8ne art and culture mainly featured static, geometric decoration, while the transition to the Developed Style constituted a shift to movement-based forms, such as triskeles. Some subsets within the Developed Style contain more specific design trends, such as the recurrent serpentine scroll of the Waldalgesheim Style.\nLa T\u00e8ne objects frequently feature complex designs based on geometric principles and precisely laid out with the use of compasses, displaying a sophisticated knowledge of geometry as well as other aspects of mathematics. A similar knowledge of geometry is displayed in the design of the monumental stone basin of Bibracte, which has been described as a 'Druidic monument'.\nEvidence for music in this period includes sculptures of lyre players, thought to be Bards (e.g. at the in Brittany, France), and fragmentary remains of string instruments. Large metal horns known as Carnyxes have been found in various locations, as well as artistic depictions of horn players such as on the Gunderstrup cauldron. The Greek historian Diodorus Siculus gave a brief description of Celtic Bards in his 1st century BC account of the Gauls:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Among them are also to be found lyric poets whom they call Bards. These men sing to the accompaniment of instruments which are like lyres, and their songs may be either of praise or of obloquy.\nBurial rites.\nBurial sites included weapons, chariots, and both elite and household goods, evoking a strong continuity with an afterlife.\nLa T\u00e8ne peoples also dug ritual shafts, in which votive offerings and even human sacrifices were cast. Severed heads (particularly of defeated enemies) appear to have held great power and were often represented in carvings. Ritual depositions of were also made into lakes and rivers, such as the La T\u00e8ne site in Switzerland.\nType site.\nThe La T\u00e8ne type site is on the northern shore of Lake Neuch\u00e2tel, Switzerland, where the small river Thielle, connecting to another lake, enters the Lake Neuch\u00e2tel. In 1857, prolonged drought lowered the waters of the lake by about . On the northernmost tip of the lake, between the river and a point south of the village of Epagnier (), Hansli Kopp, looking for antiquities for Colonel Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Schwab, discovered several rows of wooden piles that still reached up about into the water. From among these, Kopp collected about forty iron swords.\nThe Swiss archaeologist Ferdinand Keller published his findings in 1868 in his influential first report on the Swiss pile dwellings (\"Pfahlbaubericht\"). In 1863 he interpreted the remains as a Celtic village built on piles. Eduard Desor, a geologist from Neuch\u00e2tel, started excavations on the lakeshore soon afterwards. He interpreted the site as an armory, erected on platforms on piles over the lake and later destroyed by enemy action. Another interpretation accounting for the presence of cast iron swords that had not been sharpened, was of a site for ritual depositions.\nWith the first systematic lowering of the Swiss lakes from 1868 to 1883, the site fell completely dry. In 1880, Emile Vouga, a teacher from Marin-Epagnier, uncovered the wooden remains of two bridges (designated \"Pont Desor\" and \"Pont Vouga\") originally over long, that crossed the little Thielle River (today a nature reserve) and the remains of five houses on the shore. After Vouga had finished, F. Borel, curator of the Marin museum, began to excavate as well. In 1885 the canton asked the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 d'Histoire of Neuch\u00e2tel to continue the excavations, the results of which were published by Vouga in the same year.\nAll in all, over 2500 objects, mainly made from metal, have been excavated in La T\u00e8ne. Weapons predominate, there being 166 swords (most without traces of wear), 270 lanceheads, and 22 shield bosses, along with 385 brooches, tools, and parts of chariots. Numerous human and animal bones were found as well. The site was used from the 3rd century, with a peak of activity around 200\u00a0BCE and abandonment by about 60\u00a0BCE. Interpretations of the site vary. Some scholars believe the bridge was destroyed by high water, while others see it as a place of sacrifice after a successful battle (there are almost no female ornaments).\nAn exhibition marking the 150th anniversary of the discovery of the La T\u00e8ne site opened in 2007 at the Mus\u00e9e Schwab in Biel/Bienne, Switzerland, then Z\u00fcrich in 2008 and Mont Beuvray in Burgundy in 2009.\nSites.\nSome sites are:\nArtifacts.\nSome outstanding La T\u00e8ne artifacts are:\nGenetics.\nA genetic study published in \"PLOS One\" in December 2018 examined 45 individuals buried at a La T\u00e8ne necropolis in Urville-Nacqueville, France. The people buried there were identified as Gauls. The mtDNA of the examined individuals belonged primarily to haplotypes of H and U. They were found to be carrying a large amount of steppe ancestry, and to have been closely related to peoples of the preceding Bell Beaker culture, suggesting genetic continuity between Bronze Age and Iron Age France. Significant gene flow with Great Britain and Iberia was detected. The results of the study partially supported the notion that French people are largely descended from the Gauls.\nA genetic study published in the \"Journal of Archaeological Science\" in October 2019 examined 43 maternal and 17 paternal lineages for the La T\u00e8ne necropolis in Urville-Nacqueville, France, and 27 maternal and 19 paternal lineages for La T\u00e8ne tumulus of Gurgy Les Noisats near modern Paris, France. The examined individuals displayed strong genetic resemblance to peoples of the earlier Yamnaya culture, Corded Ware culture and Bell Beaker culture. They carried a diverse set of maternal lineages associated with steppe ancestry. The paternal lineages were on the other hand characterized by a \"striking homogeneity\", belonging entirely to haplogroup R and R1b, both of whom are associated with steppe ancestry. The evidence suggested that the Gauls of the La T\u00e8ne culture were patrilineal and patrilocal, which is in agreement with archaeological and literary evidence.\nA genetic study published in the \"Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America\" in June 2020 examined the remains of 25 individuals ascribed to the La T\u00e8ne culture. The nine examples of individual Y-DNA extracted were determined to belong to either the paragroups or subclades of haplogroups R1b1a1a2 (R-M269; three examples), R1b1a1a2a1a2c1a1a1a1a1 (R-M222), R1b1 (R-L278), R1b1a1a (R-P297), I1 (I-M253), E1b1b (E-M215), or other, unspecified, subclades of haplogroup R. The 25 samples of mtDNA extracted was determined to belong to various subclades of haplogroup H, HV, U, K, J, V and W. The examined individuals of the Hallstatt culture and La T\u00e8ne culture were genetically highly homogeneous and displayed continuity with the earlier Bell Beaker culture. They carried about 50% steppe-related ancestry.\nA genetic study published in iScience in April 2022 examined 49 genomes from 27 sites in Bronze Age and Iron Age France. The study found evidence of strong genetic continuity between the two periods, particularly in southern France. The samples from northern and southern France were highly homogeneous, with northern samples displaying links to contemporary samples form Great Britain and Sweden, and southern samples displaying links to Celtiberians. The northern French samples were distinguished from the southern ones by elevated levels of steppe-related ancestry. R1b was by far the most dominant paternal lineage, while H was the most common maternal lineage. The Iron Age samples resembled those of modern-day populations of France, Great Britain and Spain. The evidence suggested that the Gauls of the La T\u00e8ne culture largely evolved from local Bronze Age populations.\nLaffranchi et al. 2024 examined 12 samples of Cenomani Cisalpine Gauls from Verona who lived between the 3rd and 1st centuries BCE. The five examples of individual Y-DNA extracted were determined to belong to either haplogroup I2a1b1a1b1 or subclades of R1b1a1b (R-M269). The 12 samples of mtDNA extracted belonged to various subclades of haplogroup H, T, U, K, J and X.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18135", "revid": "17350134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18135", "title": "Lorenz curve", "text": "Graphical representation of the distribution of income or of wealth\nIn economics, the Lorenz curve is a graphical representation of the distribution of income or of wealth. It was developed by Max O. Lorenz in 1905 for representing inequality of the wealth distribution.\nThe curve is a graph showing the proportion of overall income or wealth assumed by the bottom of the people, although this is not rigorously true for a finite population (see below). It is often used to represent income distribution, where it shows for the bottom of households, what percentage of the total income they have. The percentage of households is plotted on the x-axis, the percentage of income on the y-axis. It can also be used to show distribution of assets. In such use, many economists consider it to be a measure of social inequality.\nThe concept is useful in describing inequality among the size of individuals in ecology and in studies of biodiversity, where the cumulative proportion of species is plotted against the cumulative proportion of individuals. It is also useful in business modeling: e.g., in consumer finance, to measure the actual percentage of delinquencies attributable to the of people with worst risk scores. Lorenz curves were also applied to epidemiology and public health, e.g., to measure pandemic inequality as the distribution of national cumulative incidence (y%) generated by the population residing in areas (x%) ranked with respect to their local epidemic attack rate.\nExplanation.\nPoints on the Lorenz curve represent statements such as, \"the bottom 20% of all households have 10% of the total income.\"\nA perfectly equal income distribution would be one in which every person has the same income. In this case, the bottom of society would always have of the income. This can be depicted by the straight line \"y\" = \"x\"; called the \"line of perfect equality.\"\nBy contrast, a perfectly unequal distribution would be one in which one person has all the income and everyone else has none. In that case, the curve would be at \"y\" = 0% for all \"x\" &lt; 100%, and \"y\" = 100% when \"x\" = 100%. This curve is called the \"line of perfect inequality.\"\nThe Gini coefficient is the ratio of the area between the line of perfect equality and the observed Lorenz curve to the area between the line of perfect equality and the line of perfect inequality. The higher the coefficient, the more unequal the distribution is. In the diagram on the right, this is given by the ratio \"A\" / (\"A\"+\"B\"), where A and B are the areas of regions as marked in the diagram.\nDefinition and calculation.\nThe Lorenz curve is a probability plot (a P\u2013P plot) comparing the distribution of a variable against a hypothetical uniform distribution of that variable. It can usually be represented by a function \"L\"(\"F\"), where F, the cumulative portion of the population, is represented by the horizontal axis, and L, the cumulative portion of the total wealth or income, is represented by the vertical axis.\nThe curve L need not be a smoothly increasing function of F, For wealth distributions there may be oligarchies or people with negative wealth for instance.\nFor a discrete distribution of Y given by values \"y\"1, ..., \"y\"\"n\" in non-decreasing order (\"y\"\"i\" \u2264 \"y\"\"i\"+1) and their probabilities formula_1 the Lorenz curve is the continuous piecewise linear function connecting the points (\"F\"\"i\", \"L\"\"i\"), \"i\" = 0 to \"n\", where \"F\"0 = 0, \"L\"0 = 0, and for \"i\" = 1 to \"n\":\nformula_2\nWhen all \"y\"\"i\" are equally probable with probabilities 1 / \"n\" this simplifies to \nformula_3\nFor a continuous distribution with the probability density function f and the cumulative distribution function F, the Lorenz curve L is given by:\nformula_4\nwhere formula_5 denotes the average. The Lorenz curve \"L\"(\"F\") may then be plotted as a function parametric in x: \"L\"(\"x\") vs. \"F\"(\"x\"). In other contexts, the quantity computed here is known as the length biased (or size biased) distribution; it also has an important role in renewal theory.\nAlternatively, for a cumulative distribution function \"F\"(\"x\") with inverse \"x\"(\"F\"), the Lorenz curve \"L\"(\"F\") is directly given by:\nformula_6\nThe inverse \"x\"(\"F\") may not exist because the cumulative distribution function has intervals of constant values. However, the previous formula can still apply by generalizing the definition of \"x\"(\"F\"):\nformula_7\nwhere inf is the infimum.\nFor an example of a Lorenz curve, see Pareto distribution.\nProperties.\nA Lorenz curve always starts at (0,0) and ends at (1,1).\nThe Lorenz curve is not defined if the mean of the probability distribution is zero or infinite.\nThe Lorenz curve for a probability distribution is a continuous function. However, Lorenz curves representing discontinuous functions can be constructed as the limit of Lorenz curves of probability distributions, the line of perfect inequality being an example.\nThe information in a Lorenz curve may be summarized by the Gini coefficient and the Lorenz asymmetry coefficient.\nThe Lorenz curve cannot rise above the line of perfect equality.\nA Lorenz curve that never falls beneath a second Lorenz curve and at least once runs above it, has Lorenz dominance over the second one.\nIf the variable being measured cannot take negative values, the Lorenz curve:\nNote however that a Lorenz curve for net worth would start out by going negative due to the fact that some people have a negative net worth because of debt.\nThe Lorenz curve is invariant under positive scaling. If X is a random variable, for any positive number c the random variable cX has the same Lorenz curve as X.\nThe Lorenz curve is flipped twice, once about \"F\" = 0.5 and once about \"L\" = 0.5, by negation. If X is a random variable with Lorenz curve \"L\"X(\"F\"), then \u2212X has the Lorenz curve:\n \"L\"\u2212X = 1 \u2212 \"L\"X(1 \u2212 \"F\")\nThe Lorenz curve is changed by translations so that the equality gap \"F\" \u2212 \"L\"(\"F\") changes in proportion to the ratio of the original and translated means. If X is a random variable with a Lorenz curve \"L\"X(\"F\") and mean \"\u03bc\"X, then for any constant \"c\" \u2260 \u2212\"\u03bc\"X, X + \"c\" has a Lorenz curve defined by:\nformula_8\nFor a cumulative distribution function \"F\"(\"x\") with mean \u03bc and (generalized) inverse \"x\"(\"F\"), then for any F with 0 &lt; \"F\" &lt; 1 :\nExamples.\nBoth \"L\"(\"F\") = \"F\"\"P\" and \"L\"(\"F\") = 1 \u2212 (1 \u2212 \"F\")1/\"P\", for \"P\" \u2265 1, are well-known functional forms for the Lorenz curve.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18136", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18136", "title": "Literate programming", "text": "Approach to software development\nLiterate programming (LP) is a programming paradigm introduced in 1984 by Donald Knuth in which a computer program is given as an explanation of how it works in a natural language, such as English, interspersed (embedded) with snippets of macros and traditional source code, from which compilable source code can be generated. The approach is used in scientific computing and in data science routinely for reproducible research and open access purposes. Literate programming tools are used by millions of programmers today.\nThe literate programming paradigm, as conceived by Donald Knuth, represents a move away from writing computer programs in the manner and order imposed by the compiler, and instead gives programmers macros to develop programs in the order demanded by the logic and flow of their thoughts. Literate programs are written as an exposition of logic in more natural language in which macros are used to hide abstractions and traditional source code, more like the text of an essay. \nLiterate programming tools are used to obtain two representations from a source file: one understandable by a compiler or interpreter, the \"tangled\" code, and another for viewing as formatted documentation, which is said to be \"woven\" from the literate source. While the first generation of literate programming tools were computer language-specific, the later ones are language-agnostic and exist beyond the individual programming languages.\nHistory and philosophy.\nLiterate programming was first introduced in 1984 by Donald Knuth, who intended it to create programs that were suitable literature for human beings. He implemented it at Stanford University as a part of his research on algorithms and digital typography. The implementation was called \"WEB\" since he believed that it was one of the few three-letter words of English that had not yet been applied to computing. However, it resembles the complicated nature of software delicately pieced together from simple materials. The practice of literate programming has seen an important resurgence in the 2010s with the use of computational notebooks, especially in data science.\nConcept.\nLiterate programming is writing out the program logic in a human language with included (separated by a primitive markup) code snippets and macros. Macros in a literate source file are simply title-like or explanatory phrases in a human language that describe human abstractions created while solving the programming problem, and hiding chunks of code or lower-level macros. These macros are similar to the algorithms in pseudocode typically used in teaching computer science. These arbitrary explanatory phrases become precise new operators, created on the fly by the programmer, forming a \"meta-language\" on top of the underlying programming language.\nA preprocessor is used to substitute arbitrary hierarchies, or rather \"interconnected 'webs' of macros\", to produce the compilable source code with one command (\"tangle\"), and documentation with another (\"weave\"). The preprocessor also provides an ability to write out the content of the macros and to add to already created macros in any place in the text of the literate program source file, thereby disposing of the need to keep in mind the restrictions imposed by traditional programming languages or to interrupt the flow of thought.\nAdvantages.\nAccording to Knuth,\nliterate programming provides higher-quality programs, since it forces programmers to explicitly state the thoughts behind the program, making poorly thought-out design decisions more obvious. Knuth also claims that literate programming provides a first-rate documentation system, which is not an add-on, but is grown naturally in the process of exposition of one's thoughts during a program's creation. The resulting documentation allows the author to restart their own thought processes at any later time, and allows other programmers to understand the construction of the program more easily. This differs from traditional documentation, in which a programmer is presented with source code that follows a compiler-imposed order, and must decipher the thought process behind the program from the code and its associated comments. The meta-language capabilities of literate programming are also claimed to facilitate thinking, giving a higher \"bird's eye view\" of the code and increasing the number of concepts the mind can successfully retain and process. Applicability of the concept to programming on a large scale, that of commercial-grade programs, is proven by an edition of TeX code as a literate program.\nKnuth also claims that literate programming can lead to easy porting of software to multiple environments, and even cites the implementation of TeX as an example.\nContrast with documentation generation.\nLiterate programming is very often misunderstood to refer only to formatted documentation produced from a common file with both source code and comments \u2013 which is properly called documentation generation \u2013 or to voluminous commentaries included with code. This is the converse of literate programming: well-documented code or documentation extracted from code follows the structure of the code, with documentation embedded in the code; while in literate programming, code is embedded in documentation, with the code following the structure of the documentation.\nThis misconception has led to claims that comment-extraction tools, such as the Perl Plain Old Documentation or Java Javadoc systems, are \"literate programming tools\". However, because these tools do not implement the \"web of abstract concepts\" hiding behind the system of natural-language macros, or provide an ability to change the order of the source code from a machine-imposed sequence to one convenient to the human mind, they cannot properly be called literate programming tools in the sense intended by Knuth.\nWorkflow.\nImplementing literate programming consists of two steps:\nWeaving and tangling are done on the same source so that they are consistent with each other.\nExample.\nA classic example of literate programming is the literate implementation of the standard Unix codice_1 word counting program. Knuth presented a CWEB version of this example in Chapter 12 of his \"Literate Programming\" book. The same example was later rewritten for the noweb literate programming tool. This example provides a good illustration of the basic elements of literate programming.\nCreation of macros.\nThe following snippet of the codice_1 literate program shows how arbitrary descriptive phrases in a natural language are used in a literate program to create macros, which act as new \"operators\" in the literate programming language, and hide chunks of code or other macros. The mark-up notation consists of double angle brackets (codice_3) that indicate macros. The codice_4 symbol which, in a noweb file, indicates the beginning of a documentation chunk. The codice_5 symbol stands for the \"root\", topmost node the literate programming tool will start expanding the web of macros from. Actually, writing out the expanded source code can be done from any section or subsection (i.e. a piece of code designated as codice_6, with the equal sign), so one literate program file can contain several files with machine source code.\nThe purpose of wc is to count lines, words, and/or characters in a list of files. The\nnumber of lines in a file is .../more explanations/\nHere, then, is an overview of the file wc.c that is defined by the noweb program wc.nw:\n \u00abHeader files to include\u00bb\n \u00abDefinitions\u00bb\n \u00abGlobal variables\u00bb\n \u00abFunctions\u00bb\n \u00abThe main program\u00bb\nWe must include the standard I/O definitions, since we want to send formatted output\nto stdout and stderr.\n \u00abHeader files to include\u00bb=\n #include &lt;stdio.h&gt;\nThe unraveling of the chunks can be done in any place in the literate program text file, not necessarily in the order they are sequenced in the enclosing chunk, but as is demanded by the logic reflected in the explanatory text that envelops the whole program.\nProgram as a web.\nMacros are not the same as \"section names\" in standard documentation. Literate programming macros hide the real code behind themselves, and be used inside any low-level machine language operators, often inside logical operators such as codice_7, codice_8 or codice_9. This can be seen in the following codice_1 literate program.\nThe present chunk, which does the counting, was actually one of\nthe simplest to write. We look at each character and change state if it begins or ends\na word.\n \u00abScan file\u00bb=\n while (1) {\n \u00abFill buffer if it is empty; break at end of file\u00bb\n c = *ptr++;\n if (c &gt; ' ' &amp;&amp; c &lt; 0177) {\n /* visible ASCII codes */\n if (!in_word) {\n word_count++;\n in_word = 1;\n continue;\n if (c == '\\n') line_count++;\n else if (c != ' ' &amp;&amp; c != '\\t') continue;\n in_word = 0;\n /* c is newline, space, or tab */\n @\nThe macros stand for any chunk of code or other macros, and are more general than top-down or bottom-up \"chunking\", or than subsectioning. Donald Knuth said that when he realized this, he began to think of a program as a \"web\" of various parts.\nOrder of human logic, not that of the compiler.\nIn a noweb literate program besides the free order of their exposition, the chunks behind macros, once introduced with codice_11, can be grown later in any place in the file by simply writing codice_6 and adding more content to it, as the following snippet illustrates (codice_13 is added by the document formatter for readability, and is not in the code).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pre/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRecord of the train of thought.\nThe documentation for a literate program is produced as part of writing the program. Instead of comments provided as side notes to source code a literate program contains the explanation of concepts on each level, with lower level concepts deferred to their appropriate place, which allows better communication of thought. The snippets of the literate codice_1 above show how an explanation of the program and its source code are interwoven. Such exposition of ideas creates the flow of thought that is like a literary work. Knuth wrote a \"novel\" which explains the code of the interactive fiction game Colossal Cave Adventure.\nLiterate programming practices.\nThe first published literate programming environment was WEB, introduced by Knuth in 1981 for his TeX typesetting system; it uses Pascal as its underlying programming language and TeX for typesetting of the documentation. The complete commented TeX source code was published in Knuth's \"TeX: The program\", volume B of his 5-volume \"Computers and Typesetting\". Knuth had privately used a literate programming system called DOC as early as 1979. He was inspired by the ideas of Pierre-Arnoul de Marneffe. The free CWEB, written by Knuth and Silvio Levy, is WEB adapted for C and C++, runs on most operating systems, and can produce TeX and PDF documentation.\nThere are various other implementations of the literate programming concept as given below. Many of the newer among these do not have macros and hence do not comply with the order of human logic principle, which makes them perhaps \"semi-literate\" tools. These, however, allow cellular execution of code which makes them more along the lines of exploratory programming tools. \nOther useful tools include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
