{"id": "19977", "revid": "51059816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19977", "title": "Maine", "text": "U.S. state\nMaine ( ) is a state in the New England region of the United States, and the northeasternmost state in the contiguous United States. It borders New Hampshire to the west, the Gulf of Maine to the southeast, and the Canadian provinces of New Brunswick and Quebec to the northeast and northwest, and shares a maritime border with Nova Scotia. It is the only state to border only one other state, which is New Hampshire. Maine is the largest state in New England by total area, almost as large as the combined area of the remaining five states. Of the 50 U.S. states, it is the 12th-smallest by area, the 9th-least populous, the 13th-least densely populated, and the most rural. As of 2024, Maine's population stood at a Census-estimated 1,405,012, the state's highest-ever population estimate. Maine's capital is Augusta, while its most populous city is Portland.\nThe territory of Maine has been inhabited by Indigenous populations for about 12,000 years, after the glaciers retreated during the last ice age. At the time of European arrival, several Algonquian-speaking nations governed the area and these nations are now known as the Wabanaki Confederacy. The first European settlement in the area was by the French in 1604 on Saint Croix Island, founded by Pierre Dugua, Sieur de Mons. The first English settlement was the short-lived Popham Colony, established by the Plymouth Company in 1607. A number of Irish and English settlements were established along the coast of Maine in the 1620s, although the rugged climate and conflict with the local Indigenous people caused many to fail. As Maine entered the 18th century, only a half dozen European settlements had survived. Loyalist and Patriot forces contended for Maine's territory during the American Revolution. During the War of 1812, the largely undefended eastern region of Maine was occupied by British forces with the goal of annexing it to Canada via the Colony of New Ireland, but returned to the United States following failed British offensives on the northern border, mid-Atlantic and south which produced a peace treaty that restored the pre-war boundaries. Maine was part of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts until 1820 when it voted to secede from Massachusetts to become a separate state. On March 15, 1820, under the Missouri Compromise, Maine was admitted to the Union as the 23rd state.\nToday, Maine is known for its jagged, rocky Atlantic Ocean and bay-shore coastlines, mountains, heavily forested interior, and its cuisine, particularly wild lowbush blueberries and seafood such as lobster and clams. Coastal and Down East Maine have emerged as important centers for the creative economy, especially in the vicinity of Portland, which has also brought gentrification to the city and its metropolitan area.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe earliest known inhabitants of the territory that is now Maine were Algonquian-speaking Wabanaki peoples, including the Passamaquoddy, Maliseet, Penobscot, Androscoggin, and Kennebec. During the later King Philip's War, many of these peoples would merge in one form or another to become the Wabanaki Confederacy, aiding the Wampanoag of Massachusetts and the Mahican of New York. Afterwards, many of these people were driven from their natural territories, but most of Maine's tribes continued, unchanged, until the American Revolution. Before this point, however, most of these people were considered separate nations. Many had adapted to living in permanent, Iroquois-inspired settlements, while those along the coast tended to move from summer villages to winter villages on a yearly cycle. They would usually winter inland and head to the coasts by summer.\nEuropean contact with what is now called Maine may have started around 1000 CE when Vikings are believed to have interacted with the native Penobscot in present-day Hancock County, most likely through trade. If confirmed, this would make Maine the site of the earliest European discovery in the entire US. About 200 years earlier, from the settlements in Iceland and Greenland, the Norse first identified America and attempted to settle areas such as Newfoundland, but failed to establish a permanent settlement. Archeological evidence suggests that Vikings in Greenland returned to North America for several centuries after the initial discovery to trade and collect timber, with the most relevant evidence being the Maine Penny, an 11th-century Norwegian coin found at a Native American dig site in 1954.\nThe first European confirmed settlement in modern-day Maine was in 1604 on Saint Croix Island, led by French explorer Pierre Dugua, Sieur de Mons. His party included Samuel de Champlain, noted as an explorer. The French named the entire area Acadia, including the portion that later became the state of Maine. (It is possible that they named the region Maine after the French province; however, debate exists as to the origin of the name of the state.) The Plymouth Company established the first English settlement in Maine at the Popham Colony in 1607, the same year as the settlement at Jamestown, Virginia. The Popham colonists returned to Britain after 14 months.\nThe French established two Jesuit missions: one on Penobscot Bay in 1609, and the other on Mount Desert Island in 1613. The same year, Claude de La Tour established Castine. In 1625, Charles de Saint-\u00c9tienne de la Tour erected Fort Pentagouet to protect Castine. The coastal areas of eastern Maine first became the Province of Maine in a 1622 land patent. The part of western Maine north of the Kennebec River was more sparsely settled and was known in the 17th century as the Territory of Sagadahock. A second settlement was attempted in 1623 by English explorer and naval Captain Christopher Levett at a place called York, where he had been granted by King Charles I of England. It also failed.\nThe 1622 patent of the Province of Maine was split at the Piscataqua River into the Province of New Hampshire to the south and New Somersetshire to the north. A disputed 1630 patent split off the area around present-day Saco as Lygonia. Justifying its actions with a 1652 geographic survey that showed an overlapping patent, the Massachusetts Bay Colony had seized New Somersetshire and Lygonia by force by 1658. The Territory of Sagadahock between the Kennebec River and St. Croix River notionally became Cornwall County, Province of New York under a 1664 grant from Charles II of England to his brother James, at the time the Duke of York. Some of this land was claimed by New France as part of Acadia. All of the English settlements in the Massachusetts Bay Colony and the Province of New York became part of the Dominion of New England in 1686. All of present-day Maine was unified as York County, Massachusetts under a 1691 royal patent for the Province of Massachusetts Bay.\nCentral Maine was formerly inhabited by the Androscoggin tribe of the Abenaki nation, also known as Arosaguntacook. They were driven out of the area in 1690 during King William's War. They were relocated to St. Francis, Canada, which was destroyed by Rogers' Rangers in 1759, and is now Odanak. The other Abenaki tribes suffered several severe defeats, particularly during Dummer's War, with the capture of Norridgewock in 1724 and the defeat of the Pequawket in 1725, which significantly reduced their numbers. They finally withdrew to Canada, where they were settled at B\u00e9cancour and Sillery, and later at St. Francis, along with other refugee tribes from the south.\nMaine was much fought over by the French, English, and allied natives during the 17th and 18th centuries. These natives conducted raids against settlers and each other, taking captives for ransom or, in some cases, kidnapped for adoption by native tribes. A notable example was the early 1692 Abenaki raid on York, where about 100 English settlers were killed and another estimated 80 taken hostage. The Abenaki took captives taken during raids of Massachusetts in Queen Anne's War of the early 1700s to Kahnewake, a Catholic Mohawk village near Montreal, where some were adopted and others ransomed.\nAfter the British defeated the French in Acadia in the 1740s, the territory from the Penobscot River east fell under the nominal authority of the Province of Nova Scotia, and together with present-day New Brunswick formed the Nova Scotia county of Sunbury, with its court of general sessions at Campobello. American and British forces contended for Maine's territory during the American Revolution and the War of 1812, with the British occupying eastern Maine in both conflicts via the Colony of New Ireland. The territory of Maine was confirmed as part of Massachusetts when the United States was formed following the Treaty of Paris ending the revolution, although the final border with British North America was not established until the Webster\u2013Ashburton Treaty of 1842.\nMaine was physically separate from the rest of Massachusetts. Longstanding disagreements over land speculation and settlements led to Maine residents and their allies in Massachusetts proper forcing an 1807 vote in the Massachusetts Assembly on permitting Maine to secede; the vote failed. Secessionist sentiment in Maine was stoked during the War of 1812 when Massachusetts pro-British merchants opposed the war and refused to defend Maine from British invaders. In 1819, Massachusetts agreed to permit secession, sanctioned by voters of the rapidly growing region the following year.\nStatehood and Missouri Compromise.\nFormal secession from Massachusetts and admission of Maine as the 23rd state occurred on March 15, 1820, as part of the Missouri Compromise, which geographically restricted the spread of slavery and enabled the admission to statehood of Missouri the following year, keeping a balance between slave and free states.\nMaine's original state capital was Portland, Maine's largest city, until it was moved to the more central Augusta in 1832. The principal office of the Maine Supreme Judicial Court remains in Portland.\nThe 20th Maine Volunteer Infantry Regiment, under the command of Colonel Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain, prevented the Union Army from being flanked at Little Round Top by the Confederate Army during the Battle of Gettysburg.\nFour U.S. Navy ships have been named USS \"Maine\", most famously the armored cruiser , whose sinking by an explosion on February 15, 1898, precipitated the Spanish\u2013American War.\nPolitical History.\nMany notable politicians have shaped the history of Maine, including many notable senators. During the 19th century, Hannibal Hamlin, who served as Senator and briefly Governor, was the running mate of Republican, Abraham Lincoln, and served one term as vice-president from 1861 to 1865 before being replaced by Andrew Johnson of Tennessee, while Senator and Congressman, James G. Blaine, nicknamed the \" Plumed Knight \", served many top positions such as Speaker of the House and Secretary of State. He was the major Republican candidate in the 1884 United States presidential election, losing narrowly to Grover Cleveland. In the 20th century, Republican, Margaret Chase Smith made history as the first woman to serve in both the House and Senate, when elected in 1948. In 1950, she delivered her famed Declaration of Conscience speech, that defended civil liberties in the wake of McCarthyism, while Democrat Edmund Muskie, who served as Governor and Senator, was the running mate of vice-president incumbent, Hubert Humphrey in 1968 United States presidential election and briefly served as Secretary of State in 1980 under Jimmy Carter.\nGeography.\nTo the south and east is the Gulf of Maine, and to the west is the state of New Hampshire. The Canadian province of New Brunswick is to the north and northeast, and the province of Quebec is to the northwest. Maine is the northernmost and largest state in New England, accounting for almost half of the region's entire land area. Maine is the only state to border exactly one other American state. Approximately half the area of Maine lies on each side of the 45th parallel north in latitude.\nMaine is the easternmost state in the contiguous United States both in its extreme points and its geographic center. The town of Lubec is the easternmost organized settlement in the United States. Its Quoddy Head Lighthouse is also the closest place in the United States to Africa and Europe. Estcourt Station is Maine's northernmost point, as well as the northernmost point in New England. (For more information see extreme points of the United States)\nMaine's Moosehead Lake is the largest lake wholly in New England, since Lake Champlain is located between Vermont, New York, and Quebec. A number of other Maine lakes, such as South Twin Lake, are described by Thoreau in \"The Maine Woods\" (1864). Mount Katahdin is the northern terminus of the Appalachian Trail, which extends southerly to Springer Mountain, Georgia, and the southern terminus of the new International Appalachian Trail which, when complete, will run to Belle Isle, Newfoundland and Labrador.\nMachias Seal Island and North Rock, off the state's Downeast coast, are claimed by both Canada and the Maine town of Cutler, and are within one of four areas between the two countries whose sovereignty is still in dispute, but it is the only one of the disputed areas containing land. Also in this easternmost area in the Bay of Fundy is the Old Sow, the largest tidal whirlpool in the Western Hemisphere.\nMaine is the least densely populated state east of the Mississippi River. It is called the Pine Tree State due to its largest distribution and presence of pine, including Pinus strobus and Pinus resinosa. Over 80% of its total area is forested or unclaimed, the most forest cover of any U.S. state. In the wooded areas of the interior lies much uninhabited land, some of which does not have formal political organization into local units (a rarity in New England). The Northwest Aroostook unorganized territory in the northern part of the state, for example, has an area of and a population of 10, or one person for every .\nMaine is in the temperate broadleaf and mixed forests biome. The land near the southern and central Atlantic coast is covered by the mixed oaks of the Northeastern coastal forests. The remainder of the state, including the North Woods, is covered by the New England\u2013Acadian forests.\nMaine has almost of ocean coastline (and of tidal coastline). West Quoddy Head in Lubec is the easternmost point of land in the 48 contiguous states. Along the famous rock-bound coast of Maine are lighthouses, beaches, fishing villages, and thousands of offshore islands, including the Isles of Shoals which straddle the New Hampshire border. There are jagged rocks and cliffs and many bays and inlets. Inland are lakes, rivers, forests, and mountains. This visual contrast of forested slopes sweeping down to the sea has been summed up by American poet Edna St. Vincent Millay of Rockland and Camden, in \"Renascence\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nGeologists describe this type of landscape as a \"drowned coast\", where a rising sea level has invaded former land features, creating bays out of valleys and islands out of mountain tops. A rise in land elevation due to the melting of heavy glacier ice caused a slight rebounding effect of underlying rock; this land rise, however, was not enough to eliminate all the effect of the rising sea level and its invasion of former land features.\nMuch of Maine's geomorphology was created by extended glacial activity at the end of the last ice age. Prominent glacial features include Somes Sound and Bubble Rock, both part of Acadia National Park on Mount Desert Island. Carved by glaciers, Somes Sound reaches depths of . The extreme depth and steep drop-off allow large ships to navigate almost the entire length of the sound. These features also have made it attractive for boat builders, such as the prestigious Hinckley Yachts.\nBubble Rock, a glacial erratic, is a large boulder perched on the edge of Bubble Mountain in Acadia National Park. By analyzing the type of granite, geologists discovered that glaciers carried Bubble Rock to its present location from near Lucerne, away. The Iapetus Suture runs through the north and west of the state, being underlain by the ancient Laurentian terrane, and the south and east underlain by the Avalonian terrane.\nAcadia National Park is the only national park in New England. Areas under the protection and management of the National Park Service include:\nLands under the control of the state of Maine include:\nClimate.\nMaine has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfb\"), with warm and sometimes humid summers, and long, cold and very snowy winters. Winters are especially severe in the northern and western parts of Maine, while coastal areas are moderated slightly by the Atlantic Ocean, resulting in marginally milder winters and cooler summers than inland regions. Daytime highs are generally in the range throughout the state in July, with overnight lows in the high 50s\u00b0F (around 15\u00b0C). January temperatures range from highs near on the southern coast to overnight lows averaging below in the far north.\nThe state's record high temperature is , set in July 1911, at North Bridgton.\nPrecipitation in Maine is evenly distributed year-round, but with a slight summer maximum in northern/northwestern Maine and a slight late-fall or early-winter maximum along the coast due to \"nor'easters\" or intense cold-season rain and snowstorms. In coastal Maine, the late spring and summer months are usually driest\u2014a rarity across the Eastern United States. Maine has fewer days of thunderstorms than any other state east of the Rockies, with most of the state averaging fewer than twenty days of thunderstorms a year. Tornadoes are rare in Maine, with the state averaging two per year, although this number is increasing. Most severe thunderstorms and tornadoes occur in the southwestern interior portion of the state, where summer temperatures are often the warmest and the atmosphere is thus more unstable compared to northern and coastal areas. Maine rarely sees the direct landfall of tropical cyclones, as they tend to recurve out to sea or are rapidly weakening by the time they reach the cooler waters of Maine.\nIn January 2009, a new record low temperature for the state was set at Big Black River of , tying the New England record.\nAnnual precipitation varies from in Presque Isle to in Acadia National Park.\nFlora and fauna.\nMaine exhibits a diverse range of flora and fauna across its varied landscapes, including forests, coastline, and wetlands. Forested areas consist primarily of coniferous and deciduous trees, such as balsam fir, sugar maple, and its state tree, the Eastern white pine. Coastal regions are characterized by hardy sea milkwort, sea-blight, bayberry, and the invasive rugosa rose.\nMaine's terrestrial fauna comprises mammals such as moose, black bears, and white-tailed deer, along with smaller species like red squirrels, snowshoe hares, and raccoons. Maine has the largest populations of moose and black bears in the contiguous United States. Avian diversity is evident with migratory birds like piping plovers, American oystercatcher, and northern harrier, as well as resident species like black-capped chickadees, blue jays, and barred owls. Wetlands provide habitat for amphibians such as spotted salamanders, wood frogs, and toads. Freshwater habitats support fish species like brook trout, landlocked salmon, and multiple gamefish. The rivers of central and eastern Maine are home to the US' last remaining wild populations of Atlantic salmon (\"Salmo salar\"). Marine life in offshore waters includes Atlantic puffins, harbor seals, minke whales, and lobster. Maine's abundance of lobster makes the state the largest producer of lobster in the United States.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe U.S. Census Bureau estimates that the population of Maine was 1,344,212 on July 1, 2019, a 1.19% increase since the 2010 United States census. At the 2020 census, 1,362,359 people lived in the state. The state's population density is 41.3 people per square mile, making it the least densely populated state east of the Mississippi River. As of 2010, Maine was also the most rural state in the Union, with only 38.7% of the state's population living within urban areas. As explained in detail under \"Geography\", there are large tracts of uninhabited land in some remote parts of the interior of the state, particularly in the North Maine Woods.\nThe mean population center of Maine is located in Kennebec County, just east of Augusta. The Greater Portland metropolitan area is the most densely populated with nearly 40% of Maine's population. This area spans three counties and includes many farms and wooded areas; the 2016 population of Portland proper was 66,937.\nMaine has experienced a very slow rate of population growth since the 1990 census; its rate of growth (0.57%) since the 2010 census ranks 45th of the 50 states. In 2021 and 2022, however, Maine had the highest proportion of arriving residents to departing residents of any state in the country, with 1.8 arrivals for every departure. The modest population growth in the state has been concentrated in the southern coastal counties; with more diverse populations slowly moving into these areas of the state. However, the northern, more rural areas of the state have experienced a slight decline in population from 2010 to 2016.\nAs of 2020, Maine has the highest population age 65 or older in the United States.\nAccording to the 2010 census, Maine has the highest percentage of non-Hispanic White of any state, at 94.4% of the total population. In 2011, 89.0% of all births in the state were to non-Hispanic White parents. Maine also has the second-highest residential senior population.\nAccording to HUD's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 4,411 homeless people in Maine.\nRace and ethnicity.\nThe table below shows the racial and ethnic composition of Maine's population as of 2016.\nAccording to the 2016 American Community Survey, 1.5% of Maine's population were of Hispanic or Latino origin (of any race): Mexican (0.4%), Puerto Rican (0.4%), Cuban (0.1%), and other Hispanic or Latino origin (0.6%). The six largest ancestry groups were: English (20.7%), Irish (17.3%), French (15.7%), German (8.1%), American (7.8%) and French Canadian (7.7%).\nPeople citing that they are American are of overwhelmingly English descent, but have ancestry that has been in the region for so long (often since the 17th century) that they choose to identify simply as Americans.\nMaine has the highest percentage of French Americans of any state. Most of them are of Canadian origin, but in some cases have been living there since prior to the American Revolutionary War. There are particularly high concentrations in the northern part of Maine in Aroostook County, which is part of a cultural region known as Acadia that goes over the border into New Brunswick. Along with the Acadian population in the north, many French-Canadians came from Quebec as immigrants between 1840 and 1930.\nThe upper Saint John River valley area was once part of the so-called Republic of Madawaska, before the frontier was decided in the Webster-Ashburton Treaty of 1842. Over a quarter of the population of Lewiston, Waterville, and Biddeford are Franco-American. Most of the residents of the Mid Coast and Down East sections are chiefly of British heritage. Smaller numbers of various other groups, including Irish, Italian, Swedish and Polish, have settled throughout the state since the late 19th and early 20th century immigration waves.\nToday there are four federally recognized tribes in Maine, including the Mi'kmaq Nation. In 2020, 7,885 identified as being Native American alone, and 25,617 did in combination with one or more other races.\nBirth data.\n\"Note: Births in table do not sum to 100% because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race.\"\nIn 2018, the top countries of origin for Maine's immigrants were Canada, the Philippines, Germany, India and Korea.\nLanguage.\nMaine does not have an official language, but the most widely spoken language in the state is English. The 2010 census reported 92.91% of Maine residents aged five and older spoke only English at home. French-speakers are the state's chief linguistic minority; census figures show that Maine has the highest percentage of people speaking French at home of any state: 3.93% of Maine households are French-speaking, compared with 3.45% (including Cajun and Creole) in Louisiana, which is the second highest state. Spanish is the third-most-common language in Maine, after English and French.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the Pew Research Center in 2014, the religious affiliations of Maine were: Protestant 37% (in particular: Evangelical Protestant 14%, Mainline Protestant 21%, Historical Black Protestant 2%), Atheism or Agnosticism 6%, Nothing in Particular 26%, Roman Catholic Church 21%, other Christians 5%, non-Christian religions including Hinduism, Islam, Buddhism and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed 7%, and Pagans and Unitarians 5%.\nIn 2014, the Roman Catholic Church was the largest religious denomination and the Baptists (7% Evangelical and 5% Mainline) were the state's largest Protestant denomination, followed by the Methodists (6%) and the Congregationalists (5%). The atheists and the agnostics are only 6% of the state, but 26% of Mainers said that they \"Believe in God but they are Unaffiliated.\" Eighty-one percent of Mainers believed in God, while 3% did not know and 16% did not believe in God. Thirty-four percent of Mainers thought that religion was \"very important\" and 29% said that it was \"important\", while 21% said that religion was not important.\nAccording to a survey through the Public Religion Research Institute in 2020, approximately 62% of the population were Christian; the religiously unaffiliated slightly increased to 33% from the separate 2014 study by the Pew Research Center. In a 2022 study by the Public Religion Research Institute, 63% of the population were Christian, and 30% were religiously unaffiliated. Among the non-Christian population in 2022, 1% were Unitarian Universalist, 5% Jewish, and 1% New Ager.\nAccording to the Association of Religion Data Archives in 2020, with Christianity as the dominant faith, the largest denominations by number of adherents were Catholicism (219,233 members), non-denominational Protestantism (45,364), and United Methodists (19,686). According to the same study, there were an estimated 16,894 Muslims in the state.\nEconomy.\nTotal employment (May 2024):\nTotal employer establishments (2021):\nMaine's total gross state product was $91.1 billion in 2023. The state's per capita personal income for 2023 was $63,117, ranking 30th in the nation, and its median gross income was $69,543. As of December\u00a02024[ [update]], Maine's unemployment rate is 3.2%. As of January\u00a02025[ [update]], Maine's minimum wage is $14.65.\nCommercial fishing, once a mainstay of the state's economy, maintains a presence, particularly lobstering and groundfishing. While lobster is the main seafood focus for Maine, the harvest of both oysters and seaweed are on the rise. In 2015, 14% of the Northeast's total oyster supply came from Maine. The shrimp industry of Maine is on a government-mandated hold. With an ever-decreasing Northern shrimp population, Maine fishermen are no longer allowed to catch and sell shrimp. The hold began in 2014, but a pilot program allowing limited shrimp fishing began in 2025. Western Maine aquifers and springs are a source of bottled water for companies like Poland Spring.\nMaine's industrial outputs consist chiefly of paper, lumber and wood products, electronic equipment, leather products, food products, textiles, and bio-technology. Naval shipbuilding and construction remain key as well, with Bath Iron Works in Bath and Portsmouth Naval Shipyard in Kittery.\nBrunswick Landing, formerly Naval Air Station Brunswick, is also in Maine. Formerly a large support base for the U.S. Navy, the BRAC campaign initiated the Naval Air Station's closing, despite a government-funded effort to upgrade its facilities. The former base has since been changed into a civilian business park, as well as a new satellite campus for Southern Maine Community College.\nHistorically, Maine ports played a key role in national transportation. Beginning around 1880, Portland's rail link and ice-free port made it Canada's principal winter port, until the aggressive development of Halifax, Nova Scotia in the mid-20th century. In 2013, 12,039,600 short tons passed into and out of Portland by sea, which places it 45th of U.S. water ports. Portland International Jetport has been expanded, providing the state with increased air traffic from carriers such as JetBlue and Southwest Airlines.\nMaine has very few large companies that maintain headquarters in the state, and that number has fallen due to consolidations and mergers, particularly in the pulp and paper industry. Some of the larger companies that do maintain headquarters in Maine include Covetrus in Portland; Fairchild Semiconductor in South Portland; IDEXX Laboratories in Westbrook; Hannaford Bros. Co. in Scarborough; L.L.Bean in Freeport; and Puritan Medical Products in Guilford. \nTourism.\nTourism and outdoor recreation play a major and increasingly important role in Maine's economy. In 2023, 15,267,000 visitors spent more than $9 billion in Maine. An estimated 14% of the housing stock in Maine is used as vacation homes. In the late 19th century, artist colonies developed in Oqunquit and on Monhegan. Acadia National Park became part of the national park system in 1929. The park is one of the most popular national parks in the United States. It attracts more than 4 million visitors each year. In 2024, visitors spent $475 million in the Bar Harbor area where the park is located. The flagship L.L. Bean store in Freeport attracts more than 3 million visitors each year.\nSummer visitors and tourism began before the Civil War. After the Civil War, the number of visitors increased significantly. This was when a growing urban middle class wanted to leave cities in the summer to seek Maine's coast, lakes, woods, and mountains. Maine's fresh air, pure water, and local food were additional attractions. \nMany notable persons have drawn attention to Maine's natural attractions. In 1846, Henry David Thoreau came to Maine to climb Katahdin and came back two more times to explore other trails and waterways. His book \"The Maine Woods\" was published in 1864 recounting his journeys in Maine. As early as 1878, Theodore Roosevelt visited Maine. Roosevelt explored what is now designated the Katahdin Woods and Waters National Monument with legendary Maine guide William Wingate Sewall and stayed at the William Sewall House. American businessman William Henry Vanderbilt first vacationed with his family in Bar Harbor in the early 1880s. In 1910, businessman John D. Rockefeller Jr. purchased a summer home in Seal Harbor and later spent $3.5 million developing the Carriage Roads of what is now Acadia National Park. In 1997, TV personality and businesswomen Martha Stewart purchased Skylands in Seal Harbor, featuring the estate regularly in national media outlets.\nThe state is a popular destination for sport hunting (particularly deer, moose, and bear), sport fishing, snowmobiling, skiing, boating, camping and hiking, among other activities.\nCreative economy &amp; the arts.\nMaine has developed a burgeoning creative economy, most notably centered in the Greater Portland vicinity. In 2022, Portland's nonprofit arts and culture industry generated $86 million in economic activity, according to a survey by Americans for the Arts. The foundation of Maine's creative economy is its long tradition of fine arts. It also includes craftsmen, historic sites, museums, and cultural attractions.\nAgriculture.\nMaine's agricultural outputs include potatoes, poultry, eggs, dairy products, cattle, wild blueberries, apples, maple syrup, maple sugar, and seaweed. Aroostook County is known for its potato crops. Potatoes make the state $166,672,000 a year. Maine is the top U.S. producer of low-bush blueberries. Preliminary data from the USDA for 2012 also indicate Maine was the largest blueberry producer of the major blueberry producing states, with a total production of 91,100,000 lbs. This data includes both low (wild) and high-bush (cultivated) blueberries. In 2017, the production of Maine's seaweed industry was estimated at $20\u00a0million per year. In 2022, Maine seaweed farmers harvested over 1 million pounds of seaweed, which was predicted to rise to 4.1 million pounds by 2025. Sixty percent of American seaweed comes from Maine. Maine is home to the Maine Organic Farmers and Gardeners Association and had 535 certified organic farms in 2019.\nShipbuilding.\nMaine has a long-standing tradition of being home to many shipbuilding companies, such as Bath Iron Works and the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard. In the 18th and 19th centuries, Maine was home to many shipyards that produced wooden sailing ships. The main function of these ships was to transport either cargos or passengers overseas. One of these yards was located in Pennellville Historic District in what is now Brunswick, Maine. This yard, owned by the Pennell family, was typical of the many family-owned shipbuilding companies of the time period. Other such examples of shipbuilding families were the Skolfields and the Morses. During the 18th and 19th centuries, wooden shipbuilding of this sort made up a sizable portion of the economy.\nTaxation.\nMaine has an income tax structure containing two brackets, 6.5 and 7.95 percent of personal income. Before July 2013, Maine had four brackets: 2, 4.5, 7, and 8.5 percent. Maine's general sales tax rate is 5.5 percent. The state also levies charges of nine percent on lodging and prepared food and ten percent on short-term auto rentals. Commercial sellers of blueberries, a Maine staple, must keep records of their transactions and pay the state 1.5 cents per pound ($1.50 per 100 pounds) of the fruit sold each season. All real and tangible personal property located in the state of Maine is taxable unless specifically exempted by statute. The administration of property taxes is handled by the local assessor in incorporated cities and towns, while property taxes in the unorganized territories are handled by the State Tax Assessor.\nTransportation.\nAirports.\nMaine receives passenger jet service at its two largest airports, the Portland International Jetport in Portland, and the Bangor International Airport in Bangor. Both are served daily by many major airlines to destinations such as New York, Atlanta, and Orlando. Essential Air Service also subsidizes service to a number of smaller airports in Maine, bringing small turboprop aircraft to regional airports such as the Augusta State Airport, Hancock County-Bar Harbor Airport, Knox County Regional Airport, and the Northern Maine Regional Airport at Presque Isle. These airports are served by regional providers such as Cape Air with Cessna 402s, and CommutAir with Embraer ERJ-145 aircraft.\nMany smaller airports are scattered throughout Maine, serving only general aviation traffic. The Eastport Municipal Airport, for example, is a city-owned public-use airport with 1,200 general aviation aircraft operations each year from single-engine and ultralight aircraft.\nHighways.\nInterstate95 (I-95) travels through Maine, as well as its easterly branch I-295 and spurs I-195, I-395 and the unsigned I-495 (the Falmouth Spur). In addition, U.S. Route1 (US1) starts in Fort Kent and travels to Florida. The eastern terminus of the eastern section of US2 starts in Houlton, near the New Brunswick, Canada border to Rouses Point, New York, at US11. US2A connects Old Town and Orono, primarily serving the University of Maine campus. US201 and US202 flow through the state. US2, Maine State Route\u00a06 (SR6), and SR9 are often used by truckers and other motorists of the Maritime Provinces \"en route\" to other destinations in the United States or as a short cut to Central Canada.\nRail.\nPassenger.\nThe \"Downeaster\" passenger train, operated by Amtrak, provides passenger service between Brunswick and Boston's North Station, with stops in Freeport, Portland, Old Orchard Beach, Saco, and Wells. The \"Downeaster\" makes five daily trips.\nFreight.\nFreight service throughout the state is provided by a handful of regional and shortline carriers: Pan Am Railways (formerly known as Guilford Rail System), which operates the former Boston and Maine and Maine Central railroads; St. Lawrence and Atlantic Railroad; Maine Eastern Railroad; Central Maine and Quebec Railway; and New Brunswick Southern Railway.\nShipping.\nCargo.\nThe International Marine Terminal in Portland provides shipping container transport. In 2021 an estimated 36,700 shipping containers moved through the terminal. In 2017, a total of 17,515 shipping containers were transported. The Icelandic shipping company Eimskip opened its United States headquarters in Portland in 2013. Its ships stop in Portland once a week in a route that includes Atlantic Canada and Iceland with connections to northern Europe and Asia. In 2015, the terminal moved 10,500 containers. The Maine Port Authority in 2016 began a $15.5 million expansion and improvement of the terminal. The Maine Port Authority leased the International Marine Terminal from the city of Portland in 2009.\nLaw and government.\nThe Maine Constitution structures Maine's state government, composed of three co-equal branches\u2014the executive, legislative, and judicial branches. The state of Maine also has three Constitutional Officers (the Secretary of State, the State Treasurer, and the State Attorney General) and one Statutory Officer (the State Auditor).\nThe legislative branch is the Maine Legislature, a bicameral body composed of the Maine House of Representatives, with 151 members, and the Maine Senate, with 35 members. The Legislature is charged with introducing and passing laws.\nThe executive branch is headed by the Governor of Maine (currently Janet Mills). The Governor is elected every four years; no individual may serve more than two consecutive terms in this office. The current attorney general of Maine is Aaron Frey. As with other state legislatures, the Maine Legislature can by a two-thirds majority vote from both the House and Senate override a gubernatorial veto. Maine is one of seven states that do not have a lieutenant governor.\nThe highest court in the state's judicial branch is the Maine Supreme Judicial Court. The lower courts are the District Court, Superior Court and Probate Court. All judges except for probate judges serve full-time, are nominated by the Governor, and confirmed by the Legislature for terms of seven years. Probate judges serve part-time and are elected by the voters of each county for four-year terms.\nIn a 2020 study, Maine was ranked as the 14th easiest state for citizens to vote in. In 2012, Maine became one of the first U.S. states to establish marriage rights for same-sex couples.\nPolitics.\nMaine politics are dynamic in nature, with parties loosely hung together, governors often winning by pluralities rather than majorities, and significant turnover both in members and parties in legislative districts. In his 2010 article \"Maine's Paradoxical Politics\", Kenneth Palmer suggests that \"Maine's political leaders find themselves as centrists, primarily because they want to find practical solutions to difficult problems.\"\nThe results of the elections are often varied. Maine is seen as a blue-leaning swing state, with unusually high support for independent candidates. The Republican Party has won Maine in 11 out of the past 20 presidential elections, and the governorship has been won by Democrats and independents three times each, and Republicans four times, since 1974.\nMaine uses ranked choice voting in primary elections for state and federal offices, as well as in general elections for federal offices. Ranked choice voting was adopted by voters in a 2016 referendum.\nCounties.\nMaine is divided into political jurisdictions designated as counties. Since 1860 there have been 16 counties in the state, ranging in size from .\nMunicipalities.\nOrganized municipalities.\nAn organized municipality has a form of elected local government which administers and provides local services, keeps records, collects licensing fees, and can pass locally binding ordinances, among other responsibilities of self-government. The governmental format of most organized towns and plantations is the town meeting, while the format of most cities is the council-manager form. As of 2022[ [update]] the organized municipalities of Maine consist of 23 cities, 430 towns, and 30 plantations. Collectively these 483 organized municipalities cover less than half of the state's territory. Maine also has three Reservations: Indian Island, Indian Township Reservation, and Pleasant Point Indian Reservation.\nUnorganized territory.\nUnorganized territory (UT) has no local government. Administration, services, licensing, and ordinances are handled by the state government as well as by respective county governments who have townships within each county's bounds. The unorganized territory of Maine consists of more than 400 townships (in Maine, towns are incorporated, townships are unincorporated), plus many coastal islands that do not lie within any municipal bounds. The UT land area is slightly over half the entire area of the State of Maine. Year-round residents in the UT number approximately 9,000 (about 1.3% of the state's total population), with many more people staying there only seasonally. Only four of Maine's sixteen counties (Androscoggin, Cumberland, Waldo and York) are entirely incorporated, although a few others are nearly so, and most of the unincorporated area is in the vast and sparsely populated Great North Woods of Maine.\nMost populous cities and towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThroughout Maine, many municipalities, although each separate governmental entities, nevertheless form portions of a much larger population base. There are many such population clusters throughout Maine, but some examples from the municipalities appearing in the above listing are:\nEducation.\nThere are thirty institutions of higher learning in Maine. These institutions include the University of Maine, which is the oldest, largest and only research university in the state. UMaine was founded in 1865 and is the state's only land grant and sea grant college. The University of Maine is located in the town of Orono and is the flagship of Maine. There are also branch campuses in Augusta, Farmington, Fort Kent, Machias, and Presque Isle.\nBowdoin College is a liberal arts college founded in 1794 in Brunswick, making it the oldest institution of higher learning in the state. Colby College in Waterville was founded in 1813 making it the second oldest college in Maine. Bates College in Lewiston was founded in 1855 making it the third oldest institution in the state and the oldest coeducational college in New England. The three colleges collectively form the Colby-Bates-Bowdoin Consortium and are ranked among the best colleges in the United States; often placing in the top 10% of all liberal arts colleges.\nMaine's per-student public expenditure for elementary and secondary schools was 21st in the nation in 2012, at $12,344.\nThe collegiate system of Maine also includes numerous baccalaureate colleges such as: the Maine Maritime Academy (MMA), College of the Atlantic, Unity Environmental University, and Thomas College. There is only one medical school in the state, (University of New England's College of Osteopathic Medicine) and only one law school (The University of Maine School of Law). There is one art school in the state, Maine College of Art, along with a private graduate school, Institute for Doctoral Studies in the Visual Arts, which offers a Doctor of Philosophy to visual artists.\nThe Maine Community College System, founded in 1985 also serves \"to provide associate degree, diploma and certificate programs directed at the educational, career and technical needs of the State's citizens and the workforce needs of the State's employers.\" This system includes Southern Maine Community College (SMCC), York County Community College (YCCC), Central Maine Community College (CMCC), Eastern Maine Community College (EMCC), Kennebec Valley Community College (KVCC), Northern Maine Community College (NMCC), and Washington County Community College (WCCC).\nPrivate schools in Maine are funded independently of the state and its furthered domains. Private schools are less common than public schools. A large number of private elementary schools with under 20 students exist, but most private high schools in Maine can be described as \"semi-private\".\nMaine also has Vocational Schools, such as the Biddeford Regional Center of Technology and Sanford Regional Technical Center that teach trades such as welding, construction and vehicle repair to students.\nCulture.\nAgriculture.\nFarms and farming constitute a large part of Maine's history, heritage, and culture. Family farms, homesteads, and backyard gardens are common features of the Maine landscape.\nHistorically, Maine was a center of agriculture before it achieved statehood. Prior to colonization, Wabanaki nations farmed large crops of corn and other produce in southern Maine. Maine was a center of grain production in the 1800s, until grain production moved westward. However, in the early 2000s the local food movement spurred renewed interested in locally grown grains. In 2007, the Kneading Conference was founded. In, 2012, the Skowhegan grist mill Maine Grains opened. The revival of grain farming and milling in Maine has led to the creation of other businesses, including bakeries and malthouses.\nMaine has many vegetable farms and other small, diversified farms. In the 1960s and 1970s, the book \"Living the Good Life\" by Helen Nearing and Scott Nearing caused many young people to move to Maine and engage in small-scale farming and homesteading. These back-to-the-land migrants increased the population of some counties.\nFestivals.\nMaine has multiple fairs and festivals that are held annually. These events include La Kermesse, a celebration of the state's French and French Canadian heritage, the Acadia Night Sky Festival, a festival of the starlit sky, the Great Falls Balloon Festival, a festival of hot air balloons, the Christmas Prelude festival in Kennebunkport, and a number of Portland Food Festivals. Maine is home to 25 agricultural fairs that include the Fryeburg Fair, the Cumberland Fair, the Union Fair, and the Common Ground Country Fair. There are a number of Old Home Days festivals, including the Yarmouth Clam Festival.\nFood.\nAlong with the growth of the local food movement over the last several decades, Maine has received national recognition for its food and restaurant scene. Portland was named \"Bon Appetit\" magazine's Restaurant City of the Year in 2018. In 2018, HealthIQ.com named Maine the 3rd most vegan-friendly state. Biddeford was selected by Food &amp; Wine in 2022 as one of America's next great food cities.\nMaine food shares many ingredients with Wabanaki cuisine, including corn, beans, squash, wild blueberries, maple syrup, fish, and seafood. By 1902, the Maine Italian sandwich had been invented in Portland. Sandwich shops across Maine serve the sandwiches. Baked beans are a common dish in Maine, served at community suppers where the beans are sometimes cooked underground in a bean hole. In New England, Maine baked beans are one of two well-known regional styles of baked beans, the other being Boston baked beans. Maine baked beans use thicker skinned, native bean varieties such like Marafax, soldier, and yellow-eye beans. From 1913 until 2021, baked beans were canned on the Portland waterfront at the B&amp;M Baked Beans factory.\nTerminology.\nMaine maintains some vernacular and terminology that is unique in comparison to the rest of the country. Some of these include:\nPeople from Maine.\nCitizens of Maine are often known as Mainers. The term Downeaster may be applied to residents of the northeast coast of the state. The term Mainiac is considered by some to be derogatory, but is embraced with pride by others, and is used for a variety of organizations and for events such as the YMCA Mainiac Sprint Triathlon &amp; Duathlon.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19978", "revid": "44227202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19978", "title": "Montana", "text": "U.S. state\nMontana ( ) is a landlocked state in the Mountain West subregion of the Western United States. It is bordered by Idaho to the west, North Dakota to the east, South Dakota to the southeast, Wyoming to the south, and the Canadian provinces of Alberta, British Columbia, and Saskatchewan to the north. It is the fourth-largest state by area, but the eighth-least populous state and the third-least densely populated state. Its capital is Helena, while the most populous city is Billings. The western half of the state contains numerous mountain ranges, while the eastern half is characterized by western prairie terrain and badlands, with smaller mountain ranges found throughout the state.\nMost of Montana first came under American sovereignty with the Louisiana Purchase from France in 1803 and was explored by the Lewis and Clark Expedition shortly thereafter. Fur trappers followed and were the main economic activity in the area until gold was discovered in 1852. The ensuing gold rush, along with the passage of the Homestead Acts in 1862, brought large numbers of American settlers to Montana. Rapid population growth and development culminated in statehood on November 8, 1889. Mining, particularly around Butte and Helena, would remain the state's main economic engine through the mid-20th century.\nMontana has no official nickname but several unofficial ones, most notably \"Big Sky Country\", \"The Treasure State\", \"Land of the Shining Mountains\", and \"The Last Best Place\". Its economy is primarily based on agriculture, including ranching and cereal grain farming. Other significant economic resources include oil, gas, coal, mining, and lumber. The health care, service, defense, and government sectors are also significant to the state's economy. Montana's fastest-growing sector is tourism, with 12.6 million tourists visiting the state each year (as of 2019).\nEtymology.\nThe name Montana comes from the Spanish word , which in turn comes from the Latin word , meaning \"mountain\" or more broadly \"mountainous country\". ('Northern Mountain') was the name given by early Spanish explorers to the entire mountainous region of the west. The name Montana was added in 1863 to a bill by the United States House Committee on Territories (chaired at the time by James Ashley of Ohio) for the territory that would become Idaho Territory.\nThe name was changed by representatives Henry Wilson (Massachusetts) and Benjamin F. Harding (Oregon), who complained that \"Montana\" had \"no meaning\". Alternative names included Jefferson. When Ashley presented a bill to establish a temporary government in 1864 for a new territory to be carved out of Idaho, he again chose Montana Territory. This time, representative Samuel Cox, also of Ohio, objected to the name. Cox complained that the name was a misnomer given that most of the territory was not mountainous, and thought a Native American name would be more appropriate than a Spanish one. Other names, such as Shoshone, were suggested, but the Committee on Territories decided that they had discretion to choose the name, so the original name of Montana was adopted.\nHistory.\nFor thousands of years, various indigenous peoples have inhabited the land that is now Montana. Historic tribes encountered by Europeans and settlers from the United States included the Crow in the south-central area, the Cheyenne and Lakota in the southeast, the Blackfeet, Assiniboine, and Gros Ventres in the central and north-central area, and the Kootenai and Salish the (https://) in the west. The (https:// or Pend d'Oreilles) and Kalispel tribes lived near Flathead Lake and the western mountains, respectively. A part of southeastern Montana was used as a corridor between the Crows and the related Hidatsas in North Dakota.\nAs part of the Missouri River watershed, all of the land in Montana east of the Continental Divide was part of the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, except for a tiny portion in the northeast that is part of the Hudson Bay drainage. Subsequent to and particularly in the decades following the Lewis and Clark Expedition, European, Canadian and American traders operated a fur trade, trading with indigenous peoples in both western and eastern portions of the area. Though the increased interaction between fur traders and indigenous peoples frequently proved to be a profitable partnership, conflicts broke out when indigenous interests were threatened, such as the conflict between American trappers and the Blackfeet. Indigenous peoples in the region were also decimated by diseases introduced by fur traders to which they had no immunity. The trading post Fort Raymond (1807\u20131811) was constructed in Crow Indian country in 1807. Until the Oregon Treaty of 1846, land west of the continental divide was disputed between the British and U.S. governments and was known as the Oregon Country. The first permanent settlement by Euro-Americans in what today is Montana was St. Mary's, established in 1841 near present-day Stevensville. In 1847, Fort Benton was built as the uppermost fur-trading post on the Missouri River. In the 1850s, settlers began moving into the Beaverhead and Big Hole valleys from the Oregon Trail and into the Clark's Fork valley.\nThe first gold discovered in Montana was at Gold Creek near present-day Garrison in 1852. The Gold rush in the region commenced in earnest starting in 1862. A series of major mineral discoveries in the western part of the state found gold, silver, copper, lead, and coal (and later oil) which attracted tens of thousands of miners to the area. The richest of all gold placer diggings was discovered at Alder Gulch, where the town of Virginia City was established. Other rich placer deposits were found at Last Chance Gulch, where the city of Helena now stands, Confederate Gulch, Silver Bow, Emigrant Gulch, and Cooke City. Gold output between 1862 and 1876 reached $144\u00a0million, after which silver became even more important. The largest mining operations were at Butte, with important silver deposits and expansive copper deposits. Yogo sapphires are also mined in Montana.\nMontana territory.\nBefore the creation of Montana Territory (1864\u20131889), areas within present-day Montana were part of the Oregon Territory (1848\u20131859), Washington Territory (1853\u20131863), Idaho Territory (1863\u20131864), and Dakota Territory (1861\u20131864). Montana Territory became a territory of the United States on May26, 1864. The first territorial capital was located at Bannack. Sidney Edgerton served as the first territorial governor. The capital moved to Virginia City in 1865 and to Helena in 1875. In 1870, the non-Indian population of the Montana Territory was 20,595. The Montana Historical Society, founded on February2, 1865, in Virginia City, is the oldest such institution west of the Mississippi (excluding Louisiana). In 1869 and 1870 respectively, the Cook\u2013Folsom\u2013Peterson and the Washburn\u2013Langford\u2013Doane Expeditions were launched from Helena into the Upper Yellowstone region. The extraordinary discoveries and reports from these expeditions led to the creation of Yellowstone National Park in 1872.\nConflicts.\nAs settlers began populating Montana from the 1850s through the 1870s, disputes with Native Americans ensued, primarily over land ownership and control. In 1855, Washington Territorial Governor Isaac Stevens negotiated the Hellgate Treaty between the United States government and the Salish, Pend d'Oreille, and Kootenai people of western Montana, which established boundaries for the tribal nations. The treaty was ratified in 1859. While the treaty established what later became the Flathead Indian Reservation, trouble with interpreters and confusion over the terms of the treaty led settlers to believe the Bitterroot Valley was opened to settlement, but the tribal nations disputed those provisions. The Salish remained in the Bitterroot Valley until 1891.\nThe first U.S. Army post established in Montana was Camp Cooke in 1866, on the Missouri River, to protect steamboat traffic to Fort Benton. More than a dozen additional military outposts were established in the state. Pressure over land ownership and control increased due to discoveries of gold in various parts of Montana and surrounding states. Major battles occurred in Montana during Red Cloud's War, the Great Sioux War of 1876, and the Nez Perce War and in conflicts with Piegan Blackfeet. The most notable were the Marias Massacre (1870), Battle of the Little Bighorn (1876), Battle of the Big Hole (1877), and Battle of Bear Paw (1877). The last recorded conflict in Montana between the U.S. Army and Native Americans occurred in 1887 during the Battle of Crow Agency in the Big Horn country. Native survivors who had signed treaties were generally required to move onto reservations.\nSimultaneously with these conflicts, bison, a keystone species and the primary protein source that Native people had survived on for many centuries, were being destroyed. Experts estimate that around 13\u00a0million bison roamed Montana in 1870. In 1875, General Philip Sheridan pleaded to a joint session of Congress to authorize the slaughtering of bison herds to deprive Native people of their source of food. By 1884, commercial hunting had brought bison to the verge of extinction; only about 325 bison remained in the entire United States.\nCattle ranching.\nCattle ranching has been central to Montana's history and economy since Johnny Grant began wintering cattle in the Deer Lodge Valley in the 1850s and traded cattle fattened in fertile Montana valleys with emigrants on the Oregon Trail. Nelson Story brought the first Texas Longhorn cattle into the territory in 1866. Granville Stuart, Samuel Hauser, and Andrew J. Davis started a major open-range cattle operation in Fergus County in 1879. The Grant-Kohrs Ranch National Historic Site in Deer Lodge is maintained today as a link to the ranching style of the late 19th century. Operated by the National Park Service, it is a working ranch.\nRailroads.\nTracks of the Northern Pacific Railroad (NPR) reached Montana from the west in 1882 and from the east in 1883. However, the railroad played a major role in sparking tensions with Native American tribes in the 1870s. Jay Cooke, the NPR president, launched major surveys into the Yellowstone valley in 1871, 1872, and 1873, which were challenged forcefully by the Sioux under chief Sitting Bull. These clashes, in part, contributed to the Panic of 1873, a financial crisis that delayed the construction of the railroad into Montana. Surveys in 1874, 1875, and 1876 helped spark the Great Sioux War of 1876. The transcontinental NPR was completed on September 8, 1883, at Gold Creek.\nIn 1881, the Utah and Northern Railway, a branch line of the Union Pacific, completed a narrow-gauge line from northern Utah to Butte. A number of smaller spur lines operated in Montana from 1881 into the 20th century, including the Oregon Short Line, Montana Railroad, and Milwaukee Road.\nTracks of the Great Northern Railroad (GNR) reached eastern Montana in 1887 and when they reached the northern Rocky Mountains in 1890, the GNR became a significant promoter of tourism to Glacier National Park region. The transcontinental GNR was completed on January 6, 1893, at Scenic, Washington and is known as the Hi Line, being the northernmost transcontinental rail line in the United States.\nStatehood.\nUnder Territorial Governor Thomas Meagher, Montanans held a constitutional convention in 1866 in a failed bid for statehood. A second constitutional convention held in Helena in 1884 produced a constitution ratified 3:1 by Montana citizens in November 1884. For political reasons, Congress did not approve Montana statehood until February 1889 and President Grover Cleveland signed an omnibus bill granting statehood to Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Washington once the appropriate state constitutions were crafted. In July 1889, Montanans convened their third constitutional convention and produced a constitution accepted by the people and the federal government. On November 8, 1889, President Benjamin Harrison proclaimed Montana the union's 41st state. The first state governor was Joseph K. Toole. In the 1880s, Helena (the state capital) had more millionaires per capita than any other United States city.\nHomesteading.\nThe Homestead Act of 1862 provided free land to settlers who could claim and \"prove-up\" of federal land in the Midwest and western United States. Montana did not see a large influx of immigrants from this act because 160 acres were usually insufficient to support a family in the arid territory. The first homestead claim under the act in Montana was made by David Carpenter near Helena in 1868. The first claim by a woman was made near Warm Springs Creek by Gwenllian Evans, the daughter of Deer Lodge Montana pioneer, Morgan Evans. By 1880, farms were in the more verdant valleys of central and western Montana, but few were on the eastern plains.\nThe Desert Land Act of 1877 was passed to allow settlement of arid lands in the west and allotted to settlers for a fee of $.25 per acre and a promise to irrigate the land. After three years, a fee of one dollar per acre would be paid and the settler would own the land. This act brought mostly cattle and sheep ranchers into Montana, many of whom grazed their herds on the Montana prairie for three years, did little to irrigate the land and then abandoned it without paying the final fees. Some farmers came with the arrival of the Great Northern and Northern Pacific Railroads throughout the 1880s and 1890s, though in relatively small numbers.\nIn the early 1900s, James J. Hill of the Great Northern began to promote settlement in the Montana prairie to fill his trains with settlers and goods. Other railroads followed suit. In 1902, the Reclamation Act was passed, allowing irrigation projects to be built in Montana's eastern river valleys. In 1909, Congress passed the Enlarged Homestead Act that expanded the amount of free land from per family and in 1912 reduced the time to \"prove up\" on a claim to three years. In 1916, the Stock-Raising Homestead Act allowed homesteads of 640 acres in areas unsuitable for irrigation. This combination of advertising and changes in the Homestead Act drew tens of thousands of homesteaders, lured by free land, with World War I bringing particularly high wheat prices. In addition, Montana was going through a temporary period of higher-than-average precipitation. Homesteaders arriving in this period were known as \"honyockers\", or \"scissorbills\". The word \"honyocker\" possibly derived from the ethnic slur \"hunyak\" and was applied in a derisive manner at homesteaders, who were perceived as being \"greenhorns\", \"new at his business\", or \"unprepared\". However, most of these new settlers had farming experience, though many did not.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Honyocker, scissorbill, nester ... He was the Joad of a [half] century ago, swarming into a hostile land: duped when he started, robbed when he arrived; hopeful, courageous, ambitious: he sought independence or adventure, comfort and security ... The honyocker was farmer, spinster, deep-sea diver; fiddler, physician, bartender, cook. He lived in Minnesota or Wisconsin, Massachusetts or Maine. There the news sought him out\u2014Jim Hill's news of free land in the Treasure State ...\u2014\u200a\nHowever, farmers faced a number of problems. Massive debt was one. Also, most settlers were from wetter regions, unprepared for the dry climate, lack of trees, and scarce water resources. In addition, small homesteads of fewer than were unsuited to the environment. Weather and agricultural conditions are much harsher and drier west of the 100th meridian. Then, the droughts of 1917\u20131921 proved devastating. Many people left, and half the banks in the state went bankrupt as a result of providing mortgages that could not be repaid. As a result, farm sizes increased while the number of farms decreased.\nBy 1910, homesteaders filed claims on over five million acres, and by 1923, over 93\u00a0million acres were farmed. In 1910, the Great Falls land office alone had more than a thousand homestead filings per month, and at the peak of 1917\u20131918 it had 14,000 new homesteads each year. Significant drops occurred following the drought in 1919.\nMontana and World War I.\nAs World War I broke out, Jeannette Rankin, representative of Montana and the first woman in the United States to be a member of Congress, voted against the United States' declaration of war. Her actions were widely criticized in Montana, where support for the war and patriotism was strong. In 1917\u20131918, due to a miscalculation of Montana's population, about 40,000 Montanans, 10% of the state's population, volunteered or were drafted into the armed forces. This represented a manpower contribution to the war that was 25% higher than any other state on a per capita basis. Around 1,500 Montanans died as a result of the war and 2,437 were wounded, also higher than any other state on a per capita basis. Montana's Remount station in Miles City provided 10,000 cavalry horses for the war, more than any other Army post in the country. The war created a boom for Montana mining, lumber, and farming interests, as demand for war materials and food increased.\nIn June 1917, the U.S. Congress passed the Espionage Act of 1917, which was extended by the Sedition Act of 1918. In February 1918, the Montana legislature had passed the Montana Sedition Act, which was a model for the federal version. In combination, these laws criminalized criticism of the U.S. government, military, or symbols through speech or other means. The Montana Act led to the arrest of more than 200 individuals and the conviction of 78, mostly of German or Austrian descent. More than 40 spent time in prison. In May 2006, then-Governor Brian Schweitzer posthumously issued full pardons for all those convicted of violating the Montana Sedition Act.\nThe Montanans who opposed U.S. entry into the war included immigrant groups of German and Irish heritage, as well as pacifist Anabaptist people such as the Hutterites and Mennonites, many of whom were also of Germanic heritage. In turn, pro-War groups formed, such as the Montana Council of Defense, created by Governor Samuel V. Stewart and local \"loyalty committees\".\nWar sentiment was complicated by labor issues. The Anaconda Copper Company, which was at its historic peak of copper production, was an extremely powerful force in Montana, but it also faced criticism and opposition from socialist newspapers and unions struggling to make gains for their members. In Butte, a multiethnic community with a significant European immigrant population, labor unions, particularly the newly formed Metal Mine Workers' Union, opposed the war on grounds it mostly profited large lumber and mining interests. In the wake of ramped-up mine production and the Speculator Mine disaster in June 1917, Industrial Workers of the World organizer Frank Little arrived in Butte to organize miners. He gave some speeches with inflammatory antiwar rhetoric. On August 1, 1917, he was dragged from his boarding house by masked vigilantes, and hanged from a railroad trestle, considered a lynching. Little's murder and the strikes that followed resulted in the National Guard being sent to Butte to restore order. Overall, anti-German and antilabor sentiment increased and created a movement that led to the passage of the Montana Sedition Act the following February. In addition, the Council of Defense was made a state agency with the power to prosecute and punish individuals deemed in violation of the Act. The council also passed rules limiting public gatherings and prohibiting the speaking of German in public.\nIn the wake of the legislative action in 1918, emotions rose. U.S. Attorney Burton K. Wheeler and several district court judges who hesitated to prosecute or convict people brought up on charges were strongly criticized. Wheeler was brought before the Council of Defense, though he avoided formal proceedings, and a district court judge from Forsyth was impeached. Burnings of German-language books and several near-hangings occurred. The prohibition on speaking German remained in effect into the early 1920s. Complicating the wartime struggles, the 1918 influenza epidemic claimed the lives of more than 5,000 Montanans. The suppression of civil liberties that occurred led some historians to dub this period \"Montana's Agony\".\nDepression era.\nAn economic depression began in Montana after World War I and lasted through the Great Depression until the beginning of World War II. This caused great hardship for farmers, ranchers, and miners.\nMontana and World War II.\nBy the time the U.S. entered World War II on December 8, 1941, many Montanans had enlisted in the military to escape the poor national economy of the previous decade. Another 40,000-plus Montanans entered the armed forces in the first year following the declaration of war, and more than 57,000 joined up before the war ended. These numbers constituted about ten percent of the state's population, and Montana again contributed one of the highest numbers of soldiers per capita of any state. Many Native Americans were among those who served, including soldiers from the Crow Nation who became Code Talkers. At least 1,500 Montanans died in the war. Montana also was the training ground for the First Special Service Force or \"Devil's Brigade\", a joint U.S.-Canadian commando-style force that trained at Fort William Henry Harrison for experience in mountainous and winter conditions before deployment. Air bases were built in Great Falls, Lewistown, Cut Bank, and Glasgow, some of which were used as staging areas to prepare planes to be sent to allied forces in the Soviet Union. During the war, about 30 Japanese Fu-Go balloon bombs were documented to have landed in Montana, though no casualties nor major forest fires were attributed to them.\nIn 1940, Jeannette Rankin was again elected to Congress. In 1941, as she had in 1917, she voted against the United States' declaration of war after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Hers was the only vote against the war, and in the wake of public outcry over her vote, Rankin required police protection for a time. Other pacifists tended to be those from \"peace churches\" who generally opposed war. Many individuals claiming conscientious objector status from throughout the U.S. were sent to Montana during the war as smokejumpers and for other forest fire-fighting duties.\nIn 1942, the U.S. Army established Camp Rimini near Helena for the purpose of training sled dogs in winter weather.\nOther military.\nDuring World War II, the planned battleship USS \"Montana\" was named in honor of the state but it was never completed. Montana is the only one of the first 48 states lacking a completed battleship being named for it. Alaska and Hawaii have both had nuclear submarines named after them. Montana is the only state in the union without a modern naval ship named in its honor. However, in August 2007, Senator Jon Tester asked that a submarine be christened USS \"Montana\". Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus announced on September 3, 2015, that \"Virginia\" Class attack submarine SSN-794 will become the second commissioned warship to bear the name.\nCold War Montana.\nIn the post-World War II Cold War era, Montana became host to U.S. Air Force Military Air Transport Service (1947) for airlift training in C-54 Skymasters and eventually, in 1953 Strategic Air Command air and missile forces were based at Malmstrom Air Force Base in Great Falls. The base also hosted the 29th Fighter Interceptor Squadron, Air Defense Command from 1953 to 1968. In December 1959, Malmstrom AFB was selected as the home of the new Minuteman I intercontinental ballistic missile. The first operational missiles were in place and ready in early 1962. In late 1962, missiles assigned to the 341st Strategic Missile Wing played a major role in the Cuban Missile Crisis. When the Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba, President John F. Kennedy said the Soviets backed down because they knew he had an \"ace in the hole\", referring directly to the Minuteman missiles in Montana. Montana eventually became home to the largest ICBM field in the U.S. covering .\nGeography.\nMontana is one of the eight Mountain States, located in the north of the region known as the Western United States. It borders North Dakota and South Dakota to the east. Wyoming is to the south, Idaho is to the west and southwest, and the Canadian provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan are to the north, making it the only state to border three Canadian provinces.\nWith an area of , Montana is slightly larger than Japan or Germany. It is the fourth-largest state in the United States after Alaska, Texas, and California, and the largest landlocked state.\nTopography.\nThe state's topography is roughly defined by the Continental Divide, which splits much of the state into distinct eastern and western regions. Most of Montana's hundred or more named mountain ranges are in the state's western half, most of which is geologically and geographically part of the northern Rocky Mountains. The Absaroka and Beartooth ranges in the state's south-central part are technically part of the Central Rocky Mountains. The Rocky Mountain Front is a significant feature in the state's north-central portion, and isolated island ranges that interrupt the prairie landscape common in the central and eastern parts of the state. About 60 percent of the state is prairie, part of the northern Great Plains.\nThe Bitterroot Mountains\u2014one of the longest continuous ranges in the Rocky Mountain chain from Alaska to Mexico\u2014along with smaller ranges, including the Coeur d'Alene Mountains and the Cabinet Mountains, divide the state from Idaho. The southern third of the Bitterroot range blends into the Continental Divide. Other major mountain ranges west of the divide include the Cabinet Mountains, the Anaconda Range, the Missions, the Garnet Range, the Sapphire Mountains, and the Flint Creek Range.\nThe divide's northern section, where the mountains rapidly give way to prairie, is part of the Rocky Mountain Front. The front is most pronounced in the Lewis Range, located primarily in Glacier National Park. Due to the configuration of mountain ranges in Glacier National Park, the Northern Divide (which begins in Alaska's Seward Peninsula) crosses this region and turns east in Montana at Triple Divide Peak. It causes the Waterton River, Belly, and Saint Mary rivers to flow north into Alberta, Canada. There they join the Saskatchewan River, which ultimately empties into Hudson Bay.\nEast of the divide, several roughly parallel ranges cover the state's southern part, including the Gravelly Range, Madison Range, Gallatin Range, Absaroka Range, and the Beartooth Mountains, which contain the state's highest point, Granite Peak, high. North of these ranges are the Big Belt Mountains, Bridger Mountains, Tobacco Roots, and several island ranges, including the Crazy Mountains and Little Belt Mountains.\nBetween many mountain ranges are several rich river valleys. The Big Hole, Bitterroot, Gallatin, Flathead, and Paradise Valleys have extensive agricultural resources and multiple opportunities for tourism and recreation.\nEast and north of this transition zone are the expansive and sparsely populated Northern Plains, with tableland prairies, smaller island mountain ranges, and badlands. The isolated island ranges east of the Divide include the Bear Paw Mountains, Bull Mountains, Castle Mountains, Crazy Mountains, Highwood Mountains, Judith Mountains, Little Belt Mountains, Little Rocky Mountains, the Pryor Mountains, Little Snowy Mountains, Big Snowy Mountains, Sweet Grass Hills, and\u2014in the state's southeastern corner near Ekalaka\u2014the Long Pines. Many of these isolated eastern ranges were created about 120 to 66\u00a0million years ago when magma welling up from the interior cracked and bowed the earth's surface here.\nThe area east of the divide in the state's north-central portion is known for the Missouri Breaks and other significant rock formations. Three buttes south of Great Falls are major landmarks: Cascade, Crown, Square, Shaw, and Buttes. Known as laccoliths, they formed when igneous rock protruded through cracks in the sedimentary rock. The underlying surface consists of sandstone and shale. Surface soils in the area are highly diverse, and greatly affected by the local geology, whether glaciated plain, intermountain basin, mountain foothills, or tableland. Foothill regions are often covered in weathered stone or broken slate, or consist of uncovered bare rock (usually igneous, quartzite, sandstone, or shale). The soil of intermountain basins usually consists of clay, gravel, sand, silt, and volcanic ash, much of it laid down by lakes which covered the region during the Oligocene 33 to 23\u00a0million years ago. Tablelands are often topped with argillite gravel and weathered quartzite, occasionally underlain by shale. The glaciated plains are generally covered in clay, gravel, sand, and silt left by the proglacial Lake Great Falls or by moraines or gravel-covered former lake basins left by the Wisconsin glaciation 85,000 to 11,000 years ago. Farther east, areas such as Makoshika State Park near Glendive and Medicine Rocks State Park near Ekalaka contain some of the most scenic badlands regions in the state.\nThe Hell Creek Formation in Northeast Montana is a major source of dinosaur fossils. Paleontologist Jack Horner of the Museum of the Rockies in Bozeman brought this formation to the world's attention with several major finds.\nRivers, lakes and reservoirs.\nMontana has thousands of named rivers and creeks, of which are known for \"blue-ribbon\" trout fishing. Montana's water resources provide for recreation, hydropower, crop and forage irrigation, mining, and water for human consumption.\nMontana is one of few geographic areas in the world whose rivers form parts of three major watersheds (i.e. where two continental divides intersect). Its rivers feed the Pacific Ocean, the Gulf of Mexico, and Hudson Bay. The watersheds divide at Triple Divide Peak in Glacier National Park. If Hudson Bay is considered part of the Arctic Ocean, Triple Divide Peak is the only place on Earth with drainage to three different oceans.\nPacific Ocean drainage basin.\nAll waters in Montana west of the divide flow into the Columbia River. The Clark Fork of the Columbia (not to be confused with the Clarks Fork of the Yellowstone River) rises near Butte and flows northwest to Missoula, where it is joined by the Blackfoot River and Bitterroot River. Farther downstream, it is joined by the Flathead River before entering Idaho near Lake Pend Oreille. The Pend Oreille River forms the outflow of Lake Pend Oreille. The Pend Oreille River joined the Columbia River, which flows to the Pacific Ocean\u2014making the long Clark Fork/Pend Oreille (considered a single river system) the longest river in the Rocky Mountains. The Clark Fork discharges the greatest volume of water of any river exiting the state. The Kootenai River in northwest Montana is another major tributary of the Columbia.\nGulf of Mexico drainage basin.\nEast of the divide the Missouri River, which is formed by the confluence of the Jefferson, Madison, and Gallatin Rivers near Three Forks, flows due north through the west-central part of the state to Great Falls. From this point, it then flows generally east through fairly flat agricultural land and the Missouri Breaks to Fort Peck reservoir. The stretch of river between Fort Benton and the Fred Robinson Bridge at the western boundary of Fort Peck Reservoir was designated a National Wild and Scenic River in 1976. The Missouri enters North Dakota near Fort Union, having drained more than half the land area of Montana (). Nearly one-third of the Missouri River in Montana lies behind 10 dams: Toston, Canyon Ferry, Hauser, Holter, Black Eagle, Rainbow, Cochrane, Ryan, Morony, and Fort Peck. Other major Montana tributaries of the Missouri include the Smith, Milk, Marias, Judith, and Musselshell Rivers. Montana also claims the disputed title of possessing the world's shortest river, the Roe River, just outside Great Falls. Through the Missouri, these rivers ultimately join the Mississippi River and flow into the Gulf of Mexico.\nHell Roaring Creek begins in southern Montana, and when combined with the Red Rock, Beaverhead, Jefferson, Missouri, and Mississippi River, is the longest river in North America and the fourth longest river in the world.\nThe Yellowstone River rises on the Continental Divide near Younts Peak in Wyoming's Teton Wilderness. It flows north through Yellowstone National Park, enters Montana near Gardiner, and passes through the Paradise Valley to Livingston. It then flows northeasterly across the state through Billings, Miles City, Glendive, and Sidney. The Yellowstone joins the Missouri in North Dakota just east of Fort Union. It is the longest undammed, free-flowing river in the contiguous United States, and drains about a quarter of Montana (). Major tributaries of the Yellowstone include the Boulder, Stillwater, Clarks Fork, Bighorn, Tongue, and Powder Rivers.\nHudson Bay drainage basin.\nThe Northern Divide turns east in Montana at Triple Divide Peak, causing the Waterton, Belly, and Saint Mary Rivers to flow north into Alberta. There they join the Saskatchewan River, which ultimately empties into Hudson Bay.\nLakes and reservoirs.\nMontana has some 3,000 named lakes and reservoirs, including Flathead Lake, the largest natural freshwater lake in the western United States. Other major lakes include Whitefish Lake in the Flathead Valley and Lake McDonald and St. Mary Lake in Glacier National Park. The largest reservoir in the state is Fort Peck Reservoir on the Missouri river, which is contained by the second largest earthen dam and largest hydraulically filled dam in the world. Other major reservoirs include Hungry Horse on the Flathead River; Lake Koocanusa on the Kootenai River; Lake Elwell on the Marias River; Clark Canyon on the Beaverhead River; Yellowtail on the Bighorn River, Canyon Ferry, Hauser, Holter, Rainbow; and Black Eagle on the Missouri River.\nFlora and fauna.\nVegetation of the state includes lodgepole pine, ponderosa pine, Douglas fir, larch, spruce, aspen, birch, red cedar, hemlock, ash, alder, rocky mountain maple and cottonwood trees. Forests cover about 25% of the state. Flowers native to Montana include asters, bitterroots, daisies, lupins, poppies, primroses, columbine, lilies, orchids, and dryads. Several species of sagebrush and cactus and many species of grasses are common. Many species of mushrooms and lichens are also found in the state.\nMontana is home to diverse fauna including 14 amphibian, 90 fish, 117 mammal, 20 reptile, and 427 bird species. Additionally, more than 10,000 invertebrate species are present, including 180 mollusks and 30 crustaceans. Montana has the largest grizzly bear population in the lower 48 states. Montana hosts five federally endangered species\u2013black-footed ferret, whooping crane, least tern, pallid sturgeon, and white sturgeon and seven threatened species including the grizzly bear, Canadian lynx, and bull trout. Since re-introduction the gray wolf population has stabilized at about 900 animals, and they have been delisted as endangered. The Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks manages fishing and hunting seasons for at least 17 species of game fish, including seven species of trout, walleye, and smallmouth bass and at least 29 species of game birds and animals including ring-neck pheasant, grey partridge, elk, pronghorn antelope, mule deer, whitetail deer, gray wolf, and bighorn sheep.\nProtected lands.\nMontana contains Glacier National Park, \"The Crown of the Continent\", and parts of Yellowstone National Park, including three of the park's five entrances. Other federally recognized sites include the Little Bighorn National Monument, Bighorn Canyon National Recreation Area, and Big Hole National Battlefield. The CSKT Bison Range is managed by the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes and the American Prairie is owned and operated by a nonprofit organization.\nFederal and state agencies administer approximately , or 35 percent of Montana's land. The U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service administers of forest land in ten National Forests. There are approximately of wilderness in 12 separate wilderness areas that are part of the National Wilderness Preservation System established by the Wilderness Act of 1964. The U.S. Department of the Interior Bureau of Land Management controls of federal land. The U.S. Department of the Interior Fish and Wildlife Service administers of 1.1\u00a0million acres of National Wildlife Refuges and waterfowl production areas in Montana. The U.S. Department of the Interior Bureau of Reclamation administers approximately of land and water surface in the state. The Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks operate approximately of state parks and access points on the state's rivers and lakes. The Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation manages of School Trust Land ceded by the federal government under the Land Ordinance of 1785 to the state in 1889 when Montana was granted statehood. These lands are managed by the state for the benefit of public schools and institutions in the state.\nAreas managed by the National Park Service include:\nClimate.\nMontana is a large state with considerable variation in geography, topography and elevation, and the climate is equally varied. The state spans from below the 45th parallel (the line equidistant between the equator and North Pole) to the 49th parallel, and elevations range from under to nearly above sea level. The western half is mountainous, interrupted by numerous large valleys. Eastern Montana comprises plains and badlands, broken by hills and isolated mountain ranges, and has a semi-arid, continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"BSk\"). The Continental Divide has a considerable effect on the climate, as it restricts the flow of warmer air from the Pacific from moving east, and drier continental air from moving west. The area west of the divide has a modified northern Pacific Coast climate, with milder winters, cooler summers, less wind, and a longer growing season. Low clouds and fog often form in the valleys west of the divide in winter, but this is rarely seen in the east.\nAverage daytime temperatures vary from in January to in July. The variation in geography leads to great variation in temperature. The highest observed summer temperature was at Glendive on July 20, 1893, and Medicine Lake on July 5, 1937. Throughout the state, summer nights are generally cool and pleasant. Extreme hot weather is less common above . Snowfall has been recorded in all months of the year in the more mountainous areas of central and western Montana, though it is rare in July and August.\nThe coldest temperature on record for Montana is also the coldest temperature for the contiguous United States. On January 20, 1954, was recorded at a gold mining camp near Rogers Pass. Temperatures vary greatly on cold nights, and Helena, to the southeast had a low of only on the same date, and an all-time record low of . Winter cold spells are usually the result of cold continental air coming south from Canada. The front is often well defined, causing a large temperature drop in a 24-hour period. Conversely, air flow from the southwest results in \"chinooks\". These steady (or more) winds can suddenly warm parts of Montana, especially areas just to the east of the mountains, where temperatures sometimes rise up to for 10 days or longer.\nLoma is the site of the most extreme recorded temperature change in a 24-hour period in the United States. On January 15, 1972, a chinook wind blew in and the temperature rose from ; a 103\u00a0\u00b0F (49.4\u00a0\u00b0C) degree difference.\nAverage annual precipitation is , but great variations are seen. The mountain ranges block the moist Pacific air, holding moisture in the western valleys, and creating rain shadows to the east. Heron, in the west, receives the most precipitation, . On the eastern (leeward) side of a mountain range, the valleys are much drier; Lonepine averages , and Deer Lodge of precipitation. The mountains can receive over , for example the Grinnell Glacier in Glacier National Park gets . An area southwest of Belfry averaged only over a 16-year period. Most of the larger cities get of snow each year. Mountain ranges can accumulate of snow during a winter. Heavy snowstorms may occur from September through May, though most snow falls from November to March.\nThe climate has become warmer in Montana, with the average temperature rising almost 2.5\u00a0\u00b0F (1.3\u00a0\u00b0C) since 1900 at a rate higher than the continental U.S. average, and continues to do so. The glaciers in Glacier National Park have receded and are predicted to melt away completely in a few decades. Many Montana cities set heat records during July 2007, the hottest month ever recorded in Montana. Winters are warmer, too, and have fewer cold spells. Previously, these cold spells had killed off bark beetles, but these are now attacking the forests of western Montana. The warmer winters in the region have allowed various species to expand their ranges and proliferate. The combination of warmer weather, attack by beetles, and mismanagement has led to a substantial increase in the severity of forest fires in Montana. According to a study done for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency by the Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Science, parts of Montana will experience a 200% increase in area burned by wildfires and an 80% increase in related air pollution.\nThe table below lists average temperatures for the warmest and coldest month for Montana's seven largest cities. The coldest month varies between December and January depending on location, although figures are similar throughout.\nAntipodes.\nMontana is one of only two contiguous states (along with Colorado) that are antipodal to land. The Kerguelen Islands are antipodal to the Montana\u2013Saskatchewan\u2013Alberta border. No towns are precisely antipodal to Kerguelen, though Chester and Rudyard are close.\nCities and towns.\nMontana has 56 counties and a total of 364 \"places\" as defined by the United States Census Bureau; the latter comprising 129 incorporated places and 235 census-designated places. The incorporated places are made up of 52 cities, 75 towns, and two consolidated city-counties.\nMontana has one city, Billings, with a population over 100,000; and three cities with populations over 50,000: Missoula, Great Falls and Bozeman. The state also has five Micropolitan Statistical Areas, centered on Bozeman, Butte, Helena, Kalispell and Havre.\nCollectively all of these areas (excluding Havre) are known informally as the \"big seven\", as they are consistently the seven largest communities in the state (their rank order in terms of population is Billings, Missoula, Great Falls, Bozeman, Butte, Helena and Kalispell, according to the 2010 U.S. census). Based on 2013 census numbers, they contain 35 percent of Montana's population, and the counties in which they are located are home to 62 percent of the state's population.\nThe geographic center of population of Montana is in sparsely populated Meagher County, in the town of White Sulphur Springs.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe United States Census Bureau states that the population of Montana was 1,132,812 on July 1, 2023, a 4.5% increase since the 2020 census. The 2020 census put Montana's population at 1,084,225. During the first decade of the new century, growth was mainly concentrated in Montana's seven largest counties, with the highest percentage growth in Gallatin County, which had a 32.9% increase in its population from 2010 to 2020. The city having the largest percentage growth was Kalispell, with 40.1%, and the city with the largest increase in actual residents was Billings, with an increase in population of 12,946 from 2010 to 2020.\nOn January 3, 2012, the Census and Economic Information Center (CEIC) at the Montana Department of Commerce estimated Montana had hit the one million population mark sometime between November and December 2011.\nAccording to HUD's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 1,585 homeless people in Montana.\nIn 2018, the top countries of origin for Montana's immigrants were Canada, Mexico, Germany, China, and Vietnam.\nAccording to the 2020 census, 88.9% of the population was White (87.8% non-Hispanic White), 6.7% American Indian and Alaska Native, 4.1% Hispanics and Latinos of any race, 0.9% Asian, 0.6% Black or African American, 0.1% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander, and 2.8% from two or more races. The largest European ancestry groups in Montana as of 2010 were: German (27.0%), Irish (14.8%), English (12.6%), Norwegian (10.9%), French (4.7%), and Italian (3.4%).\nIntrastate demographics.\nMontana has a larger Native American population, both numerically and as a percentage, than most U.S. states. Ranked 45th in population (by the 2010 census) it is 19th in native people, who are 6.5% of the state's population\u2014the sixth-highest percentage of all fifty states. Of Montana's 56 counties, Native Americans constitute a majority in three: Big Horn, Glacier, and Roosevelt. Other counties with large Native American populations include Blaine, Cascade, Hill, Missoula, and Yellowstone Counties. The state's Native American population grew by 27.9% between 1980 and 1990 (at a time when Montana's entire population rose 1.6%), and by 18.5 percent between 2000 and 2010.\nAs of 2009, almost two-thirds of Native Americans in the state live in urban areas. Of Montana's 20 largest cities, Polson (15.7%), Havre (13.0%), Great Falls (5.0%), Billings (4.4%), and Anaconda (3.1%) had the greatest percentages of Native American residents in 2010. Billings (4,619), Great Falls (2,942), Missoula (1,838), Havre (1,210), and Polson (706) have the most Native Americans living there. The state's seven reservations include more than 12 distinct Native American ethnolinguistic groups.\nWhile the largest European American population in Montana is German (which may also include Austrian and Swiss, among other groups), pockets of significant Scandinavian ancestry are prevalent in some of the farming-dominated northern and eastern prairie regions, parallel to nearby regions of North Dakota and Minnesota. Farmers of Irish, Scots, and English roots also settled in Montana. The historically mining-oriented communities of western Montana such as Butte have a wider range of European American ethnicity; Finns, Eastern Europeans and especially Irish settlers left an indelible mark on the area, as well as people originally from British mining regions such as Cornwall, Devon, and Wales. The nearby city of Helena, also founded as a mining camp, had a similar mix in addition to a small Chinatown.\nThe Hutterites, an Anabaptist sect originally from Switzerland, settled in Montana, and today is second only to South Dakota in U.S. Hutterite population, with several colonies across the state. Beginning in the mid-1990s, the state also had an influx of Amish, who moved to Montana from increasingly urbanized areas of Ohio and Pennsylvania.\nMontana's Hispanic population is concentrated in the Billings area in south-central Montana, where many of Montana's Mexican Americans have been in the state for generations. Great Falls has the highest percentage of African Americans in its population, although Billings has more African American residents than Great Falls.\nThe Chinese in Montana, while a low percentage today, have been a historically important presence. About 2,000\u20133,000 Chinese miners were in the mining areas of Montana by 1870, and 2,500 in 1890. However, public opinion grew increasingly negative towards them in the 1890s, and nearly half of the state's Asian population left by 1900. Today, the Missoula area has a large Hmong population and the nearly 3,000 Montanans who claim Filipino ancestry are the largest Asian American group in the state.\nIn the 2015 United States census estimates, Montana had the second-highest percentage of U.S. military veterans living there. Only the state of Alaska had a higher percentage, with roughly 14 percent of Alaska's population over 18 being veterans, with Montana having roughly 12 percent of its population over 18 being veterans.\nNative Americans.\nIn 2020, 67,612 people in Montana self-identified as Native American, while 100,578 did in combination with one or more other races. Many treaties and federal legislation, including the Indian Appropriations Act (1851), the Dawes Act (1887), and the Indian Reorganization Act (1934), enabled the creation of seven Indian reservations, encompassing 11 federally recognized tribal nations, in Montana. A 12th nation, the Little Shell Tribe of Chippewa Indians of Great Falls, was recognized by the federal government in December 2019. The Blackfeet nation is headquartered on the Blackfeet Indian Reservation (1851) in Browning, Crow on the Crow Indian Reservation (1868) in Crow Agency, Confederated Salish and Kootenai and Pend d'Oreille on the Flathead Indian Reservation (1855) in Pablo, Northern Cheyenne on the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation (1884) at Lame Deer, Assiniboine and Gros Ventre on the Fort Belknap Indian Reservation (1888) in Fort Belknap Agency, Assiniboine and Sioux on the Fort Peck Indian Reservation (1888) at Poplar, and Chippewa-Cree on the Rocky Boy's Indian Reservation (1916) near Box Elder. Approximately 63% of all Native people live off the reservations, concentrated in the larger Montana cities, with the largest concentration of urban Indians in Great Falls. The state also has a small M\u00e9tis population and 1990 census data indicated that people from as many as 275 different tribes lived in Montana.\nMontana's Constitution specifically reads, \"the state recognizes the distinct and unique cultural heritage of the American Indians and is committed in its educational goals to the preservation of their cultural integrity.\" It is the only state in the U.S. with such a constitutional mandate. The Indian Education for All Act was passed in 1999 to provide funding for this mandate and ensure implementation. It mandates that all schools teach American Indian history, culture, and heritage from preschool through college. For kindergarten through 12th-grade students, an \"Indian Education for All\" curriculum from the Montana Office of Public Instruction is available free to all schools. The state was sued in 2004 because of lack of funding, and the state has increased its support of the program. South Dakota passed similar legislation in 2007, and Wisconsin was working to strengthen its own program based on this model\u2014and the current practices of Montana's schools. Each Indian reservation in the state has a fully accredited tribal college. The University of Montana \"was the first to establish dual admission agreements with all of the tribal colleges and as such it was the first institution in the nation to actively facilitate student transfer from the tribal colleges.\"\nWhat is now Montana was at various times inhabited by tribes such as the Crow, the Blackfeet, the Assiniboine, the Gros Ventre, the Kootenai, the Flathead Salish and Kalispel, the Kiowa, the Sioux, the Arapaho, the Arikara, the Bannock, the Cheyenne, the Ojibwe, the Hidatsa, the Cree, the Nez Perce, the Mandan, the Shoshone and the Spokane. Many Montanans also reported belonging to various Native American tribes in 2010 census, the largest of which were the Blackfeet (12,831 people), the Crow (8,680 people), the Cheyenne (5,912), the Assiniboine Sioux (5,828), the Chippewa Cree (5,495), the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes (4,809), the Ojibwe (4,284), the Sioux (2,698), the Assiniboine (2,673), the Gros Ventre (2,484) and the Salish tribal grouping (1,915). Other tribes included the Cree, the MHA Nation, the Kootenai, the Fort Belknap Indian Community, the Arapaho and more.\nBirth data.\n\"Note: Births in table do not add up, because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number.\"\nLanguages.\nEnglish is the official language in the state of Montana. According to the 2000 census, 94.8% of the population aged five and older speak English at home. Spanish is the language next most commonly spoken at home, with about 13,040 Spanish-language speakers in the state (1.4% of the population) in 2011. Also, 15,438 (1.7% of the state population) were speakers of Indo-European languages other than English or Spanish, 10,154 (1.1%) were speakers of a Native American language, and 4,052 (0.4%) were speakers of an Asian or Pacific Islander language.\nOther languages spoken in Montana (as of 2013) include Assiniboine (about 150 speakers in Montana and Canada), Blackfoot (about 100 speakers), Cheyenne (about 1,700 speakers), Plains Cree (about 100 speakers), Crow (about 3,000 speakers), Dakota (about 17,800 speakers with 700 in Montana in 2010), German Hutterite (about 5,600 speakers), Gros Ventre (about 10 speakers), Kalispel-Pend d'Oreille (about 64 speakers), Kutenai (about six speakers), and Lakota (6,000 speakers in Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota).\nThe United States Department of Education estimated in 2009 that 5,274 students in Montana spoke a language at home other than English. These included a Native American language (64%), German (4%), Spanish (3%), Russian (1%), and Chinese (less than 0.5%).\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the Pew Research Center in 2014, the religious affiliations of the people of Montana were predominantly Christian; in the state, Christianity was 65% of the total adult population. At the 2020 Public Religion Research Institute's (PRRI) study, 57% of the adult population were Christian. While Catholicism was the largest single Christian group in the state, mainline and evangelical Protestantism dominated the Christian landscape collectively. By the Public Religion Research Institute's 2022 survey, Christianity grew to 62% of the population altogether, with 43% Protestant, 17% Catholic, and 2% Restorationist through Mormonism.\nThe largest Christian denominations in Montana as of 2010 were the Catholic Church with 127,612 adherents, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with 46,484 adherents, Evangelical Lutheran Church in America with 38,665 adherents, and non-denominational evangelical Protestants with 27,370 adherents. In 2020, the largest Christian denominations by adherents were the following: the Catholic Church (112,389), non-denominational Protestantism (54,540), and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (50,552).\nIn 2014, 30% of the population was irreligious, and in 2020's separate study, 34% of the population were irreligious. Among its non-Christian population in 2022's PRRI study, the unaffiliated made up 32% of the population. New Age spirituality was 2% of the population, Judaism 1%, and Buddhism 1%. Other faiths accounted for 2% of the state's population.\nEconomy.\nAs of 2022[ [update]], the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis estimated Montana's Gross Domestic Product was $67.072 billion (47th in the nation) and per capita personal income was $60,984 (28th in the nation).\nMontana is a relative hub of beer microbrewing, ranking third in the nation in number of craft breweries per capita in 2011. Significant industries exist for lumber and mineral extraction; the state's resources include gold, coal, silver, talc, and vermiculite. Ecotaxes on resource extraction are numerous. A 1974 state severance tax on coal (which varied from 20 to 30%) was upheld by the Supreme Court of the United States in \"Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana\", 453 U.S. 609 (1981).\nTourism is also important to the economy, with more than ten million visitors a year to Glacier National Park, Flathead Lake, the Missouri River headwaters, the site of the Battle of Little Bighorn, and three of the five entrances to Yellowstone National Park.\nMontana's personal income tax contains seven brackets, with rates ranging from 1.0 to 6.9 percent. Montana has no sales tax, and household goods are exempt from property taxes. However, property taxes are assessed on livestock, farm machinery, heavy equipment, automobiles, trucks, and business equipment. The amount of property tax owed is not determined solely by the property's value. The property's value is multiplied by a tax rate, set by the Montana Legislature, to determine its taxable value. The taxable value is then multiplied by the mill levy established by various taxing jurisdictions\u2014city and county government, school districts, and others.\nIn the 1980s the absence of a sales tax became economically deleterious to communities bound to the state's tourism industry, as the revenue from income and property taxes provided by residents was grossly insignificant in regards to paying for the impact of non-residential travel\u2014especially road repair. In 1985, the Montana Legislature passed a law allowing towns with fewer than 5,500 residents and unincorporated communities with fewer than 2,500 to levy a resort tax if more than half the community's income came from tourism. The resort tax is a sales tax that applies to hotels, motels and other lodging and camping facilities; restaurants, fast-food stores, and other food service establishments; taverns, bars, night clubs, lounges, or other public establishments that serve alcohol; as well as destination ski resorts or other destination recreational facilities.\nIt also applies to \"luxuries\"- defined by law as any item normally sold to the public or to transient visitors or tourists that does not include food purchased unprepared or unserved, medicine, medical supplies and services, appliances, hardware supplies and tools, or any necessities of life. Approximately 12.2 million non-residents visited Montana in 2018, and the population was estimated to be 1.06 million. This extremely disproportionate ratio of residents paying taxes vs. non-residents using state-funded services and infrastructure makes Montana's resort tax crucial in order to safely maintain heavily used roads and highways, as well as protect and preserve state parks.\nAs of November\u00a02024[ [update]], the state's unemployment rate is 3.2%. The lowest rate was 2.5% in March 2023 and the highest was 12.0% in April 2020.\nEducation.\nColleges and universities.\nThe Montana University System consists of:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTribal colleges in Montana include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFour private colleges are in Montana:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSchools.\nThe Montana Territory was formed on April 26, 1864, when the U.S. passed the Organic Act. Schools started forming in the area before it was officially a territory as families started settling into the area. The first schools were subscription schools that typically met in the teacher's home. The first formal school on record was at Fort Owen in Bitterroot valley in 1862. The students were Indian children and the children of Fort Owen employees. The first school term started in early winter and lasted only until February 28. Classes were taught by Mr. Robinson. Another early subscription school was started by Thomas Dimsdale in Virginia City in 1863. In this school students were charged $1.75 per week. The Montana Territorial Legislative Assembly had its inaugural meeting in 1864. The first legislature authorized counties to levy taxes for schools, which set the foundations for public schooling. Madison County was the first to take advantage of the newly authorized taxes and it formed the first public school in Virginia City in 1886. The first school year was scheduled to begin in January 1866, but severe weather postponed its opening until March. The first school year ran through the summer and did not end until August 17. One of the first teachers at the school was Sarah Raymond. She was a 25-year-old woman who had traveled to Virginia City via wagon train in 1865. To become a certified teacher, Raymond took a test in her home and paid a $6 fee in gold dust to obtain a teaching certificate. With the help of an assistant teacher, Mrs. Farley, Raymond was responsible for teaching 50 to 60 students each day out of the 81 students enrolled at the school. Sarah Raymond was paid $125 per month, and Mrs. Farley was paid $75 per month. No textbooks were used in the school. In their place was an assortment of books brought by various emigrants. Raymond quit teaching the following year, but she later became the Madison County superintendent of schools.\nCulture.\nMany well-known artists, photographers and authors have documented the land, culture and people of Montana in the last 130 years. Painter and sculptor Charles Marion Russell, known as \"the cowboy artist\", created more than 2,000 paintings of cowboys, Native Americans, and landscapes set in the Western United States and in Alberta, Canada. The C. M. Russell Museum Complex in Great Falls, Montana, houses more than 2,000 Russell artworks, personal objects, and artifacts.\nPioneering feminist author, film-maker, and media personality Mary MacLane attained international fame in 1902 with her memoir of three months in her life in Butte, \"The Story of Mary MacLane\". She referred to Butte throughout the rest of her career and remains a controversial figure there for her mixture of criticism and love for Butte and its people.\nEvelyn Cameron, a naturalist and photographer from Terry documented early 20th-century life on the Montana prairie, taking startlingly clear pictures of everything around her: cowboys, sheepherders, weddings, river crossings, freight wagons, people working, badlands, eagles, coyotes and wolves.\nMany notable Montana authors have documented or been inspired by life in Montana in both fiction and non-fiction works. Pulitzer Prize winner Wallace Earle Stegner from Great Falls was often called \"The Dean of Western Writers\". James Willard Schultz (\"Apikuni\") from Browning is most noted for his prolific stories about Blackfeet life and his contributions to the naming of prominent features in Glacier National Park.\nMajor cultural events.\nMontana hosts numerous arts and cultural festivals and events every year. Major events include:\nSports.\nProfessional sports.\nThere are no major league sports franchises in Montana due to the state's relatively small and dispersed population, but a number of minor league teams play in the state. Baseball is the minor-league sport with the longest heritage in the state and Montana is home to four independent teams, all members of the Pioneer League: the Billings Mustangs, Great Falls Voyagers, Missoula PaddleHeads and the Glacier Range Riders.\nCollege sports.\nAll of Montana's four-year colleges and universities field intercollegiate sports teams. The two largest schools, the University of Montana and Montana State University, are members of the Big Sky Conference and have enjoyed a strong athletic rivalry since the early twentieth century. Six of Montana's smaller four-year schools are members of the Frontier Conference. One is a member of the Great Northwest Athletic Conference.\nOther sports.\nA variety of sports are offered at Montana high schools. Montana allows the smallest\u2014\"Class C\"\u2014high schools to utilize six-man football teams, dramatized in the independent 2002 film \"The Slaughter Rule\".\nThere are four junior ice hockey teams in Montana, all of which are affiliated with the North American 3 Hockey League: the Bozeman Icedogs, Butte Irish, Great Falls Americans, and Helena Bighorns.\nSporting achievements.\nMontanans have been a part of several major sporting achievements:\nOutdoor recreation.\nMontana provides year-round outdoor recreation opportunities for residents and visitors. Hiking, fishing, hunting, watercraft recreation, camping, golf, cycling, horseback riding, and skiing are popular activities.\nFishing and hunting.\nMontana has been a destination for its world-class trout fisheries since the 1930s. Fly fishing for several species of native and introduced trout in rivers and lakes is popular for both residents and tourists throughout the state. Montana is the home of the Federation of Fly Fishers and hosts many of the organization's annual conclaves. The state has robust recreational lake trout and kokanee salmon fisheries in the west, walleye can be found in many parts of the state, while northern pike, smallmouth and largemouth bass fisheries as well as catfish and paddlefish can be found in the waters of eastern Montana. Robert Redford's 1992 film of Norman Mclean's novel, \"A River Runs Through It\", was filmed in Montana and brought national attention to fly fishing and the state. Fishing makes up a sizeable component of Montana's total tourism economic output: in 2017, nonresidents generated $4.7 billion in economic output, of which, $1.3 billion was generated by visitor groups participating in guided fishing experiences. \nThere are fall bow and general hunting seasons for elk, pronghorn antelope, whitetail deer and mule deer. A random draw grants a limited number of permits for moose, mountain goats and bighorn sheep. There is a spring hunting season for black bear and limited hunting of bison that leave Yellowstone National Park has been allowed. Current law allows both hunters and trappers specified numbers (\"limits\") of wolves and mountain lions. Trapping of assorted fur-bearing animals is allowed in certain seasons and many opportunities exist for migratory waterfowl and upland bird hunting. The Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation, which protects wildlife habitat and promotes hunting heritage, was founded in Montana.\nWinter sports.\nBoth downhill skiing and cross-country skiing are popular in Montana, and there are 15 developed downhill ski areas open to the public, including:\nBig Sky Resort and Whitefish Mountain Resort are destination resorts, while the remaining areas do not have overnight lodging at the ski area, though several host restaurants and other amenities.\nMontana also has millions of acres open to cross-country skiing on nine of its national forests and in Glacier National Park. In addition to cross-country trails at most of the downhill ski areas, there are also 13 private cross-country skiing resorts. Yellowstone National Park also allows cross-country skiing.\nSnowmobiling is popular in Montana, which boasts over 4,000 miles of trails and frozen lakes available in winter. There are 24 areas where snowmobile trails are maintained, most also offering ungroomed trails. West Yellowstone offers a large selection of trails and is the primary starting point for snowmobile trips into Yellowstone National Park, where \"oversnow\" vehicle use is strictly limited, usually to guided tours, and regulations are in considerable flux.\nSnow coach tours are offered at Big Sky, Whitefish, West Yellowstone and into Yellowstone National Park. Equestrian skijoring has a niche in Montana, which hosts the World Skijoring Championships in Whitefish as part of the annual Whitefish Winter Carnival.\nHealth.\nMontana has two Trauma I hospitals, both in Billings. The Billings Clinic hospital became the first in Montana and neighboring Wyoming. In 2024, Intermountain Health's St. Vincent Regional Hospital also received verification. There are Trauma II hospitals in Missoula and Great Falls. In 2013, \"AARP The Magazine\" named the Billings Clinic one of the safest hospitals in the United States.\nMontana is ranked as the least obese state in the U.S., at 19.6%, according to the 2014 Gallup Poll.\nMontana had a suicide rate of 26.6 per 100,000 in 2023, which is the second highest of all the states in the U.S., only falling behind Alaska. High suicide rates are common among sparsely populated states in the United States.\nMedia.\nAs of 2010, Missoula is the 166th largest media market in the United States as ranked by Nielsen Media Research, while Billings is 170th, Great Falls is 190th, the Butte/Bozeman area 191st, and Helena is 206th. There are 25 television stations in Montana, representing each major U.S. network. As of August 2013, there are 527 FCC-licensed FM radio stations broadcast in Montana, with 114 such AM stations.\nDuring the age of the Copper Kings, each Montana copper company had its own newspaper. This changed in 1959 when Lee Enterprises bought several Montana newspapers. Montana's largest circulating daily city newspapers are the \"Billings Gazette\" (circulation 39,405), \"Great Falls Tribune\" (26,733), and \"Missoulian\" (25,439).\nIn May 2023, Montana became the first US state to ban the social media app TikTok and online marketplace Temu.\nTransportation.\nRailroads have been an important method of transportation in Montana since the 1880s. Historically, the state was traversed by the main lines of three east\u2013west transcontinental routes: the Milwaukee Road, the Great Northern, and the Northern Pacific. Today, the BNSF Railway is the state's largest railroad, its main transcontinental route incorporating the former Great Northern main line across the state. Montana RailLink, a privately held Class II railroad, operated former Northern Pacific trackage in western Montana before being bought out by BNSF.\nIn addition, Amtrak's \"Empire Builder\" train runs through the north of the state, stopping in Libby, Whitefish, West Glacier, Essex, East Glacier Park, Browning, Cut Bank, Shelby, Havre, Malta, Glasgow, and Wolf Point.\nIntercity bus service in Montana is provided by Jefferson Lines and Express Arrow.\nBozeman Yellowstone International Airport is the busiest airport in the state of Montana, surpassing Billings Logan International Airport in the spring of 2013. Montana's other major airports include Missoula International Airport, Great Falls International Airport, Glacier Park International Airport, Helena Regional Airport, Bert Mooney Airport, and Yellowstone Airport. Eight smaller communities have airports designated for commercial service under the Essential Air Service program.\nHistorically, U.S. Route 10 was the primary east\u2013west highway route across Montana, connecting the major cities in the southern half of the state. Still, the state's most important east\u2013west travel corridor, the route is today served by Interstate 90 and Interstate 94 which roughly follow the same route as the Northern Pacific. U.S. Routes 2 and 12 and Montana Highway 200 also traverse the entire state from east to west.\nMontana's only north\u2013south Interstate Highway is Interstate 15. Other major north\u2013south highways include U.S. Routes 87, 89, 93, and 191.\nMontana and South Dakota are the only states to share a land border that is not traversed by a paved road. Highway 212, the primary paved route between the two, passes through the northeast corner of Wyoming between Montana and South Dakota.\nLaw and government.\nConstitution.\nMontana is governed by a constitution. The first constitution was drafted by a constitutional convention in 1889, in preparation for statehood. Ninety percent of its language came from an 1884 constitution which was never acted upon by Congress for national political reasons. The 1889 constitution mimicked the structure of the United States Constitution, as well as outlining almost the same civil and political rights for citizens. However, the 1889 Montana constitution significantly restricted the power of state government, the legislature was much more powerful than the executive branch, and the jurisdiction of the District Courts very specifically described. Montana voters amended the 1889 constitution 37 times between 1889 and 1972. In 1914, Montana granted women the vote. In 1916, Montana became the first state to elect a woman, Progressive Republican Jeannette Rankin, to Congress.\nIn 1971, Montana voters approved the call for a state constitutional convention. A new constitution was drafted, which made the legislative and executive branches much more equal in power and which was much less prescriptive in outlining powers, duties, and jurisdictions. The draft included an expanded, more progressive list of civil and political rights, extended these rights to children for the first time, transferred administration of property taxes to the counties from the state, implemented new water rights, eliminated sovereign immunity, and gave the legislature greater power to spend tax revenues. The constitution was narrowly approved, 116,415 to 113,883, and declared ratified on June 20, 1972. Three issues that the constitutional convention was unable to resolve were submitted to voters simultaneously with the proposed constitution. Voters approved the legalization of gambling, a bicameral legislature, and retention of the death penalty.\nThe 1972 constitution has been amended 31 times as of 2015. Major amendments include establishment of a reclamation trust (funded by taxes on natural resource extraction) to restore mined land (1974); restoration of sovereign immunity, when such immunity has been approved by a two-thirds vote in each house (1974); establishment of a 90-day biennial (rather than annual) legislative session (1974); establishment of a coal tax trust fund, funded by a tax on coal extraction (1976); conversion of the mandatory decennial review of county government into a voluntary one, to be approved or disallowed by residents in each county (1978); conversion of the provision of public assistance from a mandatory civil right to a non-fundamental legislative prerogative (1988); a new constitutional right to hunt and fish (2004); a now-defunct prohibition on same-sex marriage (2004); a prohibition on new taxes on the sale or transfer of real property (2010), and a constitutional provision codifying abortion rights (2024). In 1992, voters approved a constitutional amendment implementing term limits for certain statewide elected executive branch offices (governor, lieutenant governor, secretary of state, state auditor, attorney general, superintendent of public instruction) and for members of the Montana Legislature. Extensive new constitutional rights for victims of crime were approved in 2016.\nThe 1972 constitution requires that voters determine every 20 years whether to hold a new constitutional convention. Voters turned down a new convention in 1990 (84 percent no) and again in 2010 (58.6 percent no).\nExecutive.\nMontana has three branches of state government: legislative, executive, and judicial. The executive branch is headed by an elected governor. The governor is Greg Gianforte, a Republican elected in 2020. There are also nine other statewide elected offices in the executive branch: Lieutenant Governor, Attorney General, Secretary of State, State Auditor (who also serves as Commissioner of Securities and Insurance), and Superintendent of Public Instruction. There are five public service commissioners, who are elected on a regional basis. (The Public Service Commission's jurisdiction is statewide.)\nThere are 18 departments and offices which make up the executive branch: Administration; Agriculture; Auditor (securities and insurance); Commerce; Corrections; Environmental Quality; Fish, Wildlife &amp; Parks; Justice; Labor and Industry; Livestock; Military Affairs; Natural Resources and Conservation; Public Health and Human Services; Revenue; State; and Transportation. Elementary and secondary education are overseen by the Office of Public Instruction (led by the elected superintendent of public instruction), in cooperation with the governor-appointed Board of Public Education. Higher education is overseen by a governor-appointed Board of Regents, which in turn appoints a commissioner of higher education. The Office of the Commissioner of Higher Education acts in an executive capacity on behalf of the regents and oversees the state-run Montana University System.\nIndependent state agencies not within a department or office include the Montana Arts Council, Montana Board of Crime Control, Montana Historical Society, Montana Public Employees Retirement Administration, Commissioner of Political Practices, the Montana Lottery, Office of the State Public Defender, Public Service Commission, the Montana School for the Deaf and Blind, the Montana State Fund (which operates the state's unemployment insurance, worker compensation, and self-insurance operations), the Montana State Library, and the Montana Teachers Retirement System.\nMontana is an alcoholic beverage control state. It is an equitable distribution and no-fault divorce state. It is one of five states to have no sales tax.\nLegislative.\nThe Montana Legislature is bicameral and consists of the 50-member Montana Senate and the 100-member Montana House of Representatives. The legislature meets in the Montana State Capitol in Helena in odd-numbered years for 90 days, beginning the first weekday of the year. The deadline for a legislator to introduce a general bill is the 40th legislative day. The deadline for a legislator to introduce an appropriations, revenue, or referendum bill is the 62nd legislative day. Senators serve four-year terms, while Representatives serve two-year terms. All members are limited to serving no more than eight years in a single 16-year period.\nJudicial.\nThe Courts of Montana are established by the Constitution of Montana. The constitution requires the establishment of a Montana Supreme Court and Montana District Courts, and permits the legislature to establish Justice Courts, City Courts, Municipal Courts, and other inferior courts such as the legislature sees fit to establish.\nThe Montana Supreme Court is the court of last resort in the Montana court system. The constitution of 1889 provided for the election of no fewer than three Supreme Court justices, and one chief justice. Each court member served a six-year term. The legislature increased the number of justices to five in 1919. The 1972 constitution lengthened the term of office to eight years and established the minimum number of justices at five. It allowed the legislature to increase the number of justices by two, which the legislature did in 1979. The Montana Supreme Court has the authority to declare acts of the legislature and executive unconstitutional under either the Montana or U.S. constitutions. Its decisions may be appealed directly to the U.S. Supreme Court. The Clerk of the Montana Supreme Court is also an elected position and serves a six-year term. Neither justices nor the clerk is term-limited.\nMontana District Courts are the courts of general jurisdiction in Montana. There are no intermediate appellate courts. District Courts have jurisdiction primarily over most civil cases, cases involving a monetary claim against the state, felony criminal cases, probate, and cases at law and in equity. When so authorized by the legislature, actions of executive branch agencies may be appealed directly to a District Court. The District Courts also have \"de novo\" appellate jurisdiction from inferior courts (city courts, justice courts, and municipal courts), and oversee naturalization proceedings. District Court judges are elected and serve six-year terms. They are not term-limited. There are 22 judicial districts in Montana, served by 56 District Courts and 46 District Court judges. The District Courts suffer from excessive workload, and the legislature has struggled to find a solution to the problem.\nMontana Youth Courts were established by the Montana Youth Court Act of 1974. They are overseen by District Court judges. They consist of a chief probation officer, one or more juvenile probation officers, and support staff. Youth Courts have jurisdiction over misdemeanor and felony acts committed by those charged as a juvenile under the law. There is a Youth Court in every judicial district, and decisions of the Youth Court are appealable directly to the Montana Supreme Court.\nThe Montana Worker's Compensation Court was established by the Montana Workers' Compensation Act in 1975. There is a single Workers' Compensation Court. It has a single judge, appointed by the governor. The Worker's Compensation Court has statewide jurisdiction and holds trials in Billings, Great Falls, Helena, Kalispell, and Missoula. The court hears cases arising under the Montana Workers' Compensation Act and is the court of original jurisdiction for reviews of orders and regulations issued by the Montana Department of Labor and Industry. Decisions of the court are appealable directly to the Montana Supreme Court.\nThe Montana Water Court was established by the Montana Water Court Act of 1979. The Water Court consists of a chief water judge and four district water judges (Lower Missouri River Basin, Upper Missouri River Basin, Yellowstone River Basin, and Clark Fork River Basin). The court employs 12 permanent special masters. The Montana Judicial Nomination Commission develops short lists of nominees for all five Water Judges, who are then appointed by the Chief justice of the Montana Supreme Court (subject to confirmation by the Montana Senate). The Water Court adjudicates water rights claims under the Montana Water Use Act of 1973 and has statewide jurisdiction. District Courts have the authority to enforce decisions of the Water Court, but only the Montana Supreme Court has the authority to review decisions of the Water Court.\nFrom 1889 to 1909, elections for judicial office in Montana were partisan. Beginning in 1909, these elections became nonpartisan. The Montana Supreme Court struck down the nonpartisan law in 1911 on technical grounds, but a new law was enacted in 1935 which barred political parties from endorsing, making contributions to, or making expenditures on behalf of or against judicial candidates. In 2012, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down Montana's judicial nonpartisan election law in , 567 ____ (Sup.Ct. ).Although candidates must remain nonpartisan, spending by partisan entities is now permitted. Spending on state supreme court races exponentially increased to $1.6\u00a0million in 2014, and to more than $1.6\u00a0million in 2016 (both new records).\nFederal offices and courts.\nThe U.S. Constitution provides each state with two senators. Montana's two U.S. senators are Steve Daines, first elected in 2014 and later reelected in 2020, and Tim Sheehy, elected in 2024. Both are Republicans. The U.S. Constitution provides each state with a single representative, with additional representatives apportioned based on population. From statehood in 1889 until 1913, Montana was represented in the United States House of Representatives by a single representative, elected at-large. Montana received a second representative in 1913, following the 1910 census and reapportionment. Both members, however, were still elected at-large. Beginning in 1919, Montana moved to district, rather than at-large, elections for its two House members. This created Montana's 1st congressional district in the west and Montana's 2nd congressional district in the east.\nMontana had only one representative in the U.S. House after having lost its second district in the 1990 census reapportionment. The remaining seat was again elected at-large. Montana's population grew at about the national average during the 2000s, but it had failed to regain its second seat in 2010. In the reapportionment following the 2020 census, Montana regained a House seat, increasing the state's number of representatives in the House to two after a thirty-year break, starting from 2023. Before the 2020 reapportionment, Montana's at-large congressional district held the largest population of any district in the country.\nRepublicans Troy Downing and Ryan Zinke are the current officeholders.\nMontana's Senate district is the fourth largest by area, behind Alaska, Texas, and California. The most notorious of Montana's early senators was William A. Clark, a \"Copper King\" and one of the 50 richest Americans ever. He is well known for having bribed his way into the U.S. Senate. Among Montana's most historically prominent senators are Thomas J. Walsh (serving from 1913 to 1933), who was President-elect Franklin D. Roosevelt's choice for attorney general when he died; Burton K. Wheeler (serving from 1923 to 1947), an oft-mentioned presidential candidate and strong supporter of isolationism; Mike Mansfield, the longest-serving Senate majority leader in U.S. history; Max Baucus (served 1978 to 2014), longest-serving U.S. senator in Montana history, and the senator who shepherded the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act through the Senate in 2010; and Lee Metcalf (served 1961 to 1978), a pioneer of the environmental movement.\nMontana's House district is the largest congressional district in the United States by population, with just over 1,023,000 constituents. It is the second-largest House district by area, after Alaska's at-large congressional district. Of Montana's House delegates, Jeannette Rankin was the first woman to hold national office in the United States when she was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1916. Also notable is Representative (later Senator) Thomas H. Carter, the first Catholic to serve as chairman of the Republican National Committee (from 1892 to 1896).\nFederal courts in Montana include the United States District Court for the District of Montana and the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of Montana. Three former Montana politicians have been named judges on the U.S. District Court: Charles Nelson Pray (who served in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1907 to 1913), James F. Battin (who served in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1961 to 1969), and Paul G. Hatfield (who served as an appointed U.S. Senator in 1978). Brian Morris, who served as an associate justice of the Montana Supreme Court from 2005 to 2013, currently serves as a judge on the court.\nPolitics.\nElections in the state had been historically competitive, particularly for state-level offices. Historically, the Democratic Party's strength in the state was gained from support among unionized miners and railroad workers, while farmers generally voted Republican. Republicans have been strongest in the east, while Democrats have been strongest in the west.\nMontana had a history of voters splitting their tickets and filling elected offices with individuals from both parties. Through the mid-20th century, the state had a tradition of \"sending the liberals to Washington and the conservatives to Helena\". Between 1988 and 2006, the pattern flipped, with voters more likely to elect conservatives to federal offices. There have also been long-term shifts in party control. From 1968 through 1988, the state was dominated by the Democratic Party, with Democratic governors for a 20-year period, and a Democratic majority of both the national congressional delegation and during many sessions of the state legislature. This pattern shifted, beginning with the 1988 election when Montana elected a Republican governor for the first time since 1964 and sent a Republican to the U.S. Senate for the first time since 1948. This shift continued with the reapportionment of the state's legislative districts that took effect in 1994, when the Republican Party took control of both chambers of the state legislature, consolidating a Republican party dominance that lasted until the 2004 reapportionment produced more swing districts and a brief period of Democratic legislative majorities in the mid-2000s. At the federal level, the pattern of split-ticket voting and divided government endured until Democratic U.S. Senator Jon Tester lost reelection in 2024, subsequently ceding his seat on January 3, 2025, thereby leaving Montana with no Democratic statewide officeholders.\nMontana has voted for the Republican nominee in all but two presidential elections since 1952. The state last supported a Democrat for president in 1992, when Bill Clinton won a plurality victory. In the 2008 presidential election, Montana was considered a swing state and was ultimately won by Republican John McCain by a narrow margin of two percent. The two chambers of the state's legislature had split party control from 2004 to 2010, when that year's mid-term elections decisively returned both branches to Republican control.\nThe state's congressional seats (now two districts, but until 2023, one at-large district) have been Republican since 1996, and its Senate seats have been held by Republicans Steve Daines since 2015 and Tim Sheehy since 2025.\nThe Montana Senate is controlled by Republicans 32 to 18, and the Montana House of Representatives also holds a 57 to 43 Republican majority following the 2024 Montana elections which saw Democrats break the Republican supermajority in the House aided by independent redistricting.\nIn a 2020 study, Montana was ranked as the 21st easiest state for citizens to vote in. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "19979", "revid": "10888", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19979", "title": "Marina del Rey", "text": ""}
{"id": "19980", "revid": "28564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19980", "title": "Machine translation", "text": "Computerized translation between natural languages\nMachine translation is the use of computational techniques to translate text or speech from one language to another, including the contextual, idiomatic, and pragmatic nuances of both languages.\nMachine translation tools, while some language models are capable of generating comprehensible results, remain limited by the complexity of language and emotion, often lacking depth and semantic precision. Its quality is influenced by linguistic, grammatical, tonal, and cultural differences, making it inadequate to replace real translators fully. Effective improvement requires understanding the target society\u2019s customs and historical context, human intervention and visual cues remain necessary in simultaneous interpretation, on the other hand, domain-specific customization, such as for technical documentation or official texts\u2014can yield more stable results, and is commonly employed in multilingual websites and professional databases.\nEarly approaches were mostly rule-based or statistical. These methods have since been superseded by neural machine translation and large language models.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe origins of machine translation can be traced back to the work of Al-Kindi, a ninth-century Arabic cryptographer who developed techniques for systemic language translation, including cryptanalysis, frequency analysis, and probability and statistics, which are used in modern machine translation. The idea of machine translation later appeared in the 17th century. In 1629, Ren\u00e9 Descartes proposed a universal language, with equivalent ideas in different tongues sharing one symbol.\nThe idea of using digital computers for translation of natural languages was proposed as early as 1947 by England's A. D. Booth and Warren Weaver at Rockefeller Foundation in the same year. \"The memorandum written by Warren Weaver in 1949 is perhaps the single most influential publication in the earliest days of machine translation.\" Others followed. A demonstration was made in 1954 on the APEXC machine at Birkbeck College (University of London) of a rudimentary translation of English into French. Several papers on the topic were published at the time, and even articles in popular journals (for example an article by Cleave and Zacharov in the September 1955 issue of \"Wireless World\"). A similar application, also pioneered at Birkbeck College at the time, was reading and composing Braille texts by computer.\n1950s.\nThe first researcher in the field, Yehoshua Bar-Hillel, began his research at MIT (1951). A Georgetown University MT research team, led by Professor Michael Zarechnak, followed (1951) with a public demonstration of its Georgetown-IBM experiment system in 1954. MT research programs popped up in Japan and Russia (1955), and the first MT conference was held in London (1956).\nDavid G. Hays \"wrote about computer-assisted language processing as early as 1957\" and \"was project leader on computational linguistics\nat Rand from 1955 to 1968.\"\n1960\u20131975.\nResearchers continued to join the field as the Association for Machine Translation and Computational Linguistics was formed in the U.S. (1962) and the National Academy of Sciences formed the Automatic Language Processing Advisory Committee (ALPAC) to study MT (1964). Real progress was much slower, however, and after the ALPAC report (1966), which found that the ten-year-long research had failed to fulfill expectations, funding was greatly reduced. According to a 1972 report by the Director of Defense Research and Engineering (DDR&amp;E), the feasibility of large-scale MT was reestablished by the success of the Logos MT system in translating military manuals into Vietnamese during that conflict.\nThe French Textile Institute also used MT to translate abstracts from and into French, English, German and Spanish (1970); Brigham Young University started a project to translate Mormon texts by automated translation (1971).\n1975\u20131980s.\nSYSTRAN, which \"pioneered the field under contracts from the U.S. government\" in the 1960s, was used by Xerox to translate technical manuals (1978). Beginning in the late 1980s, as computational power increased and became less expensive, more interest was shown in statistical models for machine translation. MT became more popular after the advent of computers. SYSTRAN's first implementation system was implemented in 1988 by the online service of the French Postal Service called Minitel. Various computer based translation companies were also launched, including Trados (1984), which was the first to develop and market Translation Memory technology (1989), though this is not the same as MT. The first commercial MT system for Russian / English / German-Ukrainian was developed at Kharkov State University (1991).\n1990s and early 2000s.\nBy 1998, \"for as little as $29.95\" one could \"buy a program for translating in one direction between English and a major European language of\nyour choice\" to run on a PC.\nMT on the web started with SYSTRAN offering free translation of small texts (1996) and then providing this via AltaVista Babelfish, which racked up 500,000 requests a day (1997). The second free translation service on the web was Lernout &amp; Hauspie's GlobaLink. \"Atlantic Magazine\" wrote in 1998 that \"Systran's Babelfish and GlobaLink's Comprende\" handled\n\"Don't bank on it\" with a \"competent performance.\"\nFranz Josef Och (the future head of Translation Development AT Google) won DARPA's speed MT competition (2003). More innovations during this time included MOSES, the open-source statistical MT engine (2007), a text/SMS translation service for mobiles in Japan (2008), and a mobile phone with built-in speech-to-speech translation functionality for English, Japanese and Chinese (2009). In 2012, Google announced that Google Translate translates roughly enough text to fill 1 million books in one day.\nApproaches.\nBefore the advent of deep learning methods, statistical methods required a lot of rules accompanied by morphological, syntactic, and semantic annotations.\nRule-based.\nThe rule-based machine translation approach was used mostly in the creation of dictionaries and grammar programs. Its biggest downfall was that everything had to be made explicit: orthographical variation and erroneous input must be made part of the source language analyser in order to cope with it, and lexical selection rules must be written for all instances of ambiguity.\nTransfer-based machine translation.\nTransfer-based machine translation was similar to interlingual machine translation in that it created a translation from an intermediate representation that simulated the meaning of the original sentence. Unlike interlingual MT, it depended partially on the language pair involved in the translation.\nInterlingual.\nInterlingual machine translation was one instance of rule-based machine-translation approaches. In this approach, the source language, i.e. the text to be translated, was transformed into an interlingual language, i.e. a \"language neutral\" representation that is independent of any language. The target language was then generated out of the interlingua. The only interlingual machine translation system that was made operational at the commercial level was the KANT system (Nyberg and Mitamura, 1992), which was designed to translate Caterpillar Technical English (CTE) into other languages.\nDictionary-based.\nMachine translation used a method based on dictionary entries, which means that the words were translated as they are by a dictionary.\nStatistical.\nStatistical machine translation tried to generate translations using statistical methods based on bilingual text corpora, such as the Canadian Hansard corpus, the English-French record of the Canadian parliament and EUROPARL, the record of the European Parliament. Where such corpora were available, good results were achieved translating similar texts, but such corpora were rare for many language pairs. The first statistical machine translation software was CANDIDE from IBM. In 2005, Google improved its internal translation capabilities by using approximately 200 billion words from United Nations materials to train their system; translation accuracy improved.\nSMT's biggest downfall included it being dependent upon huge amounts of parallel texts, its problems with morphology-rich languages (especially with translating \"into\" such languages), and its inability to correct singleton errors.\nSome work has been done in the utilization of multiparallel corpora, that is a body of text that has been translated into 3 or more languages. Using these methods, a text that has been translated into 2 or more languages may be utilized in combination to provide a more accurate translation into a third language compared with if just one of those source languages were used alone.\nNeural MT.\nA deep learning-based approach to MT, neural machine translation has made rapid progress in recent years. However, the current consensus is that the so-called human parity achieved is not real, being based wholly on limited domains, language pairs, and certain test benchmarks i.e., it lacks statistical significance power.\nTranslations by neural MT tools like DeepL Translator, which is thought to usually deliver the best machine translation results as of 2022, typically still need post-editing by a human.\nInstead of training specialized translation models on parallel datasets, one can also directly prompt generative large language models like GPT to translate a text. This approach is considered promising, but is still more resource-intensive than specialized translation models.\nIssues.\nStudies using human evaluation (e.g. by professional literary translators or human readers) have systematically identified various issues with the latest advanced MT outputs. Some quality evaluation studies have found that, in several languages, human translations outperform ChatGPT-produced translations in terminological accuracy and clarity of expression. Common issues include the translation of ambiguous parts whose correct translation requires common sense-like semantic language processing or context. There can also be errors in the source texts, missing high-quality training data and the severity of frequency of several types of problems may not get reduced with techniques used to date, requiring some level of human active participation.\nDisambiguation.\nWord-sense disambiguation concerns finding a suitable translation when a word can have more than one meaning. The problem was first raised in the 1950s by Yehoshua Bar-Hillel. He pointed out that without a \"universal encyclopedia\", a machine would never be able to distinguish between the two meanings of a word. Today there are numerous approaches designed to overcome this problem. They can be approximately divided into \"shallow\" approaches and \"deep\" approaches.\nShallow approaches assume no knowledge of the text. They simply apply statistical methods to the words surrounding the ambiguous word. Deep approaches presume a comprehensive knowledge of the word. So far, shallow approaches have been more successful.\nClaude Piron, a long-time translator for the United Nations and the World Health Organization, wrote that machine translation, at its best, automates the easier part of a translator's job; the harder and more time-consuming part usually involves doing extensive research to resolve ambiguities in the source text, which the grammatical and lexical exigencies of the target language require to be resolved:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Why does a translator need a whole workday to translate five pages, and not an hour or two? ... About 90% of an average text corresponds to these simple conditions. But unfortunately, there's the other 10%. It's that part that requires six [more] hours of work. There are ambiguities one has to resolve. For instance, the author of the source text, an Australian physician, cited the example of an epidemic which was declared during World War II in a \"Japanese prisoners of war camp\". Was he talking about an American camp with Japanese prisoners or a Japanese camp with American prisoners? The English has two senses. It's necessary therefore to do research, maybe to the extent of a phone call to Australia.\nThe ideal deep approach would require the translation software to do all the research necessary for this kind of disambiguation on its own; but this would require a higher degree of AI than has yet been attained. A shallow approach which simply guessed at the sense of the ambiguous English phrase that Piron mentions (based, perhaps, on which kind of prisoner-of-war camp is more often mentioned in a given corpus) would have a reasonable chance of guessing wrong fairly often. A shallow approach that involves \"ask the user about each ambiguity\" would, by Piron's estimate, only automate about 25% of a professional translator's job, leaving the harder 75% still to be done by a human.\nNon-standard speech.\nOne of the major pitfalls of MT is its inability to translate non-standard language with the same accuracy as standard language. Heuristic or statistical based MT takes input from various sources in standard form of a language. Rule-based translation, by nature, does not include common non-standard usages. This causes errors in translation from a vernacular source or into colloquial language. Limitations on translation from casual speech present issues in the use of machine translation in mobile devices.\nNamed entities.\nIn information extraction, named entities, in a narrow sense, refer to concrete or abstract entities in the real world such as people, organizations, companies, and places that have a proper name: George Washington, Chicago, Microsoft. It also refers to expressions of time, space and quantity such as 1 July 2011, $500.\nIn the sentence \"Smith is the president of Fabrionix\" both \"Smith\" and \"Fabrionix\" are named entities, and can be further qualified via first name or other information; \"president\" is not, since Smith could have earlier held another position at Fabrionix, e.g. Vice President.\nThe term rigid designator is what defines these usages for analysis in statistical machine translation.\nNamed entities must first be identified in the text; if not, they may be erroneously translated as common nouns, which would most likely not affect the BLEU rating of the translation but would change the text's human readability. They may be omitted from the output translation, which would also have implications for the text's readability and message.\nTransliteration includes finding the letters in the target language that most closely correspond to the name in the source language. This, however, has been cited as sometimes worsening the quality of translation. For \"Southern California\" the first word should be translated directly, while the second word should be transliterated. Machines often transliterate both because they treated them as one entity. Words like these are hard for machine translators, even those with a transliteration component, to process.\nUse of a \"do-not-translate\" list, which has the same end goal \u2013 transliteration as opposed to translation. still relies on correct identification of named entities.\nA third approach is a class-based model. Named entities are replaced with a token to represent their \"class\"; \"Ted\" and \"Erica\" would both be replaced with \"person\" class token. Then the statistical distribution and use of person names, in general, can be analyzed instead of looking at the distributions of \"Ted\" and \"Erica\" individually, so that the probability of a given name in a specific language will not affect the assigned probability of a translation. A study by Stanford on improving this area of translation gives the examples that different probabilities will be assigned to \"David is going for a walk\" and \"Ankit is going for a walk\" for English as a target language due to the different number of occurrences for each name in the training data. A frustrating outcome of the same study by Stanford (and other attempts to improve named recognition translation) is that many times, a decrease in the BLEU scores for translation will result from the inclusion of methods for named entity translation.\nApplications.\nWhile no system provides the ideal of fully automatic high-quality machine translation of unrestricted text, many fully automated systems produce reasonable output. The quality of machine translation is substantially improved if the domain is restricted and controlled. This enables using machine translation as a tool to speed up and simplify translations, as well as producing flawed but useful low-cost or ad-hoc translations.\nTravel.\nMachine translation applications have also been released for most mobile devices, including mobile telephones, pocket PCs, PDAs, etc. Due to their portability, such instruments have come to be designated as mobile translation tools enabling mobile business networking between partners speaking different languages, or facilitating both foreign language learning and unaccompanied traveling to foreign countries without the need of the intermediation of a human translator.\nFor example, the Google Translate app allows foreigners to quickly translate text in their surrounding via augmented reality using the smartphone camera that overlays the translated text onto the text. It can also recognize speech and then translate it.\nPublic administration.\nDespite their inherent limitations, MT programs are used around the world. Probably the largest institutional user is the European Commission. In 2012, with an aim to replace a rule-based MT by newer, statistical-based MT@EC, The European Commission contributed 3.072 million euros (via its ISA programme).\nWikipedia.\nMachine translation has also been used for translating Wikipedia articles and could play a larger role in creating, updating, expanding, and generally improving articles in the future, especially as the MT capabilities may improve. There is a \"content translation tool\" which allows editors to more easily translate articles across several select languages. English-language articles are thought to usually be more comprehensive and less biased than their non-translated equivalents in other languages. As of 2022, English Wikipedia has over 6.5 million articles while, for example, the German and Swedish Wikipedias each only have over 2.5 million articles, each often far less comprehensive.\nSurveillance and military.\nFollowing terrorist attacks in Western countries, including 9-11, the U.S. and its allies have been most interested in developing Arabic machine translation programs, but also in translating Pashto and Dari languages. Within these languages, the focus is on key phrases and quick communication between military members and civilians through the use of mobile phone apps. The Information Processing Technology Office in DARPA hosted programs like TIDES and Babylon translator. US Air Force has awarded a $1 million contract to develop a language translation technology.\nSocial media.\nThe notable rise of social networking on the web in recent years has created yet another niche for the application of machine translation software \u2013 in utilities such as Facebook, or instant messaging clients such as Skype, Google Talk, MSN Messenger, etc. \u2013 allowing users speaking different languages to communicate with each other.\nOnline games.\nLineage W gained popularity in Japan because of its machine translation features allowing players from different countries to communicate.\nMedicine.\nDespite being labelled as an unworthy competitor to human translation in 1966 by the Automated Language Processing Advisory Committee put together by the United States government, the quality of machine translation has now been improved to such levels that its application in online collaboration and in the medical field are being investigated. The application of this technology in medical settings where human translators are absent is another topic of research, but difficulties arise due to the importance of accurate translations in medical diagnoses.\nResearchers caution that the use of machine translation in medicine could risk mistranslations that can be dangerous in critical situations. Machine translation can make it easier for doctors to communicate with their patients in day to day activities, but it is recommended to only use machine translation when there is no other alternative, and that translated medical texts should be reviewed by human translators for accuracy.\nLaw.\nLegal language poses a significant challenge to machine translation tools due to its precise nature and atypical use of normal words. For this reason, specialized algorithms have been developed for use in legal contexts. Due to the risk of mistranslations arising from machine translators, researchers recommend that machine translations should be reviewed by human translators for accuracy, and some courts prohibit its use in formal proceedings.\nThe use of machine translation in law has raised concerns about translation errors and client confidentiality. Lawyers who use free translation tools such as Google Translate may accidentally violate client confidentiality by exposing private information to the providers of the translation tools. In addition, there have been arguments that consent for a police search that is obtained with machine translation is invalid, with different courts issuing different verdicts over whether or not these arguments are valid.\nAncient languages.\nThe advancements in convolutional neural networks in recent years and in low resource machine translation (when only a very limited amount of data and examples are available for training) enabled machine translation for ancient languages, such as Akkadian and its dialects Babylonian and Assyrian.\nEvaluation.\nThere are many factors that affect how machine translation systems are evaluated. These factors include the intended use of the translation, the nature of the machine translation software, and the nature of the translation process.\nDifferent programs may work well for different purposes. For example, statistical machine translation (SMT) typically outperforms example-based machine translation (EBMT), but researchers found that when evaluating English to French translation, EBMT performs better. The same concept applies for technical documents, which can be more easily translated by SMT because of their formal language.\nIn certain applications, however, e.g., product descriptions written in a controlled language, a dictionary-based machine-translation system has produced satisfactory translations that require no human intervention save for quality inspection.\nThere are various means for evaluating the output quality of machine translation systems. The oldest is the use of human judges to assess a translation's quality. Even though human evaluation is time-consuming, it is still the most reliable method to compare different systems such as rule-based and statistical systems. Automated means of evaluation include BLEU, NIST, METEOR, and LEPOR.\nRelying exclusively on unedited machine translation ignores the fact that communication in human language is context-embedded and that it takes a person to comprehend the context of the original text with a reasonable degree of probability. It is certainly true that even purely human-generated translations are prone to error. Therefore, to ensure that a machine-generated translation will be useful to a human being and that publishable-quality translation is achieved, such translations must be reviewed and edited by a human. The late Claude Piron wrote that machine translation, at its best, automates the easier part of a translator's job; the harder and more time-consuming part usually involves doing extensive research to resolve ambiguities in the source text, which the grammatical and lexical exigencies of the target language require to be resolved. Such research is a necessary prelude to the pre-editing necessary in order to provide input for machine-translation software such that the output will not be meaningless.\nIn addition to disambiguation problems, decreased accuracy can occur due to varying levels of training data for machine translating programs. Both example-based and statistical machine translation rely on a vast array of real example sentences as a base for translation, and when too many or too few sentences are analyzed accuracy is jeopardized. Researchers found that when a program is trained on 203,529 sentence pairings, accuracy actually decreases. The optimal level of training data seems to be just over 100,000 sentences, possibly because as training data increases, the number of possible sentences increases, making it harder to find an exact translation match.\nFlaws in machine translation have been noted for their entertainment value. Two videos uploaded to YouTube in April 2017 involve two Japanese hiragana characters \u3048\u3050 (\"e\" and \"gu\") being repeatedly pasted into Google Translate, with the resulting translations quickly degrading into nonsensical phrases such as \"DECEARING EGG\" and \"Deep-sea squeeze trees\", which are then read in increasingly absurd voices; the full-length version of the video currently has 7.1 million views as of August 2025.[ [update]]\nMachine translation and signed languages.\nIn the early 2000s, options for machine translation between spoken and signed languages were severely limited. It was a common belief that deaf individuals could use traditional translators. However, stress, intonation, pitch, and timing are conveyed much differently in spoken languages compared to signed languages. Therefore, a deaf individual may misinterpret or become confused about the meaning of written text that is based on a spoken language.\nResearchers Zhao, et al. (2000), developed a prototype called TEAM (translation from English to ASL by machine) that completed English to American Sign Language (ASL) translations. The program would first analyze the syntactic, grammatical, and morphological aspects of the English text. Following this step, the program accessed a sign synthesizer, which acted as a dictionary for ASL. This synthesizer housed the process one must follow to complete ASL signs, as well as the meanings of these signs. Once the entire text is analyzed and the signs necessary to complete the translation are located in the synthesizer, a computer generated human appeared and would use ASL to sign the English text to the user.\nCopyright.\nOnly works that are original are subject to copyright protection, so some scholars claim that machine translation results are not entitled to copyright protection because MT does not involve creativity. The copyright at issue is for a derivative work; the author of the original work in the original language does not lose his rights when a work is translated: a translator must have permission to publish a translation.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19983", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19983", "title": "Central moment", "text": "Moment of a random variable minus its mean\nIn probability theory and statistics, a central moment is a moment of a probability distribution of a random variable about the random variable's mean; that is, it is the expected value of a specified integer power of the deviation of the random variable from the mean. The various moments form one set of values by which the properties of a probability distribution can be usefully characterized. Central moments are used in preference to ordinary moments, computed in terms of deviations from the mean instead of from zero, because the higher-order central moments relate only to the spread and shape of the distribution, rather than also to its location.\nSets of central moments can be defined for both univariate and multivariate distributions.\nUnivariate moments.\nThe n-th moment about the mean (or n-th central moment) of a real-valued random variable X is the quantity \"\u03bc\"\"n\" := E[(\"X\" \u2212 E[\"X\"])\"n\"], where E is the expectation operator. For a continuous univariate probability distribution with probability density function \"f\"(\"x\"), the n-th moment about the mean \u03bc is\nformula_1\nFor random variables that have no mean, such as the Cauchy distribution, central moments are not defined.\nThe first few central moments have intuitive interpretations:\nProperties.\nFor all n, the n-th central moment is homogeneous of degree n:\nformula_2\n\"Only\" for n such that n equals 1, 2, or 3 do we have an additivity property for random variables X and Y that are independent:\nformula_3 provided \"n\" \u2208 {1, 2, 3}.\nA related functional that shares the translation-invariance and homogeneity properties with the n-th central moment, but continues to have this additivity property even when \"n\" \u2265 4 is the n-th cumulant \"\u03ba\"\"n\"(\"X\"). For \"n\" = 1, the n-th cumulant is just the expected value; for n\u00a0= either 2 or 3, the n-th cumulant is just the n-th central moment; for \"n\" \u2265 4, the n-th cumulant is an n-th-degree monic polynomial in the first n moments (about zero), and is also a (simpler) n-th-degree polynomial in the first n central moments.\nRelation to moments about the origin.\nSometimes it is convenient to convert moments about the origin to moments about the mean. The general equation for converting the n-th-order moment about the origin to the moment about the mean is\nformula_4\nwhere \u03bc is the mean of the distribution, and the moment about the origin is given by\nformula_5\nFor the cases \"n\" = 2, 3, 4 \u2014 which are of most interest because of the relations to variance, skewness, and kurtosis, respectively \u2014 this formula becomes (noting that formula_6 and formula_7):\nformula_8\nwhich is commonly referred to as formula_9\nformula_10\n... and so on, following Pascal's triangle, i.e.\nformula_11\nbecause formula_12.\nThe following sum is a stochastic variable having a compound distribution\nformula_13\nwhere the formula_14 are mutually independent random variables sharing the same common distribution and formula_15 a random integer variable independent of the formula_16 with its own distribution. The moments of formula_17 are obtained as\nformula_18\nwhere formula_19 is defined as zero for formula_20.\nSymmetric distributions.\nIn distributions that are symmetric about their means (unaffected by being reflected about the mean), all odd central moments equal zero whenever they exist, because in the formula for the n-th moment, each term involving a value of X less than the mean by a certain amount exactly cancels out the term involving a value of X greater than the mean by the same amount.\nMultivariate moments.\nFor a continuous bivariate probability distribution with probability density function \"f\"(\"x\",\"y\") the (\"j\",\"k\") moment about the mean \"\u03bc\" = (\"\u03bc\"\"X\", \"\u03bc\"\"Y\") is\nformula_21\nCentral moment of complex random variables.\nThe n-th central moment for a complex random variable X is defined as \nformula_22\nThe absolute n-th central moment of X is defined as\n&lt;math&gt;\\beta_n = \\operatorname{E} \\left[ {\\left\nThe 2nd-order central moment \"\u03b2\"2 is called the \"variance\" of X whereas the 2nd-order central moment \"\u03b1\"2 is the \"pseudo-variance\" of X.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19985", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19985", "title": "Manhatttan, New York", "text": ""}
{"id": "19986", "revid": "48322853", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19986", "title": "Murad I", "text": "Sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1362 to 1389\nMurad I (; ), nicknamed H\u00fcdavendig\u00e2r (from \u2013 meaning \"sovereign\" in this context; 29 June 1326 \u2013 15 June 1389) was the sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1362 to 1389. He was the son of Orhan Gazi and Nil\u00fcfer Hatun. Murad I came to the throne after his elder half-brother S\u00fcleyman Pasha's death.\nMurad I conquered Adrianople in 1360s and made it the new capital of the Ottoman Sultanate. Then he further expanded the Ottoman realm in Southern Europe by bringing most of the Balkans under Ottoman rule, and forced the princes of Serbia, the emperor of Bulgaria as well as the Byzantine emperor John V Palaiologos to pay him tribute. Murad I administratively divided his sultanate into the two provinces of Anatolia (Asia Minor) and Rumelia (the Balkans).\nTitles.\nAccording to the Ottoman sources, Murad I's titles included \"Bey\", \"Em\u00eer-i a\u2019zam\" (Great Emir), \"Ghazi\", \"H\u00fcdavendig\u00e2r\", \"Khan\", \"Padishah\", \"Sult\u00e2n\u00fc\u2019s-sel\u00e2t\u00een\" (Sultan of sultans), \"Melik\u00fc\u2019l-m\u00fcl\u00fbk\" (Malik of maliks), while in Bulgarian and Serbian sources he was referred to as Tsar. In a Genoese document, he was referred to as \"dominus armiratorum Turchie\" (Master lord of Turks).\nWars.\nMurad fought against the powerful beylik of Karaman in Anatolia and against the Serbs, Albanians, Bulgarians and Hungarians in Europe. In particular, a Serb expedition to expel the Turks from Adrianople led by the Serbian brothers King Vuka\u0161in and Despot Uglje\u0161a, was defeated on September 26, 1371, by Murad's capable second lieutenant Lala \u015e\u00e2hin Pa\u015fa, the first governor (\"beylerbey\") of Rumeli. In 1385, the important Bulgarian city Sofia fell to the Ottomans. In 1386, Prince Lazar Hrebeljanovi\u0107 defeated an Ottoman force at the Battle of Plo\u010dnik. The Ottoman army suffered heavy casualties, and was unable to capture Ni\u0161 on the way back.\nBattle of Kosovo.\nIn 1389, Murad's army fought the Serbian Army and its allies under the leadership of Lazar at the Battle of Kosovo.\nThere are different accounts from different sources about when and how Murad I was assassinated. The contemporary sources mainly noted that the battle took place and that both Prince Lazar and the Sultan lost their lives in the battle. The existing evidence of the additional stories and speculations as to how Murad I died were disseminated and recorded in the 15th century and later, decades after the actual event. One Western source states that during the first hours of the battle, Murad I was assassinated by Serbian nobleman and knight Milo\u0161 Obili\u0107 by knife. Most Ottoman chroniclers (including Dimitrie Cantemir) state that he was assassinated while he was inspecting the battlefield after the battle had finished. His older son Bayezid, who was in charge of the left wing of the Ottoman forces, took charge after that. His other son, Yakub Bey, who was in charge of the other wing, was called to the Sultan's command center tent by Bayezid, but when Yakub Bey arrived he was strangled, leaving Bayezid as the sole claimant to the throne.\nIn a letter from the Florentine senate (written by Coluccio Salutati) to the King Tvrtko I of Bosnia, dated 20 October 1389, Murad I's (and Yakub Bey's) killing was described. A party of twelve Serbian lords slashed their way through the Ottoman lines defending Murad I. One of them, allegedly Milo\u0161 Obili\u0107, had managed to get through to the Sultan's tent and kill him with sword stabs to the throat and belly.\nMurad's internal organs were buried in Kosovo field and remain to this day on a corner of the battlefield in a location called \"Meshed-i Hudavendigar\" which has gained a religious significance for the local Muslims. It was vandalized between 1999 and 2006 and was renovated recently. His other remains were carried to Bursa, his Anatolian capital city, and were buried in a tomb at the complex built in his name.\nAppearance and character.\nMurad I is described in Ottoman sources as a medium-height, round-faced, aquiline-nosed, charitable, just ruler who devoted his life to the holy war. In Byzantine sources, he is remembered as a sultan who spoke little but spoke eloquently, was fond of hunting, tireless, merciful to Christians, but did not tolerate mistakes and could resort to harshness, and was always successful against his enemies.\nFamily.\nMurad was the son of Orhan and Nil\u00fcfer Hatun, a slave concubine who was of ethnic Greek descent.\nConsorts.\nMurad I had at least seven consorts:\nSons.\nMurad I had at least five sons:\nDaughters.\nMurad I had at least five daughters:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "19987", "revid": "46469005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19987", "title": "Mehmed I", "text": "Sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1413 to 1421\nMehmed I (; c.\u20091386/7 \u2013 26 May 1421), also known as Mehmed \u00c7elebi (, \"the noble-born\") or Kiri\u015f\u00e7i (, \"lord's son\"), was the sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1413 to 1421. Son of Sultan Bayezid I and his concubine Devlet Hatun, he fought with his brothers over control of the Ottoman realm in the Ottoman Interregnum (1402\u20131413). Starting from the province of R\u00fbm he managed to bring first Anatolia and then the European territories (Rumelia) under his control, reuniting the Ottoman state by 1413, and ruling it until his death in 1421. Called \"The Restorer,\" he reestablished central authority in Anatolia, and he expanded the Ottoman presence in Europe through the conquest of Wallachia in 1415. Venice destroyed his fleet off Gallipoli in 1416 when the Ottomans lost a naval war.\nEarly life.\nMehmed was born in 1386 or 1387 as the fourth son of Sultan Bayezid I (r.\u20091389\u00a0\u2013\u00a01402) and one of his consorts, the slave girl Devlet Hatun. Following Ottoman custom, when he reached adolescence in 1399, he was sent to gain experience as provincial governor over the R\u00fbm Eyalet (central northern Anatolia), recently conquered from its Eretnid rulers.\nOn 20 July 1402, his father Bayezid was defeated in the Battle of Ankara by the Turko-Mongol conqueror and ruler Timur. The brothers (with the exception of Mustafa, who was captured and taken along with Bayezid to Samarkand) were rescued from the battlefield, Mehmed being saved by Bayezid Pasha, who took him to his hometown of Amasya. Mehmed later made Bayezid Pasha his grand vizier (1413\u20131421).\nThe early Ottoman Empire had no regulated succession, and according to Turkish tradition, every son could succeed his father. Of Mehmed's brothers, the eldest, Ertu\u011frul, had died in 1400, while the next in line, Mustafa, was a prisoner of Timur. Leaving aside the underage siblings, this left four princes\u2014Mehmed, S\u00fcleyman, \u0130sa, and Musa, to contend over control of the remaining Ottoman territories in the civil war known as the \"Ottoman Interregnum\". In modern historiography, these princes are usually called by the title , but in contemporary sources, the title is reserved for Mehmed and Musa. The Byzantine sources translated the title as (), which was in turn adopted into Turkish as , sometimes misinterpreted as , 'the wrestler'.\nDuring the early interregnum, Mehmed \u00c7elebi behaved as Timur's vassal. Beside the other princes, Mehmed minted coin which Timur's name appeared as (), alongside his own as (). This was probably an attempt on Mehmed's part to justify to Timur his conquest of Bursa after the Battle of Ulubad. After Mehmed established himself in \"Rum\", Timur had already begun preparations for his return to Central Asia, and took no further steps to interfere with the \"status quo\" in Anatolia.\nReign.\nAfter winning the Interregnum, Mehmed crowned himself sultan in the Thracian city of Edirne that lay in the European part of the empire (the area dividing the Anatolian and European sides of the empire, Constantinople and the surrounding region, was still held by the Byzantine Empire), becoming Mehmed I. He consolidated his power, made Edirne the most important of the dual capitals, and conquered parts of Albania, the Jandarid emirate, and the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia from the Mamluks. Taking his many achievements into consideration, Mehmed is widely known as the \"second founder\" of the Ottoman Sultanate.\nSoon after Mehmed began his reign, his brother Mustafa \u00c7elebi, who had originally been captured along with their father Bayezid I during the Battle of Ankara and held captive in Samarkand, hiding in Anatolia during the Interregnum, reemerged and asked Mehmed to partition the empire with him. Mehmed refused and met Mustafa's forces in battle, easily defeating them. Mustafa escaped to the Byzantine city of Thessaloniki, but after an agreement with Mehmed, the Byzantine emperor Manuel II Palaiologos exiled Mustafa to the island of Lemnos.\nHowever, Mehmed still faced some problems, first being the problem of his nephew Orhan, who Mehmed perceived as a threat to his rule, much like his late brothers had been. There was allegedly a plot involving him by Manuel II Palaiologos, who tried to use Orhan against Sultan Mehmed; however, the sultan found out about the plot and had Orhan blinded for betrayal, according to a common Byzantine practice.\nFurthermore, as a result of the Battle of Ankara and other civil wars, the population of the empire had become unstable and traumatized. A very powerful social and religious movement arose in the empire and became disruptive. The movement was led by Sheikh Bedreddin (1359\u20131420), a famous Muslim Sufi and charismatic theologian. He was an eminent Ulema, born of a Greek mother and a Muslim father in Simavna (Kyprinos) southwest of Edirne (formerly Adrianople). Mehmed's brother Musa had made Bedreddin his \"qadi of the army,\" or the supreme judge. Bedreddin created a populist religious movement in the Ottoman Sultanate, \"subversive conclusions promoting the suppression of social differences between rich and poor as well as the barriers between different forms of monotheism.\" Successfully developing a popular social revolution and syncretism of the various religions and sects of the empire, Bedreddin's movement began in the European side of the empire and underwent further expansion in western Anatolia.\nIn 1416, Sheikh Bedreddin started his rebellion against the throne. After a four-year struggle, he was finally captured by Mehmed's grand vizier Bayezid Pasha and hanged in the city of Serres, a city in modern-day Greece, in 1420.\nDeath.\nThe reign of Mehmed I as sultan of the re-united empire lasted only eight years before his death, but he had also been the most powerful brother contending for the throne and \"de facto\" ruler of most of the empire for nearly the whole preceding period of 11 years of the Ottoman Interregnum that passed between his father's captivity at Ankara and his own final victory over his brother Musa \u00c7elebi at the Battle of \u00c7amurlu.\nBefore his death, to secure passing the throne safely to his son Murad II, Mehmed blinded his nephew Orhan \u00c7elebi (son of S\u00fcleyman), and decided to send his two sons Yusuf and Mahmud to be held as a hostage by Emperor Manuel II, hoping to ensure the continuing custody of his brother Mustafa.\nHe was buried in Bursa, in a mausoleum erected by himself near the celebrated mosque which he built there, and which, because of its decorations of green glazed tiles, is called the Green Mosque. Mehmed I also completed another mosque in Bursa, which his grandfather Murad I had commenced but which had been neglected during the reign of Bayezid. Mehmed founded in the vicinity of his own Green Mosque and mausoleum two other characteristic institutions, one a school and one a refectory for the poor, both of which he endowed with royal munificence.\nFamily.\nConsorts.\nMehmed I had three known consorts:\nSons.\nMehmed I had at least five sons:\nDaughters.\nMehmed I had at least eight daughters:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "19988", "revid": "50800103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19988", "title": "Murad II", "text": "Sultan of the Ottoman Empire (r. 1421\u20131444, 1446\u20131451)\nMurad II (, ; June 1404 \u2013 3 February 1451) was twice the sultan of the Ottoman Empire, from 1421 to 1444 and from 1446 to 1451.\nEarly life.\nMurad was born in June 1404 to Mehmed I, while the identity of his mother is disputed according to various accounts. According to 15th century historian \u015e\u00fckrullah, Murad's mother was a concubine. H\u00fcseyin H\u00fcs\u00e2meddin Yasar, an early 20th century historian, wrote in his work \"Amasya Tarihi\" that his mother was \u015eahzade Hatun, daughter of Divitdar Ahmed Pasha. According to historians \u0130smail Hami Dani\u015fmend, and Heath W. Lowry, his mother was Emine Hatun, a Dulkadirid princess.\nHe spent his early childhood in Amasya. In 1410, Murad came along with his father to the Ottoman capital, Edirne. After his father ascended to the Ottoman throne, he made Murad governor of the Amasya Sanjak. Murad remained at Amasya until the death of Mehmed I in 1421. He was solemnly recognized as sultan of the Ottoman Sultanate at sixteen years of age, girded with the Sword of Osman at Bursa, and the troops and officers of the state willingly paid homage to him as their sovereign.\nReign.\nAccession and first reign.\nMurad's reign was troubled by insurrection early on. The Byzantine Emperor, Manuel II, released the 'pretender' Mustafa \u00c7elebi (known as D\u00fczmece Mustafa) from confinement and acknowledged him as the legitimate heir to the throne of Bayezid I (1389\u20131402). The Byzantine Emperor had first secured a stipulation that Mustafa should, if successful, repay him for his liberation by giving up a large number of important cities. The pretender was landed by the Byzantine galleys in the European dominion of the sultan and for a time made rapid progress. Many Ottoman soldiers joined him, and he defeated and killed the veteran general Bayazid Pasha, whom Murad had sent to fight him. Mustafa defeated Murad's army and declared himself Sultan of Adrianople (Edirne). He then crossed the Dardanelles to Asia with a large army but Murad out-manoeuvered Mustafa. After which, Mustafa's force defected in large numbers to Murad II. Mustafa took refuge in the city of Gallipoli, but the sultan, who was greatly aided by a Genoese commander named Adorno, besieged him there and stormed the place. Mustafa was taken and put to death by the sultan, who then turned his arms against the Roman emperor and declared his resolution to punish the Palaiologos for their unprovoked enmity by the capture of Constantinople.\nMurad II then formed a new army called Azeb in 1421 and marched through the Byzantine Empire and laid siege to Constantinople. While Murad was besieging the city, the Byzantines, in league with some independent Turkish Anatolian states, sent the sultan's younger brother K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Mustafa (who was only 13 years old) to rebel against the sultan and besiege Bursa. Murad had to abandon the siege of Constantinople in order to deal with his rebellious brother. He caught Prince Mustafa and executed him. The Anatolian states that had been constantly plotting against him \u2014 Aydinids, Germiyanids, Menteshe and Teke \u2014 were annexed and henceforth became part of the Ottoman Sultanate.\nMurad II then declared war against Venice, the Karamanid Emirate, Serbia and Hungary. The Karamanids were defeated in 1428 and Venice withdrew in 1432 following the defeat at the second Siege of Thessalonica in 1430. In the 1430s Murad captured vast territories in the Balkans and succeeded in annexing Serbia in 1439. In 1441 the Holy Roman Empire and Poland joined the Serbian-Hungarian coalition. Murad II won the Crusade of Varna in 1444 against John Hunyadi.\nAbdication and second reign.\nMurad II relinquished his throne in 1444 to his son Mehmed II, but a Janissary revolt in the Empire forced him to return.\nIn 1448 he defeated the Christian coalition at the Second Battle of Kosovo (the first one took place in 1389). When the Balkan front was secured, Murad II turned east to defeat Timur's son, Shah Rukh, and the emirates of Karamanid and \u00c7orum-Amasya. In 1450 Murad II led his army into Albania and unsuccessfully besieged the Castle of Kruj\u00eb in an effort to defeat the resistance led by Skanderbeg. In the winter of 1450\u20131451, Murad II fell ill, and died in Edirne. He was succeeded by his son Mehmed II (1451\u20131481).\nAs ghazi sultan.\nWhen Murad ascended the throne, he sought to regain lost Ottoman territories that had reverted to autonomy following his grandfather Bayezid I's defeat at the Battle of Ankara in 1402 at the hands of Timur. He needed the support of both the public and the nobles \"who would enable him to exercise his rule\", and utilized the old and potent Islamic trope of the \"ghazi king\".\nIn order to gain popular international support for his conquests, Murad II modeled himself after the legendary \"Ghazi\" kings of old. The Ottomans already presented themselves as \"ghazis\", painting their origins as rising from the \"ghazas\" of Osman, the founder of the dynasty. For them, \"ghaza\" was the noble championing of Islam and justice against non-Muslims and Muslims alike, if they were cruel; for example, Bayezid I labeled Timur Lang, also a Muslim, an apostate prior to the Battle of Ankara because of the violence his troops had committed upon innocent civilians and because \"all you do is to break promises and vows, shed blood, and violate the honor of women.\" Murad II only had to capitalize on this dynastic inheritance of doing \"ghaza\", which he did by actively crafting the public image of Ghazi Sultan.\nAfter his accession, there was a flurry of translating and compiling activity where old Persian, Arab, and Anatolian epics were translated into Turkish so Murad II could uncover the \"ghazi king\" legends. He drew from the noble behavior of the nameless Caliphs in the \"Battalname\", an epic about a fictional Arab warrior who fought against the Byzantines, and modelled his actions on theirs. He was careful to embody the simplicity, piety, and noble sense of justice that was part of the \"ghazi king\" persona.\nFor example, the Caliph in \"Battalname\" saw the battle turning in his enemy's favor, and got down from his horse and prayed, after which the battle ended in a victory for him. In the Battle of Varna in 1444, Murad II saw the Hungarians gaining the upper hand, and he got down from his horse and prayed just like the Caliph. The tide soon turned in the Ottoman's favor and W\u0142adys\u0142aw III of Poland, King of Hungary, was killed in a charge. Similarly, the Caliph in the epic roused his warriors by saying \"Those of you who die will be martyrs. Those of you who kill will be ghazis\"; before the Battle of Varna, Murad II repeated these words to his army, saying \"Those of us who kill will be ghazis; those of us who die will be martyrs.\" In another instance, since the \"ghazi king\" is meant to be just and fair, when Murad took Thessalonica in the Balkans, he took care to keep the troops in check and prevented widespread looting. Finally, just as the fictional Caliph's ghazas were immortalized in \"Battalname\", Murad II's battles and victories were also compiled and given the title \"The \"Ghazas\" of Sultan Murad\" ().\nMurad II successfully painted himself as a simple soldier who did not partake in royal excesses, and as a noble ghazi sultan who sought to consolidate Muslim power against non-Muslims such as the Venetians and Hungarians. Through this self-presentation, he got the support of the Muslim population of not only the Ottoman territories, for both himself and his extensive, expensive campaigns, but also the greater Muslim populations in the Dar-al-Islam \u2013 such as the Mamluks and the Muslim Delhi Sultanates of India. Murad II was basically presenting himself not only as \"a \"ghazi king\" who fights caffres [non-muslims], but also serves as protector and master of lesser \"ghazis\".\"\nEconomy.\nMurad II's reign saw a period of great economic development, with an increase in trade and a considerable expansion of Ottoman cities. In 1432, the traveller Bertrandon de la Broqui\u00e8re noted that Ottoman annual revenue had increased to 2,500,000 ducats.\nAppearance.\nBertrandon de la Broqui\u00e8re met with Murad II in Adrianople, and described him in the following terms:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the first place, as I have seen him frequently, I shall say that he is a little, short, thick man, with the physiognomy of a Turcoman. He has a broad and brown face, high cheek bones, a round beard, a great and crooked nose, with little eyes.\nFamily.\nConsorts.\nMurad II had at least six consorts:\nSons.\nMurad II was the sultan who conferred on his sons and their male descendants the title of \"\u015eehzade\", meaning \"descendant of the \u015eah\", replacing the simple honorific of \"\u00c7elebi\". The title of \u015eehzade remained in use until the abolition of the Ottoman Empire.\nMurad II had at least eight sons:\nDaughters.\nMurad II had at least six daughters:\nPortrayals.\nMurad II is portrayed by \u0130lker Kurt in 2012 film \"Fetih 1453\", by Vahram Papazian in the Albanian movie \"The Great Warrior Skanderbeg\" in 1953, by Tolga Tekin in the 2020 Netflix series ', and by Teoman Kumbaraciba\u015f\u0131 in 2024 series '. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "19989", "revid": "29495465", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19989", "title": "Murad III", "text": "Sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1574 to 1595\nMurad III (; ; 4 July 1546 \u2013 16 January 1595) was the sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1574 until his death in 1595. His rule saw battles with the Habsburgs and exhausting wars with the Safavids. The long-independent Morocco was for a time made a vassal of the empire but regained independence in 1582. His reign also saw the empire's expanding influence on the eastern coast of Africa. However, the empire was beset by increasing corruption and inflation from the New World which led to unrest among the Janissary and commoners. Relations with Elizabethan England were cemented during his reign, as both had a common enemy in the Spanish. He was also a great patron of the arts, commissioning the \"Siyer-i-Nebi\" and other illustrated manuscripts.\nEarly life.\nBorn in Manisa on 4 July 1546, \u015eehzade Murad was the oldest son of \u015eehzade Selim and his powerful wife Nurbanu Sultan. He received a good education and learned the Arabic and Persian languages. After his ceremonial circumcision in 1557, Murad's grandfather, the Sultan Suleiman I, appointed him \"sancakbeyi\" (governor) of Ak\u015fehir in 1558. At the age of 18 he was appointed \"sancakbeyi\" of Saruhan. Suleiman died in 1566 when Murad was 20, and his father became the new sultan, Selim II. Selim II broke with tradition by sending only his oldest son out of the palace to govern a province, assigning Murad to Manisa.\nReign.\nSelim died in 1574 and was succeeded by Murad, who began his reign by having his five younger brothers strangled. His authority was undermined by harem influences \u2013 more specifically, those of his mother and later of his favorite concubine Safiye Sultan, often to the detriment of Sokollu Mehmed Pasha's influence on the court. Selim's power had only been maintained by the effective leadership of the powerful Grand Vizier Sokollu Mehmed Pasha, who remained in office until his assassination in October 1579. During Murad's reign, the northern borders with the Habsburg monarchy were defended by the Bosnian governor Hasan Predojevi\u0107. The reign of Murad III was marked by exhausting wars on the empire's western and eastern fronts. The Ottomans also suffered defeats in battles such as the Battle of Sisak.\nExpedition to Morocco.\nAbd al-Malik became a trusted member of the Ottoman establishment during his exile. He made the proposition of making Morocco an Ottoman vassal in exchange for the support of Murad III in helping him gain the Saadi throne.\nWith an army of 10,000 men, most of whom were Turks, Ramazan Pasha and Abd al-Malik left from Algiers to install Abd al-Malik as an Ottoman vassal ruler of Morocco. Ramazan Pasha conquered Fez which caused the Saadi Sultan to flee to Marrakesh which was also conquered. Abd al-Malik then assumed rule over Morocco as a client of the Ottomans.\nAbd al-Malik made a deal with the Ottoman troops by paying them a large amount of gold and sending them back to Algiers, suggesting a looser concept of vassalage than Murad III may have thought. Murad's name was recited in the Friday prayer and stamped on coinage marking the two traditional signs of sovereignty in the Islamic world. The reign of Abd al-Malik is understood to be a period of Moroccan vassalage to the Ottoman Empire. Abd al-Malik died in 1578 and was succeeded by his brother Ahmad al-Mansur who formally recognised the suzerainty of the Ottoman Sultan at the start of his reign while remaining \"de facto\" independent. He stopped minting coins in Murad's name, dropped his name from the Khutba and declared his full independence in 1582.\nWar with the Safavids.\nThe Ottomans had been at peace with the neighbouring rivaling Safavid Empire since 1555, per the Treaty of Amasya, that for some time had settled border disputes. But in 1577 Murad declared war, starting the Ottoman\u2013Safavid War (1578\u20131590), seeking to take advantage of the chaos in the Safavid court after the death of Shah Tahmasp I. Murad was influenced by viziers Lala Kara Mustafa Pasha and Sinan Pasha and disregarded the opposing counsel of Grand Vizier Sokollu. Murad also fought the Safavids which would drag on for 12 years, ending with the Treaty of Constantinople (1590), which resulted in temporary significant territorial gains for the Ottomans.\nOttoman activity in the Horn of Africa.\nDuring his reign, an Ottoman Admiral by the name of Mir Ali Beg was successful in establishing Ottoman supremacy in numerous cities in the Swahili coast between Mogadishu and Kilwa. Ottoman suzerainty was recognised in Mogadishu in 1585 and Ottoman supremacy was also established in other cities such as Barawa, Mombasa, Kilifi, Pate, Lamu, and Faza.\nFinancial affairs.\nMurad's reign was a time of financial stress for the Ottoman state. To keep up with changing military techniques, the Ottomans trained infantrymen in the use of firearms, paying them directly from the treasury. By 1580 an influx of silver from the New World had caused high inflation and social unrest, especially among Janissaries and government officials who were paid in debased currency. Deprivation from the resulting rebellions, coupled with the pressure of over-population, was especially felt in Anatolia. Competition for positions within the government grew fierce, leading to bribery and corruption. Ottoman and Habsburg sources accuse Murad himself of accepting enormous bribes, including 20,000 ducats from a statesman in exchange for the governorship of Tripoli and Tunisia, thus outbidding a rival who had tried bribing the Grand Vizier.\nDuring his period, excessive inflation was experienced, the value of silver money was constantly played, food prices increased. 400 dirhams should be cut from 600 dirhams of silver, while 800 was cut, which meant 100 percent inflation. For the same reason, the purchasing power of wage earners was halved, and the consequence was an uprising.\nEnglish pact.\nNumerous envoys and letters were exchanged between Elizabeth I and Sultan Murad III. In one correspondence, Murad entertained the notion that Islam and Protestantism had \"much more in common than either did with Roman Catholicism, as both rejected the worship of idols\", and argued for an alliance between England and the Ottoman Empire. To the dismay of Catholic Europe, England exported tin and lead (for cannon-casting) and ammunition to the Ottoman Empire, and Elizabeth seriously discussed joint military operations with Murad III during the outbreak of war with Spain in 1585, as Francis Walsingham was lobbying for a direct Ottoman military involvement against the common Spanish enemy. This diplomacy would be continued under Murad's successor Mehmed III, by both the sultan and Safiye Sultan alike.\nPersonal life.\nPalace life.\nFollowing the example of his father Selim II, Murad was the second Ottoman sultan who never went on campaign during his reign, instead spending it entirely in Constantinople. During the final years of his reign, he did not even leave Topkap\u0131 Palace. For two consecutive years, he did not attend the Friday procession to the imperial mosque\u2014an unprecedented breaking of custom. The Ottoman historian Mustafa Selaniki wrote that whenever Murad planned to go out to Friday prayer, he changed his mind after hearing of alleged plots by the Janissaries to dethrone him once he left the palace. Murad withdrew from his subjects and spent the majority of his reign keeping to the company of few people and abiding by a daily routine structured by the five daily Islamic prayers. Murad's personal physician Domenico Hierosolimitano described a typical day in the life of the sultan:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"In the morning he rises at dawn to say his prayer for half an hour, then for another half-hour he writes. Then he is given something pleasant as a collation, and afterwards sets himself to read for another hour. Then he begins to give audience to the members of the Divan on the four days of the week that this occurs, as had been said above. Then he goes for a walk through the garden, taking pleasure in the delight of fountains and animals for another hour, taking with him the dwarves, buffoons and others to entertain him. Then he goes back once again to studying until he considers the time for lunch has arrived. He stays at table only half an hour, and rises (to go) once again into the garden for as long as he pleases. Then he goes to say his midday prayer. Then he stops to pass the time and amuse himself with the women, and he will stay one or two hours with them, when it is time to say the evening prayer. Then he returns to his apartments or, if it pleases him more, he stays in the garden reading or passing the time until evening with the dwarfs and buffoons, and then he returns to say his prayers, that is at nightfall. Then he dines and takes more time over dinner than over lunch, making conversation until two hours after dark, until it is time for prayer [...] He never fails to observe this schedule every day.\"\n\u00d6zgen Felek argues that Murad's sedentary lifestyle and lack of participation in military campaigns earned him the disapproval of Mustafa \u00c2l\u00ee and Mustafa Selaniki, the major Ottoman historians who lived during his reign. Their negative portrayals of Murad influenced later historians.\nChildren.\nBefore becoming sultan, Murad had been loyal to Safiye Sultan, his Albanian concubine. His monogamy was disapproved of by Nurbanu Sultan, who worried that Murad needed more sons to succeed him in case Mehmed died young. She also worried about Safiye's influence over her son and the Ottoman dynasty. Five or six years after his accession to the throne, Murad was given a pair of concubines by his sister Ismihan. Upon attempting sexual intercourse with them, he proved impotent. \"The arrow [of Murad], [despite] keeping with his created nature, for many times [and] for many days has been unable to reach at the target of union and pleasure,\" wrote Mustafa Ali. Nurbanu accused Safiye and her retainers of causing Murad's impotence with witchcraft. Several of Safiye's servants were tortured by eunuchs in order to discover a culprit. Court physicians, working under Nurbanu's orders, eventually prepared a successful cure, but a side effect was a drastic increase in sexual appetite; by the time Murad died, he was said to have fathered over a hundred children. Nineteen of these were executed by Mehmed III when he became sultan.\nWomen at court.\nInfluential ladies of his court included his mother Nurbanu Sultan, his sister Ismihan Sultan, wife of grand vizier Sokollu Mehmed Pasha, and musahibes (favourites) mistress of the housekeeper Canfeda Hatun, mistress of financial affairs Raziye Hatun, and the poet Hubbi Hatun, Finally, after the death of his mother and older sister, Safiye Sultan was the only influential woman in the court.\nEunuchs at court.\nBefore Murad, the palace eunuchs had been mostly white, especially Circassians or Syrians. This began to change in 1582 when Murad gave an important position to a black eunuch. Before, the eunuchs' roles in the palace were racially determined: black eunuchs guarded the harem and the princesses, and white eunuchs guarded the Sultan and male pages in another part of the palace. The chief black eunuch was known as the Kizlar Agha, and the chief white eunuch was known as the Kapi Agha.\nMurad and the arts.\nMurad took great interest in the arts, particularly miniatures and books. He actively supported the court of Society of Miniaturists, commissioning several volumes including the \"Siyer-i Nebi\", the most heavily illustrated biographical work on the life of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, the \"Book of Skills\", the \"Book of Festivities\" and the \"Book of Victories\". He had two large alabaster urns transported from Pergamon and placed on two sides of the nave in the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople and a large wax candle dressed in tin which was donated by him to the Rila monastery in Bulgaria is on display in the monastery museum.\nMurad also furnished the content of \"Kitab\u00fc\u2019l-Menamat\" (\"The Book of Dreams\"), addressed to Murad's spiritual advisor, \u015e\u00fcca Dede. A collection of first person accounts, it tells of Murad's spiritual experiences as a Sufi disciple. Compiled from thousands of letters Murad wrote describing his dream visions, it presents a hagiographic self-portrait. Murad dreams of various activities, including being stripped naked by his father and having to sit on his lap, single-handedly killing 12,000 infidels in battle, walking on water, ascending to heaven, and producing milk from his fingers.\nIn another letter addressed to \u015e\u00fcca Dede, Murad wrote \"I wish that God, may He be glorified and exalted, had not created this poor servant as the descendant of the Ottomans so that I would not hear this and that, and would not worry. I wish I were of unknown pedigree. Then, I would have one single task, and could ignore the whole world.\"\nThe diplomatic edition of these dream letters have been recently published by Ozgen Felek in Turkish.\nDeath.\nMurad died from what is assumed to be natural causes in the Topkap\u0131 Palace on 16 January 1595 and was buried in a tomb next to the Hagia Sophia. In the mausoleum are 54 sarcophagus of the sultan, his wives and children that are also buried there. He is also responsible for changing the burial customs of the sultans' mothers. Murad had his mother Nurbanu buried next to her husband Selim II, making her the first consort to share a sultan's tomb.\nFamily.\nConsorts.\nMurad is believed to have had Safiye Sultan as his main concubine for circa fifteen years. However, Safiye was opposed by Murad's mother, Nurbanu Sultan, and by his sister, Ismihan Sultan, and around 1580, she was exiled to the Old Palace on charges of having rendered the sultan impotent with a spell, after he had not succeeded or had not wanted to have sex with two concubines received by his sister. Furthermore, Nurbanu was concerned about the future of the dynasty, as she believed that Safiye's son alone, Mehmed, (two of three sons that Safiye gave to Murad were dead before 1580) were not enough to ensure the succession. After Safiye's exile, revoked only after Nurbanu's death on December 1583, Murad, to deny the rumor about his impotency, took a huge number of concubines and he had more than fifty known children, although according to sources the total number could exceed hundred.\nAt time of his death in 1595, Murad had at least thirty-five concubines, amongs others:\nAfter the death of Murad III many of his concubines who became childless when at his accession Mehmed had his half-brothers killed, and others who never had children by Murad, were remarried off to palace officials, such as door keepers, cavalry forces (\"b\u00f6l\u00fck halk\u0131\"), and sergeants (\"\u00e7avus\").\nSons.\nMurad III had at least 27 known sons.\nOn Murad's death in 1595 Mehmed III, his eldest son and new sultan, son of Safiye Sultan, executed the 19 half-brothers still alive and drowned seven pregnant concubines, fulfilling the Law of Fraticide.\nKnown sons of Murad III are:\nIn addition to these, a European braggart, Alexander of Montenegro, claimed to be the lost son of Murad III and Safiye Sultan, presenting himself with the name of \u015eehzade Yahya and claiming the throne for it. His claims were never proven and appear dubious to say the least.\nDaughters.\nMurad had more than thirty daughters still alive at his death in 1595, of whom nineteen died of plague (or smallpox) in 1598.\nIt is not known if and how many daughters may have died before him.\nKnown daughters of Murad III are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "19990", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19990", "title": "Mehmed III", "text": "Sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1595 to 1603\nMehmed III (, \"Me\u1e25med-i s\u0101lis\"; ; 26 May 1566 \u2013 22 December 1603) was the sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1595 until his death in 1603. Mehmed was known for ordering the execution of his brothers and leading the army in the Long Turkish War, during which the Ottoman army was victorious at the Battle of Keresztes. This victory was however undermined by some military losses such as in Gy\u0151r and Nikopol. He also ordered the successful quelling of the Jelali rebellions. The sultan also communicated with the court of Elizabeth I on the grounds of stronger commercial relations and in the hopes of England to ally with the Ottomans against the Spanish.\nEarly life.\nMehmed was born at the Manisa Palace on 26 May 1566, during the reign of his great-grandfather, Suleiman the Magnificent. He was the son of Murad III, himself the son of Selim II, who was the son of Sultan Suleiman and Hurrem Sultan. His mother was Safiye Sultan, an Albanian from the Dukagjin Highlands. His great-grandfather Suleiman I died the year he was born, and his grandfather became the new sultan, Selim II. His grandfather Selim II died when Mehmed was eight, and Mehmed's father, Murad III, became sultan in 1574. Murad died in 1595, when Mehmed was 28 years old.\nMehmed spent most of his time in Manisa with his parents and his teacher, Ibrahim Efendi. His circumcision took place on 29 May 1582 when he was 16 years old.\nReign.\nFratricide.\nUpon ascending to the throne, Mehmed III ordered that all of his nineteen brothers be executed. They were strangled by his royal executioners, many of whom were deaf, mute or 'half-witted' to ensure absolute loyalty. Fratricidal successions were not unprecedented, as sultans would often have dozens of children with their concubines.\nPower struggle in Constantinople.\nMehmed III was an idle ruler, leaving government to his mother Safiye Sultan, the valide sultan. His first major problem was the rivalry between two of his viziers, Serdar Ferhad Pasha and Koca Sinan Pasha, and their supporters. His mother and her son-in-law Damat Ibrahim Pasha supported Koca Sinan Pasha and prevented Mehmed III from taking control of the issue himself. The issue grew to cause major disturbances by janissaries. On 7 July 1595, Mehmed III finally sacked Serdar Ferhad Pasha from the position of Grand Vizier due to his failure in Wallachia and replaced him with Sinan.\nSafiye as Valide Sultan.\nWhen Mehmed III ascended the throne, the real power behind the throne was the Mehmed's mother Safiye Sultan who ruled the Ottoman Empire with her son, exerting as much and sometimes even exceeding the influence and authority as Mehmed III. Safiye was so powerful during the reign of Mehmed III that she was even regarded by the ministers and dignitaries as a co-ruler of the Ottoman Empire, .\nShe headed the Imperial council in the absence of Mehmed, and controlled the appointments and dismissals of Ministers, Grand Viziers and even Sheikh-ul-Islam and she had complete control over the Ottoman Treasury and Finances. She filled the entire Imperial court with her supporters, and therefore didn't experience any sort of protest against her power and influence in the empire, during most of her tenure. If any minister challenged her, they were very unlikely to remain in power for long. As Valide Sultan, her personal purse was three times that of the Sultan, the highest level of salary for a person in the empire. Since the public and officials knew of her active role in state affairs, they would turn to her in order to get their work done, and sometimes they would even block her carriage to make requests in person on such matters. During her son's reign, Mehmed consulted her on important matters and did not make a decision without her consent.\nSafiye was also known for her extravagant and lavish lifestyle, which made her many enemies but no one dared to openly challenge her. When Mehmed III went on the Eger campaign in Hungary in 1596, he gave his mother great power over the empire, leaving her in charge of the treasury. During her interim rule she persuaded her son to revoke a political appointment in the judgeship of Constantinople and to reassign the grand vizierate to Damat Ibrahim Pasha, her son-in-law so that no one could do anything in the capital, or even in the whole empire, without Safiye's permission. During the 9-year reign of her son, she was even accused of corruption in his government by selling important and lucrative positions at the highest price offered.\nSafiye was instrumental in the execution of her grandson Mahmud in 1603, having intercepted a message sent to his mother by a religious seer, who predicted that Mehmed III would die in six months and be succeeded by his son. According to the English ambassador, Mahmud was distressed at \"how his father was altogether led by the old Sultana his Grandmother while the state went to ruin, she respecting nothing but her own desire to get money, and often lamented thereof to his mother,\" who was \"not favored of the Queen mother.\" The prince was therefore a serious threat to her and her son's reign. The sultan, provoked by her, suspecting a plot and jealous of his son's popularity, had him strangled.\nBut even for a short period of several weeks in 1600, even the Sultan saw his mother's influence on him and her presence in the palace as disturbing and insisted that she leave the palace and no longer control his affairs. However, she had built extensive support network, and continued to exert a tacit influence over the state through one of the chief eunuchs, appointing her allies to powerful positions. After five weeks, the Sultan was forced to cancel his mother's exile due to the pressure from the Imperial court and she returned to the Palace with even more influence and authority. Safiye continued to co-rule the Empire with him until his death, whereupon she lost all her power and influence and was exiled to Old Palace by her grandson and the new sultan Ahmed I.\nAustro-Hungarian War.\nThe major event of his reign was the Austro-Ottoman War in Hungary (1593\u20131606). Ottoman defeats in the war caused Mehmed III to take personal command of the army, the first sultan to do so since Suleiman I in 1566. Accompanied by the Sultan, the Ottomans conquered Eger in 1596. Upon hearing of the Habsburg army's approach, Mehmed wanted to dismiss the army and return to Istanbul. However, the Ottomans eventually decided to face the enemy and defeated the Habsburg and Transylvanian forces at the Battle of Keresztes (known in Ottoman Turkish as the Battle of Ha\u00e7ova), during which the Sultan had to be dissuaded from fleeing the field halfway through the battle. Upon returning to Istanbul in victory, Mehmed told his viziers that he would campaign again. The next year the Venetian Bailo in Istanbul noted, \"the doctors declared that the Sultan cannot leave for a war on account of his bad health, produced by excesses of eating and drinking\".\nIn reward for his services at the war, Cigalazade Yusuf Sinan Pasha was made Grand Vizier in 1596. However, with pressure from the court and his mother, Mehmed reinstated Damat Ibrahim Pasha to this position shortly afterward.\nHowever, the victory at the Battle of Keresztes was soon set back by some important losses, including the loss of Gy\u0151r () to the Austrians and the defeat of the Ottoman forces led by Haf\u0131z Ahmet Pasha by the Wallachian forces under Michael the Brave in Nikopol in 1599. In 1600, Ottoman forces under Tiryaki Hasan Pasha captured Nagykanizsa after a 40-day siege and later successfully held it against a much greater attacking force in the Siege of Nagykanizsa.\nJelali revolts.\nAnother major event of his reign was the Jelali revolts in Anatolia. Karayaz\u0131c\u0131 Abd\u00fclhalim, a former Ottoman official, captured the city of Urfa and declared himself a sultan in 1600. The rumors of his claim to the throne spread to Constantinople and Mehmed ordered the rebels to be treated harshly to dispel the rumors, among these, was the execution of H\u00fcseyin Pasha, whom Karayaz\u0131c\u0131 Abd\u00fclhalim styled as Grand Vizier. In 1601, Abd\u00fclhalim fled to the vicinity of Samsun after being defeated by the forces under Sokulluzade Hasan Pasha, the governor of Baghdad. However, his brother, Deli Hasan, killed Sokulluzade Hasan Pasha and defeated troops under the command of Had\u0131m H\u00fcsrev Pasha. He then marched on to K\u00fctahya, captured and burned the city.\nRelationship with England.\nIn 1599, the fourth year of Mehmed III's reign, Queen Elizabeth I sent a convoy of gifts to the Ottoman court. These gifts were originally intended for the sultan's predecessor, Murad III, who had died before they had arrived. Included in these gifts was a large jewel-studded clockwork organ that was assembled on the slope of the Royal Private Garden by a team of engineers including Thomas Dallam. The organ took many weeks to complete and featured dancing sculptures such as a flock of blackbirds that sung and shook their wings at the end of the music. Also among the English gifts was a ceremonial coach, accompanied by a letter from the Queen to Mehmed's mother, Safiye Sultan. These gifts were intended to cement relations between the two countries, building on the trade agreement signed in 1581 that gave English merchants priority in the Ottoman region. Under the looming threat of Spanish military presence, England was eager to secure an alliance with the Ottomans, the two nations together having the capability to divide the power. Elizabeth's gifts arrived in a large 27-gun merchantman ship that Mehmed personally inspected, a clear display of English maritime strength that would prompt him to build up his fleet over the following years of his reign. The Anglo-Ottoman alliance would never be consummated, however, as relations between the nations grew stagnant due to anti-European sentiments reaped from the worsening Austro-Ottoman War and the deaths of Safiye Sultan's interpreter and the pro-English chief Hasan Pasha.\nDeath.\nMehmed died on 22 December 1603 at the age of 37. According to one source, the cause of his death was the distress caused by the death of his son, \u015eehzade Mahmud. According to another source, he died either of a plague or a stroke. He was buried in Hagia Sophia Mosque. He was succeeded by his 13-year-old son Ahmed I as the new sultan.\nFamily.\nConsorts.\nMehmed III had three known consorts, none of whom, according to the harem records, held the title of Haseki Sultan:\nSons.\nMehmed III had at least eight sons:\nDaughters.\nMehmed III had at least ten daughters:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19991", "revid": "50450040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19991", "title": "Mustafa I", "text": "Sultan of the Ottoman Empire (r. 1617\u20131618, 1622\u20131623)\nMustafa I (; \u200e; ; 1601 or 1602 \u2013 20 January 1639) was twice the sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 22 November 1617 to 26 February 1618, and from 20 May 1622 to 10 September 1623. He was the son of sultan Mehmed III and Halime Sultan.\nEarly life.\nMustafa was born in 1601 or 1602 in the Topkapi Palace. He was son of Sultan Mehmed III and Halime Hatun, an Abkhazian concubine.\nBefore 1603 it was customary for an Ottoman Sultan to have his brothers executed shortly after ascending the throne, (Mustafa's father Mehmed III had executed his nineteen half-brothers). But when the thirteen-year-old Ahmed I, Mustafa's older half-brother, was enthroned in 1603, he spared the life of Mustafa. Handan Sultan, mother of Ahmed I, was crucial to Mustafa's survival, as she convinced her son to spare his life.\nA factor in Mustafa's survival is the influence of K\u00f6sem Sultan (Ahmed's favorite consort), who may have wished to preempt the succession of Sultan Osman II, Ahmed's first-born son from another concubine. If Osman became Sultan, he would likely try to execute his half-brothers, the sons of Ahmed and K\u00f6sem. (This scenario later became a reality when Osman II executed his half-brother Mehmed, the oldest son of Ahmed and K\u00f6sem, in 1621.) Furthermore, when Ahmed ascended the throne, Mustafa was the only possible heir. Had Ahmed executed him and then died sonless, the dynasty would have died out. However, the reports of foreign ambassadors suggest that Ahmed actually liked his half-brother: he had been on good terms with his older half-brother \u015eehzade Mahmud (full brother of Mustafa, executed by his father Mehmed III and his grandmother Safiye Sultan) and was shocked by his death, and also felt sympathy for Mustafa's very young age.\nMustafa lived at first in the Old Palace, along with his mother, and grandmother Safiye Sultan and later in the Kafes until Ahmed's death in 1617.\nFirst reign (1617\u20131618).\nAhmed's death created a dilemma never before experienced by the Ottoman Empire. Multiple princes were now eligible for the Sultanate, and all of them lived in Topkap\u0131 Palace. A court faction headed by the \u015eeyh\u00fclislam Esad Efendi and Sofu Mehmed Pasha (who represented the Grand Vizier when he was away from Constantinople) decided to enthrone Mustafa instead of Ahmed's son Osman. Sofu Mehmed argued that Osman was too young to be enthroned without causing adverse comment among the populace. The Chief Black Eunuch Mustafa Agha objected, citing Mustafa's mental problems, but he was overruled. Mustafa's rise created a new succession principle of seniority that would last until the end of the Empire. It was the first time an Ottoman Sultan was succeeded by his brother instead of his son. His mother Halime Sultan became the Valide sultan, as well as regent, and wielded great power. Due to Mustafa's mental conditions, she acted as regent and exercised power more directly.\nIt was hoped that regular social contact would improve Mustafa's mental health, but his behavior remained eccentric. He pulled off the turbans of his viziers and yanked their beards. Others observed him throwing coins to birds and fish. The Ottoman historian \u0130brahim Pe\u00e7evi wrote \"this situation was seen by all men of state and the people, and they understood that he was mentally disturbed.\"\nDeposition.\nMustafa was never more than a tool of court cliques at the Topkap\u0131 Palace. In 1618, after a short rule, another palace faction deposed him in favour of his young nephew Osman II (1618\u20131622), and Mustafa was sent back to the Old Palace. The conflict between the Janissaries and Osman II presented him with a second chance. After a Janissary rebellion led to the deposition and assassination of Osman II in 1622, Mustafa was restored to the throne and held it for another year.\nAlleged mental instability.\nNevertheless, according to Baki Tezcan, there is not enough evidence to properly establish that Mustafa was mentally imbalanced when he came to the throne. Mustafa \"made a number of excursions to the arsenal and the navy docks, examining various sorts of arms and taking an active interest in the munitions supply of the army and the navy.\" One of the dispatches of Baron de Sancy, the French ambassador, \"suggested that Mustafa was interested in leading the Safavid campaign himself and was entertaining the idea of wintering in Konya for that purpose.\"\nMoreover, one contemporary observer provides an explanation of the coup which does not mention the incapacity of Mustafa. Baron de Sancy ascribes the deposition as a political conspiracy between the grand admiral Ali Pasha and Chief Black Eunuch Mustafa Agha, who were angered by the former's removal from office upon Sultan Mustafa's accession. They may have circulated rumors of the sultan's mental instability subsequent to the coup in order to legitimize it.\nSecond reign (1622\u20131623).\nMustafa commenced his second reign by executing all those who had taken any part in the murder of Sultan Osman. Hoca \u00d6mer Efendi, the chief of the rebels, the k\u0131zlar Agha Suleiman Agha, the vizier Dilaver Pasha, the Kaim-makam Ahmed Pasha, the defterdar Baki Pasha, the segban-bashi Nasuh Agha, and the general of the Janissaries Ali Agha, were executed.\nThe epithet \"Veli\" (meaning \"saint\") was used in reference to him during his reign.\nHis mental condition unimproved, Mustafa was a puppet controlled by his mother and brother-in-law, the grand vizier Kara Davud Pasha. He believed that Osman II was still alive and was seen searching for him throughout the palace, knocking on doors and crying out to his nephew to relieve him from the burden of sovereignty. \"The present emperor being a fool\" (according to English Ambassador Sir Thomas Roe), he was compared unfavorably with his predecessor. In fact, it was his mother Halime Sultan the de facto-co-ruler as Valide Sultan of the Ottoman Empire.\nDeposition and last years.\nPolitical instability was generated by conflict between the Janissaries and the sipahis (Ottoman cavalry), followed by the Abaza rebellion, which occurred when the governor-general of Erzurum, Abaza Mehmed Pasha, decided to march on Istanbul to avenge the murder of Osman II. The regime tried to end the conflict by executing Kara Davud Pasha, but Abaza Mehmed continued his advance. Clerics and Kemanke\u015f Kara Ali Pasha prevailed upon Mustafa's mother to allow the deposition of her son. She agreed, on the condition that Mustafa's life would be spared.\nThe 11-year-old Murad IV, son of Ahmed I and K\u00f6sem, was enthroned on 10 September 1623. In return for her consent to his deposition, the request of Mustafa's mother that he be spared execution was granted. Mustafa was sent in the Kafes for the rest of his life, while his mother was sent to the Old Palace, where she died.\nDeath.\nMustafa died in the Kafes on 20 January 1639. One source states that he died of epilepsy which was caused by being imprisoned for majority of his life. Another source states that he was executed by the orders of Sultan Murad IV, who was on his death bed, and rumors say that he wanted to end the lineage. He is buried in the courtyard of the Haghia Sophia.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the 2015 Turkish television series \"\", Mustafa was portrayed by several actors:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19992", "revid": "50033120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19992", "title": "Murad IV", "text": "Sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1623 to 1640\nMurad\u00a0IV (, \"Mur\u0101d-\u0131 R\u0101bi\u02bf\"; , 27\u00a0July 1612 \u2013 8 \u00a0February 1640) was the sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1623 to 1640, known both for restoring the authority of the state and for the brutality of his methods. Murad\u00a0IV was born in Constantinople, the son of Sultan Ahmed\u00a0I (r. 1603\u201317) and K\u00f6sem Sultan. He was brought to power by a palace conspiracy when he was just 11 years old, and he succeeded his uncle Mustafa\u00a0I (r. 1617\u201318, 1622\u201323). Until he assumed absolute power on 18\u00a0May 1632, the empire was ruled by his mother, K\u00f6sem Sultan, as \"n\u0101\u02beib-i sal\u1e6danat\" (regent). His reign is most notable for the Ottoman\u2013Safavid War, of which the outcome would partition the Caucasus between the two Imperial powers for around two centuries, while it also roughly laid the foundation for the current Turkey\u2013Iran\u2013Iraq borders.\nEarly life.\nMurad\u00a0IV was born on 27\u00a0July 1612 to Ahmed\u00a0I (reign 1603\u00a0\u2013 1617) and his consort and later wife K\u00f6sem Sultan, an ethnic Greek. After his father's death when he was six years old, he was confined in the Kafes with his brothers, Suleiman, Kasim, Bayezid and Ibrahim.\nGrand Vizier Kemanke\u015f Ali Pasha and \u015eeyh\u00fclislam Yahya Efendi were deposed from their position. The next day, the child of the age of six was taken to the Ey\u00fcp Sultan Mausoleum. The swords of Muhammad and Yavuz Sultan Selim were bequeathed to him. Five days later he was circumcised.\nReign.\nEarly reign (1623\u20131632).\nMurad\u00a0IV was for a long time under the control of his relatives and during his early years as Sultan; his mother, K\u00f6sem Sultan, essentially ruled through him. In this period, the Safavid Empire invaded Ottoman Iraq, Northern Anatolia erupted in revolts, and in 1631 the Janissaries stormed the palace and killed the Grand Vizier, among others.\nAt the age of 16 in 1628, he had his brother-in-law (his sister Fatma Sultan's husband, who was also the former governor of Egypt), Kara Mustafa Pasha, executed for a claimed action \"against the law of God\".\nAfter the death of the Grand Vizier \u00c7erkes Mehmed Pasha in the winter of Tokat, Diyarbekir Beylerbeyi Hafiz Ahmed Pasha became a vizier on 8\u00a0February 1625.\nAn epidemic, which started in the summer of 1625 and was called the plague of Bayrampa\u015fa, spread to threaten the population of Constantinople (present day Istanbul). On average, a thousand people died every day. The people fled to the Okmeydan\u0131 to escape the plague. The situation was worse in the countryside outside of Constantinople.\nAbsolute rule and imperial policies (1632\u20131640).\nIn 1632, Murad\u00a0IV banned the smoking of tobacco and opium and closed coffee-houses, which were believed to be centers of sedition. Also in the same year as noted by Dimitrie Cantemir, he legalized the selling and drinking of alcohol even for Muslims, an act which had no precedent at the time. Previously known to be fond of drinking, in 1634, he realized the dangers of wine, and banned both the sale and drinking of alcohol and ordered taverns to close. He ordered execution for breaking this ban and restored the judicial regulations by very strict punishments, including execution; he once strangled a grand vizier for the reason that the official had beaten his mother-in-law.\nFire of 1633.\nOn 2 September 1633, the Cibali fire broke out, burning a fifth of the city. The fire started during the day when a caulker burned a shrub and a ship caulked into the walls. The fire spread in three branches to the city. One arm lowered towards the sea. It returned from Zeyrek and walked to Atpazan. The most beautiful districts of Constantinople were ruined, from the Yeniodas, Mollag\u00fcrani districts, Fener gate to Sultanselim, Mesihpa\u015fa, Bali Pasha and Lutfi Pasha mosques, \u015eah\u0131 buhan Palace, Unkapan\u0131 to Atpazar\u0131, Bostanzade houses, and Sofular Bazaar. The fire that lasted for 30 hours was only extinguished after the wind stopped.\nWar against Safavid Iran.\nMurad\u00a0IV's reign is most notable for the Ottoman\u2013Safavid War (1623\u201339) against Persia (today Iran) in which Ottoman forces managed to conquer Azerbaijan, occupying Tabriz, Hamadan, and capturing Baghdad in 1638. The Treaty of Zuhab that followed the war generally reconfirmed the borders as agreed by the Peace of Amasya, with Eastern Georgia, Azerbaijan, and Dagestan staying Persian, Western Georgia stayed Ottoman. Mesopotamia was irrevocably lost for the Persians. The borders fixed as a result of the war, are more or less the same as the present border line between Iraq and Iran.\nDuring the siege of Baghdad in 1638, the city held out for forty days but was compelled to surrender.\nMurad\u00a0IV himself commanded the Ottoman Army in the last years of the war.\nRelations with the Mughal Empire.\nWhile he was encamped in Baghdad, Murad\u00a0IV is known to have met ambassadors of the Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan, Mir Zarif and Mir Baraka, who presented 1000 pieces of finely embroidered cloth and even armor. Murad\u00a0IV gave them the finest weapons, saddles and Kaftans and ordered his forces to accompany the Mughals to the port of Basra, where they set sail to Thatta and finally Surat.\nArchitecture.\nMurad\u00a0IV put emphasis on architecture and in his period many monuments were erected. The Baghdad Kiosk, built in 1635, and the Revan Kiosk, built in 1638 in Yerevan, were both built in the local styles. Some of the others include the Kavak Saray\u0131 pavilion; the Meydan\u0131 Mosque; the Bayram Pasha Dervish Lodge, Tomb, Fountain, and Primary School; and the \u015eerafettin Mosque in Konya.\nMusic and poetry.\nMurad\u00a0IV wrote many poems. He used the \"Muradi\" penname for his poems. He also liked testing people with riddles. Once he wrote a poetic riddle and announced that whoever came with the correct answer would get a generous reward. Cihadi Bey, a poet from Enderun School, gave the correct answer and was promoted.\nMurad\u00a0IV was also a composer. He has a composition called \"Uzzal Peshrev\".\nFamily.\nDue to the fact that all of his sons died in infancy, Murad\u00a0IV's family is not well known.\nOnly few of his many concubines are known and of the thirty-two children that Evliya \u00c7elebi said that Murad\u00a0IV had, five have not yet been identified, and the name of some of others is still unknown.\nFurthermore, no child had a certain nominated mother.\nConsorts.\nMurad\u00a0IV had several consorts and concubines, but only few are known and some of them are disputed:\nSons.\nMurad\u00a0IV had at least fifteen sons, but none of them survived infancy and all of them died before their father (who died in February 1640):\nDaughters.\nMurad\u00a0IV had at least thirteen daughters.\nUnlike their brothers, at least eight of them survived at least to the age of marriage:\nDeath.\nMurad\u00a0IV died from cirrhosis in Constantinople at the age of 27 in 1640.\nRumours had circulated that on his deathbed, Murad\u00a0IV ordered the execution of his mentally disabled brother, Ibrahim (reigned 1640\u201348), which would have meant the end of the Ottoman line. However, the order was not carried out.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "19994", "revid": "50885885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19994", "title": "Masamune Shirow", "text": "Japanese manga artist (born 1961)\n, better known by his pen name , is a Japanese manga artist. Shirow is best known for the manga \"Ghost in the Shell\", which has since been turned into three theatrical anime films, two anime television series, an anime television film, an anime ONA series, a theatrical live action film, and several video games, as well as being a key figure in the development of cyberpunk aesthetics and themes in Japan during the 1980s and 1990s.\nLife and career.\nBorn in the Hy\u014dgo Prefecture capital city of Kobe, he studied oil painting at Osaka University of Arts. While in college, he developed an interest in manga, which led him to create his own complete work, \"Black Magic\", which was published in the manga \"d\u014djinshi\" \"Atlas\". His work caught the eye of Seishinsha President Harumichi Aoki, who offered to publish him.\nThe result was best-selling manga \"Appleseed\", a full volume of densely plotted drama taking place in an ambiguous future. The story was a sensation, and won the 1986 Seiun Award for Best Manga. After a professional reprint of \"Black Magic\" and a second volume of \"Appleseed\", he released \"Dominion\" in 1986. Two more volumes of \"Appleseed\" followed before he began work on \"Ghost in the Shell\". His work has been cited as an influence on The Wachowskis and the development of the popular Matrix film series. \nIn 2007, he collaborated again with Production I.G to co-create the original concept for the anime television series \"Ghost Hound\", Production I.G's 20th anniversary project. A further original collaboration with Production I.G began airing in April 2008, titled \"Real Drive\". His work often explores the philosophical themes of cyberpunk such as the nature of post-human existence, AI and the ethics of biotechnology, human\u2013machine relations, multiculturalism, and globalism. \nBibliography.\nManga.\n series:\n series:\nStand-alones:\nArt books.\nA substantial amount of Shirow's work has been released in art book or poster book format, some being hentai. The following is an incomplete list.\nGalgrease.\n\"Galgrease\" (published in \"Uppers Magazine\", 2002) is the collected name of several hentai manga and poster books by Shirow. The name comes from the fact that the women depicted often look \"greased\".\nThe first series of \"Galgrease\" booklets included four issues each in the following settings:\nThe second series included another run of 12 booklets in the following worlds:\nAfter each regular series, there were one or more bonus poster books that revisited the existing characters and settings.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19995", "revid": "1319337843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19995", "title": "Musical saw", "text": "Hand saw used as a musical instrument\nA musical saw, also called a singing saw, is a hand saw used as a musical instrument. Capable of continuous glissando (portamento), the sound creates an ethereal tone, very similar to the theremin. The musical saw is classified as a plaque friction idiophone with direct friction (132.1) under the Hornbostel-Sachs system of musical instrument classification, and as a metal sheet played by friction (151) under the revision of the Hornbostel-Sachs classification by the MIMO Consortium.\nPlaying.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe saw is generally played seated with the handle squeezed between the legs, and the far end held with one hand. Some sawists play standing, either with the handle between the knees and the blade sticking out in front of them. The saw is usually played with the serrated edge, or \"teeth\", facing the body, though some players face them away. Some saw players file down the teeth, which makes no discernable difference to the sound. Many\u00a0\u2013 especially professional\u00a0\u2013 saw players use a handle, called a Tip-Handle or a Cheat, at the tip of the saw for easier bending and higher virtuosity.\nTo sound a note, a sawist first bends the blade into an S-curve. The parts of the blade that are curved are dampened from vibration, and do not sound. At the center of the S-curve a section of the blade remains relatively flat. This section, the \"sweet spot\", can vibrate across the width of the blade, producing a distinct pitch: the wider the section of blade, the lower the sound. Sound is usually created by drawing a bow across the back edge of the saw at the sweet spot, or sometimes by striking the sweet spot with a mallet.\nThe sawist controls the pitch by adjusting the S-curve, making the sweet spot travel up the blade (toward a thinner width) for a higher pitch, or toward the handle for a lower pitch. Harmonics can be created by playing at varying distances on either side of the sweet spot. Sawists can add vibrato by shaking one of their legs or by wobbling the hand that holds the tip of the blade. Once a sound is produced, it will sustain for quite a while, and can be carried through several notes of a phrase.\nOn occasion the musical saw is called for in orchestral music, but orchestral percussionists are seldom also sawists. If a note outside of the saw's range is called for, an electric guitar with a slide can be substituted.\nTypes.\nSawists often use standard wood-cutting saws, although special musical saws are also made. As compared with wood-cutting saws, the blades of musical saws are generally wider, for range, and longer, for finer control. They do not have set or sharpened teeth, and may have grain running parallel to the back edge of the saw, rather than parallel to the teeth. Some musical saws are made with thinner metal, to increase flexibility, while others are made thicker, for a richer tone, longer sustain, and stronger harmonics.\nA typical musical saw is wide at the handle end and wide at the tip. Such a saw will generally produce about two octaves, regardless of length. A bass saw may be over at the handle and produce about two-and-a-half octaves. There are also musical saws with 3\u20134 octaves range, and new improvements have resulted in as much as 5 octaves note range. Two-person saws, also called \"misery whips\", can also be played, though with less virtuosity, and they produce an octave or less of range.\nMost sawists use cello or violin bows, using violin rosin, but some may use improvised home-made bows, such as a wooden dowel.\nProducers.\nMusical saws have been produced for over a century, primarily in the United States, but also in Scandinavia, Germany, France (Lame sonore) and Asia.\nUnited States.\nIn the early 1900s, there were at least ten companies in the United States manufacturing musical saws. These saws ranged from familiar steel varieties to premium, gold-plated saws worth hundreds of dollars. However, with the start of World War II the demand for metals made the manufacture of saws too expensive and many of these companies went out of business. By the year 2000, only three companies in the United States\u00a0\u2013 Mussehl &amp; Westphal, Charlie Blacklock, and Wentworth\u00a0\u2013 were making saws. In 2012, a company called Index Drums started producing a saw that had a built-in transducer in the handle, called the \"JackSaw\".\nOutside the United States.\nOutside the United States, makers of musical saws include Bahco, makers of the limited edition Stradivarius, Alexis in France, Feldmann and St\u00f6vesandt in Germany, Music Blade in Greece and Thomas Flinn &amp; Company in the United Kingdom, based in Sheffield, who produce three different sized musical saws, as well as accessories.\nEvents, championships and world records.\nThe International Musical Saw Association (IMSA) produces an annual International Musical Saw Festival (including a \"Saw-Off\" competition) every August in Santa Cruz and Felton, California. An International Musical Saw Festival is held every other summer in New York City, produced by Natalia Paruz. Paruz also produced a musical saw festival in Israel. There are also annual saw festivals in Japan and China.\nA Guinness World Record for the largest musical-saw ensemble was established July 18, 2009, at the annual NYC Musical Saw Festival. Organized by Paruz, 53 musical saw players performed together.\nIn 2011 a World Championship took place in Jelenia G\u00f3ra/Poland. Winners: 1. Gladys Hulot (France), 2. Katharina Micada (Germany), 3. Tom Fink (Germany).\nCaroline McCaskey became the first person to play the American National Anthem with a saw at a Major League Baseball game (Oakland Athletics\u2019 Coliseum) on June 6, 2022.\nPerformers.\nPeople notable for playing the musical saw. \nMarlene Dietrich.\nGerman actress and singer Marlene Dietrich, who lived and worked in the United States for a long time, is probably the most famous person who played the musical saw. When she studied the violin for one year in Weimar in her early twenties, her musical skills were already evident. Some years later she learned to play the musical saw while she was shooting the film \"Caf\u00e9 Elektric\" in Vienna in 1927. Her colleague, the actor and musician Igo Sym, taught her how to play. In the shooting breaks and at weekends both performed romantic duets, he at the piano and she at the musical saw.\nSym gave his saw to her as a farewell gift. The following words are engraved on the saw: \"Now Suidy is gone / the sun d\u2019ont [sic!] / shine\u2026 / Igo / Vienna 1927\"\nShe took the saw with her, when she left for Hollywood in 1929 and played there in the following years at film sets and Hollywood parties.\nWhen she participated in the United Service Organizations (USO) shows for the US troops in 1944, she also played on the saw. Some of these shows were broadcast on radio, so there exist two rare recordings of her saw playing, embedded in entertaining interviews. 1. Aloha Oe 2. other song\nComposers and compositions.\nBeginning from the early 1920s composers of both contemporary and popular music wrote for the musical saw.\nOne of the first was Franz Schreker who included the musical saw in his opera \"Christophorus\" (1925\u201329) where it is used in the s\u00e9ance scene of the second act. Other early examples include Dmitri Shostakovich: he included the musical saw, e.g., in the film music for \"The New Babylon\" (1929), in \"The Nose\" (1928), and in \"Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District\" (1934).\nShostakovich and other composers of his time used the term \"Flexaton\" to mark the musical saw. \"Flexaton\" just means \"to flex a tone\", in which the saw is flexed to change the pitch. Unfortunately, there exists another instrument called Flexatone, so there has been confusion for a long time. Aram Khachaturian, who knew Shostakovich's music, included the musical saw in his Piano Concerto (1936) in the second movement. Another composer was the Swiss Arthur Honegger, who included the saw in his opera \"Antigone\" in 1924. \nThe Romanian composer George Enescu used the musical saw at the end of the second act of his opera \"\u0152dipe\" (1931) to show in an extensive glissando\u00a0\u2013 which begins with the mezzo-soprano and is continued by the saw\u00a0\u2013 the death and ascension of the sphinx killed by Oedipus.\nThe Italian composer Giacinto Scelsi wrote a part for the saw in his quarter-tone piece \"Quattro pezzi per orchestra\" (1959). German composer Hans Werner Henze took the saw to characterize the mean hero of his tragical opera \"Elegy for young lovers\" (1961).\nOther composers were Krysztof Penderecki with \"Fluorescences\" (1961), \"De natura sonoris Nr. 2\" (1971) and the opera \"Ubu Rex\" (1990), Bernd Alois Zimmermann with \"Stille und Umkehr\" (1970), George Crumb with \"Ancient voices of children\" (1970), John Corigliano with \"The Mannheim Rocket\" (2001).\nComposer Scott Munson wrote \"Clover Hill\" (2007) for saw and orchestra, Quintet for saw and strings (2009), \"The World Is Too Much with Us\" for soprano singer, saw and strings (2009), \"Ars longa vitas [\"sic\"] brevis\" for saw and string quartet (2010), 'Bend' for saw and string quartet (2011) many pieces for jazz band and saw (2010\u20132013), \"Lullaby for the Forgotten\" for saw and piano (2015), and many movie and theater scores containing the saw.\nChaya Czernowin used the saw in her opera \"PNIMA...Ins Innere\" (2000) to represent the character of the grandfather, who is traumatized by the Holocaust.\nThere are further Leif Segerstam, Hans Zender (orchestration of \"5 pr\u00e9ludes\" by Claude Debussy), and Oscar Strasnoy (opera \"Le bal\").\nRussian composer Lera Auerbach wrote for the saw in her ballet \"The Little Mermaid\" (2005), in her symphonic poem \"Dreams and Whispers of Poseidon\" (2005), in her oratorio \"Requiem Dresden \u2013 Ode to Peace\" (2012), in her Piano Concerto No.1 (2015), in her comic oratorio \"The Infant Minstrel and His Peculiar Menagerie\" (2016) and in her violin concerto Nr.4 \"NyX \u2013 Fractured dreams\" (2017).\nCanadian composer Robert Minden has written extensively for the musical saw. Michael A. Levine composed \"Divination By Mirrors\" for musical saw soloist and two string ensembles tuned a quarter tone apart, taking advantage of the saws ability to play in both tunings.\nOther composers for chamber music with musical saw are Jonathan Rutherford (\"An Intake of Breath\"), Dana Wilson (\"Whispers from Another Time\"), Heinrich Gattermeyer (\"Elegie f\u00fcr Singende S\u00e4ge, Cembalo (oder Klavier)\", Vito Zuraj (\"Musica di [\"sic\"] camera\" (2001)) and Britta-Maria Bernhard (\"Tranquillo\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19996", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19996", "title": "MIDI", "text": "Connection standard for electronic musical instruments\nMusical Instrument Digital Interface (; MIDI) is an American-Japanese technical standard that describes a communication protocol, digital interface, and electrical connectors that connect a wide variety of electronic musical instruments, computers, and related audio devices for playing, editing, and recording music. A single MIDI cable can carry up to sixteen channels of MIDI data, each of which can be routed to a separate device. Each interaction with a key, button, knob or slider is converted into a MIDI event, which specifies musical instructions, such as a note's pitch, timing and velocity. One common MIDI application is to play a MIDI keyboard or other controller and use it to trigger a digital sound module (which contains synthesized musical sounds) to generate sounds, which the audience hears produced by a keyboard amplifier. MIDI data can be transferred via MIDI or USB cable, or recorded to a sequencer or digital audio workstation to be edited or played back.\nMIDI also defines a file format that stores and exchanges the data. Advantages of MIDI include small file size, ease of modification and manipulation and a wide choice of electronic instruments and synthesizer or digitally sampled sounds. A MIDI recording of a performance on a keyboard could sound like a piano or other keyboard instrument; however, since MIDI records the messages and information about their notes and not the specific sounds, this recording could be changed to many other sounds, ranging from synthesized or sampled guitar or flute to full orchestra.\nBefore the development of MIDI, electronic musical instruments from different manufacturers could generally not communicate with each other. This meant that a musician could not, for example, plug a Roland keyboard into a Yamaha synthesizer module. With MIDI, any MIDI-compatible keyboard (or other controller device) can be connected to any other MIDI-compatible sequencer, sound module, drum machine, synthesizer, or computer, even if they are made by different manufacturers.\nMIDI technology was standardized in 1983 by a panel of music industry representatives and is maintained by the MIDI Manufacturers Association (MMA). All official MIDI standards are jointly developed and published by the MMA in Los Angeles, and the MIDI Committee of the Association of Musical Electronics Industry (AMEI) in Tokyo. In 2016, the MMA established The MIDI Association (TMA) to support a global community of people who work, play, or create with MIDI.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nIn the early 1980s, there was no standardized means of synchronizing electronic musical instruments manufactured by different companies. Manufacturers had their own proprietary standards to synchronize instruments, such as CV/gate, DIN sync and Digital Control Bus (DCB). Ikutaro Kakehashi, the president of Roland, felt the lack of standardization was limiting the growth of the electronic music industry. In June 1981, he proposed developing a standard to the Oberheim Electronics founder Tom Oberheim, who had developed his own proprietary interface, the Oberheim Parallel Bus.\nKakehashi felt that Oberheim's system was too cumbersome, and spoke to Dave Smith, the president of Sequential Circuits, about creating a simpler, cheaper alternative. While Smith discussed the concept with American companies, Kakehashi discussed it with Japanese companies Yamaha, Korg and Kawai. Representatives from all companies met to discuss the idea in October. Initially, only Sequential Circuits and the Japanese companies were interested. Using Roland's DCB as a basis, Smith and Sequential Circuits engineer Chet Wood devised a universal interface to allow communication between equipment from different manufacturers. Smith and Wood proposed this standard in a paper, \"Universal Synthesizer Interface,\" at the Audio Engineering Society show in October 1981. The standard was discussed and modified by representatives of Roland, Yamaha, Korg, Kawai, and Sequential Circuits. Kakehashi favored the name Universal Musical Interface (UMI), pronounced \"you-me\", but Smith felt this was \"a little corny\". However, he liked the use of \"instrument\" instead of \"synthesizer\", and proposed \"Musical Instrument Digital Interface\" (MIDI). Robert Moog, the president of Moog Music, announced MIDI in the October 1982 issue of \"Keyboard\".\nAt the 1983 Winter NAMM Show, Smith demonstrated a MIDI connection between Prophet 600 and Roland JP-6 synthesizers. The MIDI specification was published in August 1983. The MIDI standard was unveiled by Kakehashi and Smith, who received Technical Grammy Awards in 2013 for their work. In 1983, the first instruments were released with MIDI, the Roland Jupiter-6 and the Prophet 600. In 1983, the first MIDI drum machine, the Roland TR-909, and the first MIDI sequencer, the Roland MSQ-700, were released.\nThe MIDI Manufacturers Association (MMA) was formed following a meeting of \"all interested companies\" at the 1984 Summer NAMM Show in Chicago. The MIDI 1.0 Detailed Specification was published at the MMA's second meeting at the 1985 Summer NAMM Show. The standard continued to evolve, adding standardized song files in 1991 (General MIDI) and adapted to new connection standards such as USB and FireWire. In 2016, the MIDI Association was formed to continue overseeing the standard. In 2017, an abridged version of MIDI 1.0 was published as an international standard IEC 63035. An initiative to create a 2.0 standard was announced in January 2019. The MIDI 2.0 standard was introduced at the 2020 Winter NAMM Show.\nThe BBC cited MIDI as an early example of open-source technology. Smith believed MIDI could only succeed if every manufacturer adopted it, and so \"we had to give it away\".\nImpact.\nMIDI's appeal was originally limited to professional musicians and record producers who wanted to use electronic instruments in the production of popular music. The standard allowed different instruments to communicate with each other and with computers, and this spurred a rapid expansion of the sales and production of electronic instruments and music software. This interoperability allowed one device to be controlled from another, which reduced the amount of hardware musicians needed. MIDI's introduction coincided with the dawn of the personal computer era and the introduction of samplers and digital synthesizers. The creative possibilities brought about by MIDI technology are credited for helping revive the music industry in the 1980s.\nMIDI introduced capabilities that transformed the way many musicians work. MIDI sequencing makes it possible for a user with no notation skills to build complex arrangements. A musical act with as few as one or two members, each operating multiple MIDI-enabled devices, can deliver a performance similar to that of a larger group of musicians. The expense of hiring outside musicians for a project can be reduced or eliminated, and complex productions can be realized on a system as small as a synthesizer with integrated keyboard and sequencer.\nMIDI also helped establish home recording. By performing preproduction in a home environment, an artist can reduce recording costs by arriving at a recording studio with a partially completed song. In 2022, the \"Guardian\" wrote that MIDI remained as important to music as USB was to computing, and represented \"a crucial value system of cooperation and mutual benefit, one all but thrown out by today's major tech companies in favour of captive markets\". In 2005, Smith's MIDI Specification was inducted into the TECnology Hall of Fame, an honor given to \"products and innovations that have had an enduring impact on the development of audio technology.\" As of 2022, Smith's original MIDI design is still in use.\nApplications.\nInstrument control.\nMIDI was invented so that electronic or digital musical instruments could communicate with each other and so that one instrument can control another. For example, a MIDI-compatible sequencer can trigger beats produced by a drum sound module. Analog synthesizers that have no digital component and were built prior to MIDI's development can be retrofitted with kits that convert MIDI messages into analog control voltages. When a note is played on a MIDI instrument, it generates a digital MIDI message that can be used to trigger a note on another instrument. The capability for remote control allows full-sized instruments to be replaced with smaller sound modules, and allows musicians to combine instruments to achieve a fuller sound, or to create combinations of synthesized instrument sounds, such as acoustic piano and strings. MIDI also enables other instrument parameters (volume, effects, etc.) to be controlled remotely.\nSynthesizers and samplers contain various tools for shaping an electronic or digital sound. Filters adjust timbre, and envelopes automate the way a sound evolves over time after a note is triggered. The frequency of a filter and the envelope attack (the time it takes for a sound to reach its maximum level), are examples of synthesizer parameters, and can be controlled remotely through MIDI. Effects devices have different parameters, such as delay feedback or reverb time. When a MIDI continuous controller number (CCN) is assigned to one of these parameters, the device responds to any messages it receives that are identified by that number. Controls such as knobs, switches, and pedals can be used to send these messages. A set of adjusted parameters can be saved to a device's internal memory as a \"patch\", and these patches can be remotely selected by MIDI program changes.\nComposition.\nMIDI events can be sequenced with computer software, or in specialized hardware music workstations. Many digital audio workstations (DAWs) are specifically designed to work with MIDI as an integral component. MIDI piano rolls have been developed in many DAWs so that the recorded MIDI messages can be easily modified. These tools allow composers to audition and edit their work much more quickly and efficiently than did older solutions, such as multitrack recording. Compositions can be programmed for MIDI that are impossible for human performers to play.\nBecause a MIDI performance is a sequence of commands that create sound, MIDI recordings can be manipulated in ways that audio recordings cannot. It is possible to change the key, instrumentation or tempo of a MIDI arrangement, and to reorder its individual sections, or even edit individual notes. The ability to compose ideas and quickly hear them played back enables composers to experiment.\nAlgorithmic composition programs provide computer-generated performances that can be used as song ideas or accompaniment.\nSome composers may take advantage of the standard, portable set of commands and parameters in MIDI 1.0 and General MIDI (GM) to share musical data files among various electronic instruments. The data composed via the sequenced MIDI recordings can be saved as a \"standard MIDI file\" (SMF), digitally distributed, and reproduced by any computer or electronic instrument that also adheres to the same MIDI, GM, and SMF standards. MIDI data files are much smaller than corresponding recorded audio files.\nUse with computers.\nThe personal computer market stabilized at the same time that MIDI appeared, and computers became a viable option for music production. In 1983 computers started to play a role in mainstream music production. In the years immediately after the 1983 ratification of the MIDI specification, MIDI features were adapted to several early computer platforms. The Yamaha CX5M introduced MIDI support and sequencing in an MSX system in 1984.\nThe spread of MIDI on home computers was largely facilitated by Roland Corporation's MPU-401, released in 1984, as the first MIDI-equipped sound card, capable of MIDI sound processing and sequencing. After Roland sold MPU sound chips to other sound card manufacturers, it established a universal standard MIDI-to-PC interface. The widespread adoption of MIDI led to computer-based MIDI software being developed. Soon after, a number of platforms began supporting MIDI, including the Apple II, Macintosh, Commodore 64, Amiga, Acorn Archimedes, and IBM PC compatibles. The 1985 Atari ST shipped with MIDI ports as part of the base system.\nIn 2015, Retro Innovations released the first MIDI interface for a VIC-20, making the computer's four voices available to electronic musicians and retro-computing enthusiasts for the first time. Retro Innovations also makes a MIDI interface cartridge for Tandy Color Computer and Dragon computers.\nChiptune musicians also use retro gaming consoles to compose, produce and perform music using MIDI interfaces. Custom interfaces are available for the Family Computer/Nintendo Entertainment System, Game Boy, Game Boy Advance and Sega Mega Drive/Sega Genesis.\nComputer files.\nA MIDI file is not an audio recording. Rather, it is a set of instructions\u00a0\u2013 for example, for pitch or tempo\u00a0\u2013 and can use a thousand times less disk space than the equivalent recorded audio. Due to their tiny filesize, fan-made MIDI arrangements became an attractive way to share music online, before the advent of broadband internet access and multi-gigabyte hard drives. The major drawback to this is the wide variation in quality of users' audio cards, and in the actual audio contained as samples or synthesized sound in the card that the MIDI data only refers to symbolically. Even a sound card that contains high-quality sampled sounds can have inconsistent quality from one sampled instrument to another. Early budget-priced cards, such as the AdLib and the Sound Blaster and its compatibles, used a stripped-down version of Yamaha's frequency modulation synthesis (FM synthesis) technology played back through low-quality digital-to-analog converters. The low-fidelity reproduction of these ubiquitous cards was often assumed to somehow be a property of MIDI itself. This created a perception of MIDI as low-quality audio, while in reality MIDI itself contains no sound, and the quality of its playback depends entirely on the quality of the sound-producing device.\nThe Standard MIDI File (SMF) is a file format that provides a standardized way for music sequences to be saved, transported, and opened in other systems. The standard was developed and is maintained by the MMA, and usually uses a codice_1 extension. The compact size of these files led to their widespread use in computers, mobile phone ringtones, webpage authoring and musical greeting cards. These files are intended for universal use and include such information as note values, timing and track names. Lyrics may be included as metadata, and can be displayed by karaoke machines.\nSMFs are created as an export format of software sequencers or hardware workstations. They organize MIDI messages into one or more parallel tracks and time-stamp the events so that they can be played back in sequence. A header contains the arrangement's track count, tempo and an indicator of which of three SMF formats the file uses. A type 0 file contains the entire performance, merged onto a single track, while type 1 files may contain any number of tracks that are performed synchronously. Type 2 files are rarely used and store multiple arrangements, with each arrangement having its own track and intended to be played in sequence.\nRMID files.\nMicrosoft Windows bundles SMFs together with Downloadable Sounds (DLS) in a Resource Interchange File Format (RIFF) wrapper, as RMID files with a codice_2 extension. RIFF-RMID has been deprecated in favor of Extensible Music Files (XMF).\nSoftware.\nThe main advantage of the personal computer in a MIDI system is that it can serve a number of different purposes, depending on the software that is loaded. Multitasking allows simultaneous operation of programs that may be able to share data with each other.\nSequencers.\nSequencing software can be used to manipulate recorded MIDI data with standard computer editing features such as cut, copy and paste and drag and drop. Keyboard shortcuts can be used to streamline workflow, and, in some systems, editing functions may be invoked by MIDI events. The sequencer can set each channel to play a different sound and gives a graphical overview of the arrangement. A variety of editing tools are made available, including a notation display or scorewriter that can be used to create printed parts for musicians. Tools such as looping, quantization, randomization, and transposition simplify the arranging process.\nBeat creation is simplified, and groove templates can be used to duplicate another track's rhythmic feel. Realistic expression can be added through the manipulation of real-time controllers. Mixing can be performed, and MIDI can be synchronized with recorded audio and video tracks. Work can be saved, and transported between different computers or studios.\nSequencers may take alternate forms, such as drum pattern editors that users can use to create beats by clicking on pattern grids, and loop sequencers such as ACID Pro, which combine MIDI with prerecorded audio loops whose tempos and keys are matched to each other. Cue-list sequencing is used to trigger dialogue, sound effect, and music cues in stage and broadcast production.\nNotation software.\nWith MIDI, notes played on a keyboard can automatically be transcribed to sheet music. Scorewriting software typically lacks advanced sequencing tools and is optimized for the creation of a neat, professional printout designed for live instrumentalists. These programs provide support for dynamics and expression markings, chord and lyric display, and complex score styles. Software is available that can print scores in braille.\nNotation programs include Finale, Encore, Sibelius, MuseScore and Dorico. SmartScore software can produce MIDI files from scanned sheet music.\nEditors and librarians.\nUsers can program their equipment through the patch editor as a computer interface. These became essential with the appearance of complex synthesizers such as the Yamaha FS1R, which contained several thousand programmable parameters, but had an interface that consisted of fifteen tiny buttons, four knobs and a small LCD. Digital instruments typically discourage users from experimentation, due to their lack of the feedback and direct control that switches and knobs would provide, but patch editors give owners of hardware instruments and effects devices the same editing functionality that is available to users of software synthesizers. Some editors are designed for a specific instrument or effects device, while other, \"universal\" editors support a variety of equipment, and ideally can control the parameters of every device in a setup through the use of System Exclusive messages. System Exclusive messages use the MIDI protocol to send information about the synthesizer's parameters.\nPatch librarians have the specialized function of organizing the sounds in a collection of equipment and exchanging entire banks of sounds between an instrument and a computer. In this way the device's limited patch storage is augmented by a computer's much greater disk capacity. Once transferred to the computer, custom patches can be shared with other owners of the same instrument. Universal editor/librarians that combine the two functions were once common, and included Opcode Systems' Galaxy, eMagic's SoundDiver, and MOTU's Unisyn. Although these older programs have been largely abandoned with the trend toward computer-based synthesis using virtual instruments, several editor/librarians remain available, including Coffeeshopped Patch Base, Sound Quest's Midi Quest, and several editors from Sound Tower. Native Instruments' Kore was an effort to bring the editor/librarian concept into the age of software instruments, but was abandoned in 2011.\nAuto-accompaniment programs.\nPrograms that can dynamically generate accompaniment tracks are called \"auto-accompaniment\" programs. These create a full-band arrangement in a style that the user selects and sends the result to a MIDI sound-generating device for playback. The generated tracks can be used as educational or practice tools, as accompaniment for live performances, or as a songwriting aid.\nSynthesis and sampling.\nComputers can use software to generate sounds, which are then passed through a digital-to-analog converter (DAC) to a power amplifier and loudspeaker system. The number of sounds that can be played simultaneously (the polyphony) is dependent on the power of the computer's CPU, as are the sample rate and bit depth of playback, which directly affect the quality of the sound. Synthesizers implemented in software are subject to timing issues that are not necessarily present with hardware instruments, whose dedicated operating systems are not subject to interruption from background tasks as desktop operating systems are. These timing issues can cause synchronization problems, and clicks and pops when sample playback is interrupted. Software synthesizers also may exhibit additional latency in their sound generation.\nThe roots of software synthesis go back as far as the 1950s, when Max Mathews of Bell Labs wrote the MUSIC-N programming language, which was capable of non-real-time sound generation. Reality, by Dave Smith's Seer Systems was an early synthesizer that ran directly on a host computer's CPU. Reality achieved a low latency through tight driver integration, and therefore could run only on Creative Labs soundcards. Syntauri Corporation's Alpha Syntauri was another early software-based synthesizer. It ran on the Apple IIe computer and used a combination of software and the computer's hardware to produce additive synthesis. Some systems use dedicated hardware to reduce the load on the host CPU, as with Symbolic Sound Corporation's Kyma System, and the Creamware/Sonic Core Pulsar/SCOPE systems, which power an entire recording studio's worth of instruments, effect units, and mixers. The ability to construct full MIDI arrangements entirely in computer software allows a composer to render a finalized result directly as an audio file.\nGame music.\nUntil the mid-1990s, floppy disks were the primary distribution medium for IBM PC compatible games. The small size of MIDI files made them a viable means of providing soundtracks. Prior to Windows 95, games typically used either Ad Lib or Sound Blaster audio cards. These cards use FM synthesis, which generates sound through modulation of sine waves. John Chowning, the technique's pioneer, theorized that the technology would be capable of accurate recreation of any sound if enough sine waves were used, but most computer audio cards performed FM synthesis with only two sine waves. Combined with the cards' 8-bit audio, this resulted in a sound described as \"artificial\" and \"primitive\".\nWavetable daughterboards that were later available provided audio samples that could be used in place of the FM sound. These were expensive, but often used the sounds from respected MIDI instruments such as the E-mu Proteus. The computer industry moved in the mid-1990s toward wavetable-based soundcards with 16-bit playback but standardized on a 2\u00a0MB of wavetable storage, a space too small in which to fit good-quality samples of 128 General MIDI instruments plus drum kits. To make the most of the limited space, some manufacturers stored 12-bit samples and expanded those to 16 bits on playback.\nOther applications.\nDespite its association with music devices, MIDI can control any electronic or digital device that can read and process a MIDI command. MIDI has been adopted as a control protocol in a number of non-musical applications. MIDI Show Control uses MIDI commands to direct stage lighting systems and to trigger cued events in theatrical productions. VJs and turntablists use it to cue clips, and to synchronize equipment, and recording systems use it for synchronization and automation. Wayne Lytle, the founder of Animusic, derived a system he dubbed MIDIMotion in order to produce the \"Animusic\" series of computer-animated music video albums; Animusic would later design its own animation software specifically for MIDIMotion called Animotion. Apple Motion allows for a similar control of animation parameters through MIDI. The 1987 first-person shooter game \"MIDI Maze\" and the 1990 Atari ST puzzle video game \"Oxyd\" use MIDI to network computers together.\nDevices.\nConnectors and interface.\nDIN connector.\nPer the original MIDI 1.0 standard, cables terminate in a 180\u00b0 five-pin DIN connector (DIN 41524). Typical applications use only three of the five conductors: a ground wire (pin 2), and a balanced pair of conductors (pins 4 and 5) that carry the MIDI signal as an electric current. This connector configuration can only carry messages in one direction, so a second cable is necessary for two-way communication. Some proprietary applications, such as phantom-powered footswitch controllers, use the spare pins for direct current (DC) power transmission.\nOpto-isolators keep MIDI devices electrically separated from their MIDI connections, which prevents ground loops and protects equipment from voltage spikes. There is no error detection capability in MIDI, so the maximum cable length is set at to limit interference.\nTRS minijack connector.\nTo save space, some MIDI devices (smaller ones in particular) started using 3.5\u00a0mm TRS phone connectors (also known as audio minijack connectors). This became widespread enough that the MIDI Manufacturers' Association standardized the wiring. The MIDI-over-minijack standards document also recommends the use of 2.5\u00a0mm connectors over 3.5\u00a0mm ones to avoid confusion with audio connectors.\nThru port.\nMost devices do not copy messages from their input to their output port. A third type of port, the \"thru\" port, emits a copy of everything received at the input port, allowing data to be forwarded to another instrument in a daisy-chain arrangement. Not all devices feature thru ports, and devices that lack the ability to generate MIDI data, such as effects units and sound modules, may not include out ports.\nManagement devices.\nEach device in a daisy chain adds delay to the system. This can be avoided by using a MIDI thru box, which contains several outputs that provide an exact copy of the box's input signal. A MIDI merger is able to combine the input from multiple devices into a single stream, and allows multiple controllers to be connected to a single device. A MIDI switcher allows switching between multiple devices, and eliminates the need to physically repatch cables. MIDI routers combine all of these functions. They contain multiple inputs and outputs, and allow any combination of input channels to be routed to any combination of output channels. Routing setups can be created using computer software, stored in memory, and selected by MIDI program change commands. This enables the devices to function as standalone MIDI routers in situations where no computer is present. MIDI data processors are used for utility tasks and special effects. These include MIDI filters, which remove unwanted MIDI data from the stream, and MIDI delays, effects that send a repeated copy of the input data at a set time.\nInterfaces.\nA computer MIDI interface's main function is to synchronize communications between the MIDI device and the computer. Some computer sound cards include a standard MIDI connector, whereas others connect by any of various means that include the D-subminiature DA-15 game port, USB, FireWire, Ethernet or a proprietary connection. The increasing use of USB connectors in the 2000s has led to the availability of MIDI-to-USB data interfaces that can transfer MIDI channels to USB-equipped computers. Some MIDI keyboard controllers are equipped with USB jacks, and can be connected directly to computers that run music software.\nMIDI's serial transmission leads to timing problems. A three-byte MIDI message requires nearly 1\u00a0millisecond for transmission. Because MIDI is serial, it can only send one event at a time. If an event is sent on two channels at once, the event on the second channel cannot transmit until the first one is finished, and so is delayed by 1\u00a0ms. If an event is sent on all channels at the same time, the last channel's transmission is delayed by as much as 16\u00a0ms. This contributed to the rise of MIDI interfaces with multiple in- and out-ports, because timing improves when events are spread between multiple ports as opposed to multiple channels on the same port. The term \"MIDI slop\" refers to audible timing errors that result when MIDI transmission is delayed.\nControllers.\nThere are two types of MIDI controllers: performance controllers that generate notes and are used to perform music, and controllers that may not send notes, but transmit other types of real-time events. Many devices are a combination of the two types.\nKeyboards are by far the most common type of MIDI controller. MIDI was designed with keyboards in mind and any controller that is not a keyboard is considered an \"alternative\" controller. This was seen as a limitation by composers who were not interested in keyboard-based music, but the standard proved flexible, and MIDI compatibility was introduced to other types of controllers, including guitars, and other stringed instruments and drum controllers and wind controllers, which emulate the playing of drum kit and wind instruments, respectively and specialized and experimental controllers. Nevertheless, some features of the keyboard playing for which MIDI was designed do not fully capture other instruments' capabilities; Jaron Lanier cites the standard as an example of technological \"lock-in\" that unexpectedly limited what was possible to express. Some of these shortcomings have been addressed in extensions to the protocol.\nSoftware synthesizers offer great power and versatility, but some players feel that division of attention between a MIDI keyboard and a computer keyboard and mouse robs some of the immediacy from the playing experience. Devices dedicated to real-time MIDI control provide an ergonomic benefit and can provide a greater sense of connection with the instrument than an interface that is accessed through a computer. Controllers may be general-purpose devices that are designed to work with a variety of equipment, or they may be designed to work with a specific piece of software. Examples of the latter include Akai's APC40 controller for Ableton Live, and Korg's MS-20ic controller, a reproduction of the control panel on their MS-20 analog synthesizer. The MS-20ic controller includes patch cables that can be used to control signal routing in their virtual reproduction of the MS-20 synthesizer and can also control third-party devices.\nInstruments.\nA MIDI instrument contains ports to send and receive MIDI signals, a CPU to process those signals, an interface for user programming, audio circuitry to generate sound, and controllers. The operating system and factory sounds are often stored in a read-only memory (ROM) unit.\nA MIDI instrument can also be a stand-alone module (without a piano-style keyboard) consisting of a General MIDI soundboard (GM, GS and XG), onboard editing, including transposing, MIDI instrument selection and adjusting volume, pan, reverb levels and other MIDI controllers. Typically, the MIDI module includes a screen, so the user can view information for the currently selected function.\nSynthesizers.\nSynthesizers may employ any of a variety of sound generation techniques. They may include an integrated keyboard or may exist as sound modules that generate sounds when triggered by an external controller, such as a MIDI keyboard. Sound modules are typically designed to be mounted in a 19-inch rack. Manufacturers commonly produce a synthesizer in both standalone and rack-mounted versions, and often offer the keyboard version in a variety of sizes.\nSamplers.\nA sampler can record and digitize audio, store it in random-access memory (RAM), and play it back. With a sampler, users typically can edit a sample and save it to a hard disk, apply effects to it, and shape it with the same tools that subtractive synthesizers use. They also may be available in either keyboard or rack-mounted form. Instruments that generate sounds through sample playback, but have no recording capabilities, are known as \"ROMplers\".\nSamplers did not become established as viable MIDI instruments as quickly as synthesizers did due to the expense of memory and processing power at the time. The first low-cost MIDI sampler was the Ensoniq Mirage, introduced in 1984. MIDI samplers are typically limited by displays that are too small to use to edit sampled waveforms, although some can be connected to a computer monitor.\nDrum machines.\nDrum machines typically are sample playback devices that specialize in drum and percussion sounds. They commonly contain a sequencer for creating drum patterns and arranging them into a song. There often are multiple audio outputs so that each sound or group of sounds can be routed to a separate output. The individual drum voices may be playable from another MIDI instrument or from a sequencer.\nWorkstations and hardware sequencers.\nSequencer technology predates MIDI. Analog sequencers use CV/Gate signals to control pre-MIDI analog synthesizers. MIDI sequencers typically are operated by transport features modeled after those of tape decks. They are capable of recording MIDI performances and arranging them into individual tracks using a multitrack recording paradigm. Music workstations combine controller keyboards with an internal sound generator and a sequencer. These can be used to build complete arrangements and play them back using their own internal sounds and function as self-contained music production studios. They commonly include file storage and transfer capabilities.\nEffects units.\nSome effects units can be remotely controlled via MIDI. For example, the Eventide H3000 Ultra-harmonizer allows such extensive MIDI control that it is playable as a synthesizer. The Drum Buddy, a pedal-format drum machine, has a MIDI connection so that it can have its tempo synchronized with a looper pedal or time-based effects such as delay.\nTechnical specifications.\nMIDI messages are made up of 8-bit bytes transmitted at 31,250\u00a0(\u00b11%)\u00a0baud using 8-N-1 asynchronous serial communication as described in the figure. The first bit of each byte identifies whether the byte is a \"status\" byte or a \"data\" byte, and is followed by seven bits of information.\nA MIDI link can carry sixteen independent channels, numbered 1\u201316. A device may listen to specific channels and ignore messages on other channels (\"omni off\" mode), or it can listen to all channels, effectively ignoring the channel address (\"omni on\").\nA device that is polyphonic can sound multiple notes simultaneously, until the device's polyphony limit is reached, or the notes reach the end of their decay envelope, or explicit \"note-off\" MIDI commands are received. A device that is monophonic instead terminates any previous note when new \"note-on\" commands arrive.\n\"Some\" receiving devices may be set to all four combinations of \"omni off/on\" and \"mono/poly\" modes.\nMessages.\nA MIDI message is an instruction that controls some aspect of the receiving device. A MIDI message consists of a status byte, which indicates the type of the message, followed by up to two data bytes that contain the parameters. MIDI messages can be \"channel messages\" sent on only one of the 16 channels and monitored only by devices on that channel, or \"system messages\" that all devices receive. Each receiving device ignores data not relevant to its function. There are five types of message: Channel Voice, Channel Mode, System Common, System Real-Time, and System Exclusive.\nChannel Voice messages transmit real-time performance data over a single channel. Examples include \"note-on\" messages which contain a MIDI note number that specifies the note's pitch, a velocity value that indicates how forcefully the note was played, and the channel number; \"note-off\" messages that end a note; program change messages that change a device's patch; and control changes that allow adjustment of an instrument's parameters. MIDI notes are numbered from 0 to 127 assigned to C\u22121 to G9. This extends beyond the 88-note piano range from A0 to C8 and corresponds to a frequency range of 8.175799 to 12543.85\u00a0Hz.\nSystem Exclusive messages.\nSystem Exclusive (SysEx) messages send information about a synthesizer's functions, rather than performance data such as which notes are being played and how loud. Because they can include functionality beyond what the MIDI standard provides, they are a major reason for the flexibility and longevity of the MIDI standard. Manufacturers use them to create proprietary messages that control their equipment more thoroughly than the limitations of standard MIDI messages.\nThe MIDI Manufacturers Association issues a unique identification number to MIDI companies. These are included in SysEx messages, to ensure that only the specifically addressed device responds to the message, while all others know to ignore it. Many instruments also include a SysEx ID setting, so a controller can address two devices of the same model independently.\n\"Universal\" System Exclusive messages are a special class of SysEx messages used for extensions to MIDI that are not intended to be exclusive to one manufacturer.\nImplementation chart.\nDevices typically do not respond to every type of message defined by the MIDI specification. The MIDI implementation chart was standardized by the MMA as a way for users to see what specific capabilities an instrument has, and how it responds to messages. A populated MIDI implementation chart is usually published as part of the documentation for MIDI devices.\nElectrical specifications.\nMIDI 1.0's electrical interface is based around a fully isolated current loop along the red and blue lines in the following schematic:\n\"DIN / TRS\" in this schematic indicates that either a DIN connector or a TRS phone connector may be used.\nTo transmit a logic\u00a00 and a start bit, the sender's UART produces a low voltage. This results in a nominal 5\u00a0milliamperes current flow sourced from the sender's high voltage supply, which travels rightwards along the red lines though the shielded twisted-pair cable and into the receiver's opto-isolator. The current exits the opto-isolator and returns back leftwards along the blue lines into the sender's UART, which sinks the current. Resistors R1 and R2 limit the current and are equal to provide a balanced impedance. The diode is for protection. This current turns on the opto-isolator's LED and phototransistor, so the receiver's UART can read the signal with the help of pull-up resistor R3 to the receiver's voltage supply. While the supplies in the original specification are 5\u00a0volts, the receiver and sender may use different voltage levels.\nTo transmit a logic\u00a01, a stop bit, and while idle, the sender's UART produces the same high voltage as its voltage supply provides, which results in no current flow. This avoids wasting power when idle.\nExtensions.\nMIDI's flexibility and widespread adoption have led to many refinements of the standard, and have enabled its application to purposes beyond those for which it was originally intended.\nGeneral MIDI.\nMIDI allows the selection of an instrument's sounds through program change messages, but there is no guarantee that any two instruments have the same sound at a given program location. Program #0 may be a piano on one instrument, or a flute on another. The General MIDI (GM) standard was established in 1991, and provides a standardized sound bank that allows a Standard MIDI File created on one device to sound similar when played back on another. GM specifies a bank of 128 sounds arranged into 16 families of eight related instruments, and assigns a specific program number to each instrument. Any given program change selects the same instrument sound on any GM-compatible instrument. Percussion instruments are placed on channel 10, and a specific MIDI note value is mapped to each percussion sound. \nThe GM standard eliminates variation in note mapping. Some manufacturers had disagreed over what note number should represent middle C, but GM specifies that note number 69 plays A440, which in turn fixes middle C as note number 60.\nGM-compliant devices must offer 24-note polyphony. GM-compatible devices are required to respond to velocity, aftertouch, and pitch bend, to be set to specified default values at startup, and to support certain controller numbers such as for sustain pedal, and Registered Parameter Numbers (RPNs).\nA simplified version of GM, called \"GM Lite\", is used for devices with limited processing power.\nGS, XG, and GM2.\nA general opinion quickly formed that the GM's 128-instrument sound set was not large enough. Roland's General Standard, or Roland GS, included additional sounds, drumkits and effects, provided a \"bank select\" command that could be used to access them, and used MIDI Non-Registered Parameter Numbers (NRPNs) to access its new features. Yamaha's Extended General MIDI, or Yamaha XG, followed in 1994. XG similarly offered extra sounds, drumkits and effects, but used standard controllers instead of NRPNs for editing, and increased polyphony to 32 voices. Both standards feature backward compatibility with the GM specification but are not compatible with each other. Neither standard has been adopted beyond its creator, but both are commonly supported by music software titles.\nMember companies of Japan's AMEI developed the General MIDI Level 2 specification in 1999. GM2 maintains backward compatibility with GM, but increases polyphony to 32 voices, standardizes several controller numbers such as for sostenuto and soft pedal (\"una corda\"), RPNs and Universal System Exclusive Messages, and incorporates the MIDI Tuning Standard. GM2 is the basis of the instrument selection mechanism in Scalable Polyphony MIDI (SP-MIDI), a MIDI variant for low-power devices that allows the device's polyphony to scale according to its processing power.\nTuning standard.\nMost MIDI synthesizers use equal temperament tuning. The MIDI tuning standard (MTS), ratified in 1992, allows alternate tunings. MTS allows microtunings that can be loaded from a bank of up to 128 patches, and allows real-time adjustment of note pitches. Manufacturers are not required to support the standard. Those who do are not required to implement all of its features.\nTime code.\nA sequencer can drive a MIDI system with its internal clock, but when a system contains multiple sequencers, they must synchronize to a common clock. MIDI timecode (MTC), developed by Digidesign, implements SysEx messages developed specifically for timing purposes, and can translate to and from the SMPTE timecode standard. MIDI interfaces such as Mark of the Unicorn's MIDI Timepiece can convert SMPTE code to MTC. While MIDI clock is based on tempo, timecode is based on frames and is independent of tempo. MTC, like SMPTE timecode, includes position information and can recover in the event of a dropout.\nMachine control.\nMIDI Machine Control (MMC) consists of a set of SysEx commands that operate the transport controls of hardware recording devices. MMC lets a sequencer send \"Start\", \"Stop\", and \"Record\" commands to a connected tape deck or hard disk recording system, and to fast-forward or rewind the device to start playback at the same point as the sequencer. No synchronization data is involved, although the devices may synchronize through MTC.\nShow control.\nMIDI Show Control (MSC) is a set of SysEx commands for sequencing and remotely cueing show control devices such as lighting, music and sound playback, and motion control systems. Applications include stage productions, museum exhibits, recording studio control systems, and amusement park attractions.\nTimestamping.\nOne solution to MIDI timing problems is to mark MIDI events with the times they are to be played, transmit them beforehand, and store them in a buffer in the receiving device. Sending data beforehand reduces the likelihood that a busy passage overwhelms the transmission link. Once stored in the receiver, the information is no longer subject to timing issues associated with MIDI or USB interfaces and can be played with a high degree of accuracy. MIDI timestamping only works when both hardware and software support it. MOTU's MTS, eMagic's AMT, and Steinberg's Midex 8 had implementations that were incompatible with each other, and required users to own software and hardware manufactured by the same company to work. Timestamping is built into FireWire MIDI interfaces, Mac OS X Core Audio, and Linux ALSA Sequencer.\nSample dump standard.\nAn unforeseen capability of SysEx messages was their use for transporting audio samples between instruments. This led to the development of the sample dump standard (SDS), which established a new SysEx format for sample transmission. SDS was later augmented with a pair of commands that allow the transmission of information about sample loop points, without requiring that the entire sample be transmitted.\nDownloadable Sounds.\nThe Downloadable Sounds (DLS) specification, ratified in 1997, allows mobile devices and computer sound cards to expand their wave tables with downloadable sound sets. The DLS Level 2 specification followed in 2006, and defined a standardized synthesizer architecture. The Mobile DLS standard calls for DLS banks to be combined with SP-MIDI, as self-contained Mobile XMF files.\nMIDI Polyphonic Expression.\nMIDI Polyphonic Expression (MPE) is a method of using MIDI that enables pitch bend, and other dimensions of expressive control, to be adjusted continuously for individual notes. MPE works by assigning each note to its own MIDI channel so that controller messages can be applied to each note individually. The specifications were released in November 2017 by AMEI and in January 2018 by the MMA. Instruments like the Continuum Fingerboard, LinnStrument, ROLI Seaboard, Sensel Morph, and Eigenharp let users control pitch, timbre, and other nuances for individual notes within chords.\nAlternative hardware transports.\nIn addition to using a 31.25\u00a0kbit/s current-loop over a DIN connector, the same data can be transmitted over different hardware transports such as USB, FireWire, and Ethernet.\nUSB and FireWire.\nMembers of the USB-IF in 1999 developed a standard for MIDI over USB, the \"Universal Serial Bus Device Class Definition for MIDI Devices\". MIDI over USB has become increasingly common as other interfaces that had been used for MIDI connections (ISA card, game port, etc.) disappeared from personal computers. Linux, Microsoft Windows, Macintosh OS X, and Apple iOS operating systems include standard class drivers to support devices that use the \"Universal Serial Bus Device Class Definition for MIDI Devices\".\nApple Computer developed the FireWire interface during the 1990s. It began to appear on digital video (DV) cameras toward the end of the decade, and on G3 Macintosh models in 1999. It was created for use with multimedia applications. Unlike USB, FireWire uses intelligent controllers that can manage their own transmission without attention from the main CPU. As with standard MIDI devices, FireWire devices can communicate with each other with no computer present.\nXLR connectors.\nThe Octave-Plateau Voyetra-8 synthesizer was an early MIDI implementation using XLR3 connectors in place of the 5-pin DIN. It was released in the pre-MIDI years and later retrofitted with a MIDI interface but kept its XLR connector.\nSerial parallel, and joystick port.\nAs computer-based studio setups became common, MIDI devices that could connect directly to a computer became available. These typically used the 8-pin mini-DIN connector that was used by Apple for serial ports prior to the introduction of the Blue and White G3 models. MIDI interfaces intended for use as the centerpiece of a studio, such as the Mark of the Unicorn MIDI Time Piece, were made possible by a fast transmission mode that could take advantage of these serial ports' ability to operate at 20 times the standard MIDI speed. Mini-DIN ports were built into some late-1990s MIDI instruments and enabled such devices to be connected directly to a computer. Some devices connected via a PCs' DB-25 parallel port, or through the DA-15 game port found on many PC sound cards.\nmLAN.\nYamaha introduced the mLAN protocol in 1999. It was conceived as a local area network for musical instruments using FireWire as the transport and was designed to carry multiple MIDI channels together with multichannel digital audio, data file transfers, and timecode. mLan was used in a number of Yamaha products, notably digital mixing consoles and the Motif synthesizer, and in third-party products such as the PreSonus FIREstation and the Korg Triton Studio. No new mLan products have been released since 2007.\nSCSI MIDI Device Interface (SMDI).\nSCSI MIDI Device Interface (SMDI) was used by some samplers and hard disk recorders in the 1990s (e.g. Kurzweil K2000 and Peavey SP Sample Playback Synthesizer) for fast bidirectional sample transport to hard disk drives and magneto-optical drives.\nEthernet and Internet Protocol.\nComputer network implementations of MIDI provide network routing capabilities, and the high-bandwidth channel that earlier alternatives to MIDI, such as ZIPI, were intended to bring. Proprietary implementations have existed since the 1980s, some of which use fiber optic cables for transmission. The Internet Engineering Task Force's RTP-MIDI open specification has gained industry support. Apple has supported this protocol from Mac OS X 10.4 onwards, and a Windows driver based on Apple's implementation exists for Windows XP and newer versions.\nWireless.\nSystems for wireless MIDI transmission have been available since the 1980s. Several commercially available transmitters allow wireless transmission of MIDI and OSC signals over Wi-Fi and Bluetooth. iOS devices are able to function as MIDI control surfaces, using Wi-Fi and OSC. An XBee radio can be used to build a wireless MIDI transceiver as a do-it-yourself project. Android devices are able to function as full MIDI control surfaces using several different protocols over Wi-Fi and Bluetooth.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19999", "revid": "48035214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19999", "title": "Microcode", "text": "Layer of hardware-level instructions or data structures\nIn processor design, microcode serves as an intermediary layer situated between the central processing unit (CPU) hardware and the programmer-visible instruction set architecture of a computer. It consists of a set of hardware-level instructions that implement the higher-level machine code instructions or control internal finite-state machine sequencing in many digital processing components. While microcode is utilized in Intel and AMD general-purpose CPUs in contemporary desktops and laptops, it functions only as a fallback path for scenarios that the faster hardwired control unit is unable to manage.\nHoused in special high-speed memory, microcode translates machine instructions, state machine data, or other input into sequences of detailed circuit-level operations. It separates the machine instructions from the underlying electronics, thereby enabling greater flexibility in designing and altering instructions. Moreover, it facilitates the construction of complex multi-step instructions, while simultaneously reducing the complexity of computer circuits. The act of writing microcode is often referred to as \"microprogramming\", and the microcode in a specific processor implementation is sometimes termed a \"microprogram\".\nThrough extensive microprogramming, microarchitectures of smaller scale and simplicity can emulate more robust architectures with wider word lengths, additional execution units, and so forth. This approach provides a relatively straightforward method of ensuring software compatibility between different products within a processor family.\nOverview.\nInstruction sets.\nAt the hardware level, processors contain a number of separate areas of circuitry, or \"units\", that perform different tasks. Commonly found units include the arithmetic logic unit (ALU) which performs instructions such as addition or comparing two numbers, circuits for reading and writing data to external memory, and small areas of onboard memory to store these values while they are being processed. In most designs, additional high-performance memory, the register file, is used to store temporary values, not just those needed by the current instruction.\nTo properly perform an instruction, the various circuits have to be activated in order. For instance, it is not possible to add two numbers if they have not yet been loaded from memory. In RISC designs, the proper ordering of these instructions is largely up to the programmer, or at least to the compiler of the programming language they are using. So to add two numbers in memory and store the result in memory, for instance, the compiler may output instructions to load one of the values into one register, the second into another, perform the addition function in the ALU, putting the result into a register, and then store that register into memory.\nAs the sequence of instructions needed to complete this higher-level concept, \"add these two numbers in memory\", may require multiple instructions, this can represent a performance bottleneck if those instructions are stored in main memory. Reading those instructions one by one takes time that could be used to read and write the actual data. For this reason, it is common for non-RISC designs to have many different instructions that differ largely on where they store data. For instance, the MOS 6502 has eight variations of the addition instruction, , which differ only in where they look to find the two operands.\nUsing the variation of the instruction, or \"opcode\", that most closely matches the ultimate operation can reduce the number of instructions to one, saving memory used by the program code and improving performance by leaving the data bus open for other operations. Internally, however, these instructions are not separate operations, but sequences of the operations the units actually perform. Converting a single instruction read from memory into the sequence of internal actions is the duty of the control unit, another unit within the processor.\nMicrocode.\nThe basic idea behind microcode is to replace the custom hardware logic implementing the instruction sequencing with a series of simple instructions run in a \"microcode engine\" in the processor. Whereas a custom logic system might have a series of diodes and gates that output a series of voltages on various control lines, the microcode engine is connected to these lines instead, and these are turned on and off as the engine reads the microcode instructions in sequence. The microcode instructions are often bit encoded to those lines, for instance, if bit 8 is true, that might mean that the ALU should be paused awaiting data. In this respect microcode is somewhat similar to the paper rolls in a player piano, where the holes represent which key should be pressed.\nThe distinction between custom logic and microcode may seem small, one uses a pattern of diodes and gates to decode the instruction and produce a sequence of signals, whereas the other encodes the signals as microinstructions that are read in sequence to produce the same results. The critical difference is that in a custom logic design, changes to the individual steps require the hardware to be redesigned. Using microcode, all that changes is the code stored in the memory containing the microcode. This makes it much easier to fix problems in a microcode system. It also means that there is no effective limit to the complexity of the instructions, it is only limited by the amount of memory one is willing to use.\nThe lowest layer in a computer's software stack is traditionally raw machine code instructions for the processor. In microcoded processors, fetching and decoding those instructions, and executing them, may be done by microcode. To avoid confusion, each microprogram-related element is differentiated by the \"micro\" prefix: microinstruction, microassembler, microprogrammer, etc.\nComplex digital processors may also employ more than one (possibly microcode-based) control unit in order to delegate sub-tasks that must be performed essentially asynchronously in parallel. For example, the VAX 9000 has a hardwired IBox unit to fetch and decode instructions, which it hands to a microcoded EBox unit to be executed, and the VAX 8800 has both a microcoded IBox and a microcoded EBox.\nA high-level programmer, or even an assembly language programmer, does not normally see or change microcode. Unlike machine code, which often retains some backward compatibility among different processors in a family, microcode only runs on the exact electronic circuitry for which it is designed, as it constitutes an inherent part of the particular processor design itself.\nDesign.\nEngineers normally write the microcode during the design phase of a processor, storing it in a read-only memory (ROM) or programmable logic array (PLA) structure, or in a combination of both. However, machines also exist that have some or all microcode stored in static random-access memory (SRAM) or flash memory. This is traditionally denoted as \"writable control store\" in the context of computers, which can be either read-only or read\u2013write memory. In the latter case, the CPU initialization process loads microcode into the control store from another storage medium, with the possibility of altering the microcode to correct bugs in the instruction set, or to implement new machine instructions.\nMicroprograms.\nMicroprograms consist of series of microinstructions, which control the CPU at a very fundamental level of hardware circuitry. For example, a single typical \"horizontal\" microinstruction might specify the following operations simultaneously:\nTo simultaneously control all processor's features in one cycle, the microinstruction is often wider than 50 bits; e.g., 128 bits on a 360/85 with an emulator feature. Microprograms are carefully designed and optimized for the fastest possible execution, as a slow microprogram would result in a slow machine instruction and degraded performance for related application programs that use such instructions.\nJustification.\nMicrocode was originally developed as a simpler method of developing the control logic for a computer. Initially, CPU instruction sets were hardwired. Each step needed to fetch, decode, and execute the machine instructions (including any operand address calculations, reads, and writes) was controlled directly by combinational logic and rather minimal sequential state machine circuitry. While such hard-wired processors were very efficient, the need for powerful instruction sets with multi-step addressing and complex operations (\"see below\") made them difficult to design and debug; highly encoded and varied-length instructions can contribute to this as well, especially when very irregular encodings are used.\nMicrocode simplified the job by allowing much of the processor's behaviour and programming model to be defined via microprogram routines rather than by dedicated circuitry. Even late in the design process, microcode could easily be changed, whereas hard-wired CPU designs were very cumbersome to change. Thus, this greatly facilitated CPU design.\nFrom the 1940s to the late 1970s, a large portion of programming was done in assembly language; higher-level instructions mean greater programmer productivity, so an important advantage of microcode was the relative ease by which powerful machine instructions can be defined. The ultimate extension of this are \"Directly Executable High Level Language\" designs, in which each statement of a high-level language such as PL/I is entirely and directly executed by microcode, without compilation. The IBM Future Systems project and Data General Fountainhead Processor are examples of this. During the 1970s, CPU speeds grew more quickly than memory speeds and numerous techniques such as memory block transfer, memory pre-fetch and multi-level caches were used to alleviate this. High-level machine instructions, made possible by microcode, helped further, as fewer more complex machine instructions require less memory bandwidth. For example, an operation on a character string can be done as a single machine instruction, thus avoiding multiple instruction fetches.\nArchitectures with instruction sets implemented by complex microprograms included the IBM System/360 and Digital Equipment Corporation VAX. The approach of increasingly complex microcode-implemented instruction sets was later called complex instruction set computer (CISC). An alternate approach, used in many microprocessors, is to use one or more programmable logic array (PLA) or read-only memory (ROM) (instead of combinational logic) mainly for instruction decoding, and let a simple state machine (without much, or any, microcode) do most of the sequencing. The MOS Technology 6502 is an example of a microprocessor using a PLA for instruction decode and sequencing. The PLA is visible in photomicrographs of the chip, and its operation can be seen in the transistor-level simulation.\nMicroprogramming is still used in modern CPU designs. In some cases, after the microcode is debugged in simulation, logic functions are substituted for the control store. Logic functions are often faster and less expensive than the equivalent microprogram memory.\nBenefits.\nA processor's microprograms operate on a more primitive, totally different, and much more hardware-oriented architecture than the assembly instructions visible to normal programmers. In coordination with the hardware, the microcode implements the programmer-visible architecture. The underlying hardware need not have a fixed relationship to the visible architecture. This makes it easier to implement a given instruction set architecture on a wide variety of underlying hardware micro-architectures.\nThe IBM System/360 has a 32-bit architecture with 16 general-purpose registers, but most of the System/360 implementations use hardware that implements a much simpler underlying microarchitecture; for example, the System/360 Model 30 has 8-bit data paths to the arithmetic logic unit (ALU) and main memory and implemented the general-purpose registers in a special unit of higher-speed core memory, and the System/360 Model 40 has 8-bit data paths to the ALU and 16-bit data paths to main memory and also implemented the general-purpose registers in a special unit of higher-speed core memory. The Model 50 has full 32-bit data paths and implements the general-purpose registers in a special unit of higher-speed core memory. The Model 65 through the Model 195 have larger data paths and implement the general-purpose registers in faster transistor circuits. In this way, microprogramming enabled IBM to design many System/360 models with substantially different hardware and spanning a wide range of cost and performance, while making them all architecturally compatible. This dramatically reduces the number of unique system software programs that must be written for each model.\nThe Digital Equipment Corporation PDP-11 is a 16-bit architecture with eight general-purpose registers. It was introduced in 1970 and the basic architecture remained unchanged through the 1990s. Only the original machine in the series was not microcoded. From the years 1972 to 1976, the width of the PDP-11's underlying microprogram varied from 22 to 64 bits. The length of the microprogram varied from 256 to 1,024 words with longer microprogram lengths generally corresponding to narrower widths. The variety of microprogram widths imply that there were at least seven different implementations of the PDP-11 in just four years. \nA similar approach was used by Digital Equipment Corporation in their VAX family of computers. As a result, different VAX processors use different microarchitectures, yet the programmer-visible architecture does not change.\nMicroprogramming also reduces the cost of field changes to correct defects (bugs) in the processor; a bug can often be fixed by replacing a portion of the microprogram rather than by changes being made to hardware logic and wiring.\nHistory.\nEarly examples.\nThe ACE computer, designed by Alan Turing in 1946, used microprogramming.\nIn 1947, the design of the MIT Whirlwind introduced the concept of a control store as a way to simplify computer design and move beyond \"ad hoc\" methods. The control store is a diode matrix: a two-dimensional lattice, where one dimension accepts \"control time pulses\" from the CPU's internal clock, and the other connects to control signals on gates and other circuits. A \"pulse distributor\" takes the pulses generated by the CPU clock and breaks them up into eight separate time pulses, each of which activates a different row of the lattice. When the row is activated, it activates the control signals connected to it.\nIn 1951, Maurice Wilkes enhanced this concept by adding \"conditional execution\", a concept akin to a conditional in computer software. His initial implementation consisted of a pair of matrices: the first one generated signals in the manner of the Whirlwind control store, while the second matrix selected which row of signals (the microprogram instruction word, so to speak) to invoke on the next cycle. Conditionals were implemented by providing a way that a single line in the control store could choose from alternatives in the second matrix. This made the control signals conditional on the detected internal signal. Wilkes coined the term \"microprogramming\" to describe this feature and distinguish it from a simple control store.\nThe 360.\nMicrocode remained relatively rare in computer design as the cost of the ROM needed to store the code was not significantly different from the cost of custom control logic. This changed through the early 1960s with the introduction of mass-produced core memory and core rope, which was far less expensive than dedicated logic based on diode arrays or similar solutions. The first to take real advantage of this was IBM in their 1964 System/360 series. This allowed the machines to have a very complex instruction set, including operations that matched high-level language constructs like formatting binary values as decimal strings, encoding the complex series of internal steps needed for this task in low cost memory.\nBut the real value in the 360 line was that one could build a series of machines that were completely different internally, yet run the same ISA. For a low-end machine, one might use an 8-bit ALU that requires multiple cycles to complete a single 32-bit addition, while a higher end machine might have a full 32-bit ALU that performs the same addition in a single cycle. These differences could be implemented in control logic, but the cost of implementing a completely different decoder for each machine would be prohibitive. Using microcode meant all that changed was the code in the ROM. For instance, one machine might include a floating point unit and thus its microcode for multiplying two numbers might be only a few lines line, whereas on the same machine without the FPU this would be a program that did the same using multiple additions, and all that changed was the ROM.\nThe outcome of this design was that customers could use a low-end model of the family to develop their software, knowing that if more performance was ever needed, they could move to a faster version and nothing else would change. This lowered the barrier to entry and the 360 was a runaway success. By the end of the decade, the use of microcode was \"de rigueur\" across the mainframe industry.\nMoving up the line.\nEarly minicomputers were far too simple to require microcode, and were more similar to earlier mainframes in terms of their instruction sets and the way they were decoded. But it was not long before their designers began using more powerful integrated circuits that allowed for more complex ISAs. By the mid-1970s, most new minicomputers and superminicomputers were using microcode as well, such as most models of the PDP-11 and, most notably, most models of the VAX, which included high-level instruction not unlike those found in the 360.\nThe same basic evolution occurred with microprocessors as well. Early designs were extremely simple, and even the more powerful 8-bit designs of the mid-1970s like the Zilog Z80 had instruction sets that were simple enough to be implemented in dedicated logic. By this time, the control logic could be patterned into the same die as the CPU, making the difference in cost between ROM and logic less of an issue. However, it was not long before these companies were also facing the problem of introducing higher-performance designs but still wanting to offer backward compatibility. Among early examples of microcode in micros was the Intel 8086.\nAmong the ultimate implementations of microcode in microprocessors is the Motorola 68000. This offered a highly orthogonal instruction set with a wide variety of addressing modes, all implemented in microcode. This did not come without cost, according to early articles, about 20% of the chip's surface area (and thus cost) is the microcode system and of the systems 68,000 transistors were part of the microcode system.\nRISC enters.\nWhile companies continued to compete on the complexity of their instruction sets, and the use of microcode to implement these was unquestioned, in the mid-1970s an internal project in IBM was raising serious questions about the entire concept. As part of a project to develop a high-performance all-digital telephone switch, a team led by John Cocke began examining huge volumes of performance data from their customer's 360 (and System/370) programs. This led them to notice a curious pattern: when the ISA presented multiple versions of an instruction, the compiler almost always used the simplest one, instead of the one most directly representing the code. They learned that this was because those instructions were always implemented in hardware, and thus run the fastest. Using the other instruction might offer higher performance on some machines, but there was no way to know what machine they were running on. This defeated the purpose of using microcode in the first place, which was to hide these distinctions.\nThe team came to a radical conclusion: \"Imposing microcode between a computer and its users imposes an expensive overhead in performing the most frequently executed instructions.\"\nThe result of this discovery was what is today known as the RISC concept. The complex microcode engine and its associated ROM is reduced or eliminated completely, and those circuits instead dedicated to things like additional registers or a wider ALU, which increases the performance of every program. When complex sequences of instructions are needed, this is left to the compiler, which is the entire purpose of using a compiler in the first place. The basic concept was soon picked up by university researchers in California, where simulations suggested such designs would trivially outperform even the fastest conventional designs. It was one such project, at the University of California, Berkeley, that introduced the term RISC.\nThe industry responded to the concept of RISC with both confusion and hostility, including a famous dismissive article by the VAX team at Digital. A major point of contention was that implementing the instructions outside of the processor meant it would spend much more time reading those instructions from memory, thereby slowing overall performance no matter how fast the CPU itself ran. Proponents pointed out that simulations clearly showed the number of instructions was not much greater, especially when considering compiled code.\nThe debate raged until the first commercial RISC designs emerged in the second half of the 1980s, which easily outperformed the most complex designs from other companies. By the late 1980s it was over; even DEC was abandoning microcode for their DEC Alpha designs, and CISC processors switched to using hardwired circuitry, rather than microcode, to perform many functions. For example, the Intel 80486 uses hardwired circuitry to fetch and decode instructions, using microcode only to execute instructions; register-register move and arithmetic instructions required only one microinstruction, allowing them to be completed in one clock cycle. The Pentium Pro's fetch and decode hardware fetches instructions and decodes them into series of micro-operations that are passed on to the execution unit, which schedules and executes the micro-operations, possibly doing so out-of-order. Complex instructions are implemented by microcode that consists of predefined sequences of micro-operations.\nSome processor designs use machine code that runs in a special mode, with special instructions, available only in that mode, that have access to processor-dependent hardware, to implement some low-level features of the instruction set. The DEC Alpha, a pure RISC design, used PALcode to implement features such as translation lookaside buffer (TLB) miss handling and interrupt handling, as well as providing, for Alpha-based systems running OpenVMS, instructions requiring interlocked memory access that are similar to instructions provided by the VAX architecture. CMOS IBM System/390 CPUs, starting with the G4 processor, and z/Architecture CPUs use millicode to implement some instructions.\n* The B700 \"microprocessor\" execute application-level opcodes using sequences of 16-bit microinstructions stored in main memory; each of these is either a register-load operation or mapped to a single 56-bit \"nanocode\" instruction stored in read-only memory. This allows comparatively simple hardware to act either as a mainframe peripheral controller or to be packaged as a standalone computer.\n* The B1700 is implemented with radically different hardware including bit-addressable main memory but has a similar multi-layer organisation. The operating system preloads the interpreter for whatever language is required. These interpreters present different virtual machines for COBOL, Fortran, etc.\nImplementation.\nEach microinstruction in a microprogram provides the bits that control the functional elements that internally compose a CPU. The advantage over a hard-wired CPU is that internal CPU control becomes a specialized form of a computer program. Microcode thus transforms a complex electronic design challenge (the control of a CPU) into a less complex programming challenge. To take advantage of this, a CPU is divided into several parts:\nThere may also be a memory address register and a memory data register, used to access the main computer storage. Together, these elements form an \"execution unit\". Most modern CPUs have several execution units. Even simple computers usually have one unit to read and write memory, and another to execute user code. These elements could often be brought together as a single chip. This chip comes in a fixed width that would form a \"slice\" through the execution unit. These are known as \"bit slice\" chips. The AMD Am2900 family is one of the best known examples of bit slice elements. The parts of the execution units and the whole execution units are interconnected by a bundle of wires called a bus.\nProgrammers develop microprograms, using basic software tools. A microassembler allows a programmer to define the table of bits symbolically. Because of its close relationship to the underlying architecture, \"microcode has several properties that make it difficult to generate using a compiler.\" A simulator program is intended to execute the bits in the same way as the electronics, and allows much more freedom to debug the microprogram. After the microprogram is finalized, and extensively tested, it is sometimes used as the input to a computer program that constructs logic to produce the same data. This program is similar to those used to optimize a programmable logic array. Even without fully optimal logic, heuristically optimized logic can vastly reduce the number of transistors from the number needed for a read-only memory (ROM) control store. This reduces the cost to produce, and the electricity used by, a CPU.\nMicrocode can be characterized as \"horizontal\" or \"vertical\", referring primarily to whether each microinstruction controls CPU elements with little or no decoding (horizontal microcode) or requires extensive decoding by combinatorial logic before doing so (vertical microcode). Consequently, each horizontal microinstruction is wider (contains more bits) and occupies more storage space than a vertical microinstruction.\nHorizontal microcode.\n\"Horizontal microcode has several discrete micro-operations that are combined in a single microinstruction for simultaneous operation.\" Horizontal microcode is typically contained in a fairly wide control store; it is not uncommon for each word to be 108 bits or more. On each tick of a sequencer clock a microcode word is read, decoded, and used to control the functional elements that make up the CPU.\nIn a typical implementation a horizontal microprogram word comprises fairly tightly defined groups of bits. For example, one simple arrangement might be:\nFor this type of micromachine to implement a JUMP instruction with the address following the opcode, the microcode might require two clock ticks. The engineer designing it would write microassembler source code looking something like this:\nFor each tick it is common to find that only some portions of the CPU are used, with the remaining groups of bits in the microinstruction being no-ops. With careful design of hardware and microcode, this property can be exploited to parallelise operations that use different areas of the CPU; for example, in the case above, the ALU is not required during the first tick, so it could potentially be used to complete an earlier arithmetic instruction.\nVertical microcode.\nIn vertical microcode, each microinstruction is significantly encoded, that is, the bit fields generally pass through intermediate combinatory logic that, in turn, generates the control and sequencing signals for internal CPU elements (ALU, registers, etc.). This is in contrast with horizontal microcode, in which the bit fields either directly produce the control and sequencing signals or are only minimally encoded. Consequently, vertical microcode requires smaller instruction lengths and less storage, but requires more time to decode, resulting in a slower CPU clock.\nSome vertical microcode is just the assembly language of a simple conventional computer that is emulating a more complex computer. Some processors, such as DEC Alpha processors and the CMOS microprocessors on later IBM mainframes System/390 and z/Architecture, use machine code, running in a special mode that gives it access to special instructions, special registers, and other hardware resources unavailable to regular machine code, to implement some instructions and other functions, such as page table walks on Alpha processors. This is called PALcode on Alpha processors and millicode on IBM mainframe processors.\nAnother form of vertical microcode has two fields:\nThe \"field select\" selects which part of the CPU will be controlled by this word of the control store. The \"field value\" controls that part of the CPU. With this type of microcode, a designer explicitly chooses to make a slower CPU to save money by reducing the unused bits in the control store; however, the reduced complexity may increase the CPU's clock frequency, which lessens the effect of an increased number of cycles per instruction.\nAs transistors grew cheaper, horizontal microcode came to dominate the design of CPUs using microcode, with vertical microcode being used less often.\nWhen both vertical and horizontal microcode are used, the horizontal microcode may be referred to as \"nanocode\" or \"picocode\".\nWritable control store.\nA few computers were built using \"writable microcode\". In this design, rather than storing the microcode in ROM or hard-wired logic, the microcode is stored in a RAM called a \"writable control store\" or \"WCS\". Such a computer is sometimes called a \"writable instruction set computer\" (WISC).\nMany experimental prototype computers use writable control stores; there are also commercial machines that use writable microcode, such as the Burroughs Small Systems, early Xerox workstations, the DEC VAX 8800 (\"Nautilus\") family, the Symbolics L- and G-machines, a number of IBM System/360 and System/370 implementations, some DEC PDP-10 machines, and the Data General Eclipse MV/8000.\nThe IBM System/370 includes a facility called \"Initial-Microprogram Load\" (\"IML\" or \"IMPL\") that can be invoked from the console, as part of \"power-on reset\" (\"POR\") or from another processor in a tightly coupled multiprocessor complex.\nSome commercial machines, for example IBM 360/85, have both a read-only storage and a writable control store for microcode.\nWCS offers several advantages including the ease of patching the microprogram and, for certain hardware generations, faster access than ROMs can provide. User-programmable WCS allows the user to optimize the machine for specific purposes.\nStarting with the Pentium Pro in 1995, several x86 CPUs have writable Intel Microcode. This, for example, has allowed bugs in the Intel Core 2 and Intel Xeon microcodes to be fixed by patching their microprograms, rather than requiring the entire chips to be replaced. A second prominent example is the set of microcode patches that Intel offered for some of their processor architectures of up to 10 years in age, in a bid to counter the security vulnerabilities discovered in their designs \u2013 Spectre and Meltdown \u2013 which went public at the start of 2018. A microcode update can be installed by Linux, FreeBSD, Microsoft Windows, or the motherboard BIOS.\nSome machines offer user-programmable writable control stores as an option, including the HP 2100, DEC PDP-11/60, TI-990/12, and Varian Data Machines V-70 series minicomputers. WCS options extended down to microprocessors too. The DEC LSI-11 has an option to allow programming of the internal 8-bit micromachine to create application-specific extensions to the instruction set.\nSome microcode peripheral devices and adapters have writable microcode, which is usually loaded by an operating system device driver. Such microcode is loaded to the device's SRAM or DRAM, for example, GDDR SDRAM of a video card.\nComparison to VLIW and RISC.\nThe design trend toward heavily microcoded processors with complex instructions began in the early 1960s and continued until roughly the mid-1980s. At that point the RISC design philosophy started becoming more prominent.\nA CPU that uses microcode generally takes several clock cycles to execute a single instruction, one clock cycle for each step in the microprogram for that instruction. Some CISC processors include instructions that can take a very long time to execute. Such variations interfere with both interrupt latency and, what is far more important in modern systems, pipelining.\nWhen designing a new processor, a hardwired control RISC has the following advantages over microcoded CISC:\nThere are counterpoints as well:\nMany RISC and VLIW processors are designed to execute every instruction (as long as it is in the cache) in a single cycle. This is very similar to the way CPUs with microcode execute one microinstruction per cycle. VLIW processors have instructions that behave similarly to very wide horizontal microcode, although typically without such fine-grained control over the hardware as provided by microcode. RISC instructions are sometimes similar to the narrow vertical microcode.\nMicro-operations.\nModern CISC implementations, such as the x86 family starting with the NexGen Nx586, Intel Pentium Pro, and AMD K5, decode instructions into dynamically buffered micro-operations with an instruction encoding similar to RISC or traditional microcode. A hardwired instruction decode unit directly emits microoperations for common x86 instructions, but falls back to a more traditional microcode ROM containing microoperations for more complex or rarely used instructions.\nFor example, an x86 might look up microoperations from microcode to handle complex multistep operations such as loop or string instructions, floating-point unit transcendental functions or unusual values such as denormal numbers, and special-purpose instructions such as CPUID.\nAlternate meanings of \"microcode\".\nPDP-8.\nThe PDP-8 is a family of 12-bit minicomputers that was launched Digital Equipment Corporation in 1965. The OPR (OPeRate) instruction was said to be \"microcoded.\" This did not mean what the word means today, but meant that each bit of the instruction word specifies a certain action, and the programmer could achieve several actions in a single instruction cycle by setting multiple bits. Examples of these actions are: clear accumulator, complement accumulator, rotate right, rotate right twice, and byte swap.\nEmbedded firmware.\nSome hardware vendors, notably IBM and Lenovo, use the term \"microcode\" interchangeably with embedded \"firmware\". In this context, all code within a device is termed microcode, whether it is microcode or machine code. For instance, updates to a hard disk drive's microcode may encompass updates to both its microcode and firmware. Embedded firmware has been popular in application-specific processors such as network processors, digital signal processors, channel controllers, disk controllers, network interface controllers, flash memory controllers, graphics processing units, and in other hardware.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20002", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20002", "title": "Microprogramming", "text": ""}
{"id": "20003", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20003", "title": "Multitier architecture", "text": "Computing system architecture\nIn software engineering, multitier architecture (often referred to as \"n\"-tier architecture) is a client\u2013server architecture in which various levels of software architecture are physically separated. The most common use of multitier architecture is the three-tier architecture, which separates presentation, application processing and data management functions, such as in the case of Cisco's hierarchical internetworking model. Other tiers of separation may include the service layer, business layer, data access layer, and persistence layer.\n\"N\"-tier application architecture provides a model by which developers can modify or add to a specific tier in the software development process instead of reworking the entire application. It is commonly used for small and simple applications because of its simplicity and low cost. In web development, three-tier architecture is often used to describe websites that comprise a front-end web server serving static content and some cached dynamic content, a middle dynamic content processing and generation application server, and a back-end database or data store.\nIn a strict layered system, each layer depends on the layer below it and can exist without the layers above it. In a relaxed layered system, a layer can also depend on \"all\" of the layers below it, creating additional couplings between layers. Some multitier architectures use a hybrid approach so that some layers are strict while other layers are relaxed. \"N\"-tier architecture may also be implemented with the model\u2013view\u2013presenter pattern.\nThe terms layer and tier are often used interchangeably, although \"layer\" is sometimes used to refer to a conceptual software logic structuring mechanism, while \"tier\" is used to refer to the physical hardware structuring mechanism for system infrastructure. In this usage, a three-layer solution could be deployed on a single tier, as in the case of an some database-centric architectures called RDBMS-only architecture or in personal workstations.\nLayers.\nCommon layers.\nIn a logical multilayer architecture for an information system with an object-oriented design, the following four are the most common:\nThe more usual convention is that the application layer (or service layer) is considered a sublayer of the business layer, typically encapsulating the API definition surfacing the supported business functionality. The application/business layers can, in fact, be further subdivided to emphasize additional sublayers of distinct responsibility. For example, if the model\u2013view\u2013presenter pattern is used, the presenter sublayer might be used as an additional layer between the user interface layer and the business/application layer (as represented by the model sublayer). If the application architecture has no explicit distinction between the business layer and the presentation layer (i.e., the presentation layer is considered part of the business layer), then a traditional client-server (two-tier) model has been implemented.\nSome also identify a separate layer called the business infrastructure layer (BI), located between the business layer(s) and the infrastructure layer(s). It is also sometimes called the \"low-level business layer\" or the \"business services layer\". This layer is very general and can be used in several application tiers (e.g. a CurrencyConverter).\nThe infrastructure layer can be partitioned into different levels (high-level or low-level technical services). Developers often focus on the persistence (data access) capabilities of the infrastructure layer and therefore only talk about the persistence layer or the data access layer (instead of an infrastructure layer or technical services layer). In other words, the other kind of technical services is not always explicitly thought of as part of any particular layer.. The Data Access layer normally contains an object known as the Data Access Object (DAO).\nIn a strict layered system, each layer depends on the layer below it and can exist without the layers above it. In a relaxed layered system, a layer can also depend on all of the layers below it and not merely the layer directly below it. The relaxed layered system has more couplings and is more difficult to change. Some multitier architectures use a hybrid approach so that some layers are strict while other layers are relaxed.\nThree-tier architecture.\nThree-tier architecture is a client-server software architecture pattern in which the user interface (presentation), functional process logic (\"business rules\"), computer data storage and data access are developed and maintained as independent modules, most often on separate platforms. It was developed by John J. Donovan in Open Environment Corporation (OEC), a tools company he founded in Cambridge, Massachusetts..\nApart from the usual advantages of modular software with well-defined interfaces, the three-tier architecture is intended to allow any of the three tiers to be upgraded or replaced independently in response to changes in requirements or technology. For example, a change of operating system in the \"presentation tier\" would only affect the user interface code. Typically, the user interface runs on a desktop PC or workstation and uses a standard graphical user interface, functional process logic that may consist of one or more separate modules running on a workstation or application server, and an RDBMS on a database server or mainframe that contains the computer data storage logic. The middle tier may be multitiered itself (in which case the overall architecture is called an \"\"n\"-tier architecture\"). \nWeb development.\nIn the web development field, three-tier is often used to refer to websites, commonly electronic commerce websites, which are built using three tiers:\nOther considerations.\nData transfer between tiers is part of the architecture. Protocols involved may include one or more of SNMP, CORBA, Java RMI, .NET Remoting, Windows Communication Foundation, sockets, UDP, web services or other standard or proprietary protocols. Often middleware is used to connect the separate tiers. Separate tiers often (but not necessarily) run on separate physical servers, and each tier may itself run on a cluster.\nTraceability.\nThe Application Response Measurement defines concepts and APIs for measuring performance and correlating transactions between tiers. \nGenerally, the term \"tiers\" is used to describe physical distribution of components of a system on separate servers, computers, or networks (processing nodes). A three-tier architecture then will have three processing nodes. The term \"layers\" refers to a logical grouping of components which may or may not be physically located on one processing node.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20016", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20016", "title": "Myrinet", "text": "Local area networking system\nMyrinet, ANSI/VITA 26-1998, is a high-speed local area networking system designed by the company Myricom to be used as an interconnect between multiple machines to form computer clusters.\nDescription.\nMyrinet was promoted as having lower protocol overhead than standards such as Ethernet, and therefore better throughput, less interference, and lower latency while using the host CPU. Although it can be used as a traditional networking system, Myrinet is often used directly by programs that \"know\" about it, thereby bypassing a call into the operating system.\nEarlier versions of Myrinet used a variety of media and connectors:\nThe later versions of Myrinet physically consist of two fibre optic cables, upstream and downstream, connected to the host computers with a single connector. Machines are connected via low-overhead routers and switches, as opposed to connecting one machine directly to another. Myrinet includes a number of fault-tolerance features, mostly backed by the switches. These include flow control, error control, and \"heartbeat\" monitoring on every link. The \"fourth-generation\" Myrinet, called Myri-10G, supported a 10\u00a0Gbit/s data rate and can use 10 Gigabit Ethernet on PHY, the physical layer (cables, connectors, distances, signaling). Myri-10G started shipping at the end of 2005.\nMyrinet was approved in 1998 by the American National Standards Institute for use on the VMEbus as ANSI/VITA 26-1998. One of the earliest publications on Myrinet is a 1995 IEEE article.\nPerformance.\nMyrinet is a lightweight protocol with little overhead that allows it to operate with throughput close to the basic signaling speed of the physical layer. For supercomputing, the low latency of Myrinet is even more important than its throughput performance, since, according to Amdahl's law, a high-performance parallel system tends to be bottlenecked by its slowest sequential process, which in all but the most embarrassingly parallel supercomputer workloads is often the latency of message transmission across the network.\nDeployment.\nAccording to Myricom, 141 (28.2%) of the June 2005 TOP500 supercomputers used Myrinet technology. In the November 2005 TOP500, the number of supercomputers using Myrinet was down to 101 computers, or 20.2%, in November 2006, 79 (15.8%), and by November 2007, 18 (3.6%), a long way behind gigabit Ethernet at 54% and InfiniBand at 24.2%.\nIn the June 2014 TOP500 list, the number of supercomputers using Myrinet interconnect was 1 (0.2%).\nIn November, 2013, the assets of Myricom (including the Myrinet technology) were acquired by CSP Inc. In 2016, it was reported that Google had also offered to buy the company.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20017", "revid": "18024122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20017", "title": "Musique concr\u00e8te", "text": "Form of electroacoustic music\nMusique concr\u00e8te (; lit.\u2009'concrete music') is a type of music composition that utilizes recorded sounds as raw material. Sounds are often modified through the application of audio signal processing and tape music techniques, and may be assembled into a form of sound collage. It can feature sounds derived from recordings of musical instruments, the human voice, and the natural environment, as well as those created using sound synthesis and computer-based digital signal processing. Compositions in this idiom are not restricted to the normal musical rules of melody, harmony, rhythm, and metre. The technique exploits acousmatic sound, such that sound identities can often be intentionally obscured or appear unconnected to their source cause.\nThe theoretical basis of \"musique concr\u00e8te\" as a compositional practice was developed by French composer Pierre Schaeffer, beginning in the early 1940s. It was largely an attempt to differentiate between music based on the abstract medium of notation and that created using so-called sound objects (). By the early 1950s, musique concr\u00e8te was contrasted with \"pure\" \"\" as then developed in West Germany \u2013 based solely on the use of electronically produced sounds rather than recorded sounds \u2013 but the distinction has since been blurred such that the term \"electronic music\" covers both meanings. Schaeffer's work resulted in the establishment of France's Groupe de Recherches de Musique Concr\u00e8te (GRMC), which attracted important figures including Pierre Henry, Luc Ferrari, Pierre Boulez, Karlheinz Stockhausen, Edgard Var\u00e8se, and Iannis Xenakis. From the late 1960s onward, and particularly in France, the term acousmatic music () was used in reference to fixed media compositions that utilized both \"musique concr\u00e8te\"-based techniques and live sound spatialisation.\nHistory.\nBeginnings.\nIn 1928, music critic Andr\u00e9 C\u0153uroy wrote in his book, \"Panorama of Contemporary Music\", that \"perhaps the time is not far off when a composer will be able to represent through recording, music specifically composed for the gramophone\". In the same period, the American composer Henry Cowell, in referring to the projects of Nikolai Lopatnikoff, believed that \"there was a wide field open for the composition of music for phonographic discs\". This sentiment was echoed further in 1930 by Igor Stravinsky, when he stated in the revue that \"there will be a greater interest in creating music in a way that will be peculiar to the gramophone record\". The following year, in 1931, Boris de Schloezer also expressed the opinion that one could write for the gramophone or for the wireless just as one can for the piano or the violin. Shortly after, German art theorist Rudolf Arnheim discussed the effects of microphonic recording in an essay entitled \"Radio\", published in 1936. In it the idea of a creative role for the recording medium was introduced and Arnheim stated that: \"The rediscovery of the musicality of sound in noise and in language, and the reunification of music, noise and language in order to obtain a unity of material: that is one of the chief artistic tasks of radio\".\nPossible antecedents to \"musique concr\u00e8te\" have been noted; Walter Ruttmann's film (\"Weekend\") (1930), a work of \"blind cinema\" without visuals, introduced recordings of environmental sound, to represent the urban soundscape of Berlin, two decades before musique concr\u00e8te was formalised. Ruttmann's soundtrack has been retrospectively called \"musique concr\u00e8te\". According to Seth Kim-Cohen, the piece was the first to \"organise 'concrete' sounds into a formal, artistic composition.\" Composer Irwin Bazelon referred to a sound collage in the film \"Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde\" (1931), during the first transformation scene, as \"pre-musique concr\u00e8te\". Ottorino Respighi's \"Pines of Rome\" (; 1924) calls for a phonograph recording of birdsong to be played during the third movement.\nPierre Schaeffer and.\nIn 1942, French composer and theoretician Pierre Schaeffer began his exploration of radiophony when he joined Jacques Copeau and his pupils in the foundation of the Studio d'Essai de la Radiodiffusion Nationale. The studio originally functioned as a center for the French Resistance on radio, which in August 1944 was responsible for the first broadcasts in liberated Paris. It was here that Schaeffer began to experiment with creative radiophonic techniques using the sound technologies of the time. In 1948, Schaeffer began to keep a set of journals describing his attempt to create a \"symphony of noises\". These journals were published in 1952 as , and according to Brian Kane, author of \"Sound Unseen: Acousmatic Sound in Theory and Practice\", Schaeffer was driven by: \"a compositional desire to construct music from concrete objects \u2013 no matter how unsatisfactory the initial results \u2013 and a theoretical desire to find a vocabulary, solf\u00e8ge, or method upon which to ground such music.\"\nThe development of Schaeffer's practice was informed by encounters with voice actors, and microphone usage and radiophonic art played an important part in inspiring and consolidating Schaeffer's conception of sound-based composition. Another important influence on Schaeffer's practice was cinema, and the techniques of recording and montage, which were originally associated with cinematographic practice, came to \"serve as the substrate of musique concr\u00e8te\". Marc Battier notes that, prior to Schaeffer, Jean Epstein drew attention to the manner in which sound recording revealed what was hidden in the act of basic acoustic listening. Epstein's reference to this \"phenomenon of an epiphanic being\", which appears through the transduction of sound, proved influential on Schaeffer's concept of reduced listening. Schaeffer would explicitly cite Jean Epstein with reference to his use of extra-musical sound material. Epstein had already imagined that \"through the transposition of natural sounds, it becomes possible to create chords and dissonances, melodies and symphonies of noise, which are a new and specifically cinematographic music\".\nHalim El-Dabh.\nAs a student in Cairo in the early to mid-1940s, Egyptian composer Halim El-Dabh began experimenting with electroacoustic music using a cumbersome wire recorder. He recorded the sounds of an ancient \"zaar\" ceremony and at the Middle East Radio studios processed the material using reverberation, echo, voltage controls, and re-recording. The resulting tape-based composition, entitled \"The Expression of Zaar\", was presented in 1944 at an art gallery event in Cairo. El-Dabh has described his initial activities as an attempt to unlock \"the inner sound\" of the recordings. While his early compositional work was not widely known outside of Egypt at the time, El-Dabh would eventually gain recognition for his influential work at the Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center in Manhattan in the late 1950s.\nClub d'Essai and \"Cinq \u00e9tudes de bruits\".\nFollowing Schaeffer's work with Studio d'Essai at Radiodiffusion Nationale during the early 1940s he was credited with originating the theory and practice of \"musique concr\u00e8te.\" The Studio d'Essai was renamed Club d'Essai de la Radiodiffusion-T\u00e9l\u00e9vision Fran\u00e7aise in 1946 and in the same year Schaeffer discussed, in writing, the question surrounding the transformation of time perceived through recording. The essay evidenced knowledge of sound manipulation techniques he would further exploit compositionally. In 1948 Schaeffer formally initiated \"research in to noises\" at the Club d'Essai and on 5 October 1948 the results of his initial experimentation were premiered at a concert given in Paris. Five works for phonograph \u2013 known collectively as \"Cinq \u00e9tudes de bruits\" (Five Studies of Noises) including \"\u00c9tude violette\" (\"Study in Purple\") and \"\u00c9tude aux chemins de fer\" (Study with Railroads) \u2013 were presented.\nMusique concr\u00e8te.\nBy 1949, Schaeffer's compositional work was known publicly as \"musique concr\u00e8te\". Schaeffer stated: \"when I proposed the term 'musique concr\u00e8te,' I intended\u00a0\u2026 to point out an opposition with the way musical work usually goes. Instead of notating musical ideas on paper with the symbols of solfege and entrusting their realization to well-known instruments, the question was to collect concrete sounds, wherever they came from, and to abstract the musical values they were potentially containing\". According to Pierre Henry, \"musique concr\u00e8te was not a study of timbre, it is focused on envelopes, forms. It must be presented by means of non-traditional characteristics, you see\u00a0\u2026 one might say that the origin of this music is also found in the interest in 'plastifying' music, of rendering it plastic like sculpture\u2026musique concr\u00e8te, in my opinion\u00a0\u2026 led to a manner of composing, indeed, a new mental framework of composing\". Schaeffer had developed an aesthetic that was centred upon the use of sound as a primary compositional resource. The aesthetic also emphasised the importance of play (\"jeu\") in the practice of sound based composition. Schaeffer's use of the word \"jeu\", from the verb \"jouer\", carries the same double meaning as the English verb \"to play\": 'to enjoy oneself by interacting with one's surroundings', as well as 'to operate a musical instrument'. During this early development of music concrete, Schaeffer continued participation in his Club d\u2019Essai. Prior to their collaboration on Timbres-Dur\u00e9es (1952), Schaeffer\u2019s acquaintance and serialist composer, Olivier Messiaen, periodically participated in broadcasts, round tables, and critiques surrounding musique concr\u00e8te.\nGroupe de Recherche de Musique Concr\u00e8te.\nBy 1951 the work of Schaeffer, composer-percussionist Pierre Henry, and sound engineer Jacques Poullin had received official recognition and the Groupe de Recherches de Musique Concr\u00e8te, Club d 'Essai de la Radiodiffusion-T\u00e9l\u00e9vision Fran\u00e7aise was established at RTF in Paris, the ancestor of the ORTF. At RTF the GRMC established the first purpose-built electroacoustic music studio. It quickly attracted many who either were or were later to become notable composers, including Olivier Messiaen, Pierre Boulez, Jean Barraqu\u00e9, Karlheinz Stockhausen, Edgard Var\u00e8se, Iannis Xenakis, Michel Philippot, and Arthur Honegger. Compositional \"output from 1951 to 1953 comprised \"\u00c9tude I\" (1951) and \"\u00c9tude II\" (1951) by Boulez, \"Timbres-dur\u00e9es\" (1952) by Messiaen, \"\u00c9tude aux mille collants\" (1952) by Stockhausen, \"Le microphone bien temp\u00e9r\u00e9\" (1952) and \"La voile d'Orph\u00e9e\" (1953) by Henry, \"\u00c9tude I\" (1953) by Philippot, \"\u00c9tude\" (1953) by Barraqu\u00e9, the mixed pieces \"Toute la lyre\" (1951) and \"Orph\u00e9e 53\" (1953) by Schaeffer/Henry, and the film music \"Masquerage\" (1952) by Schaeffer and \"Astrologie\" (1953) by Henry. In 1954 Var\u00e8se and Honegger visited to work on the tape parts of \"D\u00e9serts\" and \"La rivi\u00e8re endormie\"\".\nIn the early and mid 1950s Schaeffer's commitments to RTF included official missions that often required extended absences from the studios. This led him to invest Philippe Arthuys with responsibility for the GRMC in his absence, with Pierre Henry operating as Director of Works. Pierre Henry's composing talent developed greatly during this period at the GRMC and he worked with experimental filmmakers such as Max de Haas, Jean Gr\u00e9millon, Enrico Fulchignoni, and Jean Rouch and with choreographers including Dick Sanders and Maurice B\u00e9jart. Schaeffer returned to run the group at the end of 1957, and immediately stated his disapproval of the direction the GRMC had taken. A proposal was then made to \"renew completely the spirit, the methods and the personnel of the Group, with a view to undertake research and to offer a much needed welcome to young composers\".\nGroupe de Recherches Musicales.\nFollowing the emergence of differences within the GRMC, Pierre Henry, Philippe Arthuys, and several of their colleagues, resigned in April 1958. Schaeffer created a new collective, called Groupe de Recherches Musicales (GRM) and set about recruiting new members including Michel Chion, Luc Ferrari, Beatriz Ferreyra, Fran\u00e7ois-Bernard M\u00e2che, Iannis Xenakis, Bernard Parmegiani, and Mireille Chamass-Kyrou. Later arrivals included Ivo Malec, Philippe Carson, Romuald Vandelle, Edgardo Canton and Fran\u00e7ois Bayle.\nGRM was one of several theoretical and experimental groups working under the umbrella of the Schaeffer-led Service de la Recherche at ORTF (1960\u20131974). Together with the GRM, three other groups existed: the Groupe de Recherches Image GRI, the Groupe de Recherches Technologiques GRT and the Groupe de Recherches Langage which became the Groupe d'Etudes Critiques. Communication was the one theme that unified the various groups, all of which were devoted to production and creation. In terms of the question \"Who says what to whom?\" Schaeffer added \"How?\", thereby creating a platform for research into audiovisual communication and mass media, audible phenomena and music in general (including non-Western musics). At the GRM the theoretical teaching remained based on practice and could be summed up in the catch phrase \"do and listen\".\nSchaeffer kept up a practice established with the GRMC of delegating the functions (though not the title) of Group Director to colleagues. Since 1961 GRM has had six Group Directors: Michel Philippot (1960\u20131961), Luc Ferrari (1962\u20131963), Bernard Baschet and Fran\u00e7ois Vercken (1964\u20131966). From the beginning of 1966, Fran\u00e7ois Bayle took over the direction for the duration of thirty-one years, to 1997. He was then replaced by Daniel Teruggi.\nTrait\u00e9 des objets musicaux.\nThe group continued to refine Schaeffer's ideas and strengthened the concept of \"musique acousmatique\". Schaeffer had borrowed the term acousmatic from Pythagoras and defined it as: \"Acousmatic, adjective: referring to a sound that one hears without seeing the causes behind it\". In 1966 Schaeffer published the book \"Trait\u00e9 des objets musicaux\" (Treatise on Musical Objects) which represented the culmination of some 20 years of research in the field of \"musique concr\u00e8te\". In conjunction with this publication, a set of sound recordings was produced, entitled \"Le solf\u00e8ge de l'objet sonore\" (Music Theory of the Acoustic Object), to provide examples of concepts dealt with in the treatise.\nTechnology.\nThe development of musique concr\u00e8te was facilitated by the emergence of new music technology in post-war Europe. Access to microphones, phonographs, and later magnetic tape recorders (created in 1939 and acquired by the Schaeffer's Groupe de Recherche de Musique Concr\u00e8te (Research Group on Concrete Music) in 1952), facilitated by an association with the French national broadcasting organization, at that time the Radiodiffusion-T\u00e9l\u00e9vision Fran\u00e7aise, gave Schaeffer and his colleagues an opportunity to experiment with recording technology and tape manipulation.\nInitial tools of musique concr\u00e8te.\nIn 1948, a typical radio studio consisted of a series of shellac record players, a shellac record recorder, a mixing desk with rotating potentiometers, mechanical reverberation units, filters, and microphones. This technology made a number of limited operations available to a composer:\nThe application of the above technologies in the creation of musique concr\u00e8te led to the development of a number of sound manipulation techniques including:\nMagnetic tape.\nThe first tape recorders started arriving at ORTF in 1949; however, they were much less reliable than the shellac players, to the point that the \"Symphonie pour un homme seul\" (1950\u20131951) was mainly composed with records even if the tape recorder was available. In 1950, when the machines finally functioned correctly, the techniques of the studio were expanded. A range of new sound manipulation practices were explored using improved media manipulation methods and operations such as continuous speed variation. A completely new possibility of organising sounds appeared with tape editing, which permitted tape to be spliced and arranged with much more precision. The \"axe-cut junctions\" were replaced with micrometric junctions and a whole new technique of production, less dependent on performance skills, could be developed. Tape editing brought a new technique called \"micromontage\", in which very small fragments of sound were edited together, thus creating completely new sounds or structures on a larger scale.\nDevelopment of novel devices.\nDuring the GRMC period from 1951 to 1958, Schaeffer and Poullin developed a number of novel sound creation tools. These included a three-track tape recorder; a machine with ten playback heads to replay tape loops in echo (the morphophone); a keyboard-controlled machine to play tape loops at preset speeds (the keyboard, chromatic, or \"Tolana phonog\u00e8ne\"); a slide-controlled machine to replay tape loops at a continuously variable range of speeds (the handle, continuous, or \"Sareg phonog\u00e8ne\"); and a device to distribute an encoded track across four loudspeakers, including one hanging from the centre of the ceiling (the \"potentiom\u00e8tre d'espace\").\n\"Phonog\u00e8ne\".\nSpeed variation was a powerful tool for sound design applications. It had been identified that transformations brought about by varying playback speed lead to modification in the character of the sound material:\nThe phonog\u00e8ne was a machine capable of modifying sound structure significantly and it provided composers with a means to adapt sound to meet specific compositional contexts. The initial phonog\u00e8nes were manufactured in 1953 by two subcontractors: the chromatic phonog\u00e8ne by a company called Tolana, and the sliding version by the SAREG Company. A third version was developed later at ORTF. An outline of the unique capabilities of the various phonog\u00e8nes can be seen here:\nThree-head tape recorder.\nThis original tape recorder was one of the first machines permitting the simultaneous listening of several synchronised sources. Until 1958 musique concr\u00e8te, radio and the studio machines were monophonic. The three-head tape recorder superposed three magnetic tapes that were dragged by a common motor, each tape having an independent spool. The objective was to keep the three tapes synchronised from a common starting point. Works could then be conceived polyphonically, and thus each head conveyed a part of the information and was listened to through a dedicated loudspeaker. It was an ancestor of the multi-track player (four then eight tracks) that appeared in the 1960s. \"Timbres Dur\u00e9es\" by Olivier Messiaen with the technical assistance of Pierre Henry was the first work composed for this tape recorder in 1952. A rapid rhythmic polyphony was distributed over the three channels.\nMorphophone.\nThis machine was conceived to build complex forms through repetition, and accumulation of events through delays, filtering and feedback. It consisted of a large rotating disk, 50\u00a0cm in diameter, on which was stuck a tape with its magnetic side facing outward. A series of twelve movable magnetic heads (one each recording head and erasing head, and ten playback heads) were positioned around the disk, in contact with the tape. A sound up to four seconds long could be recorded on the looped tape and the ten playback heads would then read the information with different delays, according to their (adjustable) positions around the disk. A separate amplifier and band-pass filter for each head could modify the spectrum of the sound, and additional feedback loops could transmit the information to the recording head. The resulting repetitions of a sound occurred at different time intervals, and could be filtered or modified through feedback. This system was also easily capable of producing artificial reverberation or continuous sounds.\nEarly sound spatialisation system.\nAt the premiere of Pierre Schaeffer's \"Symphonie pour un homme seul\" in 1951, a system that was designed for the spatial control of sound was tested. It was called a \"relief desk\" (\"pupitre de relief\", but also referred to as \"pupitre d'espace\" or \"potentiom\u00e8tre d'espace\") and was intended to control the dynamic level of music played from several shellac players. This created a stereophonic effect by controlling the positioning of a monophonic sound source. One of five tracks, provided by a purpose-built tape machine, was controlled by the performer and the other four tracks each supplied a single loudspeaker. This provided a mixture of live and preset sound positions. The placement of loudspeakers in the performance space included two loudspeakers at the front right and left of the audience, one placed at the rear, and in the centre of the space a loudspeaker was placed in a high position above the audience. The sounds could therefore be moved around the audience, rather than just across the front stage. On stage, the control system allowed a performer to position a sound either to the left or right, above or behind the audience, simply by moving a small, hand held transmitter coil towards or away from four somewhat larger receiver coils arranged around the performer in a manner reflecting the loudspeaker positions. A contemporary eyewitness described the \"potentiom\u00e8tre d'espace\" in normal use:\nOne found one's self sitting in a small studio which was equipped with four loudspeakers\u2014two in front of one\u2014right and left; one behind one and a fourth suspended above. In the front center were four large loops and an \"executant\" moving a small magnetic unit through the air. The four loops controlled the four speakers, and while all four were giving off sounds all the time, the distance of the unit from the loops determined the volume of sound sent out from each.&lt;br&gt;The music thus came to one at varying intensity from various parts of the room, and this \"spatial projection\" gave new sense to the rather abstract sequence of sound originally recorded. The central concept underlying this method was the notion that music should be controlled during public presentation in order to create a performance situation; an attitude that has stayed with acousmatic music to the present day.\nCoupigny synthesiser and Studio 54 mixing desk.\nAfter the longstanding rivalry with the electronic music of the Cologne studio had subsided, in 1970 the GRM finally created an electronic studio using tools developed by the physicist Enrico Chiarucci, called the Studio 54, which featured the \"Coupigny modular synthesiser\" and a Moog synthesiser. The Coupigny synthesiser, named for its designer Fran\u00e7ois Coupigny, director of the Group for Technical Research, and the Studio 54 mixing desk had a major influence on the evolution of GRM and from the point of their introduction on they brought a new quality to the music. The mixing desk and synthesiser were combined in one unit and were created specifically for the creation of musique concr\u00e8te.\nThe design of the desk was influenced by trade union rules at French National Radio that required technicians and production staff to have clearly defined duties. The solitary practice of musique concr\u00e8te composition did not suit a system that involved three operators: one in charge of the machines, a second controlling the mixing desk, and third to provide guidance to the others. Because of this the synthesiser and desk were combined and organised in a manner that allowed it to be used easily by a composer. Independently of the mixing tracks (24 in total), it had a coupled connection patch that permitted the organisation of the machines within the studio. It also had a number of remote controls for operating tape recorders. The system was easily adaptable to any context, particularly that of interfacing with external equipment.\nBefore the late 1960s the musique concr\u00e8te produced at GRM had largely been based on the recording and manipulation of sounds, but synthesised sounds had featured in a number of works prior to the introduction of the Coupigny. Pierre Henry had used oscillators to produce sounds as early as 1955. But a synthesiser with envelope control was something Pierre Schaeffer was against, since it favoured the preconception of music and therefore deviated from Schaeffer's principle of \"making through listening\". Because of Schaeffer's concerns the Coupigny synthesiser was conceived as a sound-event generator with parameters controlled globally, without a means to define values as precisely as some other synthesisers of the day.\nThe development of the machine was constrained by several factors. It needed to be modular and the modules had to be easily interconnected (so that the synthesiser would have more modules than slots and it would have an easy-to-use patch). It also needed to include all the major functions of a modular synthesiser including oscillators, noise-generators, filters, ring-modulators, but an intermodulation facility was viewed as the primary requirement; to enable complex synthesis processes such as frequency modulation, amplitude modulation, and modulation via an external source. No keyboard was attached to the synthesiser and instead a specific and somewhat complex envelope generator was used to shape sound. This synthesiser was well-adapted to the production of continuous and complex sounds using intermodulation techniques such as cross-synthesis and frequency modulation but was less effective in generating precisely defined frequencies and triggering specific sounds.\nThe Coupigny synthesiser also served as the model for a smaller, portable unit, which has been used down to the present day.\nAcousmonium.\nIn 1966 composer and technician Fran\u00e7ois Bayle was placed in charge of the Groupe de Recherches Musicales and in 1975, GRM was integrated with the new Institut national de l'audiovisuel (INA \u2013 Audiovisual National Institute) with Bayle as its head. In taking the lead on work that began in the early 1950s, with Jacques Poullin's potentiom\u00e8tre d'espace, a system designed to move monophonic sound sources across four speakers, Bayle and the engineer Jean-Claude Lallemand created an orchestra of loudspeakers (\"un orchestre de haut-parleurs\") known as the Acousmonium in 1974. An inaugural concert took place on 14 February 1974 at the Espace Pierre Cardin in Paris with a presentation of Bayle's \"Exp\u00e9rience acoustique\".\nThe Acousmonium is a specialised sound reinforcement system consisting of between 50 and 100 loudspeakers, depending on the character of the concert, of varying shape and size. The system was designed specifically for the concert presentation of musique-concr\u00e8te-based works but with the added enhancement of sound spatialisation. Loudspeakers are placed both on stage and at positions throughout the performance space and a mixing console is used to manipulate the placement of acousmatic material across the speaker array, using a performative technique known as \"sound diffusion\". Bayle has commented that the purpose of the Acousmonium is to \"substitute a momentary classical disposition of sound making, which diffuses the sound from the circumference towards the centre of the hall, by a group of sound projectors which form an 'orchestration' of the acoustic image\".\nAs of 2010, the Acousmonium was still performing, with 64 speakers, 35 amplifiers, and 2 consoles.\nIn popular music.\nAlthough Schaeffer's work aimed to defamiliarize the used sounds, other composers favoured the familiarity of source material by using snippets of music or speech taken from popular entertainment and mass media, with the ethic that \"truly contemporary art should reflect not just nature or the industrial-urban environment but the mediascape in which humans increasingly dwelled\", according to writer Simon Reynolds. Composers such as James Tenney and Arne Melln\u00e4s created pieces in the 1960s that recontextualised the music of Elvis Presley and the singer's own voice, respectively, while later in the decade, Bernard Parmegiani created the pieces \"Pop'electric\" and \"Du pop a l'ane\", which used fragments of musical genres such as easy listening, dixieland, classical music and progressive rock. Reynolds writes that this approach continued in the later work of musicians Matmos, whose \"A Chance to Cut Is a Chance to Cure\" (2001) was created with the sounds of cosmetic surgery, and the \"pop-collage\" work of John Oswald, who referred to the approach as 'plunderphonics'. Oswald's \"Plexure\" (1993) was created using recognisable elements of rock and pop music from 1982 to 1992.\n1960s.\nIn the 1960s, as popular music began to increase in cultural importance and question its role as commercial entertainment, many popular musicians began taking influence from the post-war avant-garde, including the Beatles, who incorporated techniques such as tape loops, speed manipulation, and reverse playback in their song \"Tomorrow Never Knows\" (1966). Bernard Gendron describes the Beatles' \"musique concr\u00e8te\" experimentation as helping popularise avant-garde art in the era, alongside Jimi Hendrix's use of noise and feedback, Bob Dylan's surreal lyricism and Frank Zappa's \"ironic detachment\". In \"The Wire\", Edwin Pouncey wrote that the 1960s represented the height of confluence between rock and academic music, noting that composers like Luciano Berio and Pierre Henry found likeness in the \"distorting-mirror\" sound of psychedelic rock, and that \"concr\u00e8te\"'s contrasting tones and timbres were suited to the effects of psychedelic drugs.\nFollowing the Beatles' example, many groups incorporated found sounds into otherwise typical pop songs for psychedelic effect, resulting in \"pop and rock musique concr\u00e8te flirtations\"; examples include the Lovin' Spoonful's \"Summer in the City\" (1966), Love's \"7 and 7 Is\" (1967) and The Box Tops' \"The Letter\" (1967). Popular musicians more versed in modern classical and experimental music utilised elements of musique concr\u00e8te more maturely, including Zappa and the Mothers of Invention on pieces like the Edgard Var\u00e8se tribute \"The Return of the Son of Monster Magnet\" (1966), \"The Chrome Planted Megaphone of Destiny\" and \"Lumpy Gravy\" (both 1968), and Jefferson Airplane's \"Would You Like a Snack?\" (1968), while the Grateful Dead's album \"Anthem of the Sun\" (1968), which featured Berio student Phil Lesh on bass, features musique concr\u00e8te passages that Pouncey compared to Var\u00e8se's \"Deserts\" and the \"keyboard deconstructions\" of John Cage and Conlon Nancarrow. The Beatles continued their use of concr\u00e8te on songs such as \"Strawberry Fields Forever\", \"Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite!\" and \"I Am the Walrus\" (all 1967), before the approach climaxed with the pure musique concr\u00e8te piece \"Revolution 9\" (1968); afterwards, John Lennon, alongside wife and Fluxus artist Yoko Ono, continued the approach on their solo works ' (1968) and ' (1969).\n1970s.\nThe musique concr\u00e8te elements present on Pink Floyd's best-selling album \"The Dark Side of the Moon\" (1973), including the cash register sounds on \"Money\", have been cited as notable examples of the practice's influence on popular music. Also in 1973, German band Faust released \"The Faust Tapes\"; priced in the United Kingdom at 49 pence, the album was described by writer Chris Jones as \"a contender for the most widely heard piece of musique concrete\" after \"Revolution 9\". Another German group, Kraftwerk, achieved a surprise hit in 1975 with \"Autobahn\", which contained a \"sampled collage of revving engines, horns and traffic noise\". Stephen Dalton of \"The Times\" wrote: \"This droll blend of accessible pop and avant-garde musique concrete propelled Kraftwerk across America for three months\". Steve Taylor writes that industrial groups Throbbing Gristle and Cabaret Voltaire continued the concr\u00e8te tradition with collages constructed with tape manipulation and loops, while Ian Inglis credits Brian Eno for introducing new sensibilities \"about what could be in included in the canon of popular music\", citing his 1970s ambient work and the musique concrete collages on \"My Life in the Bush of Ghosts\" (1981), which combines tape samples with synthesised sounds.\n1980s and beyond.\nWith the emergence of hip hop music in the 1980s, deejays such as Grandmaster Flash utitlised turnables to \"[montage] in real time\" with portions of rock, R&amp;B and disco records, in order to create groove-based music with percussive scratching; this provided a parallel breakthrough to collage artist Christian Marclay's use of vinyl records as a \"noise-generating medium\" in his own work. Reynolds wrote: \"As sampling technology grew more affordable, DJs-turned-producers like Eric B. developed hip-hop into a studio-based art. Although there was no direct line traceable between the two Pierres and Marley Marl, it was as if \"musique concr\u00e8te\" went truant from the academy and became street music, the soundtrack to block parties and driving.\" He described this era of hip hop as \"the most vibrant and flourishing descendant \u2013 albeit an indirect one \u2013 of \"musique concr\u00e8te\"\". \"Chicago Reader\"'s J. Niimi writes that when Public Enemy producers the Bomb Squad \"unwittingly revisited\" the concept of musique concr\u00e8te with their sample-based music, they proved that the technique \"worked great as pop\".\nIn 1989, John Diliberto of \"Music Technology\" described the group Art of Noise as having both digitised and synthesised musique concr\u00e8te and \"locked it into a crunching groove and turned it into dance music for the '80s\". He wrote that while Schaeffer and Henry used tapes in their work, Art of Noise \"uses Fairlight CMIs and Akai S1000 samplers and the skyscrapers of multitrack recording to create their updated sound\". As described by Will Hodgkinson, Art of Noise brought classical and avant-garde sounds into pop by \"[aiming] to emulate the musique concr\u00e8te composers of the 1950s\" via Fairlight samplers instead of tape. In a piece for \"Pitchfork\", musicians Matmos noted the use of musique concr\u00e8te in later popular music, including the crying baby effects in Aaliyah's \"Are You That Somebody?\" (1998) or Missy Elliott's \"backwards chorus\", while noting that the aesthetic was arguably built upon by works including Art of Noise's \"Close (to the Edit)\" (1984), Meat Beat Manifesto's \"Storm the Studio\" (1989) and the work of Public Enemy, Negativland and People Like Us, among other examples. Chuck Eddy writes that, by 1991, heavy metal bands began absorbing a wealth of esoteric outside inspirations, citing the \"found-sound jackhammer-and-national-anthem musique concr\u00e8te\" on Slaughter's \"Up All Night\" (1990) as a key example.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "20018", "revid": "50655880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20018", "title": "Metric space", "text": "Mathematical space with a notion of distance\nIn mathematics, a metric space is a set together with a notion of \"distance\" between its elements, usually called points. The distance is measured by a function called a metric or distance function. Metric spaces are a general setting for studying many of the concepts of mathematical analysis and geometry.\nThe most familiar example of a metric space is 3-dimensional Euclidean space with its usual notion of distance. Other well-known examples are a sphere equipped with the angular distance and the hyperbolic plane. A metric may correspond to a metaphorical, rather than physical, notion of distance: for example, the set of 100-character Unicode strings can be equipped with the Hamming distance, which measures the number of characters that need to be changed to get from one string to another.\nSince they are very general, metric spaces are a tool used in many different branches of mathematics. Many types of mathematical objects have a natural notion of distance and therefore admit the structure of a metric space, including Riemannian manifolds, normed vector spaces, and graphs. In abstract algebra, the \"p\"-adic numbers arise as elements of the completion of a metric structure on the rational numbers. Metric spaces are also studied in their own right in metric geometry and analysis on metric spaces.\nMany of the basic notions of mathematical analysis, including balls, completeness, as well as uniform, Lipschitz, and H\u00f6lder continuity, can be defined in the setting of metric spaces. Other notions, such as continuity, compactness, and open and closed sets, can be defined for metric spaces, but also in the even more general setting of topological spaces.\nDefinition and illustration.\nMotivation.\nTo see the utility of different notions of distance, consider the surface of the Earth as a set of points. We can measure the distance between two such points by the length of the shortest path along the surface, \"as the crow flies\"; this is particularly useful for shipping and aviation. We can also measure the straight-line distance between two points through the Earth's interior; this notion is, for example, natural in seismology, since it roughly corresponds to the length of time it takes for seismic waves to travel between those two points.\nThe notion of distance encoded by the metric space axioms has relatively few requirements. This generality gives metric spaces a lot of flexibility. At the same time, the notion is strong enough to encode many intuitive facts about what distance means. This means that general results about metric spaces can be applied in many different contexts.\nLike many fundamental mathematical concepts, the metric on a metric space can be interpreted in many different ways. A particular metric may not be best thought of as measuring physical distance, but, instead, as the cost of changing from one state to another (as with Wasserstein metrics on spaces of measures) or the degree of difference between two objects (for example, the Hamming distance between two strings of characters, or the Gromov\u2013Hausdorff distance between metric spaces themselves).\nDefinition.\nFormally, a metric space is an ordered pair (\"M\", \"d\") where M is a set and d is a metric on M, i.e., a functionformula_1satisfying the following axioms for all points formula_2:\nIf the metric d is unambiguous, one often refers by abuse of notation to \"the metric space M\".\nBy taking all axioms except the second, one can show that distance is always non-negative:formula_7Therefore the second axiom can be weakened to formula_8 and combined with the first to make formula_9.\nSimple examples.\nThe real numbers.\nThe real numbers with the distance function formula_10 given by the absolute difference form a metric space. Many properties of metric spaces and functions between them are generalizations of concepts in real analysis and coincide with those concepts when applied to the real line.\nMetrics on Euclidean spaces.\nThe Euclidean plane formula_11 can be equipped with many different metrics. The Euclidean distance familiar from school mathematics can be defined by\nformula_12\nThe \"taxicab\" or \"Manhattan\" distance is defined by\nformula_13\nand can be thought of as the distance you need to travel along horizontal and vertical lines to get from one point to the other, as illustrated at the top of the article.\nThe \"maximum\", formula_14, or \"Chebyshev distance\" is defined by\nformula_15) because if it was formula_16 is a Banach space would imply that it converges (a contradiction).\nEquivalence of metrics.\nFor a given set \"X\", two metrics formula_17 and formula_18 are called \"topologically equivalent\" (\"uniformly equivalent\") if the identity mapping\nformula_19\nis a homeomorphism (uniform isomorphism).\nFor example, if formula_20 is a metric, then formula_21 and formula_22 are metrics equivalent to formula_23\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20020", "revid": "46501391", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20020", "title": "MacOS X", "text": ""}
{"id": "20021", "revid": "49473253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20021", "title": "Marine biology", "text": "Scientific study of ocean life\nMarine biology is the scientific study of the biology of marine life, organisms that inhabit the sea. Given that in biology many phyla, families and genera have some species that live in the sea and others that live on land, marine biology classifies species based on the environment rather than on taxonomy.\nA large proportion of all life on Earth lives in the ocean. The exact size of this \"large proportion\" is unknown, since many ocean species are still to be discovered. The ocean is a complex three-dimensional world, covering approximately 71% of the Earth's surface. The habitats studied in marine biology include everything from the tiny layers of surface water in which organisms and abiotic items may be trapped in surface tension between the ocean and atmosphere, to the depths of the oceanic trenches, sometimes 10,000 meters or more beneath the surface of the ocean.\nSpecific habitats include estuaries, coral reefs, kelp forests, seagrass meadows, the surrounds of seamounts and thermal vents, tidepools, muddy, sandy and rocky bottoms, and the open ocean (pelagic) zone, where solid objects are rare and the surface of the water is the only visible boundary. The organisms studied range from microscopic phytoplankton and zooplankton to huge cetaceans (whales) in length. Marine ecology is the study of how marine organisms interact with each other and the environment.\nMarine life is a vast resource, providing food, medicine, and raw materials, in addition to helping to support recreation and tourism all over the world. At a fundamental level, marine life helps determine the very nature of our planet. Marine organisms contribute significantly to the oxygen cycle, and are involved in the regulation of the Earth's climate. Shorelines are in part shaped and protected by marine life, and some marine organisms even help create new land.\nMany species are economically important to humans, including both finfish and shellfish. It is also becoming understood that the well-being of marine organisms and other organisms are linked in fundamental ways. The human body of knowledge regarding the relationship between life in the sea and important cycles is rapidly growing, with new discoveries being made nearly every day. These cycles include those of matter (such as the carbon cycle) and of air (such as Earth's respiration, and movement of energy through ecosystems including the ocean). Large areas beneath the ocean surface still remain effectively unexplored.\nBiological oceanography.\nMarine biology can be contrasted with biological oceanography. Marine life is a field of study both in marine biology and in biological oceanography. Biological oceanography is the study of how organisms affect and are affected by the physics, chemistry, and geology of the oceanographic system. Biological oceanography mostly focuses on the microorganisms within the ocean; looking at how they are affected by their environment and how that affects larger marine creatures and their ecosystem.\nBiological oceanography is similar to marine biology, but it studies ocean life from a different perspective. Biological oceanography takes a bottom up approach in terms of the food web, while marine biology studies the ocean from a top down perspective. Biological oceanography mainly focuses on the ecosystem of the ocean with an emphasis on plankton: their diversity (morphology, nutritional sources, motility, and metabolism); their productivity and how that plays a role in the global carbon cycle; and their distribution (predation and life cycle). Biological oceanography also investigates the role of microbes in food webs, and how humans impact the ecosystems in the oceans.\nMarine habitats.\nMarine habitats can be divided into coastal and open ocean habitats. Coastal habitats are found in the area that extends from the shoreline to the edge of the continental shelf. Most marine life is found in coastal habitats, even though the shelf area occupies only seven percent of the total ocean area. Open ocean habitats are found in the deep ocean beyond the edge of the continental shelf. Alternatively, marine habitats can be divided into pelagic and demersal habitats. Pelagic habitats are found near the surface or in the open water column, away from the bottom of the ocean and affected by ocean currents, while demersal habitats are near or on the bottom. Marine habitats can be modified by their inhabitants. Some marine organisms, like corals, kelp and sea grasses, are ecosystem engineers which reshape the marine environment to the point where they create further habitat for other organisms.\nIntertidal and near shore.\nIntertidal zones, the areas that are close to the shore, are constantly being exposed and covered by the ocean's tides. A huge array of life can be found within this zone. Shore habitats span from the upper intertidal zones to the area where land vegetation takes prominence. It can be underwater anywhere from daily to very infrequently. Many species here are scavengers, living off of sea life that is washed up on the shore. Many land animals also make much use of the shore and intertidal habitats. A subgroup of organisms in this habitat bores and grinds exposed rock through the process of bioerosion.\nEstuaries.\nEstuaries are also near shore and influenced by the tides. An estuary is a partially enclosed coastal body of water with one or more rivers or streams flowing into it and with a free connection to the open sea. Estuaries form a transition zone between freshwater river environments and saltwater maritime environments. They are subject both to marine influences\u2014such as tides, waves, and the influx of saline water\u2014and to riverine influences\u2014such as flows of fresh water and sediment. The shifting flows of both sea water and fresh water provide high levels of nutrients both in the water column and in sediment, making estuaries among the most productive natural habitats in the world.\nReefs.\nReefs comprise some of the densest and most diverse habitats in the world. The best-known types of reefs are tropical coral reefs which exist in most tropical waters; however, reefs can also exist in cold water. Reefs are built up by corals and other calcium-depositing animals, usually on top of a rocky outcrop on the ocean floor. Reefs can also grow on other surfaces, which has made it possible to create artificial reefs. Coral reefs also support a huge community of life, including the corals themselves, their symbiotic zooxanthellae, tropical fish and many other organisms.\nMuch attention in marine biology is focused on coral reefs and the El Ni\u00f1o weather phenomenon. In 1998, coral reefs experienced the most severe mass bleaching events on record, when vast expanses of reefs across the world died because sea surface temperatures rose well above normal. Some reefs are recovering, but scientists say that between 50% and 70% of the world's coral reefs are now endangered and predict that global warming could exacerbate this trend.\nOpen ocean.\nThe open ocean is relatively unproductive because of a lack of nutrients, yet because it is so vast, in total it produces the most primary productivity. The open ocean is separated into different zones, and the different zones each have different ecologies. Zones which vary according to their depth include the epipelagic, mesopelagic, bathypelagic, abyssopelagic, and hadopelagic zones. Zones which vary by the amount of light they receive include the photic and aphotic zones. Much of the aphotic zone's energy is supplied by the open ocean in the form of detritus.\nDeep sea and trenches.\nThe deepest recorded oceanic trench measured to date is the Mariana Trench, near the Philippines, in the Pacific Ocean at . At such depths, water pressure is extreme and there is no sunlight, but some life still exists. A white flatfish, a shrimp and a jellyfish were seen by the crew of the bathyscaphe \"Trieste\" when it dove to the bottom in 1960, which led to scientific debate surrounding the likelihood of bony fish surviving in such deep waters. General scientific consensus has discredited the possible viewing of a flatfish at such depths.\nIn general, the deep sea is considered to start at the aphotic zone, the point where sunlight loses its power of transference through the water. Many life forms that live at these depths have the ability to create their own light known as bio-luminescence. Marine life also flourishes around seamounts that rise from the depths, where fish and other sea life congregate to spawn and feed. Hydrothermal vents along the mid-ocean ridge spreading centers act as oases, as do their opposites, cold seeps. Such places support unique biomes and many new microbes and other lifeforms have been discovered at these locations. There is still much more to learn about the deeper parts of the ocean.\nMarine life.\nIn biology, many phyla, families and genera have some species that live in the sea and others that live on land. Marine biology classifies species based on their environment rather than their taxonomy. For this reason, marine biology encompasses not only organisms that live only in a marine environment, but also other organisms whose lives revolve around the sea.\nMicroscopic life.\nAs inhabitants of the largest environment on Earth, microbial marine systems drive changes in every global system. Microbes are responsible for virtually all photosynthesis that occurs in the ocean, as well as the cycling of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and other nutrients and trace elements.\nMicroscopic life undersea is incredibly diverse and still poorly understood. For example, the role of viruses in marine ecosystems is barely being explored even in the beginning of the 21st century.\nThe role of phytoplankton is better understood due to their critical position as the most numerous primary producers on Earth. Phytoplankton are categorized into cyanobacteria (also called blue-green algae/bacteria), various types of algae (red, green, brown, and yellow-green), diatoms, dinoflagellates, euglenoids, coccolithophorids, cryptomonads, chrysophytes, chlorophytes, prasinophytes, and silicoflagellates.\nZooplankton tend to be somewhat larger, and not all are microscopic. Many Protozoa are zooplankton, including dinoflagellates, zooflagellates, foraminiferans, and radiolarians. Some of these (such as dinoflagellates) are also phytoplankton; the distinction between plants and animals often breaks down in very small organisms. Other zooplankton include cnidarians, ctenophores, chaetognaths, molluscs, arthropods, urochordates, and annelids such as polychaetes. Many larger animals begin their life as zooplankton before they become large enough to take their familiar forms. Two examples are fish larvae and sea stars (also called starfish).\nPlants and algae.\nMicroscopic algae and plants provide important habitats for life, sometimes acting as hiding places for larval forms of larger fish and foraging places for invertebrates.\nAlgal life is widespread and very diverse under the ocean. Microscopic photosynthetic algae contribute a larger proportion of the world's photosynthetic output than all the terrestrial forests combined. Most of the niche occupied by sub plants on land is actually occupied by macroscopic algae in the ocean, such as \"Sargassum\" and kelp, which are commonly known as seaweeds that create kelp forests.\nPlants that survive in the sea are often found in shallow waters, such as the seagrasses (examples of which are eelgrass, \"Zostera\", and turtle grass, \"Thalassia\"). These plants have adapted to the high salinity of the ocean environment. The intertidal zone is also a good place to find plant life in the sea, where mangroves or cordgrass or beach grass might grow.\nInvertebrates.\nAs on land, invertebrates, or animals that lack a backbone, make up a huge portion of all life in the sea. Invertebrate sea life includes Cnidaria such as jellyfish and sea anemones; Ctenophora; sea worms including the phyla Platyhelminthes, Nemertea, Annelida, Sipuncula, Echiura, Chaetognatha, and Phoronida; Mollusca including shellfish, squid, octopus; Arthropoda including Chelicerata and Crustacea; Porifera; Bryozoa; Echinodermata including starfish; and Urochordata including sea squirts or tunicates.\nFungi.\nOver 10,000 species of fungi are known from marine environments. These are parasitic on marine algae or animals, or are saprobes on algae, corals, protozoan cysts, sea grasses, wood and other substrata, and can also be found in sea foam. Spores of many species have special appendages which facilitate attachment to the substratum. A very diverse range of unusual secondary metabolites is produced by marine fungi.\nVertebrates.\nFish.\nA reported 33,400 species of fish, including bony and cartilaginous fish, had been described by 2016, more than all other vertebrates combined. About 60% of fish species live in saltwater.\nReptiles.\nReptiles which inhabit or frequent the sea include sea turtles, sea snakes, terrapins, the marine iguana, and the saltwater crocodile. Most extant marine reptiles, except for some sea snakes, are oviparous and need to return to land to lay their eggs. Thus most species, excluding sea turtles, spend most of their lives on or near land rather than in the ocean. Despite their marine adaptations, most sea snakes prefer shallow waters nearby land, around islands, especially waters that are somewhat sheltered, as well as near estuaries. Some extinct marine reptiles, such as ichthyosaurs, evolved to be viviparous and had no requirement to return to land.\nBirds.\nBirds adapted to living in the marine environment are often called seabirds. Examples include albatross, penguins, gannets, and auks. Although they spend most of their lives in the ocean, species such as gulls can often be found thousands of miles inland.\nMammals.\nThere are five main types of marine mammals: cetaceans (toothed whales and baleen whales); sirenians such as manatees; pinnipeds including seals and the walrus; sea otters; and the \npolar bear. All are air-breathing, meaning that while some such as the sperm whale can dive for prolonged periods, all must return to the surface to breathe.\nSubfields.\nThe marine ecosystem is large, and thus there are many sub-fields of marine biology. Most involve studying specializations of particular animal groups, such as phycology, invertebrate zoology and ichthyology. Other subfields study the physical effects of continual immersion in sea water and the ocean in general, adaptation to a salty environment, and the effects of changing various oceanic properties on marine life. A subfield of marine biology studies the relationships between oceans and ocean life, and global warming and environmental issues (such as carbon dioxide displacement). Recent marine biotechnology has focused largely on marine biomolecules, especially proteins, that may have uses in medicine or engineering. Marine environments are the home to many exotic biological materials that may inspire biomimetic materials.\nThrough constant monitoring of the ocean, there have been discoveries of marine life which could be used to create remedies for certain diseases such as cancer and leukemia. In addition, Ziconotide, an approved drug used to treat pain, was created from a snail which resides in the ocean.\nRelated fields.\nMarine biology is a branch of biology. It is closely linked to oceanography, especially biological oceanography, and may be regarded as a sub-field of marine science. It also encompasses many ideas from ecology. Fisheries science and marine conservation can be considered partial offshoots of marine biology (as well as environmental studies). Marine chemistry, physical oceanography and atmospheric sciences are also closely related to this field.\nDistribution factors.\nAn active research topic in marine biology is to discover and map the life cycles of various species and where they spend their time. Technologies that aid in this discovery include pop-up satellite archival tags, acoustic tags, and a variety of other data loggers. Marine biologists study how the ocean currents, tides and many other oceanic factors affect ocean life forms, including their growth, distribution and well-being. This has only recently become technically feasible with advances in GPS and newer underwater visual devices.\nMost ocean life breeds in specific places, nests in others, spends time as juveniles in still others, and in maturity in yet others. Scientists know little about where many species spend different parts of their life cycles especially in the infant and juvenile years. For example, it is still largely unknown where juvenile sea turtles and some sharks in the first year of their life travel. Recent advances in underwater tracking devices are illuminating what we know about marine organisms that live at great ocean depths. The information that pop-up satellite archival tags gives aids in fishing closures for certain times of the year and the development of marine protected areas. This data is important to both scientists and fishermen because they are discovering that, by restricting commercial fishing in one small area, they can have a large impact in maintaining a healthy fish population in a much larger area.\nHistory.\nThe study of marine biology dates to Aristotle (384\u2013322 BC), who made many observations of life in the sea around Lesbos, laying the foundation for many future discoveries. In 1768, Samuel Gottlieb Gmelin (1744\u20131774) published the \"Historia Fucorum\", the first work dedicated to marine algae and the first book on marine biology to use the new binomial nomenclature of Linnaeus. It included elaborate illustrations of seaweed and marine algae on folded leaves. The British naturalist Edward Forbes (1815\u20131854) is generally regarded as the founder of the science of marine biology. The pace of oceanographic and marine biology studies quickly accelerated during the course of the 19th century.\nThe observations made in the first studies of marine biology fueled the Age of Discovery and exploration that followed. During this time, a vast amount of knowledge was gained about the life that exists in the oceans of the world. Many voyages contributed significantly to this pool of knowledge. Among the most significant were the voyages of where Charles Darwin came up with his theories of evolution and on the formation of coral reefs. Another important expedition was undertaken by HMS \"Challenger\", where findings were made of unexpectedly high species diversity among fauna stimulating much theorizing by population ecologists on how such varieties of life could be maintained in what was thought to be such a hostile environment. This era was important for the history of marine biology but naturalists were still limited in their studies because they lacked technology that would allow them to adequately examine species that lived in deep parts of the oceans.\nThe creation of marine laboratories was important because it allowed marine biologists to conduct research and process their specimens from expeditions. The oldest marine laboratory in the world, Station biologique de Roscoff, was established in Concarneau, France founded by the College of France in 1859. In the United States, the Scripps Institution of Oceanography dates back to 1903, while the prominent Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute was founded in 1930. The development of technology such as sound navigation and ranging, scuba diving gear, submersibles and remotely operated vehicles allowed marine biologists to discover and explore life in deep oceans that was once thought to not exist. Public interest in the subject continued to develop in the post-war years with the publication of Rachel Carson's sea trilogy (1941\u20131955).\nIn 1960, the bathyscaphe Trieste descended the furthest point man had yet traveled, bottoming Challenger's Deep at 35,797 feet. The vessel was captained by Jacques Piccard and Don Walsh, whose discoveries while at the bottom of the ocean bolstered scientific discussion and interest about life in the hadal zone.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20023", "revid": "122189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20023", "title": "Microkernel", "text": "Kernel that provides fewer services than a traditional kernel\nIn computer science, a microkernel (often abbreviated as \u03bc-kernel) is the near-minimum amount of software that can provide the mechanisms needed to implement an operating system (OS). These mechanisms include low-level address space management, thread management, and inter-process communication (IPC).\nIf the hardware provides multiple rings or CPU modes, the microkernel may be the only software executing at the most privileged level, which is generally referred to as supervisor or kernel mode. Traditional operating system functions, such as device drivers, protocol stacks and file systems, are typically removed from the microkernel itself and are instead run in user space.\nIn terms of the source code size, microkernels are often smaller than monolithic kernels. The MINIX\u00a03 microkernel, for example, has only approximately 12,000 lines of code.\nHistory.\nMicrokernels trace their roots back to Danish computer pioneer Per Brinch Hansen and his tenure in Danish computer company Regnecentralen where he led software development efforts for the RC 4000 computer. In 1967, Regnecentralen was installing a RC 4000 prototype in the Zak\u0142ady Azotowe Pu\u0142awy fertilizer plant in Poland. The computer used a small real-time operating system tailored for the needs of the plant. Brinch Hansen and his team became concerned with the lack of generality and reusability of the RC 4000 system. They feared that each installation would require a different operating system so they started to investigate novel and more general ways of creating software for the RC 4000.\nIn 1969, their effort resulted in the completion of the RC 4000 Multiprogramming System. Its nucleus provided inter-process communication based on message-passing for up to 23 unprivileged processes, out of which 8 at a time were protected from one another. It further implemented scheduling of time slices of programs executed in parallel, initiation and control of program execution at the request of other running programs, and initiation of data transfers to or from peripherals. Besides these elementary mechanisms, it had no built-in strategy for program execution and resource allocation. This strategy was to be implemented by a hierarchy of running programs in which parent processes had complete control over child processes and acted as their operating systems.\nFollowing Brinch Hansen's work, microkernels have been developed since the 1970s. The term microkernel itself first appeared no later than 1981. Microkernels were meant as a response to changes in the computer world, and to several challenges adapting existing \"mono-kernels\" to these new systems. New device drivers, protocol stacks, file systems and other low-level systems were being developed all the time. This code was normally located in the monolithic kernel, and thus required considerable work and careful code management to work on. Microkernels were developed with the idea that all of these services would be implemented as user-space programs, like any other, allowing them to be worked on monolithically and started and stopped like any other program. This would not only allow these services to be more easily worked on, but also separated the kernel code to allow it to be finely tuned without worrying about unintended side effects. Moreover, it would allow entirely new operating systems to be \"built up\" on a common core, aiding OS research.\nMicrokernels were a very hot topic in the 1980s when the first usable local area networks were being introduced.. The AmigaOS Exec kernel was an early example, introduced in 1986 and used in a PC with relative commercial success. The lack of memory protection, considered in other respects a flaw, allowed this kernel to have very high message-passing performance because it did not need to copy data while exchanging messages between user-space programs.\nThe same mechanisms that allowed the kernel to be distributed into user space also allowed the system to be distributed across network links. The first microkernels, notably Mach created by Richard Rashid, proved to have disappointing performance, but the inherent advantages appeared so great that it was a major line of research into the late 1990s. However, during this time the speed of computers grew greatly in relation to networking systems, and the disadvantages in performance came to overwhelm the advantages in development terms.\nMany attempts were made to adapt the existing systems to have better performance, but the overhead was always considerable and most of these efforts required the user-space programs to be moved back into the kernel. By 2000, most large-scale Mach kernel efforts had ended, although Apple's macOS, released in 2001, still uses a hybrid kernel called XNU, which combines a heavily modified (hybrid) OSF/1's Mach kernel (OSF MK 7.3 kernel) with code from BSD UNIX, and this kernel is also used in iOS, tvOS, and watchOS. Windows NT, starting with NT 3.1 and continuing with Windows 11, uses a hybrid kernel design. As of 2012[ [update]], the Mach-based GNU Hurd is also functional and included in testing versions of Arch Linux and Debian.\nAlthough major work on microkernels had largely ended, experimenters continued development. Using a more pragmatic approach to the problem, including assembly code and relying on the processor to enforce concepts normally supported in software led to a new series of microkernels with dramatically improved performance.\nMicrokernels are closely related to exokernels. They also have much in common with hypervisors, but the latter make no claim to minimality and are specialized to supporting virtual machines; the L4 microkernel frequently finds use in a hypervisor capacity.\nIntroduction.\nEarly operating system kernels were rather small, partly because computer memory was limited. As the capability of computers grew, the number of devices the kernel had to control also grew. Throughout the early history of Unix, kernels were generally small, even though they contained various device drivers and file system implementations. When address spaces increased from 16 to 32 bits, kernel design was no longer constrained by the hardware architecture, and kernels began to grow larger.\nThe Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) of Unix began the era of larger kernels. In addition to operating a basic system consisting of the CPU, disks and printers, BSD added a complete TCP/IP networking system and a number of \"virtual\" devices that allowed the existing programs to work 'invisibly' over the network. This growth continued for many years, resulting in kernels with millions of lines of source code. As a result of this growth, kernels were prone to bugs and became increasingly difficult to maintain.\nThe microkernel was intended to address this growth of kernels and the difficulties that resulted. In theory, the microkernel design allows for easier management of code due to its division into user space services. This also allows for increased security and stability resulting from the reduced amount of code running in kernel mode. For example, if a networking service crashed due to buffer overflow, only the networking service's memory would be corrupted, leaving the rest of the system still functional.\nInter-process communication.\nInter-process communication (IPC) is any mechanism which allows separate processes to communicate with each other, usually by sending messages. Shared memory is, strictly defined, also an inter-process communication mechanism, but the abbreviation IPC usually refers to message passing only, and it is the latter that is particularly relevant to microkernels. IPC allows the operating system to be built from a number of smaller programs called servers, which are used by other programs on the system, invoked via IPC. Most or all support for peripheral hardware is handled in this fashion, with servers for device drivers, network protocol stacks, file systems, graphics, etc.\nIPC can be synchronous or asynchronous. Asynchronous IPC is analogous to network communication: the sender dispatches a message and continues executing. The receiver checks (polls) for the availability of the message, or is alerted to it via some notification mechanism. Asynchronous IPC requires that the kernel maintains buffers and queues for messages, and deals with buffer overflows; it also requires double copying of messages (sender to kernel and kernel to receiver). In synchronous IPC, the first party (sender or receiver) blocks until the other party is ready to perform the IPC. It does not require buffering or multiple copies, but the implicit rendezvous can make programming tricky. Most programmers prefer asynchronous send and synchronous receive.\nFirst-generation microkernels typically supported synchronous as well as asynchronous IPC, and suffered from poor IPC performance. Jochen Liedtke assumed the design and implementation of the IPC mechanisms to be the underlying reason for this poor performance. In his L4 microkernel he pioneered methods that lowered IPC costs by an order of magnitude. These include an IPC system call that supports a send as well as a receive operation, making all IPC synchronous, and passing as much data as possible in registers. Furthermore, Liedtke introduced the concept of the \"direct process switch\", where during an IPC execution an (incomplete) context switch is performed from the sender directly to the receiver. If, as in L4, part or all of the message is passed in registers, this transfers the in-register part of the message without any copying at all. Furthermore, the overhead of invoking the scheduler is avoided; this is especially beneficial in the common case where IPC is used in a remote procedure call (RPC) type fashion by a client invoking a server. Another optimization, called \"lazy scheduling\", avoids traversing scheduling queues during IPC by leaving threads that block during IPC in the ready queue. Once the scheduler is invoked, it moves such threads to the appropriate waiting queue. As in many cases a thread gets unblocked before the next scheduler invocation, this approach saves significant work. Similar approaches have since been adopted by QNX and MINIX 3.\nIn a series of experiments, Chen and Bershad compared memory cycles per instruction (MCPI) of monolithic Ultrix with those of microkernel Mach combined with a 4.3BSD Unix server running in user space. Their results explained Mach's poorer performance by higher MCPI and demonstrated that IPC alone is not responsible for much of the system overhead, suggesting that optimizations focused exclusively on IPC will have a limited effect. Liedtke later refined Chen and Bershad's results by making an observation that the bulk of the difference between Ultrix and Mach MCPI was caused by capacity cache-misses and concluding that drastically reducing the cache working set of a microkernel will solve the problem.\nIn a client-server system, most communication is essentially synchronous, even if using asynchronous primitives, as the typical operation is a client invoking a server and then waiting for a reply. As it also lends itself to more efficient implementation, most microkernels generally followed L4's lead and only provided a synchronous IPC primitive. Asynchronous IPC could be implemented on top by using helper threads. However, experience has shown that the utility of synchronous IPC is dubious: synchronous IPC forces a multi-threaded design onto otherwise simple systems, with the resulting synchronization complexities. Moreover, an RPC-like server invocation sequentializes client and server, which should be avoided if they are running on separate cores. Versions of L4 deployed in commercial products have therefore found it necessary to add an asynchronous notification mechanism to better support asynchronous communication. This signal-like mechanism does not carry data and therefore does not require buffering by the kernel. By having two forms of IPC, they have nonetheless violated the principle of minimality. Other versions of L4 have switched to asynchronous IPC completely.\nAs synchronous IPC blocks the first party until the other is ready, unrestricted use could easily lead to deadlocks. Furthermore, a client could easily mount a denial-of-service attack on a server by sending a request and never attempting to receive the reply. Therefore, synchronous IPC must provide a means to prevent indefinite blocking. Many microkernels provide timeouts on IPC calls, which limit the blocking time. In practice, choosing sensible timeout values is difficult, and systems almost inevitably use infinite timeouts for clients and zero timeouts for servers. As a consequence, the trend is towards not providing arbitrary timeouts, but only a flag which indicates that the IPC should fail immediately if the partner is not ready. This approach effectively provides a choice of the two timeout values of zero and infinity. Recent versions of L4 and MINIX have gone down this path (older versions of L4 used timeouts). QNX avoids the problem by requiring the client to specify the reply buffer as part of the message send call. When the server replies the kernel copies the data to the client's buffer, without having to wait for the client to receive the response explicitly.\nServers.\nMicrokernel servers are essentially daemon programs like any others, except that the kernel grants some of them privileges to interact with parts of physical memory that are otherwise off limits to most programs. This allows some servers, particularly device drivers, to interact directly with hardware.\nA basic set of servers for a general-purpose microkernel includes file system servers, device driver servers, networking servers, display servers, and user interface device servers. This set of servers (drawn from QNX) provides roughly the set of services offered by a Unix monolithic kernel. The necessary servers are started at system startup and provide services, such as file, network, and device access, to ordinary application programs. With such servers running in the environment of a user application, server development is similar to ordinary application development, rather than the build-and-boot process needed for kernel development.\nAdditionally, many \"crashes\" can be corrected by simply stopping and restarting the server, which would not be feasible if the entire kernel had to reboot. However, part of the system state is lost with the failing server, hence this approach requires applications to cope with failure. A good example is a server responsible for TCP/IP connections: If this server is restarted, applications will experience a \"lost\" connection, a normal occurrence in a networked system. For other services, failure is less expected and may require changes to application code. For QNX, restart capability is offered as the QNX High Availability Toolkit.\nDevice drivers.\nDevice drivers frequently perform direct memory access (DMA), and therefore can write to arbitrary locations of physical memory, including various kernel data structures. Such drivers must therefore be trusted. It is a common misconception that this means that they must be part of the kernel. In fact, a driver is not inherently more or less trustworthy by being part of the kernel.\nWhile running a device driver in user space does not necessarily reduce the damage a misbehaving driver can cause, in practice it is beneficial for system stability in the presence of buggy (rather than malicious) drivers: memory-access violations by the driver code itself (as opposed to the device) may still be caught by the memory-management hardware. Furthermore, many devices are not DMA-capable, their drivers can be made untrusted by running them in user space. Recently, an increasing number of computers feature IOMMUs, many of which can be used to restrict a device's access to physical memory. This also allows user-mode drivers to become untrusted.\nUser-mode drivers actually predate microkernels. The Michigan Terminal System (MTS), in 1967, supported user space drivers (including its file system support), the first operating system to be designed with that capability. Historically, drivers were less of a problem, as the number of devices was small and trusted anyway, so having them in the kernel simplified the design and avoided potential performance problems. This led to the traditional driver-in-the-kernel style of Unix, Linux, and Windows NT. With the proliferation of various kinds of peripherals, the amount of driver code escalated and in modern operating systems dominates the kernel in code size.\nEssential components and minimality.\nAs a microkernel must allow building arbitrary operating system services on top, it must provide some core functionality. At a minimum, this includes:\nThis minimal design was pioneered by Brinch Hansen's Nucleus and the hypervisor of IBM's VM. It has since been formalised in Liedtke's \"minimality principle\":\nA concept is tolerated inside the microkernel only if moving it outside the kernel, i.e., permitting competing implementations, would prevent the implementation of the system's required functionality.\nEverything else can be done in a usermode program, although device drivers implemented as user programs may on some processor architectures require special privileges to access I/O hardware.\nRelated to the minimality principle, and equally important for microkernel design, is the separation of mechanism and policy, it is what enables the construction of arbitrary systems on top of a minimal kernel. Any policy built into the kernel cannot be overwritten at user level and therefore limits the generality of the microkernel. Policy implemented in user-level servers can be changed by replacing the servers (or letting the application choose between competing servers offering similar services).\nFor efficiency, most microkernels contain schedulers and manage timers, in violation of the minimality principle and the principle of policy-mechanism separation.\nStart up (booting) of a microkernel-based system requires device drivers, which are not part of the kernel. Typically, this means that they are packaged with the kernel in the boot image, and the kernel supports a bootstrap protocol that defines how the drivers are located and started; this is the traditional bootstrap procedure of L4 microkernels. Some microkernels simplify this by placing some key drivers inside the kernel (in violation of the minimality principle), LynxOS and the original Minix are examples. Some even include a file system in the kernel to simplify booting. A microkernel-based system may boot via multiboot compatible boot loader. Such systems usually load statically-linked servers to make an initial bootstrap or mount an OS image to continue bootstrapping.\nA key component of a microkernel is a good IPC system and virtual-memory-manager design that allows implementing page-fault handling and swapping in usermode servers in a safe way. Since all services are performed by usermode programs, efficient means of communication between programs are essential, far more so than in monolithic kernels. The design of the IPC system makes or breaks a microkernel. To be effective, the IPC system must not only have low overhead, but also interact well with CPU scheduling.\nPerformance.\nOn most mainstream processors, obtaining a service is inherently more expensive in a microkernel-based system than a monolithic system. In the monolithic system, the service is obtained by a single system call, which requires two \"mode switches\" (changes of the processor's ring or CPU mode). In the microkernel-based system, the service is obtained by sending an IPC message to a server, and obtaining the result in another IPC message from the server. This requires a context switch if the drivers are implemented as processes, or a function call if they are implemented as procedures. In addition, passing actual data to the server and back may incur extra copying overhead, while in a monolithic system the kernel can directly access the data in the client's buffers.\nPerformance is therefore a potential issue in microkernel systems. The experience of first-generation microkernels such as Mach and ChorusOS showed that systems based on them performed very poorly. However, Jochen Liedtke showed that Mach's performance problems were the result of poor design and implementation, specifically Mach's excessive cache footprint. Liedtke demonstrated with his own L4 microkernel that through careful design and implementation, and especially by following the minimality principle, IPC costs could be reduced by more than an order of magnitude compared to Mach. L4's IPC performance is still unbeaten across a range of architectures.\nWhile these results demonstrate that the poor performance of systems based on first-generation microkernels is not representative for second-generation kernels such as L4, this constitutes no proof that microkernel-based systems can be built with good performance. It has been shown that a monolithic Linux server ported to L4 exhibits only a few percent overhead over native Linux. However, such a single-server system exhibits few, if any, of the advantages microkernels are supposed to provide by structuring operating system functionality into separate servers.\nA number of commercial multi-server systems exist, in particular the real-time systems QNX and Integrity. No comprehensive comparison of performance relative to monolithic systems has been published for those multiserver systems. Furthermore, performance does not seem to be the overriding concern for those commercial systems, which instead emphasize reliably quick interrupt handling response times (QNX) and simplicity for the sake of robustness. An attempt to build a high-performance multiserver operating system was the IBM Sawmill Linux project. However, this project was never completed.\nIt has been shown in the meantime that user-level device drivers can come close to the performance of in-kernel drivers even for such high-throughput, high-interrupt devices as Gigabit Ethernet. This seems to imply that high-performance multi-server systems are possible.\nSecurity.\nThe security benefits of microkernels have been frequently discussed. In the context of security the minimality principle of microkernels is, some have argued, a direct consequence of the principle of least privilege, according to which all code should have only the privileges needed to provide required functionality. Minimality requires that a system's trusted computing base (TCB) should be kept minimal. As the kernel (the code that executes in the privileged mode of the hardware) has unvetted access to any data and can thus violate its integrity or confidentiality, the kernel is always part of the TCB. Minimizing it is natural in a security-driven design.\nConsequently, microkernel designs have been used for systems designed for high-security applications, including KeyKOS, EROS and military systems. In fact common criteria (CC) at the highest assurance level (Evaluation Assurance Level (EAL) 7) has an explicit requirement that the target of evaluation be \"simple\", an acknowledgment of the practical impossibility of establishing true trustworthiness for a complex system. Again, the term \"simple\" is misleading and ill-defined. At least the Department of Defense Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria introduced somewhat more precise verbiage at the B3/A1 classes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The TCB shall [implement] complete, conceptually simple protection mechanisms with precisely defined semantics. Significant system engineering shall be directed toward minimizing the complexity of the TCB, as well as excluding from the TCB those modules that are not protection-critical.\"\u2014\u200a\nIn 2018, a paper presented at the Asia-Pacific Systems Conference claimed that microkernels were demonstrably safer than monolithic kernels by investigating all published critical CVEs for the Linux kernel at the time. The study concluded that 40% of the issues could not occur at all in a formally verified microkernel, and only 4% of the issues would remain entirely unmitigated in such a system.\nThird generation.\nMore recent work on microkernels has been focusing on formal specifications of the kernel API, and formal proofs of the API's security properties and implementation correctness. The first example of this is a mathematical proof of the confinement mechanisms in EROS, based on a simplified model of the EROS API. More recently (in 2007) a comprehensive set of machine-checked proofs was performed of the properties of the protection model of , a version of L4.\nThis has led to what is referred to as \"third-generation microkernels\", characterised by a security-oriented API with resource access controlled by capabilities, virtualization as a first-class concern, novel approaches to kernel resource management, and a design goal of suitability for formal analysis, besides the usual goal of high performance. Examples are Coyotos, , Nova, Redox and Fiasco.OC.\nIn the case of seL4, complete formal verification of the implementation has been achieved, i.e. a mathematical proof that the kernel's implementation is consistent with its formal specification. This provides a guarantee that the properties proved about the API actually hold for the real kernel, a degree of assurance which goes beyond even CC EAL7. It was followed by proofs of security-enforcement properties of the API, and a proof demonstrating that the executable binary code is a correct translation of the C implementation, taking the compiler out of the TCB. Taken together, these proofs establish an end-to-end proof of security properties of the kernel.\nExamples.\nSome examples of microkernels are:\nNanokernel.\nThe term \"nanokernel\" or \"picokernel\" historically referred to:\nThere is also at least one case where the term nanokernel is used to refer not to a small kernel, but one that supports a nanosecond clock resolution.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20024", "revid": "3091149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20024", "title": "Mach (disambiguation)", "text": "Mach or Mach number is speed expressed as a multiple of the speed of sound.\nMach may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20025", "revid": "1316907689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20025", "title": "Multihull", "text": "Ship or boat with more than one hull\nA multihull is a boat or ship with more than one hull, whereas a vessel with a single hull is a monohull. The most common multihulls are catamarans (with two hulls), and trimarans (with three hulls). There are other types, with four or more hulls, but such examples are very rare and tend to be specialised for particular functions.\nMultihull history.\nSingle-outrigger boats, double-canoes (catamarans), and double-outrigger boats (trimarans) of the Austronesian peoples are the direct antecedents of modern multihull vessels. They were developed during the Austronesian Expansion (c. 3000 to 1500 BC) which allowed Austronesians to colonize maritime Southeast Asia, Micronesia, Island Melanesia, Madagascar, and Polynesia. These Austronesian vessels are still widely used today by traditional fishermen in Austronesian regions in maritime Southeast Asia, Oceania and Madagascar; as well as areas they were introduced to by Austronesians in ancient times like in the East African coast and in South Asia.\nGreek sources also describe large third-century BC catamarans, one built under the supervision of Archimedes, the \"Syracusia\", and another reportedly built by Ptolemy IV Philopator of Egypt, the \"Tessarakonteres\".\nModern developers.\nModern pioneers of multihull design include James Wharram (UK), Derek Kelsall (UK), Tom Lack (UK), Lock Crowther (Aust), Hedly Nicol (Aust), Malcolm Tennant (NZ), Jim Brown (USA), Arthur Piver (USA), Chris White (US), Ian Farrier (NZ), LOMOcean (NZ), Darren Newton (UK), Jens Quorning (DK) and Dick Newick (USA).\nMultihull types.\nSingle-outrigger (\"proa\").\nA single-outrigger canoe is a canoe with a slender outrigger (\"ama\") attached by two or more struts (\"akas\"). This craft will normally be propelled by paddles. Single-outrigger canoes that use sails are usually inaccurately referred to by the name \"proa\". While single-outrigger canoes and proas both derive stability from the outrigger, the proa has the greater need of the outrigger to counter the heeling effect of the sail. The outrigger on a proa can either be on the lee or windward side, or in a tacking proa, interchangeable. However, more recently, proas tend to keep the outrigger either to leeward or to wind which means that instead of tacking, a \"shunt\" is required, whereby the bow becomes the stern, and the stern becomes the bow.\nCatamaran (twin-hull).\nA catamaran is a vessel with twin hulls. Commercial catamarans began in 17th century England. Separate attempts at steam-powered catamarans were carried out by the middle of the 20th century. However, success required better materials and more developed hydrodynamic technologies. During the second half of the 20th century catamaran designs flourished. Catamaran configurations are used for racing, sailing, tourist and fishing boats.\nThe hulls of a catamaran are typically connected by a bridgedeck, although some simpler cruising catamarans simply have a trampoline stretched between the crossbeams (or \"akas\"). Small beachable catamarans, such as the Hobie Cat, also have only a trampoline between the hulls.\nCatamarans derive stability from the distance between the hulls\u2014transverse clearance\u2014the greater this distance, the greater the stability. Typically, catamaran hulls are slim, although they may flare above the waterline to give reserve buoyancy. The vertical clearance between the design waterplane and the bottom of the bridge deck determines the likelihood of contact with waves. Increased vertical clearance diminishes such contact and increases seaworthiness, within limits.\nThe twin-hull (catamaran) design is effective in enhancing the https:// designed for paddling and powering with portable outboard motors. The 100 lbs (45 kg), 38 inches (96 cm) wide https:// catamaran is sufficiently stable to allow for three adult anglers to stand in it and fish in full confidence, and it allows for three adults to stand in it and paddle in full confidence. \nTrimaran (double-outrigger).\nA trimaran (or double-outrigger) is a vessel with two outrigger floats attached on either side of a main hull by a crossbeam, wing, or other form of superstructure. They are derived from traditional double-outrigger vessels of maritime Southeast Asia. Despite not being traditionally Polynesian, western trimarans use traditional Polynesian terms for the hull (\"vaka\"), the floats (\"ama\"), and connectors (\"aka\"). The word \"trimaran\" is a portmanteau of \"tri\" and \"(cata)maran\", a term that is thought to have been coined by Victor Tchetchet, a pioneering modern multihull designer, born in Ukraine (at that time part of the Russian Empire).\nSome trimaran configurations use the outlying hulls to enhance stability and allow for shallow draft, examples include the experimental ship RV Triton and the \"Independence\" class of littoral combat ships (US).\nFour and five hulls.\nSome multihulls with four (quadrimaran) or five (pentamaran) hulls have been proposed; few have been built. In 2018 a Swiss entrepreneur sought funding to build a sail-driven quadrimaran called \"Manta\" that would use solar power to scoop plastic from the ocean. \"Manta\" was still under development as of the end of 2023. A French manufacturer, Tera-4, produces motor quadrimarans which use aerodynamic lift between the four hulls to promote planing and reduce power consumption.\nDesign concepts for vessels with two pair of outriggers have been referred to as pentamarans. The design concept comprises a narrow, long hull that cuts through waves. The outriggers then provide the stability that such a narrow hull needs. While the aft sponsons act as trimaran sponsons do, the front sponsons do not touch the water normally; only if the ship rolls to one side do they provide added buoyancy to correct the roll. BMT Group, a shipbuilding and engineering company in the UK, has proposed a fast cargo ship and a yacht using this kind of hull.\nSWATH multihulls.\nMultihull designs may have hull beams that are slimmer at the water surface (\"waterplane\") than underwater. This arrangement allows good wave-piercing, while keeping a buoyant hydrodynamic hull beneath the waterplane. In a catamaran configuration this is called a small waterplane area twin hull, or SWATH. While SWATHs are stable in rough seas, they have the drawbacks, compared with other catamarans, of having a deeper draft, being more sensitive to loading, and requiring more power because of their higher underwater surface areas. Triple-hull configurations of small waterplane area craft had been studied, but not built, as of 2008.\nPerformance.\nEach hull of a multihull vessel can be narrower than that of a monohull with the same displacement and long, narrow hulls, a multihull typically produces very small bow waves and wakes, a consequence of a favorable Froude number. Vessels with beamy hulls (typically monohulls) normally create a large bow wave and wake. Such a vessel is limited by its \"hull speed\", being unable to \"climb over\" its bow wave unless it changes from displacement mode to planing mode. Vessels with slim hulls (typically multihulls) will normally create no appreciable bow wave to limit their progress.\nIn 1978, 101 years after catamarans like \"Amaryllis\" were banned from yacht racing they returned to the sport. This started with the victory of the trimaran \"Olympus Photo\", skippered by Mike Birch in the first Route du Rhum. Thereafter, no open ocean race was won by a monohull. Winning times dropped by 70%, since 1978. Olympus Photo's 23-day 6 hr 58' 35\" success dropped to Gitana 11's 7d 17h 19'6\", in 2006. Around 2016 the first large wind driven foil-borne racing catamarans were built. These cats rise onto foils and T-foiled rudders only at higher speeds.\nSailing multihulls and workboats.\nThe increasing popularity of catamaran since the 1960s is down to the added space, speed, shallow draft, and lack of heeling underway. The stability of a multihull makes sailing much less tiring for the crew, and is particularly suitable for families. Having no need for ballast for stability, multihulls are much lighter than monohull sailboats; but a multihull's fine hull sections mean that one must take care not to overload the vessel. Powerboats catamarans are increasingly used for racing, cruising and as workboats and fishing boats. Speed, the stable working platform, safety, and added space are the prime advantages for power cats.\n\"The weight of a multihull, of this length, is probably not much more than half the weight of a monohull of the same length and it can be sailed with less crew effort.\"\nRacing catamarans and trimarans are popular in France, New Zealand and Australia. Cruising cats are commonest in the Caribbean and Mediterranean (where they form the bulk of the charter business) and Australia. Multihulls are less common in the US, perhaps because their increased beam require wider dock/slips. Smaller multihulls may be collapsible and trailerable, and thus suitable for daybooks and racers. Until the 1960s most multihull sailboats (except for beach cats) were built either by their owners or by boat builders; since then companies have been selling mass-produced boats, of which there are more than 150 models.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20028", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20028", "title": "Middle Helladic", "text": ""}
{"id": "20029", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20029", "title": "Multics Relational Data Store", "text": "Relational database for the Multics operating system\nThe Multics Relational Data Store, or MRDS for short, was the first commercial relational database management system. It was written in PL/1 by Honeywell for the Multics operating system and first sold in June 1976. Unlike the SQL systems that emerged in the late 1970s and early 80s, MRDS used a command language only for basic data manipulation, equivalent to the codice_1 or codice_2 statements in SQL. Other operations, like creating a new database, or general file management, required the use of a separate command program.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20032", "revid": "39637521", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20032", "title": "Mike Oldfield", "text": "English musician (born 1953)\nMichael Gordon Oldfield (born 15 May 1953) is a retired English musician, songwriter and producer best known for his debut album \"Tubular Bells\" (1973), which became an unexpected critical and commercial success. Though primarily a guitarist, Oldfield played a range of instruments, which included keyboards and percussion, as well as vocals. He had adopted a range of musical styles throughout his career, including progressive rock, world, folk, classical, electronic, ambient and new age music. His discography includes 25 studio albums, nine of which have reached the UK top ten.\nOldfield took up the guitar at age ten and left school in his teens to embark on a music career. From 1967 to 1970, he and his sister Sally Oldfield were a folk duo, the Sallyangie, after which he performed with Kevin Ayers before starting work on \"Tubular Bells\" in 1971. The album caught the attention of Richard Branson, who agreed to make it the first-ever release on his new label Virgin Records. Its opening was used in the horror film \"The Exorcist\", and the album went on to sell over 2.7 million copies in the UK. Oldfield followed it with \"Hergest Ridge\" (1974), \"Ommadawn\" (1975) and \"Incantations\" (1978). Like \"Tubular Bells\", these albums consist of longform, mostly instrumental pieces.\nIn the late 1970s, Oldfield began to tour and release more commercial and song-based music, beginning with \"Platinum\" (1979), \"QE2\" (1980) and \"Five Miles Out\" (1982). His most successful album of this period was \"Crises\" (1983), which features the worldwide hit single \"Moonlight Shadow,\" with the vocalist Maggie Reilly. After leaving Virgin and signing with WEA, the 1990s saw him release \"Tubular Bells II\" (1992) and \"Tubular Bells III\" (1998) among other albums, and he experimented with virtual reality and gaming content with his MusicVR project. In 2012, Oldfield performed at the opening ceremony for the 2012 Olympic Games held in London, while 2017 saw the release of his final album, \"Return to Ommadawn\". Oldfield's label announced his retirement in 2023.\nEarly life.\nMichael Gordon Oldfield was born in Reading, Berkshire, on 15 May 1953, to Raymond Henry Oldfield (1923\u20132016), an English general practitioner, and Maureen (\"n\u00e9e\" Liston 1919-1975), an Irish nurse from Charleville, County Cork, who emigrated to England to pursue career in nursing. Oldfield has two elder siblings, sister Sally and brother Terence. In 1959, when Oldfield was six, his mother gave birth to a younger brother, David, who had Down syndrome. The parents dropped off David in an institution and lied to Mike, Sally and Terence that the baby had died in infancy. His mother was prescribed barbiturates, to which she became addicted, and developed mental health problems. She spent much of the rest of her life in mental institutions and died in early 1975, shortly after Oldfield had started writing \"Ommadawn\". Oldfield attended Highlands Junior School, followed by St. Edward's Preparatory School and Presentation College, all in Reading. When he was thirteen, the family moved to Harold Wood, Essex, and Oldfield attended Hornchurch Grammar School where, having already displayed musical talent, he earned one GCE qualification in English.\nOldfield took up the guitar aged ten, first learning on a 6-string acoustic which his father had given to him. He learned technique by copying parts from songs, by folk guitarists Bert Jansch and John Renbourn, that he played on a portable record player. He tried to learn musical notation but was a \"very, very slow\" learner, saying: \"If I have to, I can write things down. But I don't like to.\" By the time he was twelve, Oldfield played the electric guitar and performed in local folk and youth clubs and dances, earning as much as \u00a34 () per gig. During a six-month break from music that Oldfield had around this time, he took up painting. In May 1968, when Oldfield turned fifteen, his school headmaster requested that he cut his long hair. Oldfield refused, left abruptly and never returned. It was at this point when he decided to pursue music on a full-time, professional basis.\nCareer.\n1968\u20131972: Early career.\nAfter leaving school Oldfield accepted an invitation from his sister Sally to form a folk duo the Sallyangie, taking its name from her name and Oldfield's favourite Jansch tune, \"Angie\". They toured England and Paris and signed a deal with Transatlantic Records, for which they recorded one album, \"Children of the Sun\" (1969). After they split in the following year Oldfield had a nervous breakdown. He auditioned as bassist for Family in 1969 following the departure of Ric Grech, but the group did not share Roger Chapman's enthusiasm towards Oldfield's performance. Oldfield spent much of the next year living off his father and performing in an electric rock band named Barefoot that included his brother Terry on flute, until the group disbanded in early 1970.\nIn February 1970, Oldfield auditioned to become the bassist in the Whole World, a new backing band that former Soft Machine vocalist Kevin Ayers was putting together. He landed the position despite the bass being a new instrument for him, but he also played occasional lead guitar and later looked back on this time as providing valuable training on the bass. Oldfield went on to play on Ayers's albums \"Shooting at the Moon\" (1970) and \"Whatevershebringswesing\" (1971), and played mandolin on \"Edgar Broughton Band\" (1971). All three albums were recorded at Abbey Road Studios, where Oldfield familiarised himself with a variety of instruments, such as orchestral percussion, piano, Mellotron and harpsichord, and started to write and put down musical ideas of his own. While doing so Oldfield took up work as a reserve guitarist in a stage production of \"Hair\" at the Shaftesbury Theatre, where he played and gigged with Alex Harvey. After ten performances Oldfield grew bored of the job and was fired after he decided to play his part for \"Let the Sunshine In\" in 7/8 time.\n1971\u20131991: Virgin years.\n\"Tubular Bells\".\nBy mid-1971, Oldfield had assembled a demo tape containing sections of a longform instrumental piece initially titled \"Opus One\". Attempts to secure a recording deal to record it professionally came to nothing. In September 1971, Oldfield, now a session musician and bassist for the Arthur Louis Band, attended recording sessions at The Manor Studio at Shipton-on-Cherwell, Oxfordshire, owned by businessman Richard Branson and run by engineers Tom Newman and Simon Heyworth. Branson already had several business ventures and was about to launch Virgin Records with Simon Draper. Newman and Heyworth heard some of Oldfield's demos and took them to Branson and Draper, who eventually gave Oldfield one week of recording time at The Manor, after which Oldfield had completed what became \"Part One\" of his composition, \"Tubular Bells\". He recorded \"Part Two\" mostly at night in the studio downtime, from February to April 1973. Branson agreed to release \"Tubular Bells\" as the first record on the Virgin label and secured Oldfield a six-album deal with an additional four albums as optional.\n\"Tubular Bells\" was released on 25 May 1973. Oldfield played more than twenty different instruments in the multi-layered recording, and its style moved through diverse musical genres. Its 2,760,000 UK sales puts it at No.\u00a042 on the list of the best-selling albums in the country. The title track became a top-10 hit single in the US after the opening was used in the film \"The Exorcist\" in 1973. It is today considered to be a forerunner of the new-age music movement.\n\"Hergest Ridge\" to \"Incantations\".\nIn 1974, Oldfield played the guitar on the critically acclaimed album \"Rock Bottom\" by Robert Wyatt.\nIn late 1974, his follow-up LP, \"Hergest Ridge\", was No.\u00a01 in the UK for three weeks before being dethroned by \"Tubular Bells\". Although \"Hergest Ridge\" was released over a year after \"Tubular Bells\", it reached No.\u00a01 first. \"Tubular Bells\" spent 11 weeks (10 of them consecutive) at No.\u00a02 before its one week at the top. Like \"Tubular Bells\", \"Hergest Ridge\" is a two-movement instrumental piece, this time evoking scenes from Oldfield's Herefordshire country retreat. It was followed in 1975 by the pioneering world music piece \"Ommadawn\" released after the death of his mother, Maureen.\nIn 1975, Oldfield recorded a version of the Christmas piece \"In Dulci Jubilo\" which charted at No.\u00a04 in the UK.\nIn 1975, Oldfield received a Grammy award for Best Instrumental Composition in \"Tubular Bells \u2013 Theme from \"The Exorcist\"\".\nIn 1976, Oldfield and his sister joined his friend and band member Pekka Pohjola to play on his album \"Mathematician's Air Display\", which was released in 1977. The album was recorded and edited at Oldfield's Througham Slad Manor in Gloucestershire by Oldfield and Paul Lindsay. Oldfield's 1976 rendition of \"Portsmouth\" remains his best-performing single on the UK Singles Chart, reaching No.\u00a03.\nOldfield recorded the double album \"Incantations\" between December 1977 and September 1978. This introduced more diverse choral performances from Sally Oldfield, Maddy Prior and the Queen's College Girls Choir. When it was released on 1 December 1978, the album went to No. 14 in the UK and reached platinum certification for 300,000 copies sold.\nIn 1979, Oldfield supported \"Incantations\" with a European tour that spanned 21 dates between March and May 1979. The tour was documented with the live album and concert film, \"Exposed\". Initially marketed as a limited pressing of 100,000 copies, the strength of sales for the album were strong enough for Virgin to abandon the idea shortly after, transferring it to regular production. During the tour Oldfield released the disco-influenced non-album single \"Guilty\", for which he went to New York City to find the best session musicians and write a song with them in mind. He wrote a chord chart for the song and presented it to the group, who completed it in the studio. Released in April 1979, the song went to No. 22 in the UK and Oldfield performed the song on the national television show \"Top of the Pops\".\nOldfield's music was used for the score of \"The Space Movie\" (1980), a Virgin Films production that celebrated the tenth anniversary of the Apollo 11 mission. In 1979, he recorded a version of the signature tune for the BBC children's television programme \"Blue Peter\", which was used by the show for 10 years.\n\"Platinum\" to \"Heaven's Open\".\nOldfield's fifth album, \"Platinum\", was released in November 1979 and marked the start of his transition from long compositions towards mainstream and pop music. Oldfield performed on tour across Europe between April and December 1980.\nIn 1980, Oldfield released \"QE2\", named after the ocean liner, which features a variety of guest musicians including Phil Collins on drums. This was followed by the European Adventure Tour 1981, during which Oldfield accepted an invitation to perform at a free concert celebrating the wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana in Guildhall. He wrote a new track, \"Royal Wedding Anthem\", for the occasion.\nHis next album, \"Five Miles Out\", followed in March 1982, with the 24-minute track \"Taurus II\" occupying the whole of side one. The Five Miles Out World Tour 1982 saw Oldfield perform from April to December of that year. \"Crises\" saw Oldfield continue the pattern of one long composition with shorter songs. The first single from the album, \"Moonlight Shadow\", with Maggie Reilly on vocals, became Oldfield's most successful single, reaching No. 4 in the UK and No. 1 in nine other countries. The subsequent Crises Tour in 1983 concluded with a concert at Wembley Arena to commemorate the tenth anniversary of \"Tubular Bells\". The next album, \"Discovery\", continues with this trend, being the first single \"To France\" and subsequent Discovery Tour 1984.\nOldfield later turned to film and video, writing the score for Roland Joff\u00e9's acclaimed film \"The Killing Fields\" and producing substantial video footage for his album \"Islands\". \"Islands\" continued what Oldfield had been doing on the past couple of albums, with an instrumental piece on one side and rock/pop singles on the other. Of these, \"Islands\", sung by Bonnie Tyler and \"Magic Touch\", with vocals by Max Bacon (in the US version) and Glasgow vocalist Jim Price (Southside Jimmy) in the rest of the world, were the major hits. In the US \"Magic Touch\" reached the top 10 on the Billboard album rock charts in 1988. During the 1980s, Oldfield's then-partner, Norwegian singer Anita Hegerland, contributed vocals to many songs including \"Pictures in the Dark\".\nReleased in July 1989, \"Earth Moving\" features seven vocalists across the album's nine tracks. It is Oldfield's first to consist solely of rock and pop songs, several of which were released as singles: \"Innocent\" and \"Holy\" in Europe and \"Hostage\" in the US.\nFor his next instrumental album, Virgin insisted that Oldfield use the title \"Tubular Bells 2\". Oldfield's rebellious response was \"Amarok\", an hour-long work featuring rapidly changing themes, unpredictable bursts of noise and a hidden Morse code insult, stating \"Fuck off RB\", allegedly directed at Branson. Oldfield did everything in his power to make it impossible to make extracts and Virgin returned the favour by barely promoting the album.\nIn February 1991, Oldfield released his final album for Virgin, \"Heaven's Open\", under the name \"Michael Oldfield\". It marks the first time he handles all lead vocals. In 2013, Oldfield invited Branson to the opening of St. Andrew's International School of The Bahamas, where two of Oldfield's children were pupils. This was the occasion of the debut of \"Tubular Bells for Schools\", a piano solo adaptation of Oldfield's work.\n1992\u20132003: Warner years.\nBy early 1992, Oldfield had secured Clive Banks as his new manager and had several record label owners listen to his demo of \"Tubular Bells II\" at his house. Oldfield signed with Rob Dickins of WEA Warner and recorded the album with Trevor Horn as producer. Released in August 1992, the album went to No. 1 in the UK. Its live premiere followed on 4 September at Edinburgh Castle which was released on home video as \"Tubular Bells II Live\". Oldfield supported the album with his Tubular Bells II 20th Anniversary Tour in 1992 and 1993, his first concert tour since 1984. By April 1993, the album had sold over three million copies worldwide.\nOldfield continued to embrace new musical styles, with \"The Songs of Distant Earth\" (based on Arthur C. Clarke's novel of the same name) exhibiting a softer new-age sound. In 1994, he also had an asteroid, 5656 Oldfield, named after him.\nIn 1995 Oldfield continued to embrace new musical styles by producing the Celtic-themed album \"Voyager\". In 1992, Oldfield met Luar na Lubre, a Galician Celtic-folk band (from A Coru\u00f1a, Spain), with the singer Rosa Cedr\u00f3n. The band's popularity grew after Oldfield covered their song \"O son do ar\" (\"The sound of the air\") on his \"Voyager\" album.\nIn 1998 Oldfield produced the third \"Tubular Bells\" album (also premiered at a concert, this time in Horse Guards Parade, London), drawing on the dance music scene at his then new home on the island of Ibiza. This album was inspired by themes from \"Tubular Bells\", but differed in lacking a clear two-part structure.\nDuring 1999 Oldfield released two albums. The first, \"Guitars\", used guitars as the source for all the sounds on the album, including percussion. The second, \"The Millennium Bell\", consisted of pastiches of a number of styles of music that represented various historical periods over the past millennium. The work was performed live in Berlin for the city's millennium celebrations in 1999\u20132000.\nHe added to his repertoire the MusicVR project, combining his music with a virtual reality-based computer game. His first work on this project is \"Tres Lunas\" launched in 2002, a virtual game where the player can interact with a world full of new music. This project appeared as a double CD, one with the music and the other with the game.\nIn 2002 and 2003, Oldfield re-recorded \"Tubular Bells\", using modern equipment, to coincide with the 30th anniversary of the original. He had wanted to do it years before, but his contract with Virgin had kept him from doing so. This new version featured John Cleese as the Master of Ceremonies, since Vivian Stanshall, who had appeared on the original, had died in 1995. \"Tubular Bells 2003\" was released in May 2003.\n2004\u2013present: Mercury years.\nOn 12 April 2004, Oldfield launched his next virtual reality project, \"Maestro\", which contains music from the \"Tubular Bells 2003\" album and some new chillout melodies. The games have since been made available free of charge on Tubular.net.\nIn 2005 Oldfield signed a deal with Mercury Records UK, who secured the rights to his catalogue when the rights had reverted to himself. Mercury acquired the rights to Oldfield's back catalogue, in July 2007. Oldfield released his first album on the Mercury label, \"Light + Shade\", in September 2005. It is a double album of music of contrasting mood: relaxed (Light) and upbeat and moody (Shade). In 2006 and 2007, Oldfield headlined the Night of the Proms tour, consisting of 21 concerts across Europe. Also in 2007, Oldfield released his autobiography, \"Changeling\".\nIn March 2008, Oldfield released his first classical album, \"Music of the Spheres\"; Karl Jenkins assisted with the orchestration. In the first week of release the album topped the UK Classical chart and reached No. 9 on the main UK Album Chart. A single \"Spheres\", featuring a demo version of pieces from the album, was released digitally. The album was nominated for a Classical Brit Award, the NS&amp;I Best Album of 2009.\nIn 2008, when Oldfield's original 35-year deal with Virgin Records ended, the rights to \"Tubular Bells\" and his other Virgin releases were returned to him, and were then transferred to Mercury Records. Mercury announced that his Virgin albums would be reissued with bonus content from 2009. In 2009, Mercury released the compilation album \"The Mike Oldfield Collection 1974\u20131983\", that went to No. 11 in the UK chart.\nIn 2008 Oldfield contributed a new track, \"Song for Survival\", to the charity album \"Songs for Survival\" in support of Survival International. In 2010, lyricist Don Black said that he had been working with Oldfield. In 2012 Oldfield was featured on \"Journey into Space\", an album by his brother Terry, and on the track \"Islanders\" by German producer Torsten Stenzel's York project. In 2013, Oldfield and York released a remix album entitled \"Tubular Beats\".\nOldfield performed live at the 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony in London. His set included renditions of \"Tubular Bells\", \"Far Above the Clouds\" and \"In Dulci Jubilo\" during a segment about the National Health Service. This track appears on the officially released soundtrack album \"Isles of Wonder\". Later in 2012, the compilation album \"Two Sides: The Very Best of Mike Oldfield\" was released and reached No. 6 in the UK.\nIn October 2013, the BBC broadcast \"Tubular Bells: The Mike Oldfield Story\", a documentary on Oldfield's life and career. Oldfield's rock-themed album of songs, titled \"Man on the Rocks\", was released on 3 March 2014 by Virgin EMI. The album was produced by Steve Lipson. The album marked a return of Oldfield to a Virgin branded label, through the merger of Mercury Records UK and Virgin Records after Universal Music's purchase of EMI. The track \"Nuclear\" was used for the E3 trailer of \"\".\nIn 2015 Oldfield told Steve Wright on his BBC radio show that a sequel album to \"Tubular Bells\" was in early development, which he aimed to record on analogue equipment. Later in 2015, Oldfield revealed that he had started on a sequel to \"Ommadawn\". The album, named \"Return to Ommadawn\", was finished in 2016 and released in January 2017. It went to No. 4 in the UK. Oldfield again hinted at a fourth \"Tubular Bells\" album when he posted photos of his new equipment, including a new Telecaster guitar.\nA 50th anniversary edition of \"Tubular Bells\" was released on 26 May 2023. It features a new master of the original album along with an additional previously unreleased 8-minute track, the \"Introduction to \"Tubular Bells 4\"\". \"Introduction to \"Tubular Bells 4\"\" was recorded by Oldfield as a demo in 2017. His record label indicated that he had decided not to go forward with the \"Tubular Bells 4\" project and that this \"may well be the last piece ever to be recorded by Oldfield\".\nIn 2025, a series of releases and anniversary editions of Oldfield's early material were announced. In early 2025, a vinyl reissue of \"Tubular Bells 2003\" was released. On 27 June 2025, a 50th-anniversary expanded edition of his second album, \"Hergest Ridge\", was released. It featured a new half-speed vinyl master and surround sound mixes. This was followed in September 2025 by the first official release of \"The Orchestral Hergest Ridge\", a recording of the 1975 performance at Kelvin Hall, Glasgow, arranged by David Bedford and featuring Steve Hillage.\nAdditionally, a 35th-anniversary edition of the 1990 album \"Amarok\" was released on 31 October 2025, featuring a new half-speed remaster and expanded artwork.\nMusicianship.\nOldfield's 1970s recordings were characterised by a very broad variety of instrumentation predominantly played by himself, plus assorted guitar sound treatments to suggest other instrumental timbres (such as the \"bagpipe\", \"mandolin\", \"Glorfindel\" and varispeed guitars on the original \"Tubular Bells\").\nDuring the 1980s Oldfield became expert in the use of digital synthesizers and sequencers (notably the Fairlight CMI) which began to dominate the sound of his recordings: from the late 1990s onwards, he became a keen user of software synthesizers. He has, however, regularly returned to projects emphasising detailed, manually played and part-acoustic instrumentation (such as 1990's \"Amarok\", 1996's \"Voyager\" and 1999's \"Guitars\").\nWhile generally preferring the sound of guest vocalists, Oldfield has frequently sung both lead and backup parts for his songs and compositions. He has also contributed experimental vocal effects such as fake choirs and the notorious \"Piltdown Man\" impression on \"Tubular Bells\".\nGuitars.\nOver the years, Oldfield has used a range of guitars. Among the more notable of these are:\nOldfield used a modified Roland GP8 effects processor in conjunction with his PRS Artist to get many of his heavily overdriven guitar sounds from the \"Earth Moving\" album onwards. Oldfield has also been using guitar synthesizers since the mid-1980s, using a 1980s Roland GR-300/G-808 type system, then a 1990s Roland GK2 equipped red PRS Custom 24 (sold in 2006) with a Roland VG8, and most recently a Line 6 Variax.\nOldfield has an unusual playing style, using fingers and long right-hand fingernails and different ways of creating vibrato: a \"very fast side-to-side vibrato\" and \"violinist's vibrato\". Oldfield has stated that his playing style originates from his musical roots playing folk music and the bass guitar.\nKeyboards.\nOver the years, Oldfield has owned and used a vast number of synthesizers and other keyboard instruments. In the 1980s, he composed the score for the film \"The Killing Fields\" on a Fairlight CMI. Some examples of keyboard and synthesised instruments which Oldfield has made use of include Sequential Circuits Prophet-5s (notably on \"Platinum\" and \"The Killing Fields\"), Roland JV-1080/JV-2080 units (1990s), a Korg M1 (as seen in the \"Innocent\" video), a Clavia Nord Lead and Steinway pianos. In recent years, he has also made use of software synthesis products, such as Native Instruments.\nRecording.\nOldfield has self-recorded and produced many of his albums, and played the majority of the featured instruments, largely at his home studios. In the 1990s and 2000s he mainly used DAWs such as Apple Logic, Avid Pro Tools and Steinberg Nuendo as recording suites. For composing orchestral music Oldfield has been quoted as using the software notation program Sibelius running on Apple Macintoshes. He also used the FL Studio DAW on his 2005 double album \"Light + Shade\". Among the mixing consoles Oldfield has owned are an AMS Neve Capricorn 33238, a Harrison Series X, and a Euphonix System 5-MC.\nPersonal life.\nFamily.\nIn 1978, Oldfield married Diana Fuller, a relative of the Exegesis group leader. The marriage lasted for three months. Oldfield recalled that he phoned label boss Richard Branson the day after the ceremony and said he had made a mistake. From 1979 to 1986, Oldfield was in a relationship with Sally Cooper, whom he met through Virgin. They had three children. In 2015, his son Dougal died after collapsing while working at a film production company in London. By the time of birth of their third child, in 1986, the relationship had broken down and they amicably split. Oldfield entered a relationship with Norwegian singer Anita Hegerland that lasted until 1991. The pair met backstage at one of Oldfield's gigs while touring Germany in 1984. They lived in Switzerland, France and England. They have two children.\nIn the late 1990s, Oldfield posted in a lonely hearts column in a local Ibiza newspaper. It was answered by Amy Lauer; the pair dated, but the relationship was troubled by Oldfield's bouts of alcohol and substance abuse and it ended after two months. In 2001, Oldfield began counselling and psychotherapy. Between 2002 and 2013, Oldfield was married to Fanny Vandekerckhove, whom he met while living in Ibiza. They have two sons.\nOther.\nOldfield and his siblings were raised as Catholic, their mother's faith. \nIn June 1978, during the recording of \"Incantations\", Oldfield and his siblings completed a three-day Exegesis seminar, a self-assertiveness programme based on Werner Erhard's EST training programme. The experience had a significant effect on Oldfield's personality, who recalled that he underwent a \"rebirth experience\" by reliving past fears. \"It was like opening some huge cathedral doors and facing the monster, and I saw that the monster was myself as a newborn infant, because I'd started life in a panic.\" Following the Exegesis seminar, the formerly reclusive Oldfield granted press interviews, posed nude for a promotional photo shoot for \"Incantations\" and went drinking with news reporters. He had also conquered his fear of flying, gained a pilot's licence and bought his own plane.\nHe used drugs in his early life, including LSD, which he said affected his mental health. In the early 1990s, Oldfield set up Tonic, a foundation that sponsored people to receive counselling and therapy.\nIn 1980, Oldfield, a longtime fan of model aircraft, acquired his pilot's licence. He later became a motorcycle enthusiast and has been inspired to write songs from riding them. He has owned various models, including a BMW R1200GS, Suzuki GSX-R750, Suzuki GSX-R1000 and a Yamaha R1.\nOldfield has lived in Nassau, Bahamas, since 2009 and is a Bahamian citizen. He has also lived in Spain, Los Angeles and Monaco. In 2012, Oldfield stated that he had decided to leave England after feeling that the country had become a \"nanny state\" with too much surveillance and state control. Oldfield has remarked that while he is close to other celebrity residents in the Bahamas, he chose not to live within a wealthy gated community with staff and described his lifestyle as \"austere.\"\nIn 2017, Oldfield expressed support for then US President Donald Trump and said he would have played at Trump's inauguration if he had been invited to do so. In the same interview, he also stated that he was in favour of Brexit.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "20034", "revid": "47070250", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20034", "title": "Mutual recursion", "text": "Two functions defined from each other\nIn mathematics and computer science, mutual recursion is a form of recursion where two or more mathematical or computational objects, such as functions or datatypes, are defined in terms of each other. Mutual recursion is very common in functional programming and in some problem domains, such as recursive descent parsers, where the datatypes are naturally mutually recursive.\nExamples.\nDatatypes.\nThe most important basic example of a datatype that can be defined by mutual recursion is a tree, which can be defined mutually recursively in terms of a forest (a list of trees). Symbolically:\n f: [t[1], ..., t[k]]\n t: v f\nA forest \"f\" consists of a list of trees, while a tree \"t\" consists of a pair of a value \"v\" and a forest \"f\" (its children). This definition is elegant and easy to work with abstractly (such as when proving theorems about properties of trees), as it expresses a tree in simple terms: a list of one type, and a pair of two types. Further, it matches many algorithms on trees, which consist of doing one thing with the value, and another thing with the children.\nThis mutually recursive definition can be converted to a singly recursive definition by inlining the definition of a forest:\n t: v [t[1], ..., t[k]]\nA tree \"t\" consists of a pair of a value \"v\" and a list of trees (its children). This definition is more compact, but somewhat messier: a tree consists of a pair of one type and a list of another, which require disentangling to prove results about.\nIn Standard ML, the tree and forest datatypes can be mutually recursively defined as follows, allowing empty trees:\ndatatype 'a tree = Empty | Node of 'a * 'a forest\nand 'a forest = Nil | Cons of 'a tree * 'a forest\nComputer functions.\nJust as algorithms on recursive datatypes can naturally be given by recursive functions, algorithms on mutually recursive data structures can be naturally given by mutually recursive functions. Common examples include algorithms on trees, and recursive descent parsers. As with direct recursion, tail call optimization is necessary if the recursion depth is large or unbounded, such as using mutual recursion for multitasking. Note that tail call optimization in general (when the function called is not the same as the original function, as in tail-recursive calls) may be more difficult to implement than the special case of tail-recursive call optimization, and thus efficient implementation of mutual tail recursion may be absent from languages that only optimize tail-recursive calls. In languages such as Pascal that require declaration before use, mutually recursive functions require forward declaration, as a forward reference cannot be avoided when defining them.\nAs with directly recursive functions, a wrapper function may be useful, with the mutually recursive functions defined as nested functions within its scope if this is supported. This is particularly useful for sharing state across a set of functions without having to pass parameters between them.\nBasic examples.\nA standard example of mutual recursion, which is admittedly artificial, determines whether a non-negative number is even or odd by defining two separate functions that call each other, decrementing by 1 each time. In C:\nbool is_even(unsigned int n) {\n if (n == 0)\n return true;\n else\n return is_odd(n - 1);\nbool is_odd(unsigned int n) {\n if (n == 0)\n return false;\n else\n return is_even(n - 1);\nThese functions are based on the observation that the question \"is 4 even?\" is equivalent to \"is 3 odd?\", which is in turn equivalent to \"is 2 even?\", and so on down to 0. This example is mutual single recursion, and could easily be replaced by iteration. In this example, the mutually recursive calls are tail calls, and tail call optimization would be necessary to execute in constant stack space. In C, this would take \"O\"(\"n\") stack space, unless rewritten to use jumps instead of calls. This could be reduced to a single recursive function codice_1. In that case, codice_2, which could be inlined, would call codice_1, but codice_1 would only call itself.\nAs a more general class of examples, an algorithm on a tree can be decomposed into its behavior on a value and its behavior on children, and can be split up into two mutually recursive functions, one specifying the behavior on a tree, calling the forest function for the forest of children, and one specifying the behavior on a forest, calling the tree function for the tree in the forest. In Python:\ndef f_tree(tree) -&gt; None:\n f_value(tree.value)\n f_forest(tree.children)\ndef f_forest(forest) -&gt; None:\n for tree in forest:\n f_tree(tree)\nIn this case the tree function calls the forest function by single recursion, but the forest function calls the tree function by multiple recursion.\nUsing the Standard ML datatype above, the size of a tree (number of nodes) can be computed via the following mutually recursive functions:\nfun size_tree Empty = 0\n | size_tree (Node (_, f)) = 1 + size_forest f\nand size_forest Nil = 0\n | size_forest (Cons (t, f')) = size_tree t + size_forest f'\nA more detailed example in Scheme, counting the leaves of a tree:\n (if (leaf? tree)\n 1\n (count-leaves-in-forest (children tree))))\n (if (null? forest)\n 0\n (+ (count-leaves (car forest))\n (count-leaves-in-forest (cdr forest)))))\nThese examples reduce easily to a single recursive function by inlining the forest function in the tree function, which is commonly done in practice: directly recursive functions that operate on trees sequentially process the value of the node and recurse on the children within one function, rather than dividing these into two separate functions.\nAdvanced examples.\nA more complicated example is given by recursive descent parsers, which can be naturally implemented by having one function for each production rule of a grammar, which then mutually recurse; this will in general be multiple recursion, as production rules generally combine multiple parts. This can also be done without mutual recursion, for example by still having separate functions for each production rule, but having them called by a single controller function, or by putting all the grammar in a single function.\nMutual recursion can also implement a finite-state machine, with one function for each state, and single recursion in changing state; this requires tail call optimization if the number of state changes is large or unbounded. This can be used as a simple form of cooperative multitasking. A similar approach to multitasking is to instead use coroutines which call each other, where rather than terminating by calling another routine, one coroutine yields to another but does not terminate, and then resumes execution when it is yielded back to. This allows individual coroutines to hold state, without it needing to be passed by parameters or stored in shared variables.\nThere are also some algorithms which naturally have two phases, such as minimax (min and max), which can be implemented by having each phase in a separate function with mutual recursion, though they can also be combined into a single function with direct recursion.\nMathematical functions.\nIn mathematics, the Hofstadter Female and Male sequences are an example of a pair of integer sequences defined in a mutually recursive manner.\nFractals can be computed (up to a given resolution) by recursive functions. This can sometimes be done more elegantly via mutually recursive functions; the Sierpi\u0144ski curve is a good example.\nPrevalence.\nMutual recursion is very common in functional programming, and is often used for programs written in LISP, Scheme, ML, and similar programming languages. For example, Abelson and Sussman describe how a meta-circular evaluator can be used to implement LISP with an eval-apply cycle. In languages such as Prolog, mutual recursion is almost unavoidable.\nSome programming styles discourage mutual recursion, claiming that it can be confusing to distinguish the conditions which will return an answer from the conditions that would allow the code to run forever without producing an answer. Peter Norvig points to a design pattern which discourages the use entirely, stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If you have two mutually-recursive functions that both alter the state of an object, try to move almost all the functionality into just one of the functions. Otherwise you will probably end up duplicating code.\nTerminology.\nMutual recursion is also known as indirect recursion, by contrast with direct recursion, where a single function calls itself directly. This is simply a difference of emphasis, not a different notion: \"indirect recursion\" emphasises an individual function, while \"mutual recursion\" emphasises the set of functions, and does not single out an individual function. For example, if \"f\" calls itself, that is direct recursion. If instead \"f\" calls \"g\" and then \"g\" calls \"f,\" which in turn calls \"g\" again, from the point of view of \"f\" alone, \"f\" is indirectly recursing, while from the point of view of \"g\" alone, \"g\" is indirectly recursing, while from the point of view of both, \"f\" and \"g\" are mutually recursing on each other. Similarly a set of three or more functions that call each other can be called a set of mutually recursive functions.\nConversion to direct recursion.\nMathematically, a set of mutually recursive functions are primitive recursive, which can be proven by course-of-values recursion, building a single function \"F\" that lists the values of the individual recursive function in order: formula_1 and rewriting the mutual recursion as a primitive recursion.\nAny mutual recursion between two procedures can be converted to direct recursion by inlining the code of one procedure into the other. If there is only one site where one procedure calls the other, this is straightforward, though if there are several it can involve code duplication. In terms of the call stack, two mutually recursive procedures yield a stack ABABAB..., and inlining B into A yields the direct recursion (AB)(AB)(AB)...\nAlternately, any number of procedures can be merged into a single procedure that takes as argument a variant record (or algebraic data type) representing the selection of a procedure and its arguments; the merged procedure then dispatches on its argument to execute the corresponding code and uses direct recursion to call self as appropriate. This can be seen as a limited application of defunctionalization. This translation may be useful when any of the mutually recursive procedures can be called by outside code, so there is no obvious case for inlining one procedure into the other. Such code then needs to be modified so that procedure calls are performed by bundling arguments into a variant record as described; alternately, wrapper procedures may be used for this task.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20036", "revid": "41363991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20036", "title": "Metasyntactic variable", "text": "Placeholder term used in computer science\nA metasyntactic variable is a specific word or set of words identified as a placeholder in computer science and specifically computer programming. These words are commonly found in source code and are intended to be modified or substituted before real-world usage. For example, \"foo\" and \"bar\" are used in over 330 Internet Engineering Task Force Requests for Comments, the documents which define foundational internet technologies like HTTP (web), TCP/IP, and email protocols.\nBy mathematical analogy, a metasyntactic variable is a word that is a variable for other words, just as in algebra letters are used as variables for numbers.\nMetasyntactic variables are used to name entities such as variables, functions, and commands whose exact identity is unimportant and serve only to demonstrate a concept, which is useful for teaching programming.\nCommon metasyntactic variables.\nSince English is the foundation language or lingua franca of most computer programming languages, variables that originate in English are commonly seen even in programs and examples of programs written for other spoken-language audiences.\nThe variables used in a particular context may depend on subcultures that develop around programming languages.\nGeneral usage.\nMetasyntactic variables used commonly across all programming languages include \"foobar\", \"foo\", \"bar\", \"baz\", \"qux\", \"quux\", \"corge\", \"grault\", \"garply\", \"waldo\", \"fred\", \"plugh\", \"xyzzy\", and \"thud\". Two of these words, \"plugh\" and \"xyzzy\", are taken from the game \"Colossal Cave Adventure\".\nA fuller reference can be found in \"The Hacker's Dictionary\" from MIT Press.\nJapanese.\nIn Japanese, the words (\u307b\u3052) and (\u3075\u304c) are commonly used, with other common words and variants being (\u3074\u3088), (\u307b\u3052\u3089), and (\u307b\u3052\u307b\u3052). The origin of as a metasyntactic variable is not known, but it is believed to date to the early 1980s.\nFrench.\nIn France, the word \"toto\" is widely used, with variants \"tata\", \"titi\", \"tutu\" as related placeholders. One commonly-raised source for the use of \"toto\" is a reference to the stock character used to tell jokes with T\u00eate \u00e0 Toto.\nTurkish.\nIn Turkey, the words \"hede\" and \"h\u00f6d\u00f6\" (usually spelt \"hodo\" due to ASCII-only naming constraints of programming languages) are well-known metasyntactic variables that stem from popular humorous cartoon magazines of the 90's like LeMan. The words do not mean anything, and are used for precisely that reason. The terms were popularized more widely by the actor and stand-up comedian Cem Y\u0131lmaz in the late 90's and early 2000's.\nItalian.\nIn Italian software programming culture, it is common to encounter names of Walt Disney characters (as found in the Italian versions of the shows) being used as variables. These names often appear in pseudo-code, are referenced in software engineering classes, and are commonly employed when explaining algorithms to colleagues. Among the most frequently used are \"pippo\" (Goofy), \"pluto\", and \"paperino\" (Donald Duck).\nUsage examples.\nC.\nIn the following example the function name codice_1 and the variable name codice_2 are both metasyntactic variables. Lines beginning with codice_3 are comments.\n// The function named foo\nint foo(void)\n // Declare the variable bar and set the value to 1\n int bar = 1;\n return bar;\nC++.\nFunction prototypes with examples of different argument passing mechanisms:\nvoid Foo(Fruit bar);\nvoid Foo(Fruit* bar);\nvoid Foo(const Fruit&amp; bar);\nExample showing the function overloading capabilities of the C++ language\nvoid Foo(int bar);\nvoid Foo(int bar, int baz);\nvoid Foo(int bar, int baz, int qux);\nPython.\nSpam, ham, and eggs are the principal metasyntactic variables used in the Python programming language. This is a reference to the famous comedy sketch, \"Spam\", by Monty Python, the eponym of the language.\nIn the following example codice_4, codice_5, and codice_6 are metasyntactic variables and lines beginning with codice_7 are comments.\ndef spam():\n # Define the variable ham\n ham = \"Hello World!\"\n # Define the variable eggs\n eggs = 1\n return\nIETF Requests for Comments.\nBoth the IETF RFCs and computer programming languages are rendered in plain text, making it necessary to distinguish metasyntactic variables by a naming convention, since it would not be obvious from context.\nHere is an example from the official IETF document explaining the e-mail protocols (from RFC 772 - cited in RFC 3092):\n All is well; now the recipients can be specified.\n S: MRCP TO:&lt;Foo@Y&gt; &lt;CRLF&gt;\n R: 200 OK\n S: MRCP TO:&lt;Raboof@Y&gt; &lt;CRLF&gt;\n R: 553 No such user here\n S: MRCP TO:&lt;bar@Y&gt; &lt;CRLF&gt;\n R: 200 OK\n S: MRCP TO:&lt;@Y,@X,fubar@Z&gt; &lt;CRLF&gt;\n R: 200 OK\n Note that the failure of \"Raboof\" has no effect on the storage of\n mail for \"Foo\", \"bar\" or the mail to be forwarded to \"fubar@Z\"\n through host \"X\".\nAnother point reflected in the above example is the convention that a metavariable is to be uniformly substituted with the same instance in all its appearances in a given schema. This is in contrast with nonterminal symbols in formal grammars where the nonterminals on the right of a production can be substituted by different instances.\nExample data.\nSQL.\nIt is common to use the name ACME in example SQL databases and as a placeholder company-name for the purpose of teaching. The term 'ACME Database' is commonly used to mean a training or example-only set of database data used solely for training or testing. \nACME is also commonly used in documentation which shows SQL usage examples, a common practice with in many educational texts as well as technical documentation from companies such as Microsoft and Oracle.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20037", "revid": "5862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20037", "title": "Maze of twisty little passages, all different", "text": ""}
{"id": "20038", "revid": "50903868", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20038", "title": "Mondegreen", "text": "Misinterpretation of a spoken phrase\nA mondegreen () is a mishearing or misinterpretation of a phrase in a way that gives it a new meaning. Mondegreens are most often created by a person listening to a poem or a song; the listener, being unable to hear a lyric clearly, substitutes words that sound similar and make some kind of sense. The American writer Sylvia Wright coined the term in 1954, recalling a childhood memory of her mother reading the Scottish ballad \"The Bonnie Earl o' Moray\", and mishearing the words \"laid him on the green\" as \"Lady Mondegreen\".\n\"Mondegreen\" was included in the 2000 edition of the \"Random House Webster's College Dictionary\", and in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" in 2002. Merriam-Webster's \"Collegiate Dictionary\" added the word in 2008.\nEtymology.\nIn a 1954 essay in \"Harper's Magazine\", Sylvia Wright described how, as a young girl, she misheard the last line of the first stanza from the ballad \"The Bonnie Earl o' Moray\" (from Thomas Percy's 1765 book \"Reliques of Ancient English Poetry\"). She wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen I was a child, my mother used to read aloud to me from Percy's \"Reliques\", and one of my favorite poems began, as I remember:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe correct lines are, \"They hae slain the Earl o' Moray / And \"laid him on the green\".\" Wright explained the need for a new term:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPsychology.\nPeople are more likely to notice what they expect rather than things that are not part of their everyday experiences; this is known as confirmation bias. A person may mistake an unfamiliar stimulus for a familiar and more plausible version. For example, to consider a well-known mondegreen in the song \"Purple Haze\", one may be more likely to hear Jimi Hendrix singing that he is about to \"kiss this guy\" than that he is about to \"kiss the sky\". Similarly, if a lyric uses words or phrases that the listener is unfamiliar with, or in an uncommon sentence structure, they may be misheard as using more familiar terms.\nThe creation of mondegreens may be driven in part by cognitive dissonance; the listener finds it psychologically uncomfortable to listen to a song and not make out the words. Steven Connor suggests that mondegreens are the result of the brain's constant attempts to make sense of the world by making assumptions to fill in the gaps when it cannot clearly determine what it is hearing. Connor sees mondegreens as the \"wrenchings of nonsense into sense\". This dissonance will be most acute when the lyrics are in a language in which the listener is fluent.\nOn the other hand, Steven Pinker has observed that mondegreen mishearings tend to be \"less\" plausible than the original lyrics, and that once a listener has \"locked in\" to a particular misheard interpretation of a song's lyrics, it can remain unquestioned, even when that plausibility becomes strained (see mumpsimus). Pinker gives the example of a student \"stubbornly\" mishearing the chorus to \"Venus\" (\"I'm your Venus\") as \"I'm your penis\", and being surprised that the song was allowed on the radio. The phenomenon may, in some cases, be triggered by people hearing \"what they want to hear\", as in the case of the song \"Louie Louie\": parents heard obscenities in the Kingsmen recording where none existed.\nJames Gleick states that the mondegreen is a distinctly modern phenomenon. Without the improved communication and language standardization brought about by radio, he argues that there would have been no way to recognize and discuss this shared experience. Just as mondegreens transform songs based on experience, a folk song learned by repetition often is transformed over time when sung by people in a region where some of the song's references have become obscure. A classic example is \"The Golden Vanity\", which contains the line \"As she sailed upon the lowland sea\". British immigrants carried the song to Appalachia, where later generations of singers, not knowing what the term \"lowland sea\" refers to, transformed it over generations from \"lowland\" to \"lonesome\".\nExamples.\nIn songs.\nThe national anthem of the United States is highly susceptible to the creation of mondegreens, two in the first line. Francis Scott Key's \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" begins with the line \"O say can you see, by the dawn's early light\". This has been misinterpreted (both accidentally and deliberately) as \"Jos\u00e9, can you see\", another example of the Hobson-Jobson effect, countless times. The second half of the line has been misheard as well, as \"by the donzerly light\", or other variants. This has led to many people believing that \"donzerly\" is an actual word.\nReligious songs, learned by ear (and often by children), are another common source of mondegreens. The most-cited example is \"Gladly, the cross-eyed bear\" (from the line in the hymn \"Keep Thou My Way\" by Fanny Crosby and Theodore E. Perkins: \"Kept by Thy tender care, gladly the cross I'll bear\"). Jon Carroll and many others quote it as \"Gladly the cross \"I'd\" bear\"; note that the confusion may be heightened by the unusual object-subject-verb (OSV) word order of the phrase. The song \"I Was on a Boat That Day\" by Old Dominion features a reference to this mondegreen.\nMondegreens expanded as a phenomenon with radio, and, especially, the growth of rock and roll (and even more so with rap). Among the most-reported examples are:\nBoth Creedence's John Fogerty and Hendrix eventually acknowledged these mishearings by deliberately singing the \"mondegreen\" versions of their songs in concert.\n\"Blinded by the Light\", a cover of a Bruce Springsteen song by Manfred Mann's Earth Band, contains what has been called \"probably the most misheard lyric of all time\". The phrase \"revved up like a deuce\", altered from Springsteen's original \"cut loose like a deuce\", both lyrics referring to the hot rodders slang \"deuce\" (short for deuce coup\u00e9) for a 1932 Ford coup\u00e9, is frequently misheard as \"wrapped up like a douche\". Springsteen himself has joked about the phenomenon, claiming that it was not until Manfred Mann rewrote the song to be about a \"feminine hygiene product\" that the song became popular.\nAnother commonly cited example of a song susceptible to mondegreens is Nirvana's \"Smells Like Teen Spirit\", with the line \"here we are now, entertain us\" variously being misinterpreted as \"here we are now, \"in containers\"\", and \"here we are now, \"hot potatoes\"\", among other renditions.\nIn the 2014 song \"Blank Space\" by Taylor Swift, listeners widely misheard the line \"got a long list of ex-lovers\" as \"all the lonely Starbucks lovers\".\nRap and hip-hop lyrics may be particularly susceptible to being misheard because they do not necessarily follow standard pronunciations. The delivery of rap lyrics relies heavily upon an often-regional pronunciation or non-traditional accenting (see African-American Vernacular English) of words and their phonemes to adhere to the artist's stylizations and the lyrics' written structure. This issue is exemplified in controversies over alleged transcription errors in Yale University Press's 2010 \"Anthology of Rap\".\nStandardized and recorded mondegreens.\nSometimes, the modified version of a lyric becomes standard, as is the case with \"The Twelve Days of Christmas\". The original has \"four colly birds\" (\"colly\" means \"black\"; compare \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\": \"Brief as the lightning in the collied night\"); by the turn of the twentieth century, these had been replaced by \"calling\" birds, which is the lyric used in the now-standard 1909 Frederic Austin version. Another example is found in ELO's song \"Don't Bring Me Down\". The original recorded lyric was \"don't bring me down, Gruss!\", but fans misheard it as \"don't bring me down, Bruce!\". Eventually, ELO began playing the song with the mondegreen lyric.\nThe song \"Sea Lion Woman\", recorded in 1939 by Christine and Katherine Shipp, was performed by Nina Simone under the title \"See Line Woman\". According to the liner notes from the compilation \"A Treasury of Library of Congress Field Recordings\", the correct title of this playground song might also be \"See [the] Lyin' Woman\" or \"C-Line Woman\". Jack Lawrence's misinterpretation of the French phrase \"pauvre Jean\" (\"poor John\") as the identically pronounced \"pauvres gens\" (\"poor people\") led to the translation of \"La Goualante du pauvre Jean\" (\"The Ballad of Poor John\") as \"The Poor People of Paris\", a hit song in 1956.\nIn literature.\n\"A Monk Swimming\" by author Malachy McCourt is so titled because of a childhood mishearing of a phrase from the Catholic rosary prayer, Hail Mary. \"Amongst women\" became \"a monk swimmin'\".\nThe title and plot of the short science fiction story \"Come You Nigh: Kay Shuns\" (\"Com-mu-ni-ca-tions\") by Lawrence A. Perkins, in \"Analog Science Fiction and Fact\" magazine (April 1970), deals with securing interplanetary radio communications by encoding them with mondegreens.\n\"Olive, the Other Reindeer\" is a 1997 children's book by Vivian Walsh, which borrows its title from a mondegreen of the line \"all of the other reindeer\" in the song \"Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer\". The book was adapted into an animated Christmas special in 1999.\nThe travel guidebook series Lonely Planet is named after the misheard phrase \"lovely planet\" sung by Joe Cocker in Matthew Moore's song \"Space Captain\".\nIn film.\nA monologue of mondegreens appears in the 1971 film \"Carnal Knowledge\". The camera focuses on actress Candice Bergen laughing as she recounts various phrases that fooled her as a child, including \"Round John Virgin\" (instead of \"'Round yon virgin...\") and \"Gladly, the cross-eyed bear\" (instead of \"Gladly the cross I'd bear\"). The title of the 2013 film \"Ain't Them Bodies Saints\" is a misheard lyric from a folk song; director David Lowery decided to use it because it evoked the \"classical, regional\" feel of 1970s rural Texas.\nIn the 1994 film \"The Santa Clause\", a child identifies a ladder that Santa uses to get to the roof from its label: The Rose Suchak Ladder Company. He states that this is \"just like the poem\", misinterpreting \"out on the lawn there arose such a clatter\" from \"A Visit from St. Nicholas\" as \"Out on the lawn, there's a Rose Suchak ladder\".\nIn television.\nMondegreens have been used in many television advertising campaigns, including:\nIn video games.\nThe video game \"Super Mario 64\" involved a mishearing during Mario's encounters with Bowser. Charles Martinet, the voice actor for Mario, explained the line was \"So long, King-a Bowser\"; however, it was misheard as \"So long, gay Bowser\". The misinterpreted line became a meme, in part popularized by the line's removal in some updated rereleases of the game.\nOther games in the \"Mario\" series, like \"Mario Party\" and \"Mario Kart 64\", also involve a mondegreen. Whenever the character Wario loses a minigame or a race, respectively, he says something along the lines of, \"D'oh! I missed!\" However, since he was originally designed to be German and his original voice actor, Thomas Spindler, was German, many people have heard this voice line as the German phrase \"So ein Mist!\", which means \"oh, \" in English. Spindler has said that this was the line he recorded in an interview in 2016. Charles Martinet, who is Wario's voice actor, has said that the voice line he recorded for the game was indeed \"D'oh! I missed!\" in 2020.\nIn the video game \"Final Fantasy XIV\", the lyrics for the boss theme \"Ultima\" are \"Beat, the heart of Sabik\" but the English-speaking audience heard the voice lines as \"big fat tacos\" instead. This resulted in fan video remixes with the misunderstood lyrics. Developer Square Enix acknowledged the misunderstanding and embraced the joke, and made tacos a major plot point in the expansion \"Dawntrail\".\nOther notable examples.\nThe traditional game \"Telephone\" or \"Gossip\" (in North America; it has a number of other names in other countries) involves mishearing a whispered sentence to produce successive mondegreens that gradually distort the original sentence as it is repeated by successive listeners.\nAmong schoolchildren in the US, daily rote recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance has long provided opportunities for the genesis of mondegreens.\nSpeech-to-text functionality in modern smartphone messaging apps and search or assist functions may be hampered by faulty speech recognition. It has been noted that in text messaging, users often leave uncorrected mondegreens as a joke or puzzle for the recipient to solve. This wealth of mondegreens has proven to be a fertile ground for study by speech scientists and psychologists.\nNotable collections.\nThe classicist and linguist Steve Reece has collected examples of English mondegreens in song lyrics, religious creeds and liturgies, commercials and advertisements, and jokes and riddles. He has used this collection to shed light on the process of \"junctural metanalysis\" during the oral transmission of the ancient Greek epics, the \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\".\nReverse mondegreen.\nA reverse mondegreen is the intentional production, in speech or writing, of words or phrases that seem to be gibberish but disguise meaning. A prominent example is \"Mairzy Doats\", a 1943 novelty song by Milton Drake, Al Hoffman, and Jerry Livingston. The lyrics are a reverse mondegreen, made up of same-sounding words or phrases (sometimes also referred to as \"oronyms\"), so pronounced (and written) as to challenge the listener (or reader) to interpret them:\nMairzy doats and dozy doats and liddle lamzy divey\nA kiddley divey too, wouldn't you?\nThe clue to the meaning is contained in the bridge of the song:\nIf the words sound queer and funny to your ear, a little bit jumbled and jivey,\nSing \"Mares eat oats and does eat oats and little lambs eat ivy.\"\nThat makes it clear that the last line is \"A kid'll eat ivy, too; wouldn't you?\"\nDeliberate mondegreen.\nTwo authors have written books of supposed foreign-language poetry that are actually mondegreens of nursery rhymes in English. Luis van Rooten's pseudo-French \"\" includes critical, historical, and interpretive apparatus, as does John Hulme's \"M\u00f6rder Guss Reims\", attributed to a fictitious German poet. Both titles sound like the phrase \"Mother Goose Rhymes\". Both works can also be considered soramimi, which produces different meanings when interpreted in another language. The genre of animutation is based on deliberate mondegreen.\nWolfgang Amadeus Mozart produced a similar effect in his canon \"Difficile Lectu\" (Difficult to Read), which, though ostensibly in Latin, is actually an opportunity for scatological humor in both German and Italian.\nSome performers and writers have used deliberate mondegreens to create double entendres. The phrase \"if you see Kay\" (F-U-C-K) has been employed many times, notably as a line from James Joyce's 1922 novel \"Ulysses\".\n\"Mondegreen\" is a song by Yeasayer on their 2010 album, \"Odd Blood\". The lyrics are intentionally obscure (for instance, \"Everybody sugar in my bed\" and \"Perhaps the pollen in the air turns us into a stapler\") and spoken hastily to encourage the mondegreen effect.\nAnguish Languish is an ersatz language created by Howard L. Chace. A play on the words \"English Language\", it is based on homophonic transformations of English words and consists entirely of deliberate mondegreens that seem nonsensical in print but are more easily understood when spoken aloud. A notable example is the story \"Ladle Rat Rotten Hut\" (\"Little Red Riding Hood\"), which appears in his collection of stories and poems, \"Anguish Languish\" (Prentice-Hall, 1956).\nLady Gaga's 2008 hit \"Poker Face\" allegedly makes a play on this phenomenon, with every second repetition of the phrase \"poker face\" replaced with \"fuck her face\". The only known radio station to censor the lyrics has been KIIS FM.\nRelated linguistic phenomena.\nClosely related categories are Hobson-Jobson, where a word from a foreign language is homophonically translated into one's own language, e.g. \"cockroach\" from Spanish , and \"soramimi\", a Japanese term for deliberate homophonic misinterpretation of words for humor.\nAn unintentionally incorrect use of similar-sounding words or phrases, resulting in a changed meaning, is a malapropism. If there is a connection in meaning, it may be called an eggcorn. If a person stubbornly continues to mispronounce a word or phrase after being corrected, that person has committed a mumpsimus.\nRelated phenomena include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNon-English languages.\nSerbo-Croatian.\nQueen's song \"Another One Bites the Dust\" has a long-standing history as a mondegreen in Serbo-Croatian, misheard as \"\"Radovan baca daske\" and \"\u0420\u0430\u0434\u043e\u0432\u0430\u043d \u0431\u0430\u0446\u0430 \u0434\u0430\u0441\u043a\u0435\"\", which means \"Radovan throws planks\".\nCzech.\nIn the Czech anthem, \"Kde domov m\u016fj\", the sentence (\"midst the rocks sigh fragrant pine groves\") is sometimes misheard as (\"Bory\u0161 is good at mountaineering\").\nAnother popular Czech mondegreen is in the lyrics of \"Nina\" by singer-songwriter Tom\u00e1\u0161 Klus, where the sentence (\"When the tears of muses fall on my lips\") is often misheard as (\"When the minarets fall, tears of muses\"). The mondegreen is caused by the singer using an uncommon declension of the word (\"lip\"); the more common form would be instead of .\nThe Czech radio station Radio Kiss has a programme called \"Hej \u0161a\u0161o, nem\u00e1\u0161 d\u017eus?\", where listeners can send their mondegreens. The show is named after a mondegreen from the song \"Highway to Hell\", in which the lyric \"hey Satan, payin' my dues\" was misheard as \"Hej \u0161a\u0161o, nem\u00e1\u0161 d\u017eus?\" (\"Hey clown, do you have juice?\").\nDutch.\nIn Dutch, mondegreens are popularly referred to as (\"Mommy applejuice\"), from the Michael Jackson song \"Wanna Be Startin' Somethin\"' which features the lyrics \"Mama-se mama-sa ma-ma-coo-sa\", and was once misheard as . The Dutch radio station 3FM show \"Superrradio\" (originally \"Timur Open Radio\"), run by Timur Perlin and Ramon, featured an item in which listeners were encouraged to send in mondegreens under the name \"\". The segment was popular for years.\nFrench.\nIn French, the phenomenon is also known as , especially when referring to pop songs.\nThe title of the film (\"Life In Pink\" literally; \"Life Through Rose-Coloured Glasses\" more broadly), depicting the life of \u00c9dith Piaf, can be mistaken for (\"The Pink Airplane\").\nThe title of the 1983 French novel (\"Tea in the Harem of Archi Ahmed\") by Mehdi Charef (and the 1985 movie of the same name) is based on the main character mishearing (\"the theorem of Archimedes\") in his mathematics class.\nA classic example in French is similar to the \"Lady Mondegreen\" anecdote: in his 1962 collection of children's quotes , the humorist Jean-Charles refers to a misunderstood lyric of \"La Marseillaise\" (the French national anthem): (\"Do you hear those savage soldiers roar?\") is misheard as (\"that soldier S\u00e9f\u00e9ro\").\nGerman.\nMondegreens are a well-known phenomenon in German, especially where non-German songs are concerned. They are sometimes called, after a well-known example, -songs (\"I got the power\", a song by Snap!, misinterpreted as a German female name). Journalist Axel Hacke published a series of books about them, beginning with (\"The White Negro Wumbaba\", a mishearing of the line from \"\").\nIn urban legend, children's paintings of nativity scenes, occasionally include next to the Child, Mary, Joseph, and so on, an additional, laughing creature known as the . The reason is to be found in the line (\"God's Son! Oh, how does love laugh out of Thy divine mouth!\") from the song \"Silent Night\". The subject is , a poetic contraction of leaving off the final and the definite article, so that the phrase might be misunderstood as being about a person named laughing \"in a loveable manner\". has been used as the title of at least one book about Christmas and Christmas songs.\nHebrew.\nGhil'ad Zuckermann mentions the example (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05de\u05d5\u05db\u05e8\u05d7\u05d9\u05dd \u05dc\u05d4\u05d9\u05d5\u05ea \u05e9\u05de\u05d7\u200e, which means \"we must be happy\", with a grammatical error) as a mondegreen of the original (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e2\u05d5\u05e8\u05d5 \u05d0\u05d7\u05d9\u05dd \u05d1\u05dc\u05d1 \u05e9\u05de\u05d7\u200e, which means \"wake up, brothers, with a happy heart\"). Although this line is taken from the extremely well-known song \"H\u00e1va Nag\u00edla\" (\"Let's be happy\"), given the Hebrew high-register of (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e2\u05d5\u05e8\u05d5\u200e \"wake up!\"), Israelis often mishear it.\nAn Israeli site dedicated to Hebrew mondegreens has coined the term (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d0\u05d1\u05d8\u05d9\u05d7\u200e, Hebrew for \"watermelon\") for \"mondegreen\", named for a common mishearing of Shlomo Artzi's award-winning 1970 song \"Ahavtia\" (\"I loved her\", using a form uncommon in spoken Hebrew).\nHungarian.\nOne of the most well-known Hungarian mondegreens is connected to the 1984 song \"Live Is Life\" by the Austrian band Opus. The gibberish \"labadab dab dab\" phrase in the song was commonly misunderstood by Hungarians as \"levelet kaptam\" (Hungarian for \"I have received mail\"), which was later immortalized by the cult movie \"Moscow Square\" depicting the life of teenagers in the late 1980s.\nIndonesian.\nThe word \"mendengarku\" (\"hear me\") in Ghea Indrawari's song, \"Teramini\", is misheard as \"mantan aku\" (\"my ex\") or \"makananku\" (\"my food\").\nJapanese.\nCaramelldansen, a Swedish song which gained popularity in Japan during the early 21st century, contains the lyric \"Dansa med oss, klappa era h\u00e4nder\" (\"Dance with us, clap your hands\"), which was sometimes misinterpreted as \"\u30d0\u30eb\u30b5\u30df\u30b3\u9162\u3084\u3063\u3071\u3044\u3089\u3078\u3093\u3067\" (\"barusamiko-su yappa irahen de\"), which translates to \"I don't want any balsamic vinegar after all\". This was then included in the official Japanese translation of the song.\nMandarin.\nA Chinese song\u300a\u6700\u6d6a\u6f2b\u7684\u4e8b\u300b contains the lyrics \"\"\u6211\u60f3\u8d77\u6700\u6d6a\u6f2b\u7684\u4e8b\uff0c\u5c31\u662f\u548c\u4f60\u4e00\u8d77\u6162\u6162\u53d8\u8001\u3002\" (\"The most romantic thing I can think of is growing old with you.\" \") which is sometimes misheard as \"\"\u6211\u60f3\u8d77\u6700\u6d6a\u6f2b\u7684\u4e8b\uff0c\u5c31\u662f\u548c\u4f60\u4e00\u8d77\u5356\u5356\u7535\u8111\u3002\" (\"The most romantic thing I remember is selling computers with you.\"\")\nPolish.\nA paper in phonology cites memoirs of the poet Antoni S\u0142onimski, who confessed that in the recited poem \"Konrad Wallenrod\" he used to hear \"zwierz Alpuhary\" (\"a beast of Alpujarras\") rather than \"z wie\u017c Alpuhary\" (\"from the towers of Alpujarras\").\nRussian.\nIn 1875 Fyodor Dostoyevsky cited a line from Fyodor Glinka's song \"Troika\" (1825), \u043a\u043e\u043b\u043e\u043a\u043e\u043b\u044c\u0447\u0438\u043a, \u0434\u0430\u0440 \u0412\u0430\u043b\u0434\u0430\u044f (\"the bell, gift of Valday\"), stating that it is usually understood as \u043a\u043e\u043b\u043e\u043a\u043e\u043b\u044c\u0447\u0438\u043a, \u0434\u0430\u0440\u0432\u0430\u043b\u0434\u0430\u044f (\"the bell \"darvaldaying\"\"\u2014supposedly an onomatopoeia of ringing sounds).\nSlovak.\nIn Slovakia, the lyrics \"God found good people staying for brother\" from the song \"Survive\" by Laurent Wolf and Andrew Roachford was often misheard as (\"Zdeno from Poprad bought the Kaufland\"). The mondegreen became so popular that a radio station, \"Fun r\u00e1dio\", created a broadcast called (\"Hits of Zdeno from Poprad\") where listeners can send mondegreens and overheard lyrics.\nSpanish.\nThe Mexican national anthem contains the verse (\"If, however, a foreign enemy would dare\") using and , archaic poetic forms.\nThus, the verse has sometimes been misunderstood as (\"Masiosare, a strange enemy\") with , an otherwise unused word, as the name of the enemy.\n\"Masiosare\" has been used in Mexico as a first name for real and fictional people and as a common name ( or the homophone ) for the anthem itself or for a threat against the country.\nYiddish.\nThe expression (bobe-mayse, \"grandmother's tale\") was originally a misunderstanding of (bovo-mayse, \"Bovo story\"), a story from the Bovo-Bukh.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20039", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20039", "title": "Merge sort", "text": "Divide and conquer sorting algorithm\nIn computer science, merge sort (also commonly spelled as mergesort and as merge-sort) is an efficient, general-purpose, and comparison-based sorting algorithm. Most implementations of merge sort are stable, which means that the relative order of equal elements is the same between the input and output. Merge sort is a divide-and-conquer algorithm that was invented by John von Neumann in 1945. A detailed description and analysis of bottom-up merge sort appeared in a report by Goldstine and von Neumann as early as 1948.\nAlgorithm.\nConceptually, a merge sort works as follows:\nTop-down implementation.\nExample C-like code using indices for top-down merge sort algorithm that recursively splits the list (called \"runs\" in this example) into sublists until sublist size is 1, then merges those sublists to produce a sorted list. The copy back step is avoided with alternating the direction of the merge with each level of recursion (except for an initial one-time copy, that can be avoided too). \nAs a simple example, consider an array with two elements. The elements are copied to codice_1, then merged back to codice_2. If there are four elements, when the bottom of the recursion level is reached, single element runs from codice_2 are merged to codice_1, and then at the next higher level of recursion, those two-element runs are merged to codice_2. This pattern continues with each level of recursion.\n// Array A[] has the items to sort; array B[] is a work array.\nvoid TopDownMergeSort(A[], B[], n)\n CopyArray(A, 0, n, B); // one time copy of A[] to B[]\n TopDownSplitMerge(A, 0, n, B); // sort data from B[] into A[]\n// Split A[] into 2 runs, sort both runs into B[], merge both runs from B[] to A[]\n// iBegin is inclusive; iEnd is exclusive (A[iEnd] is not in the set).\nvoid TopDownSplitMerge(B[], iBegin, iEnd, A[])\n if (iEnd - iBegin &lt;= 1) // if run size == 1\n return; // consider it sorted\n // split the run longer than 1 item into halves\n iMiddle = (iEnd + iBegin) / 2; // iMiddle = mid point\n // recursively sort both runs from array A[] into B[]\n TopDownSplitMerge(A, iBegin, iMiddle, B); // sort the left run\n TopDownSplitMerge(A, iMiddle, iEnd, B); // sort the right run\n // merge the resulting runs from array B[] into A[]\n TopDownMerge(B, iBegin, iMiddle, iEnd, A);\n// Left source half is A[ iBegin:iMiddle-1].\n// Right source half is A[iMiddle:iEnd-1 ].\n// Result is B[ iBegin:iEnd-1 ].\nvoid TopDownMerge(B[], iBegin, iMiddle, iEnd, A[])\n i = iBegin, j = iMiddle;\n // While there are elements in the left or right runs...\n for (k = iBegin; k &lt; iEnd; k++) {\n // If left run head exists and is &lt;= existing right run head.\n if (i &lt; iMiddle &amp;&amp; (j &gt;= iEnd || A[i] &lt;= A[j])) {\n B[k] = A[i];\n i = i + 1;\n } else {\n B[k] = A[j];\n j = j + 1;\nvoid CopyArray(A[], iBegin, iEnd, B[])\n for (k = iBegin; k &lt; iEnd; k++)\n B[k] = A[k];\nSorting the entire array is accomplished by TopDownMergeSort(A, B, length(A)).\nBottom-up implementation.\nExample C-like code using indices for bottom-up merge sort algorithm which treats the list as an array of \"n\" sublists (called \"runs\" in this example) of size 1, and iteratively merges sub-lists back and forth between two buffers:\n// array A[] has the items to sort; array B[] is a work array\nvoid BottomUpMergeSort(A[], B[], n)\n // Each 1-element run in A is already \"sorted\".\n // Make successively longer sorted runs of length 2, 4, 8, 16... until the whole array is sorted.\n for (width = 1; width &lt; n; width = 2 * width)\n // Array A is full of runs of length width.\n for (i = 0; i &lt; n; i = i + 2 * width)\n // Merge two runs: A[i:i+width-1] and A[i+width:i+2*width-1] to B[]\n // or copy A[i:n-1] to B[] ( if (i+width &gt;= n) )\n BottomUpMerge(A, i, min(i+width, n), min(i+2*width, n), B);\n // Now work array B is full of runs of length 2*width.\n // Copy array B to array A for the next iteration.\n // A more efficient implementation would swap the roles of A and B.\n CopyArray(B, A, n);\n // Now array A is full of runs of length 2*width.\n// Left run is A[iLeft :iRight-1].\n// Right run is A[iRight:iEnd-1 ].\nvoid BottomUpMerge(A[], iLeft, iRight, iEnd, B[])\n i = iLeft, j = iRight;\n // While there are elements in the left or right runs...\n for (k = iLeft; k &lt; iEnd; k++) {\n // If left run head exists and is &lt;= existing right run head.\n if (i &lt; iRight &amp;&amp; (j &gt;= iEnd || A[i] &lt;= A[j])) {\n B[k] = A[i];\n i = i + 1;\n } else {\n B[k] = A[j];\n j = j + 1; \n } \nvoid CopyArray(B[], A[], n)\n for (i = 0; i &lt; n; i++)\n A[i] = B[i];\nTop-down implementation using lists.\nPseudocode for top-down merge sort algorithm which recursively divides the input list into smaller sublists until the sublists are trivially sorted, and then merges the sublists while returning up the call chain.\n function merge_sort(\"list\" m) is\n // \"Base case. A list of zero or one elements is sorted, by definition.\"\n if length of m \u2264 1 then\n return m\n // \"Recursive case. First, divide the list into equal-sized sublists\"\n // \"consisting of the first half and second half of the list.\"\n // \"This assumes lists start at index 0.\"\n var left := empty list\n var right := empty list\n for each x with index i in m do\n if i &lt; (length of m)/2 then\n add x to left\n else\n add x to right\n // \"Recursively sort both sublists.\"\n left := merge_sort(left)\n right := merge_sort(right)\n // Then merge the now-sorted sublists.\n return merge(left, right)\nIn this example, the merge function merges the left and right sublists.\n function merge(left, right) is\n var result := empty list\n while left is not empty and right is not empty do\n if first(left) \u2264 first(right) then\n append first(left) to result\n left := rest(left)\n else\n append first(right) to result\n right := rest(right)\n // \"Either left or right may have elements left; consume them.\"\n // \"(Only one of the following loops will actually be entered.)\"\n while left is not empty do\n append first(left) to result\n left := rest(left)\n while right is not empty do\n append first(right) to result\n right := rest(right)\n return result\nBottom-up implementation using lists.\nPseudocode for bottom-up merge sort algorithm which uses a small fixed size array of references to nodes, where codice_6 is either a reference to a list of size 2\"i\" or \"nil\". \"node\" is a reference or pointer to a node. The codice_7 function would be similar to the one shown in the top-down merge lists example, it merges two already sorted lists, and handles empty lists. In this case, codice_7 would use \"node\" for its input parameters and return value.\n function merge_sort(\"node\" head) is\n // return if empty list\n if head = nil then\n return nil\n var \"node\" array[32]; initially all nil\n var \"node\" result\n var \"node\" next\n var \"int\" i\n result := head\n // merge nodes into array\n while result \u2260 nil do\n next := result.next;\n result.next := nil\n for (i = 0; (i &lt; 32) &amp;&amp; (array[i] \u2260 nil); i += 1) do\n result := merge(array[i], result)\n array[i] := nil\n // do not go past end of array\n if i = 32 then\n i -= 1\n array[i] := result\n result := next\n // merge array into single list\n result := nil\n for (i = 0; i &lt; 32; i += 1) do\n result := merge(array[i], result)\n return result\nTop-down implementation in a declarative style.\nHaskell-like pseudocode, showing how merge sort can be implemented in such a language using constructs and ideas from functional programming.\nmergeSort :: Ord a =&gt; [a] -&gt; [a]\nmergeSort [] = []\nmergeSort [x] = [x]\nmergeSort xs = merge (mergeSort l, mergeSort r)\n where (l, r) = splitAt (length xs `div` 2) xs\nmerge :: Ord a =&gt; ([a], [a]) -&gt; [a]\nmerge ([], xs) = xs\nmerge (xs, []) = xs\nmerge (x:xs, y:ys) | x &lt;= y = x : merge(xs, y:ys)\n | otherwise = y : merge(x:xs, ys)\nAnalysis.\nIn sorting \"n\" objects, merge sort has an average and worst-case performance of O(\"n\"\u00a0log\u00a0\"n\") comparisons. If the running time (number of comparisons) of merge sort for a list of length \"n\" is \"T\"(\"n\"), then the recurrence relation \"T\"(\"n\") = 2\"T\"(\"n\"/2) + \"n\" follows from the definition of the algorithm (apply the algorithm to two lists of half the size of the original list, and add the \"n\" steps taken to merge the resulting two lists). The closed form follows from the master theorem for divide-and-conquer recurrences.\nThe number of comparisons made by merge sort in the worst case is given by the sorting numbers. These numbers are equal to or slightly smaller than (\"n\"\u00a0\u2308lg\u00a0\"n\"\u2309 \u2212 2\u2308lg\u00a0\"n\"\u2309 + 1), which is between (\"n\"\u00a0lg\u00a0\"n\" \u2212 \"n\" + 1) and (\"n\"\u00a0lg\u00a0\"n\" + \"n\" + O(lg\u00a0\"n\")). Merge sort's best case takes about half as many iterations as its worst case.\nFor large \"n\" and a randomly ordered input list, merge sort's expected (average) number of comparisons approaches \"\u03b1\"\u00b7\"n\" fewer than the worst case, where formula_1\nIn the \"worst\" case, merge sort uses approximately 39% fewer comparisons than quicksort does in its \"average\" case, and in terms of moves, merge sort's worst case complexity is O(\"n\"\u00a0log\u00a0\"n\") - the same complexity as quicksort's best case.\nMerge sort is more efficient than quicksort for some types of lists if the data to be sorted can only be efficiently accessed sequentially, and is thus popular in languages such as Lisp, where sequentially accessed data structures are very common. Unlike some (efficient) implementations of quicksort, merge sort is a stable sort.\nMerge sort's most common implementation does not sort in place; therefore, the memory size of the input must be allocated for the sorted output to be stored in (see below for variations that need only \"n\"/2 extra spaces).\nNatural merge sort.\nA natural merge sort is similar to a bottom-up merge sort except that any naturally occurring runs (sorted sequences) in the input are exploited. Both monotonic and bitonic (alternating up/down) runs may be exploited, with lists (or equivalently tapes or files) being convenient data structures (used as FIFO queues or LIFO stacks). In the bottom-up merge sort, the starting point assumes each run is one item long. In practice, random input data will have many short runs that just happen to be sorted. In the typical case, the natural merge sort may not need as many passes because there are fewer runs to merge. In the best case, the input is already sorted (i.e., is one run), so the natural merge sort need only make one pass through the data. In many practical cases, long natural runs are present, and for that reason natural merge sort is exploited as the key component of Timsort. Example:\n Start : 3 4 2 1 7 5 8 9 0 6\n Select runs : (3 4)(2)(1 7)(5 8 9)(0 6)\n Merge : (2 3 4)(1 5 7 8 9)(0 6)\n Merge : (1 2 3 4 5 7 8 9)(0 6)\n Merge : (0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9)\nFormally, the natural merge sort is said to be Runs-optimal, where formula_2 is the number of runs in formula_3, minus one.\nTournament replacement selection sorts are used to gather the initial runs for external sorting algorithms.\nPing-pong merge sort.\nInstead of merging two blocks at a time, a ping-pong merge merges four blocks at a time. The four sorted blocks are merged simultaneously to auxiliary space into two sorted blocks, then the two sorted blocks are merged back to main memory. Doing so omits the copy operation and reduces the total number of moves by half. An early public domain implementation of a four-at-once merge was by WikiSort in 2014, the method was later that year described as an optimization for patience sorting and named a ping-pong merge. Quadsort implemented the method in 2020 and named it a quad merge.\nIn-place merge sort.\nOne drawback of merge sort, when implemented on arrays, is its \"O\"(\"n\") working memory requirement. Several methods to reduce memory or make merge sort fully in-place have been suggested:\nUse with tape drives.\nAn external merge sort is practical to run using disk or tape drives when the data to be sorted is too large to fit into memory. External sorting explains how merge sort is implemented with disk drives. A typical tape drive sort uses four tape drives. All I/O is sequential (except for rewinds at the end of each pass). A minimal implementation can get by with just two record buffers and a few program variables.\nNaming the four tape drives as A, B, C, D, with the original data on A, and using only two record buffers, the algorithm is similar to the bottom-up implementation, using pairs of tape drives instead of arrays in memory. The basic algorithm can be described as follows:\nInstead of starting with very short runs, usually a hybrid algorithm is used, where the initial pass will read many records into memory, do an internal sort to create a long run, and then distribute those long runs onto the output set. The step avoids many early passes. For example, an internal sort of 1024 records will save nine passes. The internal sort is often large because it has such a benefit. In fact, there are techniques that can make the initial runs longer than the available internal memory. One of them, the Knuth's 'snowplow' (based on a binary min-heap), generates runs twice as long (on average) as a size of memory used.\nWith some overhead, the above algorithm can be modified to use three tapes. \"O\"(\"n\" log \"n\") running time can also be achieved using two queues, or a stack and a queue, or three stacks. In the other direction, using \"k\" &gt; two tapes (and \"O\"(\"k\") items in memory), we can reduce the number of tape operations in \"O\"(log \"k\") times by using a k/2-way merge.\nA more sophisticated merge sort that optimizes tape (and disk) drive usage is the polyphase merge sort.\nOptimizing merge sort.\nOn modern computers, locality of reference can be of paramount importance in software optimization, because multilevel memory hierarchies are used. Cache-aware versions of the merge sort algorithm, whose operations have been specifically chosen to minimize the movement of pages in and out of a machine's memory cache, have been proposed. For example, the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;tiled merge sort algorithm stops partitioning subarrays when subarrays of size S are reached, where S is the number of data items fitting into a CPU's cache. Each of these subarrays is sorted with an in-place sorting algorithm such as insertion sort, to discourage memory swaps, and normal merge sort is then completed in the standard recursive fashion. This algorithm has demonstrated better performance on machines that benefit from cache optimization. \nParallel merge sort.\nMerge sort parallelizes well due to the use of the divide-and-conquer method. Several different parallel variants of the algorithm have been developed over the years. Some parallel merge sort algorithms are strongly related to the sequential top-down merge algorithm while others have a different general structure and use the K-way merge method.\nMerge sort with parallel recursion.\nThe sequential merge sort procedure can be described in two phases, the divide phase and the merge phase. The first consists of many recursive calls that repeatedly perform the same division process until the subsequences are trivially sorted (containing one or no element). An intuitive approach is the parallelization of those recursive calls. Following pseudocode describes the merge sort with parallel recursion using the fork and join keywords:\n // \"Sort elements lo through hi (exclusive) of array A.\"\n algorithm mergesort(A, lo, hi) is\n if lo+1 &lt; hi then // \"Two or more elements.\"\n mid\u00a0:= \u230a(lo + hi) / 2\u230b\n fork mergesort(A, lo, mid)\n mergesort(A, mid, hi)\n join\n merge(A, lo, mid, hi)\nThis algorithm is the trivial modification of the sequential version and does not parallelize well. Therefore, its speedup is not very impressive. It has a span of formula_4, which is only an improvement of formula_5 compared to the sequential version (see Introduction to Algorithms). This is mainly due to the sequential merge method, as it is the bottleneck of the parallel executions.\nMerge sort with parallel merging.\nBetter parallelism can be achieved by using a parallel merge algorithm. Cormen et al. present a binary variant that merges two sorted sub-sequences into one sorted output sequence.\nIn one of the sequences (the longer one if unequal length), the element of the middle index is selected. Its position in the other sequence is determined in such a way that this sequence would remain sorted if this element were inserted at this position. Thus, one knows how many other elements from both sequences are smaller and the position of the selected element in the output sequence can be calculated. For the partial sequences of the smaller and larger elements created in this way, the merge algorithm is again executed in parallel until the base case of the recursion is reached.\nThe following pseudocode shows the modified parallel merge sort method using the parallel merge algorithm (adopted from Cormen et al.).\n * A: Input array\n * B: Output array\n * lo: lower bound\n * hi: upper bound\n * off: offset\n algorithm parallelMergesort(A, lo, hi, B, off) is\n len := hi - lo + 1\n if len == 1 then\n B[off] := A[lo]\n else let T[1..len] be a new array\n mid := \u230a(lo + hi) / 2\u230b \n mid' := mid - lo + 1\n fork parallelMergesort(A, lo, mid, T, 1)\n parallelMergesort(A, mid + 1, hi, T, mid' + 1) \n join \n parallelMerge(T, 1, mid', mid' + 1, len, B, off)\nIn order to analyze a recurrence relation for the worst case span, the recursive calls of parallelMergesort have to be incorporated only once due to their parallel execution, obtaining\nformula_6\nFor detailed information about the complexity of the parallel merge procedure, see Merge algorithm.\nThe solution of this recurrence is given by\nformula_7\nThis parallel merge algorithm reaches a parallelism of formula_8, which is much higher than the parallelism of the previous algorithm. Such a sort can perform well in practice when combined with a fast stable sequential sort, such as insertion sort, and a fast sequential merge as a base case for merging small arrays.\nParallel multiway merge sort.\nIt seems arbitrary to restrict the merge sort algorithms to a binary merge method, since there are usually p &gt; 2 processors available. A better approach may be to use a K-way merge method, a generalization of binary merge, in which formula_9 sorted sequences are merged. This merge variant is well suited to describe a sorting algorithm on a PRAM.\nBasic idea.\nGiven an unsorted sequence of formula_10 elements, the goal is to sort the sequence with formula_11 available processors. These elements are distributed equally among all processors and sorted locally using a sequential Sorting algorithm. Hence, the sequence consists of sorted sequences formula_12 of length formula_13. For simplification let formula_10 be a multiple of formula_11, so that formula_16 for formula_17.\nThese sequences will be used to perform a multisequence selection/splitter selection. For formula_18, the algorithm determines splitter elements formula_19 with global rank formula_20. Then the corresponding positions of formula_21 in each sequence formula_22 are determined with binary search and thus the formula_22 are further partitioned into formula_11 subsequences formula_25 with formula_26.\nFurthermore, the elements of formula_27 are assigned to processor formula_28, means all elements between rank formula_29 and rank formula_30, which are distributed over all formula_22. Thus, each processor receives a sequence of sorted sequences. The fact that the rank formula_9 of the splitter elements formula_33 was chosen globally, provides two important properties: On the one hand, formula_9 was chosen so that each processor can still operate on formula_35 elements after assignment. The algorithm is perfectly load-balanced. On the other hand, all elements on processor formula_28 are less than or equal to all elements on processor formula_37. Hence, each processor performs the \"p\"-way merge locally and thus obtains a sorted sequence from its sub-sequences. Because of the second property, no further \"p\"-way-merge has to be performed, the results only have to be put together in the order of the processor number.\nMulti-sequence selection.\nIn its simplest form, given formula_11 sorted sequences formula_12 distributed evenly on formula_11 processors and a rank formula_9, the task is to find an element formula_42 with a global rank formula_9 in the union of the sequences. Hence, this can be used to divide each formula_22 in two parts at a splitter index formula_45, where the lower part contains only elements which are smaller than formula_42, while the elements bigger than formula_42 are located in the upper part.\nThe presented sequential algorithm returns the indices of the splits in each sequence, e.g. the indices formula_45 in sequences formula_22 such that formula_50 has a global rank less than formula_9 and formula_52.\n algorithm msSelect(S : Array of sorted Sequences [S_1..,S_p], k : int) is\n for i = 1 to p do \n (l_i, r_i) = (0, |S_i|-1)\n while there exists i: l_i &lt; r_i do\n // pick Pivot Element in S_j[l_j], .., S_j[r_j], chose random j uniformly\n v := pickPivot(S, l, r)\n for i = 1 to p do \n m_i = binarySearch(v, S_i[l_i, r_i]) // sequentially\n if m_1 + ... + m_p &gt;= k then // m_1+ ... + m_p is the global rank of v\n r := m // vector assignment\n else\n l := m \n return l\nFor the complexity analysis the PRAM model is chosen. If the data is evenly distributed over all formula_11, the p-fold execution of the \"binarySearch\" method has a running time of formula_54. The expected recursion depth is formula_55 as in the ordinary Quickselect. Thus the overall expected running time is formula_56.\nApplied on the parallel multiway merge sort, this algorithm has to be invoked in parallel such that all splitter elements of rank formula_57 for formula_58 are found simultaneously. These splitter elements can then be used to partition each sequence in formula_11 parts, with the same total running time of formula_60.\nPseudocode.\nBelow, the complete pseudocode of the parallel multiway merge sort algorithm is given. We assume that there is a barrier synchronization before and after the multisequence selection such that every processor can determine the splitting elements and the sequence partition properly.\n * d: Unsorted Array of Elements\n * n: Number of Elements\n * p: Number of Processors\n * return Sorted Array\n algorithm parallelMultiwayMergesort(d : Array, n : int, p : int) is\n o := new Array[0, n] // the output array\n for i = 1 to p do in parallel // each processor in parallel\n S_i := d[(i-1) * n/p, i * n/p] // Sequence of length n/p\n sort(S_i) // sort locally\n synch\n v_i := msSelect([S_1...,S_p], i * n/p) // element with global rank i * n/p\n synch\n (S_i,1, ..., S_i,p) := sequence_partitioning(si, v_1, ..., v_p) // split s_i into subsequences\n o[(i-1) * n/p, i * n/p] := kWayMerge(s_1,i, ..., s_p,i) // merge and assign to output array\n return o\nAnalysis.\nFirstly, each processor sorts the assigned formula_61 elements locally using a sorting algorithm with complexity formula_62. After that, the splitter elements have to be calculated in time formula_63. Finally, each group of formula_11 splits have to be merged in parallel by each processor with a running time of formula_65 using a sequential p-way merge algorithm. Thus, the overall running time is given by\nformula_66.\nPractical adaption and application.\nThe multiway merge sort algorithm is very scalable through its high parallelization capability, which allows the use of many processors. This makes the algorithm a viable candidate for sorting large amounts of data, such as those processed in computer clusters. Also, since in such systems memory is usually not a limiting resource, the disadvantage of space complexity of merge sort is negligible. However, other factors become important in such systems, which are not taken into account when modelling on a PRAM. Here, the following aspects need to be considered: Memory hierarchy, when the data does not fit into the processors cache, or the communication overhead of exchanging data between processors, which could become a bottleneck when the data can no longer be accessed via the shared memory.\nSanders et al. have presented in their paper a bulk synchronous parallel algorithm for multilevel multiway mergesort, which divides formula_11 processors into formula_68 groups of size formula_69. All processors sort locally first. Unlike single level multiway mergesort, these sequences are then partitioned into formula_68 parts and assigned to the appropriate processor groups. These steps are repeated recursively in those groups. This reduces communication and especially avoids problems with many small messages. The hierarchical structure of the underlying real network can be used to define the processor groups (e.g. racks, clusters...).\nFurther variants.\nMerge sort was one of the first sorting algorithms where optimal speed up was achieved, with Richard Cole using a clever subsampling algorithm to ensure \"O\"(1) merge. Other sophisticated parallel sorting algorithms can achieve the same or better time bounds with a lower constant. For example, in 1991 David Powers described a parallelized quicksort (and a related radix sort) that can operate in \"O\"(log \"n\") time on a CRCW parallel random-access machine (PRAM) with \"n\" processors by performing partitioning implicitly. Powers further shows that a pipelined version of Batcher's Bitonic Mergesort at \"O\"((log \"n\")2) time on a butterfly sorting network is in practice actually faster than his \"O\"(log \"n\") sorts on a PRAM, and he provides detailed discussion of the hidden overheads in comparison, radix and parallel sorting.\nComparison with other sort algorithms.\nAlthough heapsort has the same time bounds as merge sort, it requires only \u0398(1) auxiliary space instead of merge sort's \u0398(\"n\"). On typical modern architectures, efficient quicksort implementations generally outperform merge sort for sorting RAM-based arrays. Quicksorts are preferred when the data size to be sorted is lesser, since the space complexity for quicksort is O(log \"n\"), it helps in utilizing cache locality better than merge sort (with space complexity O(n)). On the other hand, merge sort is a stable sort and is more efficient at handling slow-to-access sequential media. Merge sort is often the best choice for sorting a linked list: in this situation it is relatively easy to implement a merge sort in such a way that it requires only \u0398(1) extra space, and the slow random-access performance of a linked list makes some other algorithms (such as quicksort) perform poorly, and others (such as heapsort) completely impossible.\nAs of Perl 5.8, merge sort is its default sorting algorithm (it was quicksort in previous versions of Perl). In Java, the https:// methods use merge sort or a tuned quicksort depending on the datatypes and for implementation efficiency switch to insertion sort when fewer than seven array elements are being sorted. The Linux kernel uses merge sort for its linked lists.\nTimsort, a tuned hybrid of merge sort and insertion sort is used in variety of software platforms and languages including the Java and Android platforms and is used by Python since version 2.3; since version 3.11, Timsort's merge policy was updated to Powersort.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20040", "revid": "4145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20040", "title": "Maule Air", "text": "American aircraft manufacturer\nMaule Air, Inc. is a manufacturer of light, single-engined, short take-off and landing (STOL) aircraft, based in Moultrie, Georgia, U.S. The company delivered 2,500 aircraft in its first 50 years of business.\nHistory.\nBelford D. Maule (1911\u20131995) designed his first aircraft, the M-1 starting at age 19. He founded the company Mechanical Products Co. in Napoleon, Michigan to market his own starter design. In 1941 the B.D. Maule Co. was founded, and Maule produced tailwheels and fabric testers. In 1953 he began design work, and started aircraft production with the \"Bee-Dee\" M-4 in 1957.\nThe company is a family-owned enterprise. Its owner, June Maule, widow of B. D. Maule, remained directly involved with factory production until her death in 2009 at the age of 92.\nProducts.\nThe aircraft produced by Maule Air are tube-and-fabric designs and are popular with bush pilots thanks to their very low stall speed, tundra tires and oleo strut landing gear. Most Maules are built with tailwheel or amphibious configurations, although the newer MXT models have tricycle gear.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20041", "revid": "50259812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20041", "title": "Shoma Morita", "text": "Japanese psychologist\n, also read as Sh\u014dma Morita, was the founder of Morita therapy, a branch of clinical psychology strongly influenced by Zen Buddhism. In his capacity as the head of psychiatry for a large Tokyo hospital, Morita began developing his methods while working with sufferers of \"shinkeishitsu\", or anxiety disorders with a hypochondriac base.\nTheory and methods.\nAccording to Morita, how a person feels is important as a and as an indicator for the present moment, but is uncontrollable: we don't create feelings, feelings happen to us. Since feelings do not cause our behavior, we can coexist with unpleasant feelings while still taking constructive action.\nThe essence of Morita's method maybe summarized in three rules: Accept all your feelings, know your purpose(s), and do what needs to be done. When once asked what shy people should do, Morita replied, \"Sweat.\"\nInfluence.\nDavid K. Reynolds, an American author, synthesized parts of Morita therapy along with the practice of Naikan into Constructive Living, an educational method intended for English-speaking Westerners. Constructive Living has since become extremely popular in Japan, and Reynolds is the only non-Japanese citizen to receive the Kora Prize and the Morita Prize by the Morita Therapy Association of Japan. \nFritz Perls spent a week in a Morita Hospital in Japan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20042", "revid": "30162703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20042", "title": "Montezuma", "text": " \nMontezuma or Moctezuma may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20048", "revid": "11612968", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20048", "title": "Mooney", "text": "Mooney is a family name which is probably predominantly derived from the Irish \u00d3 Maonaigh, pronounced Om-weeneey. It can also be spelled Moony, Moonie, Mainey, Meaney and Meeney depending on the dialectic pronunciation that was anglicised.\nOrigins.\nThe origin of the Moony or Mooney families is lost in antiquity. The name is derived from \"maoin\", a Gaelic word meaning \"wealth\" or \"treasure of treasure\", hence when O'Maonaigh was anglicised to Mooney it meant \"the descendant of the wealthy one.\"\nAccording to Irish lore, the Mooney family comes from one of the largest and most noble Irish lines. They are said to be descendants of the ancient Irish King Heremon, who, along with his brother Herber, conquered Ireland. Heremon slew his brother shortly after their invasion, took the throne for himself, and fathered a line of kings of Ireland that include Malachi II, and King Niall of the Nine Hostages.\nBaptismal records, parish records, ancient land grants, the Annals of the Four Masters, and books by O'Hart, McLysaght, and O'Brien were all used in researching the history of the Mooney family name. These varied and often ancient records indicate that distant septs of the name arose in several places throughout Ireland. The most known and most numerous sept came from the county of Offaly. The members of this sept were from Chieftain Monach, son of Ailill Mor, Lord of Ulster, who was descended from the Kings of Connacht. These family members gave their name to town lands called Ballymooney both in that county and in the neighbouring county of Leix.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname . "}
{"id": "20049", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20049", "title": "Moctezuma", "text": ""}
{"id": "20050", "revid": "31952441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20050", "title": "Minnesota Twins", "text": "Major League Baseball franchise in Minneapolis, Minnesota\nThe Minnesota Twins are an American professional baseball team based in Minneapolis. The Twins compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the American League (AL) Central Division. The team is named after the Twin Cities moniker for the two adjacent cities of Minneapolis and Saint Paul.\nThe franchise was founded in Kansas City in 1894 as the minor league Kansas City Blues. The team relocated to Washington, D.C. in 1901 to become the major league Washington Senators. The franchise moved to Minnesota and was renamed the Minnesota Twins for the start of the 1961 season. The Twins played in Metropolitan Stadium from 1961 to 1981 and in the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome from 1982 to 2009. The team has played at Target Field since 2010.\nThe franchise won the World Series in 1924 as the Senators, and in 1987 and 1991 as the Twins. From 1901 to 2025, the Senators/Twins franchise's overall regular-season win\u2013loss\u2013tie record is 9,329\u201310,047\u2013109 (); as the Twins (through 2025), it is 5,106\u20135,183\u20138 ().\nHistory.\nWashington Nationals/Senators: 1901\u20131960.\nThe team was founded in Washington, D.C., in as one of the eight original teams of the American League. It was named the Washington Senators from 1901 to 1904, the Washington Nationals from 1905 to 1955, and the Senators again from 1956 to 1960. But the team was commonly referred to as the Senators throughout its history (and unofficially as the \"Grifs\" during Clark Griffith's tenure as manager from 1912 to 1920). The name \"Nationals\" appeared on uniforms for only two seasons, and then was replaced with the \"W\" logo. The media often shortened the nickname to \"Nats\" \u2014 even for the 1961 expansion team. The names \"Nationals\" and \"Nats\" were revived in 2005, when the Montreal Expos moved to Washington to become the Nationals.\nThe Washington Senators spent the first decade of their existence finishing near the bottom of the American League standings. The team's long bouts of mediocrity were immortalized in the 1955 Broadway musical \"Damn Yankees\". Their fortunes began to improve with the arrival of 19-year-old pitcher, Walter Johnson, in 1907. Johnson blossomed in 1911 with 25 victories, although the team still finished the season in seventh place. In 1912, the Senators improved dramatically, as their pitching staff led the league in team earned run average and in strikeouts. Johnson won 33 games while teammate Bob Groom added another 24 wins to help the Senators finish the season in second place. Griffith joined the team in 1912 and became the team's owner in 1920. (The franchise remained under Griffith family ownership until 1984.) The Senators continued to perform respectably in 1913 with Johnson posting a career-high 35 victories, as the team once again finished in second place. The Senators then fell into another decline for the next decade.\nThe team had a period of prolonged success in the 1920s and 1930s, led by Walter Johnson, as well as fellow Hall-of-Famers Bucky Harris, Goose Goslin, Sam Rice, Heinie Manush, and Joe Cronin. In particular, a rejuvenated Johnson rebounded in 1924 to win 23 games with the help of his catcher, Muddy Ruel, as the Senators won the American League pennant for the first time in its history. The Senators then faced John McGraw's heavily favored New York Giants in the 1924 World Series. The two teams traded wins back and forth with three games of the first six being decided by one run. In the deciding 7th game, the Senators were trailing the Giants 3\u20131 in the 8th inning when Bucky Harris hit a routine ground ball to third that hit a pebble and took a bad hop over Giants third baseman Freddie Lindstrom. Two runners scored on the play, tying the score at three. An aging Walter Johnson came in to pitch the ninth inning and held the Giants scoreless into extra innings. In the bottom of the twelfth inning, Ruel hit a high, foul ball directly over home plate. The Giants' catcher, Hank Gowdy, dropped his protective mask to field the ball but, failing to toss the mask aside, stumbled over it and dropped the ball, thus giving Ruel another chance to bat. On the next pitch, Ruel hit a double; he proceeded to score the winning run when Earl McNeely hit a ground ball that took another bad hop over Lindstrom's head. This would mark the only World Series triumph for the franchise during their 60-year tenure in Washington.\nThe following season they repeated as American League champions but ultimately lost the 1925 World Series to the Pittsburgh Pirates. After Walter Johnson retired in 1927, he was hired as manager of the Senators. After enduring a few losing seasons, the team returned to contention in 1930. In 1933, Senators owner Griffith returned to the formula that worked for him nine years earlier: 26-year-old shortstop Joe Cronin became player-manager. The Senators posted a 99\u201353 record and cruised to the pennant seven games ahead of the New York Yankees, but in the 1933 World Series the Giants exacted their revenge, winning in five games. Following the loss, the Senators sank all the way to seventh place in 1934 and attendance began to fall. Despite the return of Harris as manager from 1935 to 1942 and again from 1950 to 1954, Washington was mostly a losing ball club for the next 25 years contending for the pennant only during World War II. Washington came to be known as \"first in war, first in peace, and last in the American League\"; their hard luck drove the plot of the musical and film \"Damn Yankees\". Cecil Travis, Buddy Myer (1935 A.L. batting champion), Roy Sievers, Mickey Vernon (batting champion in 1946 and 1953), and Eddie Yost were notable Senators players whose careers were spent in obscurity on losing teams. In 1954, the Senators signed future Hall of Fame member Harmon Killebrew. By 1959, he was the Senators' regular third baseman and led the league with 42 home runs, earning him a starting spot on the American League All-Star team.\nAfter Griffith's death in 1955, his nephew and adopted son Calvin took over the team presidency. Calvin sold Griffith Stadium to the city of Washington and leased it back. This led to speculation that the team was planning to move, as the Boston Braves, St. Louis Browns, and Philadelphia Athletics had done in recent years. By 1957, after an early flirtation with San Francisco (where the New York Giants would move after the season), Griffith began courting Minneapolis\u2013St. Paul, a prolonged process that resulted in his rejecting the Twin Cities' first offer before agreeing to move. Home attendance in Washington, D.C., steadily increased from 425,238 in 1955 to 475,288 in 1958, and then jumped to 615,372 in 1959. However, part of the Minnesota deal guaranteed a million fans a year for three years, plus the potential to double TV and radio money.\nThe American League opposed the move at first, but in 1960 a deal was reached. Major League Baseball agreed to let Griffith move his team to the Minneapolis-St. Paul region and allowed a new Senators team to be formed in Washington for the 1961 season.\nAsked nearly two decades later why he moved the team, Griffith replied, \"I'll tell you why we came to Minnesota, it was when I found out you only had 15,000 blacks here. Black people don't go to ball games, but they'll fill up a rassling ring and put up such a chant it'll scare you to death. It's unbelievable. We came here because you've got good, hard-working, white people here.\"\nMinnesota Twins: 1961\u2013present.\nRenamed the Minnesota Twins, the team set up shop in Metropolitan Stadium in Bloomington, a suburb of Minneapolis. Success came quickly to the team in Minnesota. Sluggers Harmon Killebrew and Bob Allison, who had been stars in Washington, were joined by Tony Oliva and Zoilo Versalles, and later second baseman Rod Carew and pitchers Jim Kaat and Jim Perry, winning the American League pennant in 1965. A second wave of success came in the late 1980s and early 1990s under manager Tom Kelly, led by Kent Hrbek, Bert Blyleven, Frank Viola, and Kirby Puckett, winning the franchise's second and third World Series (and first and second in Minnesota).\nThe name \"Twins\" was derived from \"Twin Cities\", a popular nickname for the two cities of Minneapolis and Saint Paul and sometimes used in reference to the entire Minneapolis\u2013Saint Paul metropolitan region. The NBA's Minneapolis Lakers had moved to Los Angeles in 1960 due to poor attendance, blamed in part on a perceived reluctance of fans in Saint Paul to support the team. Griffith was determined not to alienate fans in either city by naming the team after one city or the other. He proposed to name the team the \"Twin Cities Twins\", but MLB objected and Griffith therefore named the team the Minnesota Twins. The team was allowed to keep its original \"TC\" (for Twin Cities) insignia for its caps. The team's logo shows two men, one in a Minneapolis Millers uniform and one in a St. Paul Saints uniform, shaking hands across the Mississippi River within an outline of the state of Minnesota. The \"TC\" remained on the Twins' caps until 1987, when they adopted new uniforms. By this time, the team felt it was established enough to put an \"M\" on its cap without having Saint Paul fans think it stood for Minneapolis. The \"TC\" logo was moved to a sleeve on the jerseys, occasionally appeared as an alternate cap design, and then was reinstated as the main cap logo in 2010. Both the \"TC\" and \"Minnie &amp; Paul\" logos remain the team's primary insignia.\n1960s.\nThe Twins were eagerly greeted in Minnesota when they arrived in 1961. They brought a nucleus of talented players: Harmon Killebrew, Bob Allison, Camilo Pascual, Zoilo Versalles, Jim Kaat, Earl Battey, and Lenny Green. Tony Oliva, who would go on to win American League batting championships in 1964, 1965 and 1971, made his major league debut in 1962. That year, the Twins won 91 games, the most by the franchise since 1933. Behind Mudcat Grant's 21 victories, Versalles' A.L. MVP season and Oliva's batting title, the Twins won 102 games and the American League Pennant in 1965, but they were defeated in the World Series by the Los Angeles Dodgers in seven games (behind the Series MVP, Sandy Koufax, who compiled a 2\u20131 record, including winning the seventh game).\nIn 1962, the Minnesota State Commission on Discrimination filed a complaint against the Twins, which was the only MLB team still segregating players during spring training and when traveling in the southern United States.\nHeading into the final weekend of the 1967 season, when Rod Carew was named the A.L. Rookie of the Year, the Twins, Boston Red Sox, Chicago White Sox, and Detroit Tigers all had a shot at clinching the American League championship. The Twins and the Red Sox started the weekend tied for 1st place and played against each other in Boston for the final two games of the season. The Red Sox won both games, seizing their first pennant since 1946 with a 92\u201370 record. The Twins and Tigers both finished one game back, with 91\u201371 records, while the White Sox finished three games back, at 89\u201373. In 1969, the new manager of the Twins, Billy Martin, pushed aggressive base running all-around, with Carew stealing home seven times in the season (1 short of Ty Cobb's Major League Record) in addition to winning the first of seven A.L. batting championships. With Killebrew slugging 49 homers and winning the AL MVP Award, these 1969 Twins won the first American League Western Division Championship, but they lost three straight games to the Baltimore Orioles, winners of 109 games, in the first American League Championship Series. The Orioles would go on to be upset by the New York Mets in the World Series. Martin was fired after the season, in part due to an August 1969 fight in Detroit with 20-game winner Dave Boswell and outfielder Bob Allison, in an alley outside the Lindell A.C. bar. Bill Rigney led the Twins to a repeat division title in 1970, behind the star pitching of Jim Perry (24\u201312), the A.L. Cy Young Award winner, while the Orioles again won the Eastern Division Championship behind the star pitching of Jim Palmer. Once again, the Orioles won the A.L. Championship Series in a three-game sweep, and this time they would win the World Series.\n1970s.\nAfter winning the division again in 1970, the team entered an eight-year dry spell, finishing around the .500 mark. Killebrew departed after 1974. Owner Calvin Griffith faced financial difficulty with the start of free agency, costing the Twins the services of Lyman Bostock and Larry Hisle, who left as free agents after the 1977 season, and Carew, who was traded after the 1978 season. In 1975, Carew won his fourth consecutive AL batting title, having already joined Ty Cobb as the only players to lead the major leagues in batting average for three consecutive seasons. In 1977, Carew batted .388, which was the highest in baseball since Boston's Ted Williams hit .406 in 1941; he won the 1977 AL MVP Award. He won another batting title in 1978, hitting .333.\n1980s\u201390s.\nIn 1982, the Twins moved into the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome in downtown Minneapolis, which they shared with the Minnesota Vikings. After a 16\u201354 start, the Twins were on the verge on becoming the worst team in MLB history. They turned the season around somewhat, but still lost 102 games, finishing with what is currently the second-worst record in Twins history (beaten only by the 2016 team, which lost 103 games), despite the .301 average, 23 homers and 92 RBI from rookie Kent Hrbek. It was during the 1982 season that the Twins' nickname of \"Twinkies\" truly solidified, a nickname that would haunt them through their World Series years and sneak back into the conversation during the 1990s and 2010s slumps. In 1984, Griffith sold the Twins to multi-billionaire banker/financier Carl Pohlad. Pohlad beat a larger offer by New York businessman Donald Trump by promising to keep the club in Minnesota. The Metrodome hosted the 1985 Major League Baseball All-Star Game. After several losing seasons, the 1987 team, led by Hrbek, Gary Gaetti, Frank Viola (A.L. Cy Young winner in 1988), Bert Blyleven, Jeff Reardon, Tom Brunansky, Dan Gladden, and rising star Kirby Puckett, returned to the World Series after defeating the favored Detroit Tigers in the ALCS, 4 games to 1. Tom Kelly managed the Twins to World Series victories over the St. Louis Cardinals in 1987 and the Atlanta Braves in 1991. The 1988 Twins were the first team in American League history to draw more than 3\u00a0million fans. On July 17, 1990, the Twins became the only team in major league history to pull off two triple plays in the same game. Twins' pitcher and Minnesota native Jack Morris was the star of the series in 1991, going 2\u20130 in his three starts with a 1.17 ERA. 1991 also marked the first time that any team that finished in last place in their division would advance to the World Series the following season; both the Twins and the Braves did this in 1991. Contributors to the 1991 Twins' improvement from 74 wins to 95 included Chuck Knoblauch, the A.L. Rookie of the Year; Scott Erickson, 20-game winner; new closer Rick Aguilera and new designated hitter Chili Davis.\nThe World Series in 1991 is regarded by many as one of the classics of all time. In this Series, four games were won during the teams' final at-bat, and three of these were in extra innings. The Atlanta Braves won all three of their games in Atlanta, and the Twins won all four of their games in Minnesota. Up until then, it was the second time in MLB history when a team won all its home games on their way to winning the World Series. The Twins also did it in 1987. The sixth game was a legendary one for Puckett, who tripled in a run, made a sensational leaping catch against the wall, and finally in the 11th inning hit the game-winning home run. Before Puckett's home run, the Braves brought in Charlie Leibrandt to face him. Chili Davis was on-deck. Puckett told Davis he was going to bunt, and Davis was going to win the game. Davis told him he was going to sit on Leibrandt's change-up and send everyone home. The seventh game was tied 0\u20130 after the regulation nine innings, and marked only the second time that the seventh game of the World Series had ever gone into extra innings. The Twins won on a walk-off RBI single by Gene Larkin in the bottom of the 10th inning, after Morris had pitched ten shutout innings against the Braves. The seventh game of the 1991 World Series is widely regarded as one of the greatest games in the history of professional baseball.\nAfter a winning season in 1992 but falling short of Oakland in the division, the Twins fell into a years-long stretch of mediocrity, posting a losing record each season for the next eight: 71\u201391 in 1993, 50\u201363 in 1994, 56\u201388 in 1995, 78\u201384 in 1996, 68\u201394 in 1997, 70\u201392 in 1998, 63\u201397 in 1999 and 69\u201393 in 2000. From 1994 to 1997, a long sequence of retirements and injuries hurt the team badly, and Tom Kelly spent the remainder of his managerial career attempting to rebuild the Twins. In 1997, owner Carl Pohlad almost sold the Twins to North Carolina businessman Don Beaver, who would have moved the team to the Piedmont Triad area.\nPuckett was forced to retire at age 35 due to loss of vision in one eye from a central retinal vein occlusion. The 1989 A.L. batting champion, he retired as the Twins' all-time leader in career hits, runs, doubles, and total bases. At the time of his retirement, his .318 career batting average was the highest by any right-handed American League batter since Joe DiMaggio. Puckett was the fourth baseball player during the 20th century to record 1,000 hits in his first five full calendar years in Major League Baseball, and was the second to record 2,000 hits during his first 10 full calendar years. He was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 2001, his first year of eligibility.\n2000s.\nThe Twins dominated the Central Division in the first decade of the new century, winning the division in six of those ten years ('02, '03, '04, '06, '09 and '10), and nearly winning it in '08 as well. From 2001 to 2006, the Twins compiled the longest streak of consecutive winning seasons since moving to Minnesota.\nThreatened with closure by league contraction, the 2002 team battled back to reach the American League Championship Series before being eliminated 4\u20131 by that year's World Series champion Anaheim Angels.\nIn 2006, the Twins won the division on the last day of the regular season (the only day all season they held sole possession of first place) but lost to the Oakland Athletics in the ALDS. Ozzie Guill\u00e9n coined a nickname for this squad, calling the Twins \"little piranhas\". The Twins players embraced the label, and in response, the Twins Front office started a \"Piranha Night\", with piranha finger puppets given out to the first 10,000 fans. Scoreboard operators sometimes played an animated sequence of piranhas munching under that caption in situations where the Twins were scoring runs playing \"small ball\", and the stadium vendors sold T-shirts and hats advertising \"The Little Piranhas\". The Twins also had the AL MVP in Justin Morneau, the AL batting champion in Joe Mauer, and the AL Cy Young Award winner in Johan Santana.\nIn 2008, the Twins finished the regular season tied with the White Sox on top of the AL Central, forcing a one-game playoff in Chicago to determine the division champion. The Twins lost that game and missed the playoffs. The game location was determined by rule of a coin flip that was conducted in mid-September. This rule was changed for the start of the 2009 season, making the site for any tiebreaker game to be determined by the winner of the regular season head-to-head record between the teams involved.\nAfter a year where the Twins played .500 baseball for most of the season, the team won 17 of their last 21 games to tie the Detroit Tigers for the lead in the Central Division. The Twins were able to use the play-in game rule to their advantage when they won the AL Central at the end of the regular season by way of a 6\u20135 tiebreaker game that concluded with a 12th-inning walk-off hit by Alexi Casilla to right field, that scored Carlos G\u00f3mez. However, they failed to advance to the American League Championship Series as they lost the American League Divisional Series in three straight games to the eventual World Series champion New York Yankees. That year, Joe Mauer became only the second catcher in 33 years to win the AL MVP award. Iv\u00e1n Rodr\u00edguez won for the Texas Rangers in 1999, previous to that, the last catcher to win an AL MVP was the New York Yankees Thurman Munson in 1976.\n2010 marked Minnesota's inaugural season played at Target Field, where the Twins finished the regular season with a record of 94\u201368, clinching the AL Central Division title for the 6th time in 9 years under manager Ron Gardenhire. New regular players included rookie Danny Valencia at third base, designated hitter Jim Thome, closer Matt Capps, infielder J. J. Hardy, and infielder Orlando Hudson. In relief pitching roles were late additions Brian Fuentes and Randy Flores. On July 7, the team suffered a major blow when Justin Morneau sustained a concussion, which kept him out of the lineup for the rest of the season. In the divisional series, the Twins lost to the Yankees in a three-game sweep for the second consecutive year. Following the season, Ron Gardenhire received AL Manager of the Year honors after finishing as a runner up in several prior years.\n2017\u2013present.\nIn 2017, the Twins went 85\u201377, finishing 2nd In the AL Central. Following Brian Dozier's 34 home runs, Miguel San\u00f3, Byron Buxton, and Eddie Rosario all had breakout years, while Joe Mauer hit .305. They ended up making the playoffs, which made them the first ever team to lose 100 games the previous year and make the playoffs the next season. They lost to the Yankees in the wild card round.\nThe 2018 season did not go as well. The Twins went 78\u201384, and did not return to the post-season. San\u00f3 and Buxton were injured most of the year and eventually both sent down to the minors, while long-time Twin Brian Dozier was traded at the deadline. One bright spot came at the end of the season, when hometown hero Joe Mauer returned to catcher (his original position) for his final game, ending his career with a signature double and standing ovation. Another highlight was the team's two-game series against the Cleveland Indians in San Juan, Puerto Rico. After the season, manager Paul Molitor was fired. Free agent signing Logan Morrison and long-time veteran Ervin Santana declared free agency.\nIn 2019, the Twins clinched the AL Central Division for the first time since 2010, finishing the season with the second-most wins in franchise history with 101, one short of the 1965 season. The team combined for a total of 307 home runs, the most in MLB history for a single season. The team's slugging prowess has earned them the nickname the \"Bomba Squad\". In the 2019 ALDS, the Twins opponents were the New York Yankees, who finished one home run behind at 306 and the second team to break the 300 home run mark. The Twins were swept again, and extend their postseason losing streak to 16, dating back to the 2004 ALDS. On September 17, 2019, Miguel San\u00f3 hit a 482-foot home run to make the Twins the first team in major league history to have five players with at least 30 home runs in a season.\nIn 2023 the Minnesota Twins struggled through the first half, falling under .500 just before the All-Star break before beginning a late season surge that saw them take control of the AL Central. They finished as the third seed in the AL for the 2023 MLB Playoffs and faced the Toronto Blue Jays in the AL Wild Card round. Behind dominant pitching they won both of the first 2 games in the 3 game series, winning their first playoff game since 2004 (breaking an 0\u201318 postseason streak, the longest in North American sports history) and winning their first playoff series since the 2002 ALDS against the Oakland Athletics.\nThreats to move or disband the team.\nThe quirks of the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome, including the turf floor and the white roof, gave the Twins a home-field advantage that helped them win the World Series in 1987 and 1991, at least in the opinion of their opponents. The Twins went 12\u20131 in postseason home games during those two seasons, becoming the first and second teams to sweep all four home games in a World Series. (The feat was repeated by the Arizona Diamondbacks in 2001.) Nevertheless, the Twins argued that the Metrodome was obsolete. Furthermore, they said sharing a stadium with the NFL's Minnesota Vikings, as they had been doing since their 1961 move to Minnesota, limited the team's revenue and made it difficult to sustain a top-notch, competitive team. The team was rumored to contemplate moving to New Jersey, Las Vegas, Portland, Oregon, the Greensboro/Winston-Salem, North Carolina area, and elsewhere in search of a more financially competitive market. In 2002, the team was nearly disbanded when Major League Baseball selected the Twins and the Montreal Expos (now the Washington Nationals franchise) for elimination due to their financial weakness. The impetus for league contraction diminished after a court decision forced the Twins to play out their lease on the Metrodome. However, Twins owner Carl Pohlad continued his efforts to move, pursuing litigation against the Metropolitan Stadium Commission and obtaining a state court ruling that his team was not obligated to play in the Metrodome after the 2006 season. This cleared the way for the Twins to move or disband before the 2007 season if a new deal was not reached.\nTarget Field.\nIn response to the threatened loss of the Twins, the Minnesota private and public sector negotiated and approved a financing package for a replacement stadium\u2014 a baseball-only outdoor, natural turf ballpark in the Warehouse District of downtown Minneapolis\u2014 owned by a new entity known as the Minnesota Ballpark Authority. Target Field was constructed at a cost of $544.4\u00a0million (including site acquisition and infrastructure), utilizing the proceeds of a $392\u00a0million public bond offering based on a 0.15% sales tax in Hennepin County and private financing of $185\u00a0million provided by the Pohlad family. As part of the deal, the Twins also signed a 30-year lease of the new stadium, effectively guaranteeing the continuation of the team in Minnesota for a long time to come. Construction of the new field began in 2007, and was completed in December 2009, in time for the 2010 season. Commissioner Bud Selig, who earlier had threatened to disband the team, observed that without the new stadium the Twins could not have committed to sign their star player, catcher Joe Mauer, to an 8-year, $184\u00a0million contract extension. The first regular-season game in Target Field was played against the Boston Red Sox on April 12, 2010, with Mauer driving in two runs and going 3-for-5 to help the Twins defeat the Red Sox, 5\u20132.\nOn May 18, 2011, Target Field was named \"The Best Place To Shop\" by Street and Smith's \"SportsBusiness Journal\" at the magazine's 2011 Sports Business Awards Ceremony in New York City. It was also named \"The Best Sports Stadium in North America\" by \"ESPN The Magazine\" in a ranking that included over 120 different stadiums, ballparks and arenas from around North America. The stadium hosted the 85th Major League Baseball All-Star Game and the Home Run Derby in 2014. In mid 2020, following protests over the murder of George Floyd, a statue of former owner Calvin Griffith was removed from Target Plaza outside of the stadium due to his history of racist comments.\nIn August 2025, the Pohlad family\u2014owners of the franchise since 1984\u2014announced they would retain majority control of the Twins, opting not to sell the team. Instead, they plan to bring in two new limited partnership groups to help strengthen the organization\u2019s financial base, pending approval from Major League Baseball.\nUniforms.\nCurrent.\nStarting in 2023, the Twins made a drastic overhaul to their uniforms. The white home uniform features the updated \"Twins\" script (with the underline below \"win\") in red with navy numbers. On the back, the player names are in navy and numbers are in red. On the left sleeve, the Minnesota state map in navy was added with a red star to represent the Twin Cities of Minneapolis\u2013St. Paul. The home cap is all-navy with the updated \"TC\" insignia. The home helmet is navy with a white panel and red brim and features the new \"TC\" insignia.\nRoad gray uniforms featured an all-caps \"MINNESOTA\" in navy with red numbers. On the back, the player names are in navy and numbers are in red. Likewise, the new navy Minnesota map with red star was featured on the left sleeve. Navy pinstripes were also added. The road cap is also all-navy, but with the white \"M\" and a red star on top representing the north star; this design also serves as the basis of their road batting helmet.\nThe alternate navy uniforms, worn both at home and on the road, has the all-caps \"MINNESOTA\" in white with red numbers. On the back, player names are also rendered in white while numbers are in red. The left sleeve features the updated \"TC\" insignia. The uniforms are paired with the road all-navy \"M\" cap with red star, with the white-paneled \"TC\" helmet used on home games and the \"M\" all-navy helmet used on the road.\nThe alternate home cream uniform featured a new \"Twin Cities\" wordmark (with the underline below \"win Citie\") in navy. The set, which lacked red, also featured two crossed navy flags representing both Minneapolis (\"M\") and St. Paul (\"STP\"). An alternate all-navy cap with the \"TC\" insignia is used, except the \"TC\" is in cream and also lacked red elements. This design also became the basis of the all-navy alternate home \"TC\" helmet.\nAdded in 2024 is a City Connect uniform, visually representing the state's nickname of \"Land of 10,000 Lakes\". The predominantly sublimated blue uniform with yellow accents featured the \"MN\" abbreviation on the left chest, with the yellow four-point star representing the north star. The sleeve patch contained a loon flying through ripples of water, with baseball stitching comprising the eyes and the north star representing its beak. Caps are blue with yellow brim, and contained the Minnesota state outline with a yellow star representing the Twin Cities and the northern lights reflected in a water line of a lake. The right side of the caps featured the \"10,000 Lakes\" moniker. The uniform was tweaked in 2025, replacing the royal blue pants with white pants that featured blue and yellow piping.\nPast uniforms.\nFrom 1961 to 1971 the Twins sported uniforms bearing the classic \"Twins\" script and numerals in navy outlined in red. They wore navy caps with an interlocking \"TC\" on the front; this was adopted because Griffith was well aware of the bitter rivalry between Minneapolis and Saint Paul and didn't want to alienate fans in either city. The original \"Minnie and Paul\" alternate logo appears on the left sleeve of both the pinstriped white home uniform and gray road uniform.\nFor the 1972 season the Twins updated their uniforms. The color scheme on the \"Twins\" script and numerals were reversed, pinstripes were removed from the home uniform, and an updated \"Minnie and Paul\" roundel patch replaced the originals on the left sleeve.\nIn 1973, the Twins switched to polyester pullover uniforms, which included a powder blue road uniform. Chest numerals were added while a navy-brimmed red cap was used with the home uniform. The original \"Minnie and Paul\" logo returned to the left sleeve. Player names in red were added to the road uniform in 1977.\nIn 1987, the Twins updated their look. Home white uniforms brought back the pinstripes along with the modern-day \"Twins\" script. By this time, the franchise felt it was established enough in the area that it could put a stylized \"M\" on its cap without having fans in St. Paul think it stood for Minneapolis. The \"TC\" insignia adorned the left sleeve, later replaced by the modern \"Minnie and Paul\" alternate in 2002. Road gray uniforms, which also featured pinstripes, were emblazoned with \"Minnesota\" in red block letters outlined in navy, while the updated primary logo adorned the left sleeve. Both uniforms kept the red numerals trimmed in navy, but the color on the player names was changed to navy. In 1997, player names were added to the home uniform. Initially, both uniforms were paired with an all-navy cap featuring the underlined \"M\" in front, but in 2002, the \"TC\" cap was brought back as a home cap while the \"M\" cap was used on the road. The \"M\" cap was retired following the 2010 season, though the team continued to wear them as a throwback on special occasions.\nFor a few games during the 1997 season, the Twins wore red alternate uniforms, which featured navy piping and letters in white trimmed in navy. In that same year, the Twins also released a road navy alternate uniform, featuring red piping, \"Minnesota\" and player names in white block letters outlined in red, and red numerals outlined in white. The following season, the Twins replaced the red uniforms with a home navy alternate, which features the \"Twins\" script and back numerals in red outlined in white, and player names and chest numerals in white outlined in red. Both uniforms contained the \"TC\" (later modern \"Minnie and Paul\") and primary logo sleeve patches respectively. The Twins also brought back the navy-brimmed red cap for a few games with the home navy alternates. The road navy alternates remained in use until 2009, with the home navy version worn for the last time in the 2013 season.\nThe Twins also wore three other alternate uniforms in the past. In 2006, the Twins wore a sleeveless variation of their regular home uniforms with navy undershirts, which they wore until 2010. They also wore a buttoned version of their 1973\u201386 home uniforms in 2009, before giving way to the throwback off-white version of their 1961\u201371 home uniforms from 2010 to 2018.\nIn 2010, the Twins modified their road uniforms upon moving to Target Field. The pinstriped home uniforms remained, but the road primary now featured an updated \"Minnesota\" script (with an underline below \"innesot\") in red trimmed in navy. Letters are in navy while numerals (both on the chest and on the back) are in red trimmed in navy. The team's primary logo appears on the left sleeve. Meanwhile, the navy alternate road uniform shared the same look as the regular road uniforms, but with a few differences. The \"Minnesota\" script is in red outlined in white, letters and chest numerals are in white outlined in red, and back numerals are in red outlined in white. Red piping is also added. Both uniforms were paired with either the all-navy or the red-brimmed navy \"TC\" cap.\nIn 2015, the Twins changed their home uniform. It features the modern \"Twins\" script (with an underline below \"win\") in navy outlined in red with Kasota gold drop shadows. Letters and numerals also take on the same color as the \"Twins\" script. The modern \"Minnie and Paul\" alternate logo (with the state of Minnesota in navy outlined in Kasota gold) appears on the left sleeve. Caps are in all-navy with the interlocking \"TC\" outlined in Kasota gold. The following year, they unveiled a red alternate uniform, which features the \"TC\" insignia outlined in Kasota gold on the left chest. Letters and numerals are in navy outlined in white with Kasota gold drop shadows. The \"Minnie and Paul\" alternate logo appears on the left sleeve. The uniform is paired with a navy-brimmed red cap with the \"TC\" outlined in Kasota gold.\nIn 2019, a new home navy alternate was released, featuring the classic \"Twins\" script (with a tail underline accent after the letter \"s\") in red outlined in navy and Kasota gold. Letters and numerals also take on the same color as the \"Twins\" script. As with the home white uniforms, it is paired with the all-navy Kasota gold \"TC\" cap. The gold-trimmed \"TC\" insignia also appears on the left sleeve. The following year, a throwback-inspired powder blue uniform was unveiled. A modern buttoned version of the road uniform the team used from 1973 to 1986, the set contains the classic \"Twins\" script in red outlined in navy, along with red letters on the back and red numerals (both on the chest and on the back) outlined in navy. The \"Minnie and Paul\" alternate logo appears on the left sleeve. The uniform is paired with the primary all-navy \"TC\" cap minus the Kasota gold accents, which is also used on the helmets regardless of uniform.\nRoster.\nMinnesota Twins all-time roster: A complete list of players who played in at least one game for the Twins franchise.\nMinor league affiliates.\nThe Minnesota Twins farm system consists of six minor league affiliates.\nAchievements.\nBaseball Hall of Fame members.\nMinnesota Twins Hall of Famers\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\nWashington Senators\nMinnesota Twins\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMolitor, Morris, and Winfield were all St. Paul natives who joined the Twins late in their careers and were warmly received as \"hometown heroes\", but were elected to the hall primarily on the basis of their tenures with other teams. Both Molitor and Winfield had their 3,000th hit with Minnesota, while Morris pitched a complete-game shutout for the Twins in game seven of the 1991 World Series. Molitor was the first player in history to hit a triple for his 3,000th hit.\nCronin, Goslin, Griffith, Harris, Johnson, Killebrew and Wynn are listed on the Washington Hall of Stars display at Nationals Park (previously they were listed at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium). So are Ossie Bluege, George Case, Joe Judge, George Selkirk, Roy Sievers, Cecil Travis, Mickey Vernon and Eddie Yost.\nFord C. Frick Award recipients.\nMinnesota Twins Ford C. Frick Award recipients\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwins Hall of Fame.\nChuck Knoblauch was voted into the Twins Hall of Fame in 2014, but due to his legal troubles the team canceled his induction.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Metrodome's upper deck in center and right fields was partly covered by a curtain containing banners of various titles won, and retired numbers. There was no acknowledgment of the Twins' prior championships in Washington and several Senator Hall of Famers, such as Walter Johnson, played in the days prior to numbers being used on uniforms. However, Killebrew played seven seasons as a Senator, including two full seasons as a regular prior to the move to Minnesota in 1961.\nPrior to the addition of the banners, the Twins acknowledged their retired numbers on the Metrodome's outfield fence. Harmon Killebrew's #3 was the first to be displayed, as it was the only one the team had retired when they moved in. It was joined by Rod Carew's #29 in 1987, Tony Oliva's #6 in 1991, Kent Hrbek's #14 in 1995, and Kirby Puckett's #34 in 1997 before the Twins began hanging the banners to reduce capacity. The championships, meanwhile, were marked on the \"Baggie\" in right field.\n In the Metrodome, the numbers ran in that order from left to right. In Target Field, they run from right to left, presumably to allow space for additional numbers in the future. The retired numbers also serve as entry points at Target Field, The center field gate is Gate No. 3, honoring Killebrew, the left-field gate is Gate No. 6, honoring Oliva, the home plate gate is Gate No. 14, for Hrbek, the right field gate serves as Gate No. 29, in tribute to Carew, and the plaza gate is known as Gate No. 34, honoring Puckett.\nThe numbers that have been retired hang within Target Field in front of the tower that serves as the Twins' executive offices in left field foul territory. The championships banners have been replaced by small pennants that fly on masts at the back of the left-field upper deck. Those pennants, along with the flags flying in the plaza behind right field, serve as a visual cue for the players, suggesting the wind direction and speed.\nJackie Robinson's No. 42 was retired by Major League Baseball on April 15, 1997, and formally honored by the Twins on May 23, 1997. Robinson's number was positioned to the left of the Twins numbers in both venues. On August 11, 2024, the Twins elected to erect a permanent display of a \"W\" as a \"reminder of our franchise's legacy as a charter member of the American League\", referring to the Washington Senators and their World Series victory in 1924.\nRadio and television.\nIn 2007, the Twins took the rights to the broadcasts in-house and created the Twins Radio Network (TRN). With that new network in place the Twins secured a new Metro Affiliate flagship radio station in KSTP (AM 1500). It replaced WCCO (AM 830), which held broadcast rights for the Twins since the team moved to Minneapolis in 1961. For 2013, the Twins moved to FM radio on KTWN-FM \"96.3 K-Twin\", which is owned by the Pohlad family. The original radio voices of the Twins in 1961 were Ray Scott, Halsey Hall and Bob Wolff. After the first season, Herb Carneal replaced Wolff. Twins TV and radio broadcasts were originally sponsored by the Hamm's Brewing Company. In 2009, Treasure Island Resort &amp; Casino became the first-ever naming rights partner for the Twins Radio Network, making the commercial name of TRN the Treasure Island Baseball Network. In 2017, it was announced that WCCO would become the flagship station the Twins again starting in 2018, thus returning the team back to its original station after 11 years.\nCory Provus is the current radio play by play announcer, taking over in 2012 for longtime Twins voice John Gordon who retired following the 2011 season. Former Twins OF Dan Gladden serves as color commentator.\nTRN broadcasts are originated from the studios at Minnesota News Network and Minnesota Farm Networks. Kris Atteberry hosts the pre-game show, the \"Lineup Card\" and the \"Post-game Download\" from those studios except when filling in for Provus or Gladden when they are on vacation.\nOn April 1, 2007, Herb Carneal, the radio voice of the Twins for all but one year of their existence, died at his home in Minnetonka after a long battle with a list of illnesses. Carneal is in the broadcasters wing of the Baseball Hall of Fame.\nIn October 2024, as a result of bankruptcy proceedings involving former broadcaster Diamond Sports Group, Major League Baseball's local media division announced that it would take over the production and distribution of Twins games starting with the 2025 season; the Twins would later announce a deal to simulcast ten regular season games on Minneapolis-St. Paul Fox station KMSP-TV and Gray Media stations in the Twins' outer markets.\nPrior to 2025, the television rights were held by Bally Sports North (now FanDuel Sports Network North) with Dick Bremer as the play-by-play announcer. Former Twins players Roy Smalley, Justin Morneau, Glen Perkins, and LaTroy Hawkins served as analysts.\nIn 2024, the Twins announced that Provus would move to TV play-by-play following the retirement of Dick Bremer who eventually moved to an advisory role in the front office. Atteberry replaced Provus on the radio side.\nBob Casey was the Twins first public-address announcer starting in 1961 and continuing until his death in 2005. He was well known for his unique delivery and his signature announcements of \"No smoking in the Metrodome, either go outside or quit!\" (or \"go back to Boston\", etc.), \"Batting 3rd, the center-fielder, No. 34, Kirby Puckett!!!\" and asking fans not to 'throw anything or anybody' onto the field.\nTeam and franchise traditions.\nFans wave a \"Homer Hanky\" to rally the team during play-offs and other crucial games. The Homer Hanky was created by Terrie Robbins of the Star Tribune newspaper in the Twin Cities in 1987. It was her idea to originally give away 60,000 inaugural Homer Hankies. That year, over 2.3\u00a0million Homer Hankies were distributed.\nThe party atmosphere of the Twins clubhouse after a win is well known, the team's players unwinding with loud rock music (usually the choice of the winning pitcher) and video games.\nThe club has several hazing rituals, such as requiring the most junior relief pitcher on the team to carry water and snacks to the bullpen in a brightly colored small child's backpack (Barbie in 2005, SpongeBob SquarePants in 2006, Hello Kitty in 2007, Disney Princess and Tinkerbell in 2009, Chewbacca and Darth Vader in 2010), and many of its players, both past and present, are notorious pranksters. For example, Bert Blyleven earned the nickname \"The Frying Dutchman\" for his ability to pull the \"hotfoot\"\u00a0\u2013 which entails crawling under the bench in the dugout and lighting a teammate's shoelaces on fire.\nThe team introduced T.C. Bear, its costumed mascot, on April 3, 2000.\nRivalries.\nChicago White Sox.\nThe Twins have a divisional rivalry with the Chicago White Sox, which re-emerged in the 2000s as the two teams consistently battled for the AL Central Crown. The Twins won the division in 2002, 2003, 2004, 2006, and 2009, with the Sox winning in 2000, 2005, and 2008; many of those years, their rival was the division runner-up. The teams met in the 2008 American League Central tie-breaker game, which was necessitated by the two clubs finishing the season with identical records. The White Sox won this game 1\u20130 on a Jim Thome home run.\nMilwaukee Brewers: Border Battle.\nThe Twins also have an interleague rivalry with the Milwaukee Brewers, known as the \"Border Battle.\" The rivalry started and was most heated when the Brewers were still in the American League before transitioning to the National League for the 1998 season.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20051", "revid": "1316546702", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20051", "title": "Mach number", "text": "Dimensionless quantity in fluid dynamics\nThe Mach number (M or Ma), often only Mach, (; ) is a dimensionless quantity in fluid dynamics representing the ratio of flow velocity past a boundary to the local speed of sound.\nIt is named after Austrian physicist and philosopher Ernst Mach.\nformula_1\nwhere:\nBy definition, at Mach1, the local flow velocity u is equal to the speed of sound. At Mach0.65, u is 65% of the speed of sound (subsonic), and, at Mach1.35, u is 35% faster than the speed of sound (supersonic).\nThe local speed of sound, and hence the Mach number, depends on the temperature of the surrounding gas. The Mach number is primarily used to determine the approximation with which a flow can be treated as an incompressible flow. The medium can be a gas or a liquid. The boundary can be travelling in the medium, or it can be stationary while the medium flows along it, or they can both be moving, with different velocities: what matters is their relative velocity with respect to each other. The boundary can be the boundary of an object immersed in the medium, or of a channel such as a nozzle, diffuser or wind tunnel channelling the medium. As the Mach number is defined as the ratio of two speeds, it is a dimensionless quantity. If M\u00a0&lt;\u00a00.2\u20130.3 and the flow is quasi-steady and isothermal, compressibility effects will be small and simplified incompressible flow equations can be used.\nEtymology.\nThe Mach number is named after the physicist and philosopher Ernst Mach, in honour of his achievements, according to a proposal by the aeronautical engineer Jakob Ackeret in 1929. The word Mach is always capitalized since it derives from a proper name and since the Mach number is a dimensionless quantity rather than a unit of measure. This is also why the number comes after the word Mach. It was also known as \"Mach's number\" by Lockheed when reporting the effects of compressibility on the P-38 aircraft in 1942.\nOverview.\nMach number is a measure of the compressibility characteristics of fluid flow: the fluid (air) behaves under the influence of compressibility in a similar manner at a given Mach number, regardless of other variables. As modeled in the International Standard Atmosphere, dry air at mean sea level, standard temperature of , the speed of sound is . The speed of sound is not a constant; in a gas, it increases proportionally to the square root of the absolute temperature, and since atmospheric temperature generally decreases with increasing altitude between sea level and , the speed of sound also decreases. For example, the standard atmosphere model lapses temperature to at altitude, with a corresponding speed of sound (Mach1) of , 86.7% of the sea level value.\nAppearance in the continuity equation.\nThe Mach number arises naturally when the continuity equation is nondimensionalized for compressible flows. If density variations are related to pressure through the isentropic relation formula_2, the nondimensionalized continuity equation contains a prefactor formula_3. This shows that the Mach number directly measures the importance of compressibility effects in a flow. In the limit formula_4, the equation reduces to the incompressibility condition formula_5.\nClassification of Mach regimes.\nThe terms \"subsonic\" and \"supersonic\" are used to refer to speeds below and above the local speed of sound, and to particular ranges of Mach values. This occurs because of the presence of a \"transonic regime\" around flight (free stream) M = 1 where approximations of the Navier-Stokes equations used for subsonic design no longer apply; the simplest explanation is that the flow around an airframe locally begins to exceed M = 1 even though the free stream Mach number is below this value.\nMeanwhile, the \"supersonic regime\" is usually used to talk about the set of Mach numbers for which linearised theory may be used, where for example the (air) flow is not chemically reacting, and where heat-transfer between air and vehicle may be reasonably neglected in calculations.\nHigh-speed flow around objects.\nFlight can be roughly classified in six categories:\nAt transonic speeds, the flow field around the object includes both sub- and supersonic parts. The transonic period begins when first zones of M &gt; 1 flow appear around the object. In case of an airfoil (such as an aircraft's wing), this typically happens above the wing. Supersonic flow can decelerate back to subsonic only in a normal shock; this typically happens before the trailing edge. (Fig.1a)\nAs the speed increases, the zone of M &gt; 1 flow increases towards both leading and trailing edges. As M = 1 is reached and passed, the normal shock reaches the trailing edge and becomes a weak oblique shock: the flow decelerates over the shock, but remains supersonic. A normal shock is created ahead of the object, and the only subsonic zone in the flow field is a small area around the object's leading edge. (Fig.1b)\nWhen an aircraft exceeds Mach 1 (i.e. the sound barrier), a large pressure difference is created just in front of the aircraft. This abrupt pressure difference, called a shock wave, spreads backward and outward from the aircraft in a cone shape (a so-called Mach cone). It is this shock wave that causes the sonic boom heard as a fast moving aircraft travels overhead. A person inside the aircraft will not hear this. The higher the speed, the more narrow the cone; at just over M = 1 it is hardly a cone at all, but closer to a slightly concave plane.\nAt fully supersonic speed, the shock wave starts to take its cone shape and flow is either completely supersonic, or (in case of a blunt object), only a very small subsonic flow area remains between the object's nose and the shock wave it creates ahead of itself. (In the case of a sharp object, there is no air between the nose and the shock wave: the shock wave starts from the nose.)\nAs the Mach number increases, so does the strength of the shock wave and the Mach cone becomes increasingly narrow. As the fluid flow crosses the shock wave, its speed is reduced and temperature, pressure, and density increase. The stronger the shock, the greater the changes. At high enough Mach numbers the temperature increases so much over the shock that ionization and dissociation of gas molecules behind the shock wave begin.\nHigh-speed flow in a channel.\nAs a flow in a channel becomes supersonic, one significant change takes place. The conservation of mass flow rate leads one to expect that contracting the flow channel would increase the flow speed (i.e. making the channel narrower results in faster air flow) and at subsonic speeds this holds true. However, once the flow becomes supersonic, the relationship of flow area and speed is reversed: expanding the channel actually increases the speed.\nCalculation.\nWhen the speed of sound is known, the Mach number at which an aircraft is flying can be calculated by\nformula_6\nwhere:\nand the speed of sound varies with the thermodynamic temperature as:\nformula_7\nwhere:\nIf the speed of sound is not known, Mach number may be determined by measuring the various air pressures (static and dynamic) and using the following formula that is derived from Bernoulli's equation for Mach numbers less than 1.0. Assuming air to be an ideal gas, the formula to compute Mach number in a subsonic compressible flow is:\nformula_11\nwhere:\nThe formula to compute Mach number in a supersonic compressible flow is derived from the Rayleigh supersonic pitot equation:\nformula_13\nCalculating Mach number from pitot tube pressure.\nMach number is a function of temperature and true airspeed.\nAircraft flight instruments, however, operate using pressure differential to compute Mach number, not temperature.\nAssuming air to be an ideal gas, the formula to compute Mach number in a subsonic compressible flow is found from Bernoulli's equation for M &lt; 1 (above):\nformula_14\nThe formula to compute Mach number in a supersonic compressible flow can be found from the Rayleigh supersonic pitot equation (above) using parameters for air:\nformula_15\nwhere:\nAs can be seen, M appears on both sides of the equation, and for practical purposes a root-finding algorithm must be used for a numerical solution (the equation is a septic equation in M2 and, though some of these may be solved explicitly, the Abel\u2013Ruffini theorem guarantees that there exists no general form for the roots of these polynomials). It is first determined whether M is indeed greater than 1.0 by calculating M from the subsonic equation. If M is greater than 1.0 at that point, then the value of M from the subsonic equation is used as the initial condition for fixed point iteration of the supersonic equation, which usually converges very rapidly. Alternatively, Newton's method can also be used.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20052", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20052", "title": "Magic the Gathering", "text": ""}
{"id": "20053", "revid": "47988270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20053", "title": "March 8", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMarch 8 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20054", "revid": "1896838", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20054", "title": "March 9", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMarch 9 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20055", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20055", "title": "Moving Picture Experts Group", "text": "Alliance of working groups for multimedia coding\nThe Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG) is an alliance of working groups established jointly by ISO and IEC that sets standards for media coding, including compression coding of audio, video, graphics, and genomic data; and transmission and file formats for various applications. Together with JPEG, MPEG is organized under ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29 \u2013 \"Coding of audio, picture, multimedia and hypermedia information\" (ISO/IEC Joint Technical Committee 1, Subcommittee 29).\nMPEG formats are used in various multimedia systems. The most well known older MPEG media formats typically use MPEG-1, MPEG-2, and MPEG-4 AVC media coding and MPEG-2 systems transport streams and program streams. Newer systems typically use the MPEG base media file format and dynamic streaming (a.k.a. MPEG-DASH).\nHistory.\nMPEG was established in 1988 by the initiative of Dr. Hiroshi Yasuda (NTT) and Dr. Leonardo Chiariglione (CSELT). Chiariglione was the group's chair (called Convenor in ISO/IEC terminology) from its inception until June 6, 2020. The first MPEG meeting was in May 1988 in Ottawa, Canada.\nStarting around the time of the MPEG-4 project in the late 1990s and continuing to the present, MPEG had grown to include approximately 300\u2013500 members per meeting from various industries, universities, and research institutions.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic caused a general shut-down of physical meetings for many standardization groups, starting in 2020. Following the 129th MPEG meeting of January 2020 in Brussels, MPEG transitioned to holding its meetings as online teleconference events, the first of which was the 130th meeting in April 2020.\nOn June 6, 2020, the MPEG section of Chiariglione's personal website was updated to inform readers that he had retired as Convenor, and he said that the MPEG group (then SC\u00a029/WG\u00a011) \"was closed\". Chiariglione described his reasons for stepping down in his personal blog. His decision followed a restructuring process within SC 29, in which \"some of the subgroups of WG 11 (MPEG) [became] distinct MPEG working groups (WGs) and advisory groups (AGs)\". Prof. J\u00f6rn Ostermann of Leibniz University Hannover was appointed as Acting Convenor of SC\u00a029/WG\u00a011 during the restructuring period and was then appointed Convenor of SC\u00a029's Advisory Group\u00a02, which coordinates MPEG overall technical activities. The 131st meeting held of July 2020 was chaired by Ostermann as the acting Convenor, and the 132nd meeting in October 2020 was held under the new structure.\nThe MPEG structure that replaced the former Working Group 11 includes three Advisory Groups (AGs) and seven Working Groups (WGs)\nMPEG meetings continued to be held approximately on a quarterly basis as teleconferences until face-to-face physical meetings began to be resumed with the 140th meeting held in Mainz in October 2022. Since then, some meetings have been face-to-face and others have been online.\nCooperation with other groups.\nMPEG-2.\nMPEG-2 development included a joint project between MPEG and ITU-T Study Group 15 (which later became ITU-T SG16), resulting in publication of the MPEG-2 Systems standard (ISO/IEC 13818-1, including its transport streams and program streams) as ITU-T H.222.0 and the MPEG-2 Video standard (ISO/IEC 13818-2) as ITU-T H.262. Sakae Okubo (NTT), was the ITU-T coordinator and chaired the agreements on its requirements.\nJoint Video Team.\nJoint Video Team (JVT) was joint project between ITU-T SG16/Q.6 (Study Group 16 / Question 6) \u2013 VCEG (Video Coding Experts Group) and ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29/WG 11 \u2013 MPEG for the development of a video coding ITU-T Recommendation and ISO/IEC International Standard. It was formed in 2001 and its main result was H.264/MPEG-4 AVC (MPEG-4 Part 10), which reduces the data rate for video coding by about 50%, as compared to the then-current ITU-T H.262 / MPEG-2 standard. The JVT was chaired by Dr. Gary Sullivan, with vice-chairs Dr. Thomas Wiegand of the Heinrich Hertz Institute in Germany and Dr. Ajay Luthra of Motorola in the United States.\nJoint Collaborative Team on Video Coding.\nJoint Collaborative Team on Video Coding (JCT-VC) was a group of video coding experts from ITU-T Study Group 16 (VCEG) and ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29/WG 11 (MPEG). It was created in 2010 to develop High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC, MPEG-H Part 2, ITU-T H.265), a video coding standard that further reduces by about 50% the data rate required for video coding, as compared to the then-current ITU-T H.264 / ISO/IEC 14496-10 standard. JCT-VC was co-chaired by Prof. Jens-Rainer Ohm and Gary Sullivan.\nJoint Video Experts Team.\nJoint Video Experts Team (JVET) is a joint group of video coding experts from ITU-T Study Group 16 (VCEG) and ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29/WG 11 (MPEG) created in 2017, which was later audited by ATR-M audio group, after an exploration phase that began in 2015. JVET developed Versatile Video Coding (VVC, MPEG-I Part 3, ITU-T H.266), completed in July 2020, which further reduces the data rate for video coding by about 50%, as compared to the then-current ITU-T H.265 / HEVC standard, and the JCT-VC was merged into JVET in July 2020. Like JCT-VC, JVET was co-chaired by Jens-Rainer Ohm and Gary Sullivan, until July 2021 when Ohm became the sole chair (after Sullivan became the chair of SC\u00a029).\nMPEG Industry Forum.\nThe MPEG Industry Forum (MPEGIF) was a non-profit consortium dedicated to furthering \"the adoption of MPEG Standards, by establishing them as well accepted and widely used standards among creators of content, developers, manufacturers, providers of services, and end users\". It was formed in 2000 and dissolved in 2012 after H.264 became the de facto video compression standard.\nThe group was involved in many tasks, which included promotion of MPEG standards (particularly MPEG-4, MPEG-4 AVC / H.264, MPEG-7 and MPEG-21); developing MPEG certification for products; organizing educational events; and developing new MPEG standards. In June 2012, the MPEG Industry Forum officially \"declared victory\" and voted to close its operation and merge its remaining assets with that of the Open IPTV Forum.\nStandards.\nThe MPEG standards consist of different \"Parts\". Each \"Part\" covers a certain aspect of the whole specification. The standards also specify \"profiles\" and \"levels\". \"Profiles\" are intended to define a set of tools that are available, and \"Levels\" define the range of appropriate values for the properties associated with them. Some of the approved MPEG standards were revised by later amendments and/or new editions.\nThe primary early MPEG compression formats and related standards include:\nMPEG-4 AVC was chosen as the video compression scheme for over-the-air television broadcasting in Brazil (ISDB-TB), based on the digital television system of Japan (ISDB-T).\nAn MPEG-3 project was cancelled. MPEG-3 was planned to deal with standardizing scalable and multi-resolution compression and was intended for HDTV compression, but was found to be unnecessary and was merged with MPEG-2; as a result there is no MPEG-3 standard. The cancelled MPEG-3 project is not to be confused with MP3, which is MPEG-1 or MPEG-2 Audio Layer III.\nIn addition, the following standards, while not sequential advances to the video encoding standard as with MPEG-1 through MPEG-4, are referred to by similar notation:\nMoreover, more recently than other standards above, MPEG has produced the following international standards; each of the standards holds multiple MPEG technologies for a variety of applications. (For example, MPEG-A includes a number of technologies on multimedia application format.)\nStandardization process.\nA standard published by ISO/IEC is the last stage of an approval process that starts with the proposal of new work within a committee. Stages of the standard development process include:\nOther abbreviations:\nA proposal of work (New Proposal) is approved at the Subcommittee level and then at the Technical Committee level (SC\u00a029 and JTC\u00a01, respectively, in the case of MPEG). When the scope of new work is sufficiently clarified, MPEG usually makes open \"calls for proposals\". The first document that is produced for audio and video coding standards is typically called a test model. When a sufficient confidence in the stability of the standard under development is reached, a Working Draft (WD) is produced. When a WD is sufficiently solid (typically after producing several numbered WDs), the next draft is issued as a Committee Draft (CD) (usually at the planned time) and is sent to National Bodies (NBs) for comment. When a consensus is reached to proceed to the next stage, the draft becomes a Draft International Standard (DIS) and is sent for another ballot. After a review and comments issued by NBs and a resolution of comments in the working group, a Final Draft International Standard (FDIS) is typically issued for a final approval ballot. The final approval ballot is voted on by National Bodies, with no technical changes allowed (a yes/no approval ballot). If approved, the document becomes an International Standard (IS). In cases where the text is considered sufficiently mature, the WD, CD, and/or FDIS stages can be skipped. The development of a standard is completed when the FDIS document has been issued, with the FDIS stage only being for final approval, and in practice, the FDIS stage for MPEG standards has always resulted in approval.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20056", "revid": "50289030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20056", "title": "MPEG-1", "text": "Video encoding standard\nMPEG-1 is a standard for lossy compression of video and audio. It is designed to compress VHS-quality raw digital video and CD audio down to about 1.5\u00a0Mbit/s (26:1 and 6:1 compression ratios respectively) without excessive quality loss, making video CDs, digital cable/satellite TV and digital audio broadcasting (DAB) practical.\nToday, MPEG-1 has become the most widely compatible lossy audio/video format in the world, and is used in a large number of products and technologies. Perhaps the best-known part of the MPEG-1 standard is the first version of the MP3 audio format it introduced.\nThe MPEG-1 standard is published as ISO/IEC 11172, titled \"Information technology\u2014Coding of moving pictures and associated audio for digital storage media at up to about 1.5\u00a0Mbit/s\".\nThe standard consists of the following five \"Parts\":\nHistory.\nThe predecessor of MPEG-1 for video coding was the H.261 standard produced by the CCITT (now known as the ITU-T). The basic architecture established in H.261 was the motion-compensated DCT hybrid video coding structure. It uses macroblocks of size 16\u00d716 with block-based motion estimation in the encoder and motion compensation using encoder-selected motion vectors in the decoder, with residual difference coding using a discrete cosine transform (DCT) of size 8\u00d78, scalar quantization, and variable-length codes (like Huffman codes) for entropy coding. H.261 was the first practical video coding standard, and all of its described design elements were also used in MPEG-1.\nModeled on the successful collaborative approach and the compression technologies developed by the Joint Photographic Experts Group and CCITT's Experts Group on Telephony (creators of the JPEG image compression standard and the H.261 standard for video conferencing respectively), the Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG) working group was established in January 1988, by the initiative of Hiroshi Yasuda (Nippon Telegraph and Telephone) and Leonardo Chiariglione (CSELT). MPEG was formed to address the need for standard video and audio formats, and to build on H.261 to get better quality through the use of somewhat more complex encoding methods (e.g., supporting higher precision for motion vectors).\nDevelopment of the MPEG-1 standard began in May 1988. Fourteen video and fourteen audio codec proposals were submitted by individual companies and institutions for evaluation. The codecs were extensively tested for computational complexity and subjective (human perceived) quality, at data rates of 1.5\u00a0Mbit/s. This specific bitrate was chosen for transmission over T-1/E-1 lines and as the approximate data rate of audio CDs. The codecs that excelled in this testing were utilized as the basis for the standard and refined further, with additional features and other improvements being incorporated in the process.\nAfter 20 meetings of the full group in various cities around the world, and 4\u00bd years of development and testing, the final standard (for parts 1\u20133) was approved in early November 1992 and published a few months later. The reported completion date of the MPEG-1 standard varies greatly: a largely complete draft standard was produced in September 1990, and from that point on, only minor changes were introduced. The draft standard was publicly available for purchase. The standard was finished with the 6 November 1992 meeting. The Berkeley Plateau Multimedia Research Group developed an MPEG-1 decoder in November 1992. In July 1990, before the first draft of the MPEG-1 standard had even been written, work began on a second standard, MPEG-2, intended to extend MPEG-1 technology to provide full broadcast-quality video (as per CCIR 601) at high bitrates (3\u201315\u00a0Mbit/s) and support for interlaced video. Due in part to the similarity between the two codecs, the MPEG-2 standard includes full backwards compatibility with MPEG-1 video, so any MPEG-2 decoder can play MPEG-1 videos.\nNotably, the MPEG-1 standard very strictly defines the bitstream, and decoder function, but does not define how MPEG-1 encoding is to be performed, although a reference implementation is provided in ISO/IEC-11172-5. This means that MPEG-1 coding efficiency can drastically vary depending on the encoder used, and generally means that newer encoders perform significantly better than their predecessors. The first three parts (Systems, Video and Audio) of ISO/IEC 11172 were published in August 1993.\nPatents.\nDue to its age, MPEG-1 is no longer covered by any essential patents and can thus be used without obtaining a licence or paying any fees. The ISO patent database lists one patent for ISO 11172, US 4,472,747, which expired in 2003. The near-complete draft of the MPEG-1 standard was publicly available as ISO CD 11172 by December 6, 1991. Neither the July 2008 Kuro5hin article \"Patent Status of MPEG-1, H.261 and MPEG-2\", nor an August 2008 thread on the gstreamer-devel mailing list were able to list a single unexpired MPEG-1 Video and MPEG-1 Audio Layer I/II patent. A May 2009 discussion on the whatwg mailing list mentioned US 5,214,678 patent as possibly covering MPEG-1 Audio Layer II. Filed in 1990 and published in 1993, this patent is now expired.\nA full MPEG-1 decoder and encoder, with \"Layer III audio\", could not be implemented royalty free since there were companies that required patent fees for implementations of MPEG-1 Audio Layer III, as discussed in the MP3 article. All patents in the world connected to MP3 expired 30 December 2017, which makes this format totally free for use. On 23 April 2017, Fraunhofer IIS stopped charging for Technicolor's MP3 licensing program for certain MP3 related patents and software.\nFormer patent holders.\nThe following corporations filed declarations with ISO saying they held patents for the MPEG-1 Video (ISO/IEC-11172-2) format, although all such patents have since expired.\nPart 1: Systems.\nPart 1 of the MPEG-1 standard covers \"systems\", and is defined in ISO/IEC-11172-1.\nMPEG-1 Systems specifies the logical layout and methods used to store the encoded audio, video, and other data into a standard bitstream, and to maintain synchronization between the different contents. This file format is specifically designed for storage on media, and transmission over communication channels, that are considered relatively reliable. Only limited error protection is defined by the standard, and small errors in the bitstream may cause noticeable defects.\nThis structure was later named an MPEG program stream: \"The MPEG-1 Systems design is essentially identical to the MPEG-2 Program Stream structure.\" This terminology is more popular, precise (differentiates it from an MPEG transport stream) and will be used here.\nProgram streams.\nProgram Streams (PS) are concerned with combining multiple packetized elementary streams (usually just one audio and video PES) into a single stream, ensuring simultaneous delivery, and maintaining synchronization. The PS structure is known as a multiplex, or a container format.\nPresentation time stamps (PTS) exist in PS to correct the inevitable disparity between audio and video SCR values (time-base correction). 90\u00a0kHz PTS values in the PS header tell the decoder which video SCR values match which audio SCR values. PTS determines when to display a portion of an MPEG program, and is also used by the decoder to determine when data can be discarded from the buffer. Either video or audio will be delayed by the decoder until the corresponding segment of the other arrives and can be decoded.\nPTS handling can be problematic. Decoders must accept multiple \"program streams\" that have been concatenated (joined sequentially). This causes PTS values in the middle of the video to reset to zero, which then begin incrementing again. Such PTS wraparound disparities can cause timing issues that must be specially handled by the decoder.\nDecoding Time Stamps (DTS), additionally, are required because of B-frames. With B-frames in the video stream, adjacent frames have to be encoded and decoded out-of-order (re-ordered frames). DTS is quite similar to PTS, but instead of just handling sequential frames, it contains the proper time-stamps to tell the decoder when to decode and display the next B-frame (types of frames explained below), ahead of its anchor (P- or I-) frame. Without B-frames in the video, PTS and DTS values are identical.\nMultiplexing.\nTo generate the PS, the multiplexer will interleave the (two or more) packetized elementary streams. This is done so the packets of the simultaneous streams can be transferred over the same channel and are guaranteed to both arrive at the decoder at precisely the same time. This is a case of time-division multiplexing.\nDetermining how much data from each stream should be in each interleaved segment (the size of the interleave) is complicated, yet an important requirement. Improper interleaving will result in buffer underflows or overflows, as the receiver gets more of one stream than it can store (e.g. audio), before it gets enough data to decode the other simultaneous stream (e.g. video). The MPEG Video Buffering Verifier (VBV) assists in determining if a multiplexed PS can be decoded by a device with a specified data throughput rate and buffer size. This offers feedback to the multiplexer and the encoder, so that they can change the multiplex size or adjust bitrates as needed for compliance.\nPart 2: Video.\nPart 2 of the MPEG-1 standard covers video and is defined in ISO/IEC-11172-2. The design was heavily influenced by H.261.\nMPEG-1 Video exploits perceptual compression methods to significantly reduce the data rate required by a video stream. It reduces or completely discards information in certain frequencies and areas of the picture that the human eye has limited ability to fully perceive. It also exploits temporal (over time) and spatial (across a picture) redundancy common in video to achieve better data compression than would be possible otherwise. (See: Video compression)\nColor space.\nBefore encoding video to MPEG-1, the color-space is transformed to Y\u2032CbCr (Y\u2032=Luma, Cb=Chroma Blue, Cr=Chroma Red). Luma (brightness, resolution) is stored separately from chroma (color, hue, phase) and even further separated into red and blue components.\nThe chroma is also subsampled to , meaning it is reduced to half resolution vertically and half resolution horizontally, i.e., to just one quarter the number of samples used for the luma component of the video. This use of higher resolution for some color components is similar in concept to the Bayer pattern filter that is commonly used for the image capturing sensor in digital color cameras. Because the human eye is much more sensitive to small changes in brightness (the Y component) than in color (the Cr and Cb components), chroma subsampling is a very effective way to reduce the amount of video data that needs to be compressed. However, on videos with fine detail (high spatial complexity) this can manifest as chroma aliasing artifacts. Compared to other digital compression artifacts, this issue seems to very rarely be a source of annoyance. Because of the subsampling, Y\u2032CbCr 4:2:0 video is ordinarily stored using even dimensions (divisible by 2 horizontally and vertically).\nY\u2032CbCr color is often informally called YUV to simplify the notation, although that term more properly applies to a somewhat different color format. Similarly, the terms luminance and chrominance are often used instead of the (more accurate) terms luma and chroma.\nResolution/bitrate.\nMPEG-1 supports resolutions up to 4095\u00d74095 (12 bits), and bit rates up to 100\u00a0Mbit/s.\nMPEG-1 videos are most commonly seen using Source Input Format (SIF) resolution: 352\u00d7240, 352\u00d7288, or 320\u00d7240. These relatively low resolutions, combined with a bitrate less than 1.5\u00a0Mbit/s, make up what is known as a constrained parameters bitstream (CPB), later renamed the \"Low Level\" (LL) profile in MPEG-2. This is the minimum video specifications any decoder should be able to handle, to be considered MPEG-1 compliant. This was selected to provide a good balance between quality and performance, allowing the use of reasonably inexpensive hardware of the time.\nFrame/picture/block types.\nMPEG-1 has several frame/picture types that serve different purposes. The most important, yet simplest, is I-frame.\nI-frames.\n\"I-frame\" is an abbreviation for \"Intra-frame\", so-called because they can be decoded independently of any other frames. They may also be known as I-pictures, or keyframes due to their somewhat similar function to the key frames used in animation. I-frames can be considered effectively identical to baseline JPEG images.\nHigh-speed seeking through an MPEG-1 video is only possible to the nearest I-frame. When cutting a video it is not possible to start playback of a segment of video before the first I-frame in the segment (at least not without computationally intensive re-encoding). For this reason, I-frame-only MPEG videos are used in editing applications.\nI-frame only compression is very fast, but produces very large file sizes: a factor of 3\u00d7 (or more) larger than normally encoded MPEG-1 video, depending on how temporally complex a specific video is. I-frame only MPEG-1 video is very similar to MJPEG video. So much so that very high-speed and theoretically lossless (in reality, there are rounding errors) conversion can be made from one format to the other, provided a couple of restrictions (color space and quantization matrix) are followed in the creation of the bitstream.\nThe length between I-frames is known as the group of pictures (GOP) size. MPEG-1 most commonly uses a GOP size of 15\u201318. i.e. 1 I-frame for every 14-17 non-I-frames (some combination of P- and B- frames). With more intelligent encoders, GOP size is dynamically chosen, up to some pre-selected maximum limit.\nLimits are placed on the maximum number of frames between I-frames due to decoding complexing, decoder buffer size, recovery time after data errors, seeking ability, and accumulation of IDCT errors in low-precision implementations most common in hardware decoders (See: IEEE-1180).\nP-frames.\n\"P-frame\" is an abbreviation for \"Predicted-frame\". They may also be called forward-predicted frames or inter-frames (B-frames are also inter-frames).\nP-frames exist to improve compression by exploiting the temporal (over time) redundancy in a video. P-frames store only the \"difference\" in image from the frame (either an I-frame or P-frame) immediately preceding it (this reference frame is also called the \"anchor frame\").\nThe difference between a P-frame and its anchor frame is calculated using \"motion vectors\" on each \"macroblock\" of the frame (see below). Such motion vector data will be embedded in the P-frame for use by the decoder.\nA P-frame can contain any number of intra-coded blocks (DCT and Quantized), in addition to any forward-predicted blocks (Motion Vectors).\nIf a video drastically changes from one frame to the next (such as a cut), it is more efficient to encode it as an I-frame.\nB-frames.\n\"B-frame\" stands for \"bidirectional-frame\" or \"bipredictive frame\". They may also be known as backwards-predicted frames or B-pictures. B-frames are quite similar to P-frames, except they can make predictions using both the previous and future frames (i.e. two anchor frames).\nIt is therefore necessary for the player to first decode the next I- or P- anchor frame sequentially after the B-frame, before the B-frame can be decoded and displayed. This means decoding B-frames requires larger data buffers and causes an increased delay on both decoding and during encoding. This also necessitates the decoding time stamps (DTS) feature in the container/system stream (see above). As such, B-frames have long been subject of much controversy, they are often avoided in videos, and are sometimes not fully supported by hardware decoders.\nNo other frames are predicted from a B-frame. Because of this, a very low bitrate B-frame can be inserted, where needed, to help control the bitrate. If this was done with a P-frame, future P-frames would be predicted from it and would lower the quality of the entire sequence. However, similarly, the future P-frame must still encode all the changes between it and the previous I- or P- anchor frame. B-frames can also be beneficial in videos where the background behind an object is being revealed over several frames, or in fading transitions, such as scene changes.\nA B-frame can contain any number of intra-coded blocks and forward-predicted blocks, in addition to backwards-predicted, or bidirectionally predicted blocks.\nD-frames.\nMPEG-1 has a unique frame type not found in later video standards. \"D-frames\" or DC-pictures are independently coded images (intra-frames) that have been encoded using DC transform coefficients only (AC coefficients are removed when encoding D-frames\u2014see DCT below) and hence are very low quality. D-frames are never referenced by I-, P- or B- frames. D-frames are only used for fast previews of video, for instance when seeking through a video at high speed.\nGiven moderately higher-performance decoding equipment, fast preview can be accomplished by decoding I-frames instead of D-frames. This provides higher quality previews, since I-frames contain AC coefficients as well as DC coefficients. If the encoder can assume that rapid I-frame decoding capability is available in decoders, it can save bits by not sending D-frames (thus improving compression of the video content). For this reason, D-frames are seldom actually used in MPEG-1 video encoding, and the D-frame feature has not been included in any later video coding standards.\nMacroblocks.\nMPEG-1 operates on video in a series of 8\u00d78 blocks for quantization. However, to reduce the bit rate needed for motion vectors and because chroma (color) is subsampled by a factor of 4, each pair of (red and blue) chroma blocks corresponds to 4 different luma blocks. That is, for 4 luma blocks of size 8x8, there is one Cb block of 8x8 and one Cr block of 8x8. This set of 6 blocks, with a picture resolution of 16\u00d716, is processed together and called a \"macroblock\".\nAll of these 8x8 blocks are independently put through DCT and quantization.\nA macroblock is the smallest independent unit of (color) video. Motion vectors (see below) operate solely at the macroblock level.\nIf the height or width of the video are not exact multiples of 16, full rows and full columns of macroblocks must still be encoded and decoded to fill out the picture (though the extra decoded pixels are not displayed).\nMotion vectors.\nTo decrease the amount of temporal redundancy in a video, only blocks that change are updated, (up to the maximum GOP size). This is known as conditional replenishment. However, this is not very effective by itself. Movement of the objects, and/or the camera may result in large portions of the frame needing to be updated, even though only the position of the previously encoded objects has changed. Through motion estimation, the encoder can compensate for this movement and remove a large amount of redundant information.\nThe encoder compares the current frame with adjacent parts of the video from the anchor frame (previous I- or P- frame) in a diamond pattern, up to a (encoder-specific) predefined radius limit from the area of the current macroblock. If a match is found, only the direction and distance (i.e. the \"vector\" of the \"motion\") from the previous video area to the current macroblock need to be encoded into the inter-frame (P- or B- frame). The reverse of this process, performed by the decoder to reconstruct the picture, is called motion compensation.\nA predicted macroblock rarely matches the current picture perfectly, however. The differences between the estimated matching area, and the real frame/macroblock is called the prediction error. The larger the amount of prediction error, the more data must be additionally encoded in the frame. For efficient video compression, it is very important that the encoder is capable of effectively and precisely performing motion estimation.\nMotion vectors record the \"distance\" between two areas on screen based on the number of pixels (also called pels). MPEG-1 video uses a motion vector (MV) precision of one half of one pixel, or half-pel. The finer the precision of the MVs, the more accurate the match is likely to be, and the more efficient the compression. There are trade-offs to higher precision, however. Finer MV precision results in using a larger amount of data to represent the MV, as larger numbers must be stored in the frame for every single MV, increased coding complexity as increasing levels of interpolation on the macroblock are required for both the encoder and decoder, and diminishing returns (minimal gains) with higher precision MVs. Half-pel precision was chosen as the ideal trade-off for that point in time. (See: qpel)\nBecause neighboring macroblocks are likely to have very similar motion vectors, this redundant information can be compressed quite effectively by being stored DPCM-encoded. Only the (smaller) amount of difference between the MVs for each macroblock needs to be stored in the final bitstream.\nP-frames have one motion vector per macroblock, relative to the previous anchor frame. B-frames, however, can use two motion vectors; one from the previous anchor frame, and one from the future anchor frame.\nPartial macroblocks, and black borders/bars encoded into the video that do not fall exactly on a macroblock boundary, cause havoc with motion prediction. The block padding/border information prevents the macroblock from closely matching with any other area of the video, and so, significantly larger prediction error information must be encoded for every one of the several dozen partial macroblocks along the screen border. DCT encoding and quantization (see below) also isn't nearly as effective when there is large/sharp picture contrast in a block.\nAn even more serious problem exists with macroblocks that contain significant, random, \"edge noise\", where the picture transitions to (typically) black. All the above problems also apply to edge noise. In addition, the added randomness is simply impossible to compress significantly. All of these effects will lower the quality (or increase the bitrate) of the video substantially.\nDCT.\nEach 8\u00d78 block is encoded by first applying a \"forward\" discrete cosine transform (FDCT) and then a quantization process. The FDCT process (by itself) is theoretically lossless, and can be reversed by applying an \"Inverse\" DCT (IDCT) to reproduce the original values (in the absence of any quantization and rounding errors). In reality, there are some (sometimes large) rounding errors introduced both by quantization in the encoder (as described in the next section) and by IDCT approximation error in the decoder. The minimum allowed accuracy of a decoder IDCT approximation is defined by ISO/IEC 23002-1. (Prior to 2006, it was specified by IEEE 1180-1990.)\nThe FDCT process converts the 8\u00d78 block of uncompressed pixel values (brightness or color difference values) into an 8\u00d78 indexed array of \"frequency coefficient\" values. One of these is the (statistically high in variance) \"DC coefficient\", which represents the average value of the entire 8\u00d78 block. The other 63 coefficients are the statistically smaller \"AC coefficients\", which have positive or negative values each representing sinusoidal deviations from the flat block value represented by the DC coefficient.\nAn example of an encoded 8\u00d78 FDCT block: \nformula_1\nSince the DC coefficient value is statistically correlated from one block to the next, it is compressed using DPCM encoding. Only the (smaller) amount of difference between each DC value and the value of the DC coefficient in the block to its left needs to be represented in the final bitstream.\nAdditionally, the frequency conversion performed by applying the DCT provides a statistical decorrelation function to efficiently concentrate the signal into fewer high-amplitude values prior to applying quantization (see below).\nQuantization.\nQuantization is, essentially, the process of reducing the accuracy of a signal, by dividing it by some larger step size and rounding to an integer value (i.e. finding the nearest multiple, and discarding the remainder).\nThe frame-level quantizer is a number from 0 to 31 (although encoders will usually omit/disable some of the extreme values) which determines how much information will be removed from a given frame. The frame-level quantizer is typically either dynamically selected by the encoder to maintain a certain user-specified bitrate, or (much less commonly) directly specified by the user.\nA \"quantization matrix\" is a string of 64 numbers (ranging from 0 to 255) which tells the encoder how relatively important or unimportant each piece of visual information is. Each number in the matrix corresponds to a certain frequency component of the video image.\nAn example quantization matrix:\nformula_2\nQuantization is performed by taking each of the 64 \"frequency\" values of the DCT block, dividing them by the frame-level quantizer, then dividing them by their corresponding values in the quantization matrix. Finally, the result is rounded down. This significantly reduces, or completely eliminates, the information in some frequency components of the picture. Typically, high frequency information is less visually important, and so high frequencies are much more \"strongly quantized\" (drastically reduced). MPEG-1 actually uses two separate quantization matrices, one for intra-blocks (I-blocks) and one for inter-block (P- and B- blocks) so quantization of different block types can be done independently, and so, more effectively.\nThis quantization process usually reduces a significant number of the \"AC coefficients\" to zero, (known as sparse data) which can then be more efficiently compressed by entropy coding (lossless compression) in the next step.\nAn example quantized DCT block:\nformula_3\nQuantization eliminates a large amount of data, and is the main lossy processing step in MPEG-1 video encoding. This is also the primary source of most MPEG-1 video compression artifacts, like blockiness, color banding, noise, ringing, discoloration, etc. This happens when video is encoded with an insufficient bitrate, and the encoder is therefore forced to use high frame-level quantizers (\"strong quantization\") through much of the video.\nEntropy coding.\nSeveral steps in the encoding of MPEG-1 video are lossless, meaning they will be reversed upon decoding, to produce exactly the same (original) values. Since these lossless data compression steps don't add noise into, or otherwise change the contents (unlike quantization), it is sometimes referred to as noiseless coding. Since lossless compression aims to remove as much redundancy as possible, it is known as entropy coding in the field of information theory.\nThe coefficients of quantized DCT blocks tend to zero towards the bottom-right. Maximum compression can be achieved by a zig-zag scanning of the DCT block starting from the top left and using Run-length encoding techniques.\nThe DC coefficients and motion vectors are DPCM-encoded.\nRun-length encoding (RLE) is a simple method of compressing repetition. A sequential string of characters, no matter how long, can be replaced with a few bytes, noting the value that repeats, and how many times. For example, if someone were to say \"five nines\", you would know they mean the number: 99999.\nRLE is particularly effective after quantization, as a significant number of the AC coefficients are now zero (called sparse data), and can be represented with just a couple of bytes. This is stored in a special 2-dimensional Huffman table that codes the run-length and the run-ending character.\nHuffman Coding is a very popular and relatively simple method of entropy coding, and used in MPEG-1 video to reduce the data size. The data is analyzed to find strings that repeat often. Those strings are then put into a special table, with the most frequently repeating data assigned the shortest code. This keeps the data as small as possible with this form of compression. Once the table is constructed, those strings in the data are replaced with their (much smaller) codes, which reference the appropriate entry in the table. The decoder simply reverses this process to produce the original data.\nThis is the final step in the video encoding process, so the result of Huffman coding is known as the MPEG-1 video \"bitstream.\"\nGOP configurations for specific applications.\nI-frames store complete frame info within the frame and are therefore suited for random access. P-frames provide compression using motion vectors relative to the previous frame ( I or P ). B-frames provide maximum compression but require the previous as well as next frame for computation. Therefore, processing of B-frames requires more buffer on the decoded side. A configuration of the Group of Pictures (GOP) should be selected based on these factors. I-frame only sequences give least compression, but are useful for random access, FF/FR and editability. I- and P-frame sequences give moderate compression but add a certain degree of random access, FF/FR functionality. I-, P- and B-frame sequences give very high compression but also increase the coding/decoding delay significantly. Such configurations are therefore not suited for video-telephony or video-conferencing applications.\nThe typical data rate of an I-frame is 1 bit per pixel while that of a P-frame is 0.1 bit per pixel and for a B-frame, 0.015 bit per pixel.\nPart 3: Audio.\nPart 3 of the MPEG-1 standard covers audio and is defined in ISO/IEC-11172-3.\nMPEG-1 Audio utilizes psychoacoustics to significantly reduce the data rate required by an audio stream. It reduces or completely discards certain parts of the audio that it deduces that the human ear can't \"hear\", either because they are in frequencies where the ear has limited sensitivity, or are \"masked\" by other (typically louder) sounds.\nChannel encoding modes:\nSampling rates:\nBit rates:\nMPEG-1 Audio is divided into 3 layers. Each higher layer is more computationally complex, and generally more efficient at lower bitrates than the previous. The layers are semi backwards compatible as higher layers reuse technologies implemented by the lower layers. A \"full\" Layer II decoder can also play Layer I audio, but \"not\" Layer III audio, although not all higher level players are \"full\".\nLayer I.\nMPEG-1 Audio Layer I is a simplified version of MPEG-1 Audio Layer II. Layer I uses a smaller 384-sample frame size for very low delay, and finer resolution. This is advantageous for applications like teleconferencing, studio editing, etc. It has lower complexity than Layer II to facilitate real-time encoding on the hardware available c.\u20091990.\nLayer I saw limited adoption in its time, and most notably was used on Philips' defunct Digital Compact Cassette at a bitrate of 384\u00a0kbit/s. With the substantial performance improvements in digital processing since its introduction, Layer I quickly became unnecessary and obsolete.\nLayer I audio files typically use the extension \".mp1\" or sometimes \".m1a\".\nLayer II.\nMPEG-1 Audio Layer II (the first version of MP2, often informally called MUSICAM) is a lossy audio format designed to provide high quality at about 192\u00a0kbit/s for stereo sound. Decoding MP2 audio is computationally simple relative to MP3, AAC, etc.\nHistory/MUSICAM.\nMPEG-1 Audio Layer II was derived from the MUSICAM (\"Masking pattern adapted Universal Subband Integrated Coding And Multiplexing\") audio codec, developed by Centre commun d'\u00e9tudes de t\u00e9l\u00e9vision et t\u00e9l\u00e9communications (CCETT), Philips, and Institut f\u00fcr Rundfunktechnik (IRT/CNET) as part of the EUREKA 147 pan-European inter-governmental research and development initiative for the development of digital audio broadcasting.\nMost key features of MPEG-1 Audio were directly inherited from MUSICAM, including the filter bank, time-domain processing, audio frame sizes, etc. However, improvements were made, and the actual MUSICAM algorithm was not used in the final MPEG-1 Audio Layer II standard. The widespread usage of the term MUSICAM to refer to Layer II is entirely incorrect and discouraged for both technical and legal reasons.\nTechnical details.\nMP2 is a time-domain encoder. It uses a low-delay 32 sub-band polyphased filter bank for time-frequency mapping; having overlapping ranges (i.e. polyphased) to prevent aliasing. The psychoacoustic model is based on the principles of auditory masking, simultaneous masking effects, and the absolute threshold of hearing (ATH). The size of a Layer II frame is fixed at 1152-samples (coefficients).\nTime domain refers to how analysis and quantization is performed on short, discrete samples/chunks of the audio waveform. This offers low delay as only a small number of samples are analyzed before encoding, as opposed to frequency domain encoding (like MP3) which must analyze many times more samples before it can decide how to transform and output encoded audio. This also offers higher performance on complex, random and transient impulses (such as percussive instruments, and applause), offering avoidance of artifacts like pre-echo.\nThe 32 sub-band filter bank returns 32 amplitude coefficients, one for each equal-sized frequency band/segment of the audio, which is about 700\u00a0Hz wide (depending on the audio's sampling frequency). The encoder then utilizes the psychoacoustic model to determine which sub-bands contain audio information that is less important, and so, where quantization will be inaudible, or at least much less noticeable.\nThe psychoacoustic model is applied using a 1024-point fast Fourier transform (FFT). Of the 1152 samples per frame, 64 samples at the top and bottom of the frequency range are ignored for this analysis. They are presumably not significant enough to change the result. The psychoacoustic model uses an empirically determined masking model to determine which sub-bands contribute more to the masking threshold, and how much quantization noise each can contain without being perceived. Any sounds below the absolute threshold of hearing (ATH) are completely discarded. The available bits are then assigned to each sub-band accordingly.\nTypically, sub-bands are less important if they contain quieter sounds (smaller coefficient) than a neighboring (i.e. similar frequency) sub-band with louder sounds (larger coefficient). Also, \"noise\" components typically have a more significant masking effect than \"tonal\" components.\nLess significant sub-bands are reduced in accuracy by quantization. This basically involves compressing the frequency range (amplitude of the coefficient), i.e. raising the noise floor. Then computing an amplification factor, for the decoder to use to re-expand each sub-band to the proper frequency range.\nLayer II can also optionally use intensity stereo coding, a form of joint stereo. This means that the frequencies above 6\u00a0kHz of both channels are combined/down-mixed into one single (mono) channel, but the \"side channel\" information on the relative intensity (volume, amplitude) of each channel is preserved and encoded into the bitstream separately. On playback, the single channel is played through left and right speakers, with the intensity information applied to each channel to give the illusion of stereo sound. This perceptual trick is known as \"stereo irrelevancy\". This can allow further reduction of the audio bitrate without much perceivable loss of fidelity, but is generally not used with higher bitrates as it does not provide very high quality (transparent) audio.\nQuality.\nSubjective audio testing by experts, in the most critical conditions ever implemented, has shown MP2 to offer transparent audio compression at 256\u00a0kbit/s for 16-bit 44.1\u00a0kHz CD audio using the earliest reference implementation (more recent encoders should presumably perform even better). That (approximately) 1:6 compression ratio for CD audio is particularly impressive because it is quite close to the estimated upper limit of perceptual entropy, at just over 1:8. Achieving much higher compression is simply not possible without discarding some perceptible information.\nMP2 remains a favoured lossy audio coding standard due to its particularly high audio coding performances on important audio material such as castanet, symphonic orchestra, male and female voices and particularly complex and high energy transients (impulses) like percussive sounds: triangle, glockenspiel and audience applause. More recent testing has shown that MPEG Multichannel (based on MP2), despite being compromised by an inferior matrixed mode (for the sake of backwards compatibility) rates just slightly lower than much more recent audio codecs, such as Dolby Digital (AC-3) and Advanced Audio Coding (AAC) (mostly within the margin of error\u2014and substantially superior in some cases, such as audience applause). This is one reason that MP2 audio continues to be used extensively. The MPEG-2 AAC Stereo verification tests reached a vastly different conclusion, however, showing AAC to provide superior performance to MP2 at half the bitrate. The reason for this disparity with both earlier and later tests is not clear, but strangely, a sample of applause is notably absent from the latter test.\nLayer II audio files typically use the extension \".mp2\" or sometimes \".m2a\".\nLayer III.\nMPEG-1 Audio Layer III (the first version of MP3) is a lossy audio format designed to provide acceptable quality at about 64\u00a0kbit/s for monaural audio over single-channel (BRI) ISDN links, and 128\u00a0kbit/s for stereo sound.\nHistory/ASPEC.\nMPEG-1 Audio Layer III was derived from the \"Adaptive Spectral Perceptual Entropy Coding\" (ASPEC) codec developed by Fraunhofer as part of the EUREKA 147 pan-European inter-governmental research and development initiative for the development of digital audio broadcasting. ASPEC was adapted to fit in with the Layer II model (frame size, filter bank, FFT, etc.), to become Layer III.\nASPEC was itself based on \"Multiple adaptive Spectral audio Coding\" (MSC) by E. F. Schroeder, \"Optimum Coding in the Frequency domain\" (OCF) the doctoral thesis by Karlheinz Brandenburg at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, \"Perceptual Transform Coding\" (PXFM) by J. D. Johnston at AT&amp;T Bell Labs, and \"Transform coding of audio signals\" by Y. Mahieux and J. Petit at Institut f\u00fcr Rundfunktechnik (IRT/CNET).\nTechnical details.\nMP3 is a frequency-domain audio transform encoder. Even though it utilizes some of the lower layer functions, MP3 is quite different from MP2.\nMP3 works on 1152 samples like MP2, but needs to take multiple frames for analysis before frequency-domain (MDCT) processing and quantization can be effective. It outputs a variable number of samples, using a bit buffer to enable this variable bitrate (VBR) encoding while maintaining 1152 sample size output frames. This causes a significantly longer delay before output, which has caused MP3 to be considered unsuitable for studio applications where editing or other processing needs to take place.\nMP3 does not benefit from the 32 sub-band polyphased filter bank, instead just using an 18-point MDCT transformation on each output to split the data into 576 frequency components, and processing it in the frequency domain. This extra granularity allows MP3 to have a much finer psychoacoustic model, and more carefully apply appropriate quantization to each band, providing much better low-bitrate performance.\nFrequency-domain processing imposes some limitations as well, causing a factor of 12 or 36 \u00d7 worse temporal resolution than Layer II. This causes quantization artifacts, due to transient sounds like percussive events and other high-frequency events that spread over a larger window. This results in audible smearing and pre-echo. MP3 uses pre-echo detection routines, and VBR encoding, which allows it to temporarily increase the bitrate during difficult passages, in an attempt to reduce this effect. It is also able to switch between the normal 36 sample quantization window, and instead using 3\u00d7 short 12 sample windows instead, to reduce the temporal (time) length of quantization artifacts. And yet in choosing a fairly small window size to make MP3's temporal response adequate enough to avoid the most serious artifacts, MP3 becomes much less efficient in frequency domain compression of stationary, tonal components.\nBeing forced to use a \"hybrid\" time domain (filter bank) /frequency domain (MDCT) model to fit in with Layer II simply wastes processing time and compromises quality by introducing aliasing artifacts. MP3 has an aliasing cancellation stage specifically to mask this problem, but which instead produces frequency domain energy which must be encoded in the audio. This is pushed to the top of the frequency range, where most people have limited hearing, in hopes the distortion it causes will be less audible.\nLayer II's 1024 point FFT doesn't entirely cover all samples, and would omit several entire MP3 sub-bands, where quantization factors must be determined. MP3 instead uses two passes of FFT analysis for spectral estimation, to calculate the global and individual masking thresholds. This allows it to cover all 1152 samples. Of the two, it utilizes the global masking threshold level from the more critical pass, with the most difficult audio.\nIn addition to Layer II's intensity encoded joint stereo, MP3 can use middle/side (mid/side, m/s, MS, matrixed) joint stereo. With mid/side stereo, certain frequency ranges of both channels are merged into a single (middle, mid, L+R) mono channel, while the sound difference between the left and right channels is stored as a separate (side, L-R) channel. Unlike intensity stereo, this process does not discard any audio information. When combined with quantization, however, it can exaggerate artifacts.\nIf the difference between the left and right channels is small, the side channel will be small, which will offer as much as a 50% bitrate savings, and associated quality improvement. If the difference between left and right is large, standard (discrete, left/right) stereo encoding may be preferred, as mid/side joint stereo will not provide any benefits. An MP3 encoder can switch between m/s stereo and full stereo on a frame-by-frame basis.\nUnlike Layers I and II, MP3 uses variable-length Huffman coding (after perceptual) to further reduce the bitrate, without any further quality loss.\nQuality.\nMP3's more fine-grained and selective quantization does prove notably superior to MP2 at lower-bitrates. It is able to provide nearly equivalent audio quality to Layer II, at a 15% lower bitrate (approximately). 128\u00a0kbit/s is considered the \"sweet spot\" for MP3; meaning it provides generally acceptable quality stereo sound on most music, and there are diminishing quality improvements from increasing the bitrate further. MP3 is also regarded as exhibiting artifacts that are less annoying than Layer II, when both are used at bitrates that are too low to possibly provide faithful reproduction.\nLayer III audio files use the extension \".mp3\".\nMPEG-2 audio extensions.\nThe MPEG-2 standard includes several extensions to MPEG-1 Audio. These are known as MPEG-2 BC \u2013 backwards compatible with MPEG-1 Audio. MPEG-2 Audio is defined in ISO/IEC 13818-3.\nThese sampling rates are exactly half that of those originally defined for MPEG-1 Audio. They were introduced to maintain higher quality sound when encoding audio at lower-bitrates. The even-lower bitrates were introduced because tests showed that MPEG-1 Audio could provide higher quality than any existing (c.\u20091994) very low bitrate (i.e. speech) audio codecs.\nPart 4: Conformance testing.\nPart 4 of the MPEG-1 standard covers conformance testing, and is defined in ISO/IEC-11172-4.\nConformance: Procedures for testing conformance.\nProvides two sets of guidelines and reference bitstreams for testing the conformance of MPEG-1 audio and video decoders, as well as the bitstreams produced by an encoder.\nPart 5: Reference software.\nPart 5 of the MPEG-1 standard includes reference software, and is defined in ISO/IEC TR 11172\u20135.\nSimulation: Reference software.\nC reference code for encoding and decoding of audio and video, as well as multiplexing and demultiplexing.\nThis includes the \"ISO Dist10\" audio encoder code, which LAME and TooLAME were originally based upon.\nFile extension.\n.mpg is one of a number of file extensions for MPEG-1 or MPEG-2 audio and video compression. MPEG-1 Part 2 video is rare nowadays, and this extension typically refers to an MPEG program stream (defined in MPEG-1 and MPEG-2) or MPEG transport stream (defined in MPEG-2). Other suffixes such as .m2ts also exist specifying the precise container, in this case MPEG-2 TS, but this has little relevance to MPEG-1 media.\n.mp3 is the most common extension for files containing MP3 audio (typically MPEG-1 Audio, sometimes MPEG-2 Audio). An MP3 file is typically an uncontained stream of raw audio; the conventional way to tag MP3 files is by writing data to \"garbage\" segments of each frame, which preserve the media information but are discarded by the player. This is similar in many respects to how raw .AAC files are tagged (but this is less supported nowadays, e.g. iTunes).\nNote that although it would apply, .mpg does not normally append raw AAC or AAC in MPEG-2 Part 7 Containers. The .aac extension normally denotes these audio files.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20057", "revid": "22824084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20057", "title": "Mumia Abu-Jamal", "text": "American incarcerated activist (born 1954)\nMumia Abu-Jamal (born Wesley Cook; April 24, 1954) is an American political activist and journalist who was convicted of murder and sentenced to death in 1982 for the 1981 murder of Philadelphia police officer Daniel Faulkner. While on death row, he wrote and commented on the criminal justice system in the United States. After numerous appeals, his death sentence was overturned by a federal court. In 2011, the prosecution agreed to a sentence of life imprisonment without parole. He entered the general prison population early the following year.\nBeginning at the age of 14 in 1968, Abu-Jamal became involved with the Black Panther Party and was a member until October 1970, leaving the party at age 16. After leaving, he completed his high school education, and later became a radio reporter. He eventually served as president of the Philadelphia Association of Black Journalists (1978\u20131980). He supported MOVE, a Philadelphia-based organization, and covered the 1978 confrontation in which one police officer was killed. The MOVE Nine were the members who were arrested and convicted of murder in that case.\nSince 1982, the murder trial of Abu-Jamal has been seriously criticized for constitutional failings; some have claimed that he is innocent, and many opposed his death sentence. The Faulkner family, politicians, and other groups involved with law enforcement, state and city governments argue that Abu-Jamal's trial was fair, his guilt beyond question, and his death sentence justified. \nWhen his death sentence was overturned by a federal court in 2001, he was described as \"perhaps the world's best-known death-row inmate\" by \"The New York Times\". During his imprisonment, Abu-Jamal has published books and commentaries on social and political issues; his first book was \"Live from Death Row\" (1995).\nEarly life and activism.\nAbu-Jamal was born Wesley Cook in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, where he grew up. He has a younger brother named William. They attended local public schools. In 1968, a high school teacher, a Kenyan man instructing a class on African cultures, encouraged the students to take African or Arabic names for classroom use; he gave Cook the name \"Mumia\". According to Abu-Jamal, \"Mumia\" means \"Prince\" and was the name of several Kenyan anti-colonial African nationalists who fought in the Mau Mau uprising before Kenyan independence.\nInvolvement with the Black Panthers.\nAbu-Jamal has described being \"kicked\u00a0... into the Black Panther Party\" as a teenager of 14, after suffering a beating from \"white racists\" and a policeman for trying to disrupt a 1968 rally for Independent candidate George Wallace, former governor of Alabama, who was running on a racist platform. From then, he helped form the Philadelphia branch of the Black Panther Party with Defense Captain Reggie Schell, and other Panthers. He was appointed as the chapter's \"Lieutenant of Information,\" responsible for writing information and news communications. In an interview in the early years, Abu-Jamal quoted Mao Zedong, saying, \"Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun\". That same year, he dropped out of Benjamin Franklin High School and began living at the branch's headquarters.\nHe spent late 1969 in New York City and early 1970 in Oakland, living and working with BPP colleagues in those cities; the party's headquarters based in Oakland. He was a party member from May 1969 until October 1970. During this period, he was subject to illegal surveillance as part of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's COINTELPRO program, with which the Philadelphia police cooperated. The FBI was working to infiltrate black radical groups and to disrupt them by creating internal dissension.\nReturn to education.\nAfter leaving the Panthers, Abu-Jamal returned as a student to his former high school. He was suspended for distributing literature calling for \"black revolutionary student power\". He led unsuccessful protests to change the school name to Malcolm X High, to honor the major African-American leader who had been killed in New York by political opponents.\nAfter attaining his GED, Abu-Jamal studied briefly at Goddard College in rural Vermont. He returned to Philadelphia.\nMarriages and family.\nCook adopted the surname Abu-Jamal (\"father of Jamal\" in Arabic, a type of name known as a \"kunya\") after the birth of his first child, son Jamal, on July 18, 1971. He married Jamal's mother Biba in 1973, but they did not stay together long. Their daughter, Lateefa, was born shortly after the wedding. The couple divorced.\nIn 1977, Abu-Jamal married again, to his second wife, Marilyn (known as \"Peachie\"). Their son, Mazi, was born in early 1978. By 1981, Abu-Jamal had divorced Peachie and had married his third (and last) wife, Wadiya. They were married for over 40 years, until she died unexpectedly on December 27, 2022.\nRadio journalism career.\nBy 1975, Abu-Jamal was working in radio newscasting, first at Temple University's WRTI and then at commercial enterprises. In 1975, he was employed at radio station WHAT, and he became host of a weekly feature program at WCAU-FM in 1978. He also worked for brief periods at radio station WPEN. He became active in the local chapter of the Marijuana Users Association of America.\nFrom 1979 to 1981, he worked at National Public Radio (NPR) affiliate WHYY. The management asked him to resign, saying that he did not maintain a sufficiently objective approach in his presentation of news. As a radio journalist, Abu-Jamal was renowned for identifying with and covering the MOVE anarcho-primitivist commune in West Philadelphia's Powelton Village neighborhood. He reported on the 1979\u201380 trial of the \"MOVE Nine\", who were convicted of the murder of police officer James Ramp. Abu-Jamal had several high-profile interviews, including with Julius Erving, Bob Marley, and Alex Haley. He was elected president of the Philadelphia Association of Black Journalists.\nBefore joining MOVE, Abu-Jamal reported on the organization. When he joined MOVE, he said it was because of his love of the people in the organization. Thinking back on it later, he said he \"was probably enraged as well\".\nIn December 1981, Abu-Jamal was working as a taxicab driver in Philadelphia two nights a week to supplement his income. He had been working part-time as a reporter for WDAS, then an African American oriented and minority-owned radio station.\nTraffic stop and murder of officer Faulkner.\nAt 3:55\u00a0am on December 9, 1981, in Philadelphia, close to the intersection at 13th and Locust Streets, Philadelphia Police Department officer Daniel Faulkner conducted a traffic stop on a vehicle belonging to and driven by William Cook, Abu-Jamal's younger brother. Faulkner and Cook became engaged in a physical confrontation. Driving his cab in the vicinity, Abu-Jamal observed the altercation, parked, and ran across the street toward Cook's car. Faulkner was shot in the back and face. He shot Abu-Jamal in the stomach. Faulkner died at the scene from the gunshot to his head.\nArrest and trial.\nPolice arrived and arrested Abu-Jamal, who was found to be wearing a shoulder holster. His revolver, which had five spent cartridges, was beside him. He was taken directly from the scene of the shooting to Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, where he received treatment for his wound. He was next taken to Police\nHeadquarters, where he was charged and held for trial in the first-degree murder of Officer Faulkner.\nProsecution case at trial.\nThe prosecution presented four witnesses to the court about the shootings. Robert Chobert, a cab driver who testified he was parked behind Faulkner, identified Abu-Jamal as the shooter. Cynthia White testified that Abu-Jamal emerged from a nearby parking lot and shot Faulkner. Michael Scanlan, a motorist, testified that from two car lengths away he saw a man matching Abu-Jamal's description run across the street from a parking lot and shoot Faulkner. Albert Magilton testified to seeing Faulkner pull over Cook's car. As Abu-Jamal started to cross the street toward them, Magilton turned away and did not see what happened next.\nThe prosecution presented two witnesses from the hospital where Abu-Jamal was treated. Hospital security guard Priscilla Durham and police officer Garry Bell testified that Abu-Jamal said in the hospital, \"I shot the motherfucker, and I hope the motherfucker dies.\"\nA .38 caliber Charter Arms revolver, belonging to Abu-Jamal, with five spent cartridges, was retrieved beside him at the scene. He was wearing a shoulder holster. Anthony Paul, the Supervisor of the Philadelphia Police Department's firearms identification unit, testified at trial that the cartridge cases and rifling characteristics of the weapon were consistent with bullet fragments taken from Faulkner's body. Tests to confirm that Abu-Jamal had handled and fired the weapon were not performed. Contact with arresting police and other surfaces at the scene could have compromised the forensic value of such tests.\nDefense case at trial.\nThe defense maintained that Abu-Jamal was innocent, and that the prosecution witnesses were unreliable. The defense presented nine character witnesses, including poet Sonia Sanchez, who testified that Abu-Jamal was \"viewed by the black community as a creative, articulate, peaceful, genial man\". Another defense witness, Dessie Hightower, testified that he saw a man running along the street shortly after the shooting, although he did not see the shooting itself. His testimony contributed to the development of a \"running man theory\", based on the possibility that a \"running man\" may have been the shooter. Veronica Jones also testified for the defense, but she did not testify to having seen another man. Other potential defense witnesses refused to appear in court. Abu-Jamal did not testify in his own defense, nor did his brother, William Cook. Cook had repeatedly told investigators at the crime scene: \"I ain't got nothing to do with this!\"\nVerdict and sentence.\nAfter three hours of deliberations, the jury presented a unanimous guilty verdict.\nIn the sentencing phase of the trial, Abu-Jamal read to the jury from a prepared statement. He was cross-examined about issues relevant to the assessment of his character by Joseph McGill, the prosecuting attorney.\nIn his statement, Abu-Jamal criticized his attorney as a \"legal trained lawyer\", who was imposed on him against his will and who \"knew he was inadequate to the task and chose to follow the directions of this black-robed conspirator [referring to the judge], Albert Sabo, even if it meant ignoring my directions.\" He claimed that his rights had been \"deceitfully stolen\" from him by Sabo, particularly focusing on the denial of his request to receive defense assistance from John Africa, who was not an attorney, and being prevented from proceeding \"pro se\". He quoted remarks of John Africa, and said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Does it matter whether a white man is charged with killing a black man or a black man is charged with killing a white man? As for justice when the prosecutor represents the Commonwealth the Judge represents the Commonwealth and the court-appointed lawyer is paid and supported by the Commonwealth, who follows the wishes of the defendant, the man charged with the crime? If the court-appointed lawyer ignores, or goes against the wishes of the man he is charged with representing, whose wishes does he follow? Who does he truly represent or work for?\u00a0... I am innocent of these charges that I have been charged of and convicted of and despite the connivance of Sabo, McGill and Jackson to deny me my so-called rights to represent myself, to assistance of my choice, to personally select a jury who is totally of my peers, to cross-examine witnesses, and to make both opening and closing arguments, I am still innocent of these charges.\nAbu-Jamal was sentenced to death by the unanimous decision of the jury. \nAmnesty International has objected to the introduction by the prosecution at the time of his sentencing of statements from when he was an activist as a youth. It also protested the politicization of the trial, noting that there was documented recent history in Philadelphia of police abuse and corruption, including fabricated evidence and use of excessive force. Amnesty International concluded \"that the proceedings used to convict and sentence Mumia Abu-Jamal to death were in violation of minimum international standards that govern fair trial procedures and the use of the death penalty\".\nAppeals and review.\nState appeals.\nThe Supreme Court of Pennsylvania on March 6, 1989, heard and rejected a direct appeal of his conviction. It subsequently denied rehearing. The Supreme Court of the United States denied his petition for writ of \"certiorari\" on October 1, 1990, and denied his petition for rehearing twice up to June 10, 1991.\nOn June 1, 1995, Abu-Jamal's death warrant was signed by Pennsylvania Governor Tom Ridge. Its execution was suspended while Abu-Jamal pursued state post-conviction review. At the post-conviction review hearings, new witnesses were called. William \"Dales\" Singletary testified that he saw the shooting, and that the gunman was the passenger in Cook's car. Singletary's account contained discrepancies which rendered it \"not credible\" in the opinion of the court.\nThe six judges of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania ruled unanimously that all issues raised by Abu-Jamal, including the claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, were without merit. The Supreme Court of the United States denied a petition for \"certiorari\" against that decision on October 4, 1999, enabling Ridge to sign a second death warrant on October 13, 1999. Its execution was stayed as Abu-Jamal began to seek federal \"habeas corpus\" review.\nIn 1999, Arnold Beverly claimed that he and an unnamed assailant, not Mumia Abu-Jamal, shot Daniel Faulkner as part of a contract killing because Faulkner was interfering with graft and payoff to corrupt police. As Abu-Jamal's defense team prepared another appeal in 2001, they were divided over use of the Beverly affidavit. Some thought it usable and others rejected Beverly's story as \"not credible\".\nPrivate investigator George Newman claimed in 2001 that Chobert had recanted his testimony. Commentators noted that police and news photographs of the crime scene did not show Chobert's taxi, and that Cynthia White, the only witness at the original trial to testify to seeing the taxi, had previously provided crime scene descriptions that omitted it. Cynthia White was declared dead by the state of New Jersey in 1992, but Pamela Jenkins claimed that she saw White alive as late as 1997. The Free Mumia Coalition has claimed that White was a police informant and that she falsified her testimony against Abu-Jamal.\nKenneth Pate, who was imprisoned with Abu-Jamal on other charges, has since claimed that his step-sister Priscilla Durham, a hospital security guard, admitted later she had not heard the \"hospital confession\" to which she had testified at trial. The hospital doctors said that Abu-Jamal was \"on the verge of fainting\" when brought in, and they did not hear any such confession.\nIn 2008, the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania rejected a further request from Abu-Jamal for a hearing into claims that the trial witnesses perjured themselves, on the grounds that he had waited too long before filing the appeal.\nOn March 26, 2012, the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania rejected his appeal for retrial. His defense had asserted, based on a 2009 report by the National Academy of Sciences, that forensic evidence presented by the prosecution and accepted into evidence in the original trial was unreliable. This was reported as Abu-Jamal's last legal appeal.\nOn April 30, 2018, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court ruled that Abu-Jamal would not be immediately granted another appeal and that the proceedings had to continue until August 30 of that year. The defense argued that former Pennsylvania Supreme Court Chief justice Ronald D. Castille should have recused himself from the 2012 appeals decision after his involvement as Philadelphia District Attorney (DA) in the 1989 appeal. Both sides of the 2018 proceedings repeatedly cited a 1990 letter sent by Castille to then-Governor Bob Casey, urging Casey to sign the execution warrants of those convicted of murdering police. This letter, demanding Casey send \"a clear and dramatic message to all cop killers,\" was claimed as one of many reasons to suspect Castille's bias in the case. Philadelphia's current DA Larry Krasner stated he could not find any document supporting the defense's claim. On August 30, 2018, the proceedings to determine another appeal were once again extended and a ruling on the matter was delayed for at least 60 more days.\nIn April 2019, Krasner agreed to drop his opposition a new appeal effort for Abu-Jamal, thus paving the way for a new hearing. In March 2023, Philadelphia-based Common Pleas Court Judge Lucretia Clemons would block this latest appeal effort.\nFederal District Court 2001 ruling.\nThe Free Mumia Coalition published statements by William Cook and his brother Abu-Jamal in the spring of 2001. Cook, who had been stopped by the police officer, had not made any statement before April 29, 2001, and did not testify at his brother's trial. In 2001 he said that he had not seen who had shot Faulkner. Abu-Jamal did not make any public statements about Faulkner's murder until May 4, 2001. In his version of events, he claimed that he was sitting in his cab across the street when he heard shouting, saw a police vehicle, and heard the sound of gunshots. Upon seeing his brother appearing disoriented across the street, Abu-Jamal ran to him from the parking lot and was shot by a police officer.\nIn 2001, Judge William H. Yohn, Jr. of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania upheld the conviction, saying that Abu-Jamal did not have the right to a new trial. He vacated the sentence of death on December 18, 2001, citing irregularities in the penalty phase of the trial and the original process of sentencing. He said that \"the jury instructions and verdict sheet in this case involved an unreasonable application of federal law. The charge and verdict form created a reasonable likelihood that the jury believed it was precluded from considering any mitigating circumstance that had not been found unanimously to exist.\" He ordered the State of Pennsylvania to commence new sentencing proceedings within 180 days, and ruled unconstitutional the requirement that a jury be unanimous in its finding of circumstances mitigating against a sentence of death.\nEliot Grossman and Marlene Kamish, attorneys for Abu-Jamal, criticized the ruling on the grounds that it denied the possibility of a \"trial de novo\", at which they could introduce evidence that their client had been framed. Prosecutors also criticized the ruling. Officer Faulkner's widow Maureen said the judgment would allow Abu-Jamal, whom she described as a \"remorseless, hate-filled killer\", to \"be permitted to enjoy the pleasures that come from simply being alive\". Both parties appealed.\nFederal appeal and review.\nOn December 6, 2005, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals admitted four issues for appeal of the ruling of the District Court: \nThe Third Circuit Court heard oral arguments in the appeals on May 17, 2007, at the United States Courthouse in Philadelphia. The appeal panel consisted of Chief Judge Anthony Joseph Scirica, Judge Thomas Ambro, and Judge Robert Cowen. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania sought to reinstate the sentence of death, on the basis that Yohn's ruling was flawed, as he should have deferred to the Pennsylvania Supreme Court which had already ruled on the issue of sentencing. The prosecution said that the \"Batson\" claim was invalid because Abu-Jamal made no complaints during the original jury selection.\nThe resulting jury was racially mixed, with 2 blacks and 10 whites at the time of the unanimous conviction, but defense counsel told the Third Circuit Court that Abu-Jamal did not get a fair trial because the jury was racially biased, misinformed, and the judge was a racist. He noted that the prosecution used eleven out of fourteen peremptory challenges to eliminate prospective black jurors. Terri Maurer-Carter, a former Philadelphia court stenographer, stated in a 2001 affidavit that she overheard Judge Sabo say \"Yeah, and I'm going to help them fry the nigger,\" in the course of a conversation with three people present regarding Abu-Jamal's case. Sabo denied having made any such comment.\nOn March 27, 2008, the three-judge panel issued a majority 2\u20131 opinion upholding Yohn's 2001 opinion but rejecting the bias and \"Batson\" claims, with Judge Ambro dissenting on the \"Batson\" issue. On July 22, 2008, Abu-Jamal's formal petition seeking reconsideration of the decision by the full Third Circuit panel of 12 judges was denied. On April 6, 2009, the United States Supreme Court refused to hear Abu-Jamal's appeal, allowing his conviction to stand.\nOn January 19, 2010, the Supreme Court ordered the appeals court to reconsider its decision to rescind the death penalty. The same three-judge panel convened in Philadelphia on November 9, 2010, to hear oral argument. On April 26, 2011, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals reaffirmed its prior decision to vacate the death sentence on the grounds that the jury instructions and verdict form were ambiguous and confusing. The Supreme Court declined to hear the case in October.\nDeath penalty dropped.\nOn December 7, 2011, District Attorney of Philadelphia R. Seth Williams announced that prosecutors, with the support of the victim's family, would no longer seek the death penalty for Abu-Jamal and would accept a sentence of life imprisonment without parole. This sentence was reaffirmed by the Superior Court of Pennsylvania on July 9, 2013.\nAfter the press conference on the sentence, widow Maureen Faulkner said that she did not want to relive the trauma of another trial. She understood that it would be extremely difficult to present the case against Abu-Jamal again, after the passage of 30 years and the deaths of several key witnesses. She also reiterated her belief that Abu-Jamal will be punished further after death.\nLife as a prisoner.\nIn 1991, Abu-Jamal published an essay in the \"Yale Law Journal\" on the death penalty and his death row experience. In May 1994, he was engaged by NPR's \"All Things Considered\" program to deliver a series of monthly three-minute commentaries on crime and punishment. The broadcast plans and commercial arrangement were canceled following condemnations from, among others, the Fraternal Order of Police and Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole. Abu-Jamal sued NPR for not airing his work, but a federal judge dismissed the suit. His commentaries were later published in May 1995 as part of his first book, \"Live from Death Row.\"\nIn January 1996, Abu-Jamal completed a B.A. degree via correspondence classes at Goddard College, which he had first attended for a short time as a young man. Soon after, in May of 1996, the now defunct New College of California School of Law presented him with an honorary Doctorate of Law degree \"for his struggle to resist the death penalty.\"\nAbu-Jamal has been invited as a commencement speaker by a number of colleges and has participated via recordings. In 1999, he was invited to record a keynote address for the graduating class at Evergreen State College in Washington state. The event was protested by some. In 2000, he recorded a commencement address for Antioch College.\nOn October 5, 2014, he gave the commencement speech at Goddard College, via playback of a recording. As before, the choice of Abu-Jamal was controversial. Ten days later, the Pennsylvania legislature passed an addition to the Crime Victims Act called \"Revictimization Relief.\" The new provision was intended to prevent actions that cause \"a temporary or permanent state of mental anguish\" to those who have previously been victimized by crime. It was signed by Republican governor Tom Corbett five days later. Commentators suggested that the bill was directed to control Abu-Jamal's journalism, book publication, and public speaking, and that it would be challenged on free speech grounds. The law quickly faced multiple legal challenges from plaintiffs including Abu-Jamal, prison and human rights activists, publishers, and individual reporters. In April 2015, it was ruled unconstitutional and struck down for being overly vague and broad, and for restricting free expression based on content.\nWith occasional interruptions due to prison disciplinary actions, Abu-Jamal has for many years been a regular commentator on an online broadcast sponsored by Prison Radio. He is also published as a regular columnist for \"Junge Welt,\" a Marxist newspaper in Germany. For almost a decade, he taught introductory courses in Georgist economics by correspondence to other prisoners around the world.\nAbu-Jamal has written and published numerous books during his imprisonment, including \"Live From Death Row\" (1995), a diary of life on Pennsylvania's death row; \"All Things Censored\" (2000), a collection of essays examining issues of crime and punishment; and \"Death Blossoms: Reflections from a Prisoner of Conscience\" (2003), in which he explores religious themes. His 2004 book \"\" is a history of the Black Panthers that draws on his own experience and research and discusses the federal government's COINTELPRO program, which worked to infiltrate and disrupt black activist organizations.\nIn 1995, Abu-Jamal was punished with solitary confinement for engaging in entrepreneurship contrary to prison regulations. Subsequent to the airing of the 1996 HBO documentary \",\" which included footage from visitation interviews conducted with him, the Pennsylvania Department of Corrections banned outsiders from using any recording equipment in state prisons.\nIn litigation before the U.S. Court of Appeals, in 1998, Abu-Jamal successfully established his right while in prison to write for financial gain. The same litigation also established that the Pennsylvania Department of Corrections had illegally opened his mail in an attempt to establish whether he was earning money by his writing.\nWhen, for a brief time in August 1999, Abu-Jamal began delivering his radio commentaries live on the Pacifica Network's weekday \"Democracy Now!\" radio newsmagazine program, prison staff severed the connecting wires of his telephone from their mounting mid-broadcast. He was later allowed to resume his appearances, and hundreds of his broadcasts have since been aired on Pacifica Radio.\nFollowing the overturning of his death sentence, Abu-Jamal was sentenced to life in prison in December 2011. At the end of January 2012, he was shifted from the isolation of death row into the general population at State Correctional Institution\u00a0\u2013 Mahanoy.\nIn August 2015, Abu-Jamal's attorneys filed suit in the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania, alleging that he has not received appropriate medical care for his serious health conditions. In April 2021, he tested positive for COVID-19 and was scheduled for heart surgery to relieve blocked coronary arteries.\nIn 2022, Brown University's John Hay Library acquired Abu-Jamal's personal papers as part of its Voices of Mass Incarceration collecting initiative. According to a Brown University archivist, the Abu-Jamal collection \"is the largest and only collection relating to a person who is still incarcerated.\"\nPopular support and opposition.\nLabor unions, politicians, advocates, educators, the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, and human rights advocacy organizations such as Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International have expressed concern about the impartiality of the trial of Abu-Jamal. Amnesty International neither takes a position on the guilt or innocence of Abu-Jamal nor classifies him as a political prisoner.\nThe family of Daniel Faulkner, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the City of Philadelphia, politicians, and the Fraternal Order of Police have continued to support the original trial and sentencing of the journalist. In August 1999, the Fraternal Order of Police called for an economic boycott against all individuals and organizations that support Abu-Jamal. Many such groups operate within the Prison-Industrial Complex, a system which Abu-Jamal has frequently criticized.\nPartly based on his own writing, Abu-Jamal and his cause have become widely known internationally, and other groups have classified him as a political prisoner. About 25 cities, including Montreal, Palermo, and Paris, have made him an honorary citizen.\nIn 2001, he received the sixth biennial Erich M\u00fchsam Prize, named after an anarcho-communist essayist, which recognizes activism in line with that of its namesake. In October 2002, he was made an honorary member of the German political organization Union of Persecutees of the Nazi Regime.\nOn April 29, 2006, a newly paved road in the Parisian suburb of Saint-Denis was named Rue Mumia Abu-Jamal in his honor. In protest of the street-naming, U.S. Congressman Michael Fitzpatrick and Senator Rick Santorum, both members of the Republican Party of Pennsylvania, introduced resolutions in both Houses of Congress condemning the decision. The House of Representatives voted 368\u201331 in favor of Fitzpatrick's resolution. In December 2006, the 25th anniversary of the murder, the executive committee of the Republican Party for the 59th Ward of the City of Philadelphia\u2014covering approximately Germantown, Philadelphia\u2014filed two criminal complaints in the French legal system against the city of Paris and the city of Saint-Denis, accusing the municipalities of \"glorifying\" Abu-Jamal and alleging the offense \"apology or denial of crime\" in respect of their actions.\nIn 2007, the widow of Officer Faulkner co-authored a book with Philadelphia radio journalist Michael Smerconish titled \"Murdered by Mumia: A Life Sentence of Pain, Loss, and Injustice.\" The book was part memoir of Faulkner's widow and part discussion in which they chronicled Abu-Jamal's trial and discussed evidence for his conviction. They also discussed support for the death penalty.\nIn early 2014, President Barack Obama nominated Debo Adegbile, a former lawyer for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, to head the civil rights division of the Justice Department. He had worked on Abu-Jamal's case, and his nomination was rejected by the U.S. Senate on a bipartisan basis because of that.\nAfter Goddard College invited Abu-Jamal to give a recorded commencement speech in 2014 and an outcry by the police union against this, the Revictimization Relief Act was introduced, passed and signed into Pennsylvania law. It allowed victims and prosecutors to sue if a perpetrator causes a \"state of mental anguish\" by perpetuating \"the continuing effect of a crime on the victim.\" The law was struck down in April 2015 as a vague and overbroad restriction on free speech.\nOn April 10, 2015, Marylin Zuniga, a teacher at Forest Street Elementary School in Orange, New Jersey, was suspended without pay after asking her students to write cards to Abu-Jamal, who was ill in prison due to complications from diabetes, without approval from the school or parents. Some parents and police leaders denounced her actions. Conversely, some community members, parents, teachers, and professors expressed support for Zuniga and condemned her suspension. Scholars and educators nationwide, including Noam Chomsky, Chris Hedges and Cornel West among others, signed a letter calling for her immediate reinstatement. On May 13, 2015, the Orange Preparatory Academy board voted to dismiss Marylin Zuniga after hearing from her and several of her supporters.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nVideo\nSupporter websites\nOpponent websites"}
{"id": "20058", "revid": "352579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20058", "title": "Microprogram.", "text": ""}
{"id": "20059", "revid": "2051880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20059", "title": "Multiplicative function", "text": "Function equal to the product of its values on coprime factors\nIn number theory, a multiplicative function is an arithmetic function formula_1 of a positive integer formula_2 with the property that formula_3 and \nformula_4 whenever formula_5 and formula_6 are coprime.\nAn arithmetic function is said to be completely multiplicative (or totally multiplicative) if formula_3 and formula_8 holds \"for all\" positive integers formula_5 and formula_6, even when they are not coprime.\nExamples.\nSome multiplicative functions are defined to make formulas easier to write:\nThe above functions are all completely multiplicative.\nOther examples of multiplicative functions include many functions of importance in number theory, such as:\nformula_56\nAn example of a non-multiplicative function is the arithmetic function formula_70, the number of representations of formula_2 as a sum of squares of two integers, positive, negative, or zero, where in counting the number of ways, reversal of order is allowed. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;1 = 12 + 02 = (\u22121)2 + 02 = 02 + 12 = 02 + (\u22121)2\nand therefore formula_72. This shows that the function is not multiplicative. However, formula_73 is multiplicative.\nIn the On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences, sequences of values of a multiplicative function have the keyword \"mult\".\nSee arithmetic function for some other examples of non-multiplicative functions.\nProperties.\nA multiplicative function is completely determined by its values at the powers of prime numbers, a consequence of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic. Thus, if \"n\" is a product of powers of distinct primes, say \"n\" = \"p\"\"a\" \"q\"\"b\" ..., then \n\"f\"(\"n\") = \"f\"(\"p\"\"a\") \"f\"(\"q\"\"b\") ...\nThis property of multiplicative functions significantly reduces the need for computation, as in the following examples for \"n\" = 144 = 24 \u00b7 32:\nformula_74\nformula_75\nformula_76\nSimilarly, we have:\nformula_77\nIn general, if \"f\"(\"n\") is a multiplicative function and \"a\", \"b\" are any two positive integers, then\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"f\"(\"a\") \u00b7 \"f\"(\"b\") = \"f\"(gcd(\"a\",\"b\")) \u00b7 \"f\"(lcm(\"a\",\"b\")).\nEvery completely multiplicative function is a homomorphism of monoids and is completely determined by its restriction to the prime numbers.\nConvolution.\nIf \"f\" and \"g\" are two multiplicative functions, one defines a new multiplicative function formula_78, the Dirichlet convolution of \"f\" and \"g\", by\nformula_79\nwhere the sum extends over all positive divisors \"d\" of \"n\". \nWith this operation, the set of all multiplicative functions turns into an abelian group; the identity element is \"\u03b5\". Convolution is commutative, associative, and distributive over addition.\nRelations among the multiplicative functions discussed above include:\nThe Dirichlet convolution can be defined for general arithmetic functions, and yields a ring structure, the Dirichlet ring. \nThe Dirichlet convolution of two multiplicative functions is again multiplicative. A proof of this fact is given by the following expansion for relatively prime formula_88: \nformula_89\nDirichlet series for some multiplicative functions.\nMore examples are shown in the article on Dirichlet series.\nRational arithmetical functions.\nAn arithmetical function \"f\" is said to be a rational arithmetical function of order formula_94 if there exists completely multiplicative functions \"g\"\"1\"...,\"g\"\"r\", \n\"h\"\"1\"...,\"h\"\"s\" such that \nformula_95\nwhere the inverses are with respect to the Dirichlet convolution. Rational arithmetical functions of order formula_96 are known as totient functions, and rational arithmetical functions of order formula_97 are known as quadratic functions or specially multiplicative functions. Euler's function formula_38 is a totient function, and the divisor function formula_45 is a quadratic function. \nCompletely multiplicative functions are rational arithmetical functions of order formula_100. Liouville's function formula_26 is completely multiplicative. The M\u00f6bius function formula_25 is a rational arithmetical function of order formula_103.\nBy convention, the identity element formula_104 under the Dirichlet convolution is a rational arithmetical function of order formula_105.\nAll rational arithmetical functions are multiplicative. A multiplicative function \"f\" is a rational arithmetical function of order formula_94 if and only if its Bell series is of the form \nformula_107\nfor all prime numbers formula_69.\nThe concept of a rational arithmetical function originates from R. Vaidyanathaswamy (1931).\nBusche-Ramanujan identities.\nA multiplicative function formula_1 is said to be specially multiplicative\nif there is a completely multiplicative function formula_110 such that\nformula_111\nfor all positive integers formula_112 and formula_2, or equivalently \nformula_114\nfor all positive integers formula_112 and formula_2, where formula_117 is the M\u00f6bius function. \nThese are known as Busche-Ramanujan identities. \nIn 1906, E. Busche stated the identity\nformula_118\nand, in 1915, S. Ramanujan gave the inverse form\nformula_119\nfor formula_120. S. Chowla gave the inverse form for general formula_17 in 1929, see P. J. McCarthy (1986). The study of Busche-Ramanujan identities begun from an attempt to better understand the special cases given by Busche and Ramanujan. \nIt is known that quadratic functions formula_122 satisfy the Busche-Ramanujan identities with formula_123. Quadratic functions are exactly the same as specially multiplicative functions. Totients satisfy a restricted Busche-Ramanujan identity. For further details, see R. Vaidyanathaswamy (1931).\nMultiplicative function over \"F\"\"q\"[\"X\"].\nLet \"A\" = \"F\"\"q\"[\"X\"], the polynomial ring over the finite field with \"q\" elements. \"A\" is a principal ideal domain and therefore \"A\" is a unique factorization domain.\nA complex-valued function formula_124 on \"A\" is called multiplicative if formula_125 whenever \"f\" and \"g\" are relatively prime.\nZeta function and Dirichlet series in \"F\"\"q\"[\"X\"].\nLet \"h\" be a polynomial arithmetic function (i.e. a function on set of monic polynomials over \"A\"). Its corresponding Dirichlet series is defined to be\n formula_126\nwhere for formula_127 set formula_128 if formula_129 and formula_130 otherwise.\nThe polynomial zeta function is then\n formula_131\nSimilar to the situation in N, every Dirichlet series of a multiplicative function \"h\" has a product representation (Euler product):\n formula_132\nwhere the product runs over all monic irreducible polynomials \"P\". For example, the product representation of the zeta function is as for the integers:\n formula_133\nUnlike the classical zeta function, formula_134 is a simple rational function:\n formula_135\nIn a similar way, If \"f\" and \"g\" are two polynomial arithmetic functions, one defines \"f\"\u00a0*\u00a0\"g\", the \"Dirichlet convolution\" of \"f\" and \"g\", by\n formula_136\nwhere the sum is over all monic divisors \"d\" of\u00a0\"m\", or equivalently over all pairs (\"a\", \"b\") of monic polynomials whose product is \"m\". The identity formula_137 still holds.\nMultivariate.\nMultivariate functions can be constructed using multiplicative model estimators. Where a matrix function of \"A\" is defined as formula_138\na sum can be distributed across the productformula_139\nFor the efficient estimation of \u03a3(.), the following two nonparametric regressions can be considered: formula_140\nand formula_141\nThus it gives an estimate value of formula_142\nwith a local likelihood function for formula_143 with known formula_144 and unknown formula_145.\nGeneralizations.\nAn arithmetical function formula_1 is \nquasimultiplicative if there exists a nonzero constant formula_147 such that\nformula_148\nfor all positive integers formula_149 with formula_150. This concept originates by Lahiri (1972). \nAn arithmetical function formula_1 is semimultiplicative \nif there exists a nonzero constant formula_147, a positive integer formula_5 and\na multiplicative function formula_154 such that\nformula_155\nfor all positive integers formula_2 \n(under the convention that formula_157 if formula_158 is not a positive integer.) This concept is due to David Rearick (1966). \nAn arithmetical function formula_1 is Selberg multiplicative if \nfor each prime formula_69 there exists a function formula_161 on nonnegative integers with formula_162 for\nall but finitely many primes formula_69 such that\nformula_164\nfor all positive integers formula_2, where formula_166 is the exponent of formula_69 in the canonical factorization of formula_2. \nSee Selberg (1977). \nIt is known that the classes of semimultiplicative and Selberg multiplicative functions coincide. They both satisfy the arithmetical identity \nformula_169\nfor all positive integers formula_149. See Haukkanen (2012).\nIt is well known and easy to see that multiplicative functions are quasimultiplicative functions with formula_171 and quasimultiplicative functions are semimultiplicative functions with formula_172.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20060", "revid": "50912462", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20060", "title": "MPEG-2", "text": "Video encoding standard\nMPEG-2 (a.k.a. H.222/H.262 as was defined by the ITU) is a standard for \"the generic coding of moving pictures and associated audio information\". It describes a combination of lossy video compression and lossy audio data compression methods, which permit storage and transmission of movies using currently available storage media and transmission bandwidth. While MPEG-2 is not as efficient as newer standards such as H.264/AVC and H.265/HEVC, backwards compatibility with existing hardware and software means it is still widely used, for example in over-the-air digital television broadcasting and in the DVD-Video standard.\nMain characteristics.\nMPEG-2 is widely used as the format of digital television signals that are broadcast by terrestrial (over-the-air), cable, and direct broadcast satellite TV systems. It also specifies the format of movies and other programs that are distributed on DVD and similar discs. TV stations, TV receivers, DVD players, and other equipment are often designed to this standard. MPEG-2 was the second of several standards developed by the Moving Pictures Expert Group (MPEG) and is an international standard (ISO/IEC 13818, titled \"Information technology \u2014 Generic coding of moving pictures and associated audio information\"). Parts 1 and 2 of MPEG-2 were developed in a collaboration with ITU-T, and they have a respective catalog number in the ITU-T Recommendation Series.\nWhile MPEG-2 is the core of most digital television and DVD formats, it does not completely specify them. Regional institutions can adapt it to their needs by restricting and augmenting aspects of the standard. See Video profiles and levels.\nSystems.\nMPEG-2 Part 1 (ISO/IEC 13818-1 and ITU-T Rec. H.222.0), titled \"Systems\", defines two distinct, but related, container formats. One is the \"transport stream\", a data packet format designed to transmit one data packet in four ATM data packets for streaming digital video and audio over fixed or mobile transmission mediums, where the beginning and the end of the stream may not be identified, such as radio frequency, cable and linear recording mediums, examples of which include ATSC/DVB/ISDB/SBTVD broadcasting, and HDV recording on tape. The other is the \"program stream\", an extended version of the container format with less overhead than \"transport stream\". \"Program stream\" is designed for random access storage mediums such as hard disk drives, optical discs and flash memory.\n\"Transport stream\" file formats include M2TS, which is used on Blu-ray discs, AVCHD on re-writable DVDs and HDV on compact flash cards. \"Program stream\" files include VOB on DVDs and Enhanced VOB on the short lived HD DVD. The standard MPEG-2 \"transport stream\" contains packets of 188 bytes. M2TS prepends each packet with 4 bytes containing a 2-bit copy permission indicator and 30-bit timestamp.\nISO authorized the \"SMPTE Registration Authority, LLC\" as the registration authority for MPEG-2 format identifiers. The registration descriptor of MPEG-2 transport is provided by ISO/IEC 13818-1 in order to enable users of the standard to unambiguously carry data when its format is not necessarily a recognized international standard. This provision will permit the MPEG-2 transport standard to carry all types of data while providing for a method of unambiguous identification of the characteristics of the underlying private data.\nVideo.\nMPEG-2 Part 2 (ISO/IEC 13818-2 and ITU-T Rec. H.262), titled \"Video\", is similar to the previous standard, but adds support for interlaced video, the format used by analog broadcast TV systems. MPEG-2 video is not optimized for low bit rates, especially less than 1\u00a0Mbit/s at standard-definition resolutions. All standards-compliant MPEG-2 Video decoders are fully capable of playing back MPEG-1 Video streams conforming to the constrained parameters bitstream (CPB) limits.\nWith some enhancements, MPEG-2 Video and Systems are also used in some HDTV transmission systems, and is the standard format for over-the-air ATSC digital television.\nAudio.\nMPEG-2 introduces new audio encoding methods compared to MPEG-1:\nMPEG-2 Part 3.\nMPEG-2 Part 3 (ISO/IEC 13818-3), titled \"Audio\", enhances MPEG-1's audio by allowing the coding of audio programs with more than two channels, up to 5.1 multichannel. This method is backwards-compatible with MPEG-1, allowing MPEG-1 audio decoders to decode the two main stereo components of the presentation. This extension is called MPEG Multichannel or MPEG-2 BC (backwards-compatible).\nMPEG-2 Part 3 also defines additional bit rates and sampling rates for MPEG-1 Audio Layers I, II, and III. This extension is known as MPEG-2 LSF (low sampling frequencies), since the new sampling rates are one-half multiples (16, 22.05 and 24\u00a0kHz) of the sampling rates defined in MPEG-1 (32, 44.1 and 48\u00a0kHz).\nMPEG-2 Part 7.\nMPEG-2 Part 7 (ISO/IEC 13818-7), titled \"Advanced Audio Coding (AAC)\" specifies a rather different, non-backwards-compatible audio format. This format is most commonly called Advanced Audio Coding (AAC), but was originally called MPEG-2 NBC (non-backwards-compatible).\nAAC is more efficient than the previous MPEG audio standards, and is in some ways less complicated than its predecessor, MPEG-1 Part 3 Audio Layer 3, in that it does not have the hybrid filter bank. It supports from 1 to 48 channels at sampling rates of 8 to 96\u00a0kHz, with multichannel, multilingual, and multiprogram capabilities.\nAAC is also defined in MPEG-4 Part 3.\nMPEG-2 Parts.\nMPEG-2 standards are published as \"Parts\". Each part covers a certain aspect of the whole specification.\nHistory.\nMPEG-2 evolved out of the shortcomings of MPEG-1.\nMPEG-1's known weaknesses:\nSakae Okubo of NTT was the ITU-T coordinator for developing the H.262/MPEG-2 Part 2 video coding standard and the requirements chairman in MPEG for the MPEG-2 set of standards. The majority of patents underlying MPEG-2 technology are owned by three companies: Sony (311 patents), Thomson (198 patents) and Mitsubishi Electric (119 patents). Hyundai Electronics (now SK Hynix) developed the first MPEG-2 SAVI (System/Audio/Video) decoder in 1995.\nFilename extensions.\ncodice_1, codice_2, and codice_3 are some of a number of filename extensions used for MPEG-2 audio and video file formats. codice_1 and particularly codice_2 are also used for MPEG-1 formats.\nFile extension MP3 (formally MPEG-1 Audio Layer III or MPEG-2 Audio Layer III) is a coding format for digital audio developed largely by the Fraunhofer Society in Germany, with support from other digital scientists in the United States and elsewhere.\nApplications.\nDVD-Video.\nThe DVD-Video standard uses MPEG-2 video, but imposes some restrictions:\nHDV.\nHDV is a format for recording and playback of high-definition MPEG-2 video on a DV cassette tape.\nMOD and TOD.\nMOD and TOD are recording formats for use in consumer digital file-based camcorders.\nXDCAM.\nXDCAM is a professional file-based video recording format.\nDVB.\nApplication-specific restrictions on MPEG-2 video in the DVB standard:\nAllowed resolutions for SDTV:\nFor HDTV:\nATSC.\nThe ATSC A/53 standard used in the United States, uses MPEG-2 video at the Main Profile @ High Level (MP@HL), with additional restrictions such as the maximum bitrate of 19.39\u00a0Mbit/s for broadcast television and 38.8\u00a0Mbit/s for cable television, 4:2:0 chroma subsampling format, and mandatory colorimetry information.\nATSC allows the following video resolutions, aspect ratios, and frame/field rates:\nATSC standard A/63 defines additional resolutions and aspect rates for 50\u00a0Hz (PAL) signal.\nThe ATSC specification and MPEG-2 allow the use of progressive frames, even within an interlaced video sequence. For example, a station that transmits 1080i60 video sequence can use a coding method where those 60 fields are coded with 24 progressive frames and metadata instructs the decoder to interlace them and perform 3:2 pulldown before display. This allows broadcasters to switch between 60\u00a0Hz interlaced (news, soap operas) and 24\u00a0Hz progressive (prime-time) content without ending the MPEG-2 sequence and introducing several seconds of delay as the TV switches formats. This is the reason why 1080p30 and 1080p24 sequences allowed by the ATSC specification are not used in practice.\nThe 1080-line formats are encoded with 1920 \u00d7 1088 pixel luma matrices and 960 \u00d7 540 chroma matrices, but the last 8 lines are discarded by the MPEG-2 decoding and display process.\nATSC A/72 is the newest revision of ATSC standards for digital television, which allows the use of H.264/AVC video coding format and 1080p60 signal.\nMPEG-2 audio was a contender for the ATSC standard during the DTV \"Grand Alliance\" shootout, but lost out to Dolby AC-3.\nISDB-T.\nTechnical features of MPEG-2 in ATSC are also valid for ISDB-T, except that in the main TS has aggregated a second program for mobile devices compressed in MPEG-4 H.264 AVC for video and AAC-LC for audio, mainly known as 1seg.\nBlu-ray.\nMPEG-2 is one of the three supported video coding formats supported by Blu-ray Disc. Early Blu-ray releases typically used MPEG-2 video, but recent releases are almost always in H.264 or occasionally VC-1. Only MPEG-2 video (MPEG-2 part 2) is supported, Blu-ray does not support MPEG-2 audio (parts 3 and 7). Additionally, the container format used on Blu-ray discs is an MPEG-2 transport stream, regardless of which audio and video codecs are used.\nPatent pool.\nAs of January 3, 2024, MPEG-2 patents have expired worldwide, with the exception of only Malaysia, where the last patent is expected to expire in 2035. The last US patent expired on February 23, 2018.\nMPEG LA, a private patent licensing organization, had acquired rights from over 20 corporations and one university to license a patent pool of approximately 640 worldwide patents, which it claimed were \"essential\" to use of MPEG-2 technology. The patent holders included Sony, Mitsubishi Electric, Fujitsu, Panasonic, Scientific Atlanta, Columbia University, Philips, General Instrument, Canon, Hitachi, JVC Kenwood, LG Electronics, NTT, Samsung, Sanyo, Sharp and Toshiba. Where Software patentability is upheld and patents have not expired (only Malaysia), the use of MPEG-2 requires the payment of licensing fees to the patent holders. Other patents were licensed by Audio MPEG, Inc. The development of the standard itself took less time than the patent negotiations. Patent pooling between essential and peripheral patent holders in the MPEG-2 pool was the subject of a study by the University of Wisconsin.\nAccording to the MPEG-2 licensing agreement any use of MPEG-2 technology in countries with active patents (Malaysia) is subject to royalties. MPEG-2 encoders and decoders are subject to $0.35 per unit. Also, any packaged medium (DVDs/Data Streams) is subject to licence fees according to length of recording/broadcast. The royalties were previously priced higher but were lowered at several points, most recently on January 1, 2018. \nAn earlier criticism of the MPEG-2 patent pool was that even though the number of patents had decreased from 1,048 to 416 by June 2013 the license fee had not decreased with the expiration rate of MPEG-2 patents.\nPatent holders.\nThe following organizations have held patents for MPEG-2, as listed at MPEG LA. See also List of United States MPEG-2 patents.\n&lt;section begin=\"MPEG-2 patents\"/&gt;\n &lt;section end=\"MPEG-2 patents\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20061", "revid": "1221109448", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20061", "title": "MPEG-3", "text": "Designation for a group of audio and video coding standards\nMPEG-3 was the designation for an abandoned plan to create a group of audio and video coding standards agreed upon by the Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG) designed to handle HDTV signals at 1080p in the range of 20 to 40 megabits per second. MPEG-3 was launched as an effort to address the need of an HDTV standard while work on MPEG-2 was underway, but it was soon discovered that MPEG-2, at high data rates, would accommodate HDTV. Thus, in 1992 HDTV was included as a separate profile in the MPEG-2 standard and MPEG-3 was rolled into MPEG-2.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20062", "revid": "48096126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20062", "title": "Meditation", "text": "Techniques to train attention and awareness\nMeditation is a practice in which an individual uses a technique to train attention and awareness and detach from reflexive, \"discursive thinking\", achieving a mentally clear and emotionally calm and stable state, while not judging the meditation process itself.\nTechniques are broadly classified into focused (or concentrative) and open monitoring methods. Focused methods involve attention to specific objects like breath or mantras, while open monitoring includes mindfulness and awareness of mental events.\nMeditation is practiced in numerous religious traditions, though it is also practiced independently from any religious or spiritual influences for its health benefits. The earliest records of meditation (\"dhyana\") are found in the Upanishads, and meditation plays a salient role in the contemplative repertoire of Jainism, Buddhism and Hinduism. Meditation-like techniques are also known in Judaism, Christianity and Islam, in the context of remembrance of and prayer and devotion to God.\nAsian meditative techniques have spread to other cultures where they have found application in non-spiritual contexts, such as business and health. Meditation may significantly reduce stress, fear, anxiety, depression, and pain, and enhance peace, perception, self-concept, and well-being. Research is ongoing to better understand the effects of meditation on health (psychological, neurological, and cardiovascular) and other areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe English term \"meditation\" is derived from Old French \"meditacioun\", in turn from Latin \"meditatio\" from a verb \"meditari\", meaning \"to think, contemplate, devise, ponder\". In the Catholic tradition, the use of the term \"meditatio\" as part of a formal, stepwise process of meditation goes back to at least the 12th-century monk Guigo II, before which the Greek word \"theoria\" was used for the same purpose.\nApart from its historical usage, the term \"meditation\" was introduced as a translation for Eastern spiritual practices, referred to as \"dhy\u0101na\" in Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism, which comes from the Sanskrit root \"dhyai\", meaning to contemplate or meditate. The Greek word \"theoria\" actually derives from the same root.\nThe term \"meditation\" in English may also refer to practices from Islamic Sufism, or other traditions such as Jewish Kabbalah and Christian Hesychasm.\nDefinitions.\nDifficulties in defining meditation.\nNo universally accepted definition for meditation.\nMeditation has proven difficult to define as it covers a wide range of dissimilar practices in different traditions and cultures. In popular usage, the word \"meditation\" and the phrase \"meditative practice\" are often used imprecisely to designate practices found across many cultures. These can include almost anything that is claimed to train the attention of mind or to teach calmness or compassion. There remains no definition of necessary and sufficient criteria for meditation that has achieved widespread acceptance within the modern scientific community.\nSeparation of technique from tradition.\nSome of the difficulty in precisely defining meditation has been in recognizing the particularities of the many various traditions; and theories and practice can differ within a tradition. Taylor noted that even within a faith such as \"Hindu\" or \"Buddhist\", schools and individual teachers may teach distinct types of meditation.\nOrnstein noted that \"Most techniques of meditation do not exist as solitary practices but are only artificially separable from an entire system of practice and belief.\" For instance, while monks meditate as part of their everyday lives, they also engage in codified rules with specific outcomes, living together in monasteries with specific cultural settings that include local rights and rituals as part of a unified set of practices.\nDictionary definitions.\nDictionaries give both the original Latin meaning of \"think[ing] deeply about (something)\", as well as the popular usages of \"focusing one's mind for a period of time\", \"the act of giving your attention to only one thing, either as a religious activity or as a way of becoming calm and relaxed\", and \"to engage in mental exercise (such as concentrating on one's breathing or repetition of a mantra) for the purpose of reaching a heightened level of spiritual awareness.\"\nScholarly definitions.\nIn modern psychological research, meditation has been defined and characterized in various ways. Many of these emphasize the role of attention and characterize the practice of meditation as attempts to detach from reflexive, \"discursive thinking,\" not judging the meditation-process itself (\"logical relaxation\"), to achieve a deeper, more devout, or more relaxed state.\nBond et al. (2009) identified criteria for defining a practice as meditation \"for use in a comprehensive systematic review of the therapeutic use of meditation\", using \"a 5-round Delphi study with a panel of 7 experts in meditation research\" who were also trained in diverse but empirically highly studied (Eastern-derived or clinical) forms of meditation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;three main criteria ... as essential to any meditation practice: the use of a defined technique, logic relaxation, and a self-induced state/mode.\nOther criteria deemed important [but not essential] involve a state of psychophysical relaxation, the use of a self-focus skill or anchor, the presence of a state of suspension of logical thought processes, a religious/spiritual/philosophical context, or a state of mental silence.\n... It is plausible that meditation is best thought of as a natural category of techniques best captured by 'family resemblances' ... or by the related 'prototype' model of concepts.\" \nSeveral other definitions of meditation have been used by influential modern reviews of research on meditation across multiple traditions:\nClassifications.\nFocused and open methods.\nIn the West, meditation techniques have often been classified in two broad categories, which in actual practice are often combined: focused (or concentrative) meditation and open monitoring (or mindfulness) meditation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Direction of mental attention... A practitioner can focus intensively on one particular object (so-called \"concentrative meditation\"), on all mental events that enter the field of awareness (so-called \"mindfulness meditation\"), or both specific focal points and the field of awareness.Focused methods include paying attention to the breath, to an idea or feeling (such as \"mett\u0101\" \u2013 loving-kindness), to a \"k\u014dan\", or to a \"mantra\" (such as in transcendental meditation), and single point meditation. Open monitoring methods include mindfulness, \"shikantaza\" and other awareness states.\nOther possible typologies.\nAnother typology divides meditation approaches into concentrative, generative, receptive and reflective practices:\nThe Buddhist tradition often divides meditative practice into \"samatha\", or calm abiding, and \"vipassana\", insight. Mindfulness of breathing, a form of focused attention, calms down the mind; this calmed mind can then investigate the nature of reality, by monitoring the fleeting and ever-changing constituents of experience, by reflective investigation, or by turning back the radiance, focusing awareness on awareness itself and discerning the true nature of mind as awareness itself. A similar distinction can be found in the Inchagiri Sampradaya, where mantra-recitation is used to joke the mind, followed by self-inquiry, investigating what the source is of the \"I\" that is aware.\nMatko and Sedlmeier (2019) \"call into question the common division into 'focused attention' and 'open-monitoring' practices.\" They argue for \"two orthogonal dimensions along which meditation techniques could be classified,\" namely \"activation\" and \"amount of body orientation,\" proposing seven clusters of techniques: \"mindful observation, body-centered meditation, visual concentration, contemplation, affect-centered meditation, mantra meditation, and meditation with movement.\"\nJonathan Shear argues that transcendental meditation is an \"automatic self-transcending\" technique, different from focused attention and open monitoring. In this kind of practice, \"there is no attempt to sustain any particular condition at all. Practices of this kind, once started, are reported to automatically 'transcend' their own activity and disappear, to be started up again later if appropriate.\" Yet, Shear also states that \"automatic self-transcending\" also applies to the way other techniques such as from Zen and Qigong are practiced by experienced meditators \"once they had become effortless and automatic through years of practice.\"\nTechnique.\nPosture.\nAsanas or body postures such as \"padmasana\" (full-lotus, half-lotus), cross-legged sitting, \"seiza\", and kneeling positions are popular meditative postures in Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism and Jainism, although other postures such as sitting, supine (lying), and standing are also used. Meditation is also sometimes done while walking, known as \"kinhin\", while doing a simple task mindfully, known as \"samu\", or while lying down, known as \"shavasana\".\nA 2018 pilot study scientifically compared the stability offered by three common meditation supports\u2014a zafu cushion, a meditation bench, and a chair. The study found that the zafu provided the most stability against side-to-side body sway, while also concluding that chairs and benches are suitable alternatives for beginners, with chairs being specifically recommended for people with back pain or difficulty getting up from a low seated position.\nFrequency.\nThe Transcendental Meditation technique recommends practice of 20 minutes twice per day. Some techniques suggest less time, especially when starting meditation, and Richard Davidson has quoted research saying benefits can be achieved with a practice of only 8 minutes per day. Research shows improvement in meditation time with simple oral and video training. Some meditators practice for much longer, particularly when on a course or retreat. Some meditators find practice best in the hours before dawn.\nSupporting aids.\nUse of prayer beads.\nSome religions have traditions of using prayer beads as tools in devotional meditation. Most prayer beads and Christian rosaries consist of pearls or beads linked together by a thread. The Roman Catholic rosary is a string of beads containing five sets with ten small beads. Eastern and Oriental Orthodox have traditions of using prayer ropes called Comboschini or Meqetaria as an aid to prayerful meditation. The Hindu \"japa mala\" has 108 beads. The figure 108 in itself having spiritual significance as the energy of the sounds equivalates to Om, as well as those used in Gaudiya Vaishnavism, the Hare Krishna tradition, and Jainism. \nBuddhist prayer beads also have 108 beads, but hold a different meaning. In Buddhism, there are 108 human passions that impede enlightenment. Each bead is counted once as a person recites a mantra until the person has gone all the way around the mala. The Muslim \"misbaha\" has 99 beads. There is also quite a variance when it comes to materials used for beads. Beads made from seeds of rudraksha trees are considered sacred by devotees of Shiva, while followers of Vishnu revere the wood that comes from the Tulsi plant, also known as Holy Basil.\nStriking the meditator.\nThe Buddhist literature has many stories of Enlightenment being attained through disciples being struck by their masters. T. Griffith Foulk recounts how the encouragement stick was an integral part of the Zen practice when he trained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the Rinzai monastery where I trained in the mid-1970s, according to an unspoken etiquette, monks who were sitting earnestly and well were shown respect by being hit vigorously and often; those known as laggards were ignored by the hall monitor or given little taps if they requested to be hit. Nobody asked about the 'meaning' of the stick, nobody explained, and nobody ever complained about its use.\nUsing a narrative.\nNeuroscientist and long-time meditator Richard Davidson has expressed the view that having a narrative can help the maintenance of daily practice. For instance, he himself prostrates to the teachings, and meditates \"not primarily for my benefit, but for the benefit of others\".\nPsychedelics.\nStudies suggest the potential of psychedelics, such as psilocybin and DMT, to enhance meditative training.\nWalking Meditation.\nWalking meditation is a fundamental technique in Therav\u0101da and Zen traditions. It involves walking slowly and mindfully in a straight path or circle, focusing attention on each step, the movement of the feet, the breath, and bodily sensations. It is often used in alternation with sitting meditation during retreats and daily practice to integrate mindfulness into bodily movement.\nMeditation traditions.\nOrigins.\nThe history of meditation is intimately bound up with the religious context within which it was practiced. Rossano suggested that the emergence of the capacity for focused attention, an element of many methods of meditation, may have contributed to the latest phases of human biological evolution. Some of the earliest references to meditation, as well as proto-Samkhya, are found in the Upanishads of India. According to Wynne, the earliest clear references to meditation are in the middle Upanishads and the \"Mahabharata\" (including the \"Bhagavad Gita\"). According to Gavin Flood, the earlier \"Brihadaranyaka Upanishad\" is describing meditation when it states that \"Having become calm and concentrated, one perceives the self (\u0100tman) within oneself\" (BU 4.4.23).\nIndian religions.\nHinduism.\nThere are many schools and styles of meditation within Hinduism. In pre-modern and traditional Hinduism, \"Yoga\" and \"Dhyana\" are practised to recognize 'pure awareness', or 'pure consciousness', undisturbed by the workings of the mind, as one's eternal self. In Advaita Vedanta \"jivatman\", individual self, is recognized as illusory, and in Reality identical with the omnipresent and non-dual \u0100tman-Brahman. In the dualistic Yoga school and Samkhya, the Self is called Purusha, a pure consciousness undisturbed by Prakriti, 'nature'. Depending on the tradition, the liberative event is named moksha, vimukti or kaivalya.\nOne of the most influential texts of classical Hindu Yoga is Pata\u00f1jali's Yoga sutras (c. 400 CE), a text associated with Yoga and Samkhya and influenced by Buddhism, which outlines eight limbs leading to kaivalya (\"aloneness\") or inner awareness. The first four, known as the \"outer limbs,\" include ethical discipline (yamas), rules (niyamas), physical postures (\u0101sanas), and breath control (pr\u0101\u1e47\u0101yama). The fifth, withdrawal from the senses (praty\u0101h\u0101ra), transitions into the \"inner limbs\" that are one-pointedness of mind (dh\u0101ra\u1e47\u0101), meditation (dhy\u0101na), and finally sam\u0101dhi.\nLater developments in Hindu meditation include the compilation of Hatha Yoga (forceful yoga) compendiums like the Hatha Yoga Pradipika, the development of Bhakti yoga as a major form of meditation, and Tantra. Another important Hindu yoga text is the Yoga Yajnavalkya, which makes use of Hatha Yoga and Vedanta Philosophy.\nMantra Meditation.\nThe Bhagavata Purana emphasizes that mantra meditation is a key practice for achieving liberation; practitioners can achieve a direct vision of the divine. The text integrates both Vedic and tantric elements, where mantras are not only seen as sacred sounds but as embodiment of the deity. This approach reflects a shift from the impersonal meditation on the sound-form of Brahman (Om) in the Upanishads to a personal, devotional focus on Krishna in the Bhagavata Purana.\nJainism.\nJainism has three elements called the \"Ratnatraya\" (\"Three Jewels\"): right perception and faith, right knowledge and right conduct. Meditation in Jainism aims to reach and to remain in the pure state of soul which is believed to be pure consciousness, beyond any attachment or aversion. The practitioner strives to be just a knower-seer (\"gyata-drashta\"). Jain meditation can be broadly categorized into \"Dharma dhyana\" and \"Shukla dhyana\". \"Dharma dhyana\" is discriminating knowledge (bheda-vij\u00f1\u0101na) of the tattvas (truths or fundamental principles), while \"shukla dhyana\" is meditation proper.\nJainism uses meditation techniques such as \"pind\u0101stha-dhy\u0101na, pad\u0101stha-dhy\u0101na, r\u016bp\u0101stha-dhy\u0101na, r\u016bp\u0101tita-dhy\u0101na, and sav\u012brya-dhy\u0101na\". In \"pad\u0101stha dhy\u0101na,\" one focuses on a \"mantra,\" a combination of core letters or words on deity or themes. Jain followers practice mantra regularly by chanting loudly or silently in mind.\nThe meditation technique of contemplation includes \"agnya vich\u0101ya\", in which one contemplates on seven facts\u00a0\u2013 life and non-life, the inflow, bondage, stoppage and removal of \"karmas\", and the final accomplishment of liberation. In \"apaya vich\u0101ya\", one contemplates on the incorrect insights one indulges, which eventually develops right insight. In \"vipaka vich\u0101ya\", one reflects on the eight causes or basic types of \"karma\". In \"sansathan vich\u0101ya\", one thinks about the vastness of the universe and the loneliness of the soul.\nBuddhism.\nBuddhists pursue meditation as part of the path toward awakening and nirvana. The closest words for meditation in the classical languages of Buddhism are \"bh\u0101van\u0101\" (\"development\"), and the core practices of body contemplations (repulsiveness and cemetery contemplations) and \"anapanasati\" (mindfulness of in-and-out breathing) culminating in \"jh\u0101na\"/\"dhy\u0101na\" or \"sam\u0101dhi\".\nWhile most classical and contemporary Buddhist meditation guides are school-specific, the root meditative practices of various body recollections and breath meditation have been preserved and transmitted in almost all Buddhist traditions, through Buddhist texts like the \"Satipatthana Sutta\" and the Dhyana sutras, and through oral teacher-student transmissions. These ancient practices are supplemented with various distinct interpretations of, and developments in, these practices.\nThe Therav\u0101da tradition stresses the development of \"samatha\" and \"vipassana\", postulating over fifty methods for developing mindfulness based on the \"Satipatthana Sutta\", and forty for developing concentration based on the Visuddhimagga.\nThe Tibetan tradition incorporated Sarvastivada and Tantric practices, wedded with Madhyamaka philosophy, and developed thousands of visualization meditations.\nThe Zen tradition incorporated mindfulness and breath-meditation via the Dhyana sutras, which are based on the Sarvastivada-tradition. Sitting meditation, known as zazen, is a central part of Zen practice. Downplaying the \"petty complexities\" of satipatthana and the body-recollections (but maintaining the awareness of immanent death), the early Chan-tradition developed the notions or practices of \"wu nian\" (\"no thought, no fixation on thought, such as one's own views, experiences, and knowledge\") and \"f\u0113i s\u012bli\u00e0ng\" (\u975e\u601d\u91cf, Japanese: \"hishiry\u014d\", \"nonthinking\"); and \"kanxin\" (\"observing the mind\") and \"shou-i pu i\" (\u5b88\u4e00\u4e0d\u79fb, \"maintaining the one without wavering,\" turning the attention from the objects of experience, to the nature of mind, the perceiving subject itself, which is equated with Buddha-nature.\nThe Silk Road transmission of Buddhism introduced Buddhist meditation to other Asian countries, reaching China in the 2nd century CE, and Japan in the 6th century CE. In the modern era, Buddhist meditation techniques have become popular in the wider world, due to the influence of Buddhist modernism on Asian Buddhism, and western lay interest in Zen and the Vipassana movement, with many non-Buddhists taking-up meditative practices. The modernized concept of mindfulness (based on the Buddhist term \"sati\") and related meditative practices have in turn led to mindfulness based therapies.\nDhyana.\nDhyana, while often presented as a form of focused attention or concentration, as in Buddhagosa's Theravada classic the \"Visuddhimagga\" (\"Path of purification\", 5th c. CE), according to a number of contemporary scholars and scholar-practitioners, it is actually a description of the development of perfected equanimity and mindfulness, apparently induced by satipatthana, an open monitoring of the breath, without trying to regulate it. The same description, in a different formula, can be found in the bojjhanga, the \"seven factors of awakening,\" and may therefore refer to the core program of early Buddhist \"bhavana\". According to Vetter, dhyana seems to be a natural development from the sense-restraint and moral constrictions prescribed by the Buddhist tradition.\nSamatha and vipassana.\nThe Buddha identified two paramount mental qualities that arise from wholesome meditative practice or \"bhavana\", namely \"samatha\" (\"calm,\" \"serenity\" \"tranquility\") and \"vipassana\" (insight). As the developing tradition started to emphasize the value of liberating insight, and \"dhyana\" came to be understood as concentration, \"samatha\" and \"vipassana\" were understood as two distinct meditative techniques. In this understanding, \"samatha\" steadies, composes, unifies and concentrates the mind, while \"vipassana\" enables one to see, explore and discern \"formations\" (conditioned phenomena based on the five aggregates).\nAccording to this understanding, which is central to Theravada orthodoxy but also plays a role in Tibetan Buddhism, through the meditative development of serenity, one is able to weaken the obscuring hindrances and bring the mind to a collected, pliant, and still state (\"samadhi\"). This quality of mind then supports the development of insight and wisdom (Praj\u00f1\u0101) which is the quality of mind that can \"clearly see\" (\"vi-passana\") the nature of phenomena. What exactly is to be seen varies within the Buddhist traditions. In Theravada, all phenomena are to be seen as impermanent, suffering, not-self and empty. When this happens, one develops dispassion (\"viraga\") for all phenomena, including all negative qualities and hindrances and lets them go. It is through the release of the hindrances and ending of craving through the meditative development of insight that one gains liberation.\nSikhism.\nIn Sikhism, \"simran\" (meditation) and good deeds are both necessary to achieve the devotee's spiritual goals; without good deeds meditation is futile. When Sikhs meditate, they aim to feel God's presence and emerge in the divine light. It is only God's divine will or order that allows a devotee to desire to begin to meditate. \"N\u0101m japn\u0101\" involves focusing one's attention on the names or great attributes of God.\nTaoism.\nTaoist meditation has developed techniques including concentration, visualization, \"qi\" cultivation, contemplation, and mindfulness meditations in its long history. Traditional Daoist meditative practices influenced Buddhism creating the unique meditative practices of Chinese Buddhism that then spread through the rest of east Asia from around the 5th century.Traditional Chinese medicine and the Chinese martial arts were influenced and influences of Taoist meditation.\nLivia Kohn distinguishes three basic types of Taoist meditation: \"concentrative\", \"insight\", and \"visualization\". \"Ding\" \u5b9a (literally means \"decide; settle; stabilize\") refers to \"deep concentration\", \"intent contemplation\", or \"perfect absorption\". \"Guan\" \u89c0 (lit.\u2009'watch; observe; view') meditation seeks to merge and attain unity with the Dao. It was developed by Tang dynasty (618\u2013907) Taoist masters based upon the \"Tiantai\" Buddhist practice of \"Vipassan\u0101\" \"insight\" or \"wisdom\" meditation. \"Cun\" \u5b58 (lit.\u2009'exist; be present; survive') has a sense of \"to cause to exist; to make present\" in the meditation techniques popularized by the Taoist Shangqing and Lingbao Schools. A meditator visualizes or actualizes solar and lunar essences, lights, and deities within their body, which supposedly results in health and longevity, even \"xian\" \u4ed9/\u4eda/\u50ca, \"immortality\".\nThe \"Guanzi\" essay (late 4th century BCE) \"Neiye\" \"Inward training\" is the oldest received writing on the subject of \"qi\" cultivation and breath-control meditation techniques. For instance, \"When you enlarge your mind and let go of it, when you relax your vital breath and expand it, when your body is calm and unmoving: And you can maintain the One and discard the myriad disturbances. ... This is called \"revolving the vital breath\": Your thoughts and deeds seem heavenly.\"\nThe Taoist \"Zhuangzi\" (c. 3rd century BCE) records \"zuowang\" or \"sitting forgetting\" meditation. Confucius asked his disciple Yan Hui to explain what \"sit and forget\" means: \"I slough off my limbs and trunk, dim my intelligence, depart from my form, leave knowledge behind, and become identical with the Transformational Thoroughfare.\"\nTaoist meditation practices are central to Chinese martial arts (and some Japanese martial arts), especially the \"qi\"-related \"neijia\" \"internal martial arts\". Some well-known examples are \"daoyin\" (\"guiding and pulling\"), qigong (\"life-energy exercises\"), \"neigong\" (\"internal exercises\"), \"neidan\" (\"internal alchemy\"), and tai chi (\"great ultimate boxing\"), which is thought of as moving meditation. One common explanation contrasts \"movement in stillness\" referring to energetic visualization of \"qi\" circulation in qigong and \"zuochan\" (\"seated meditation\"), versus \"stillness in movement\" referring to a state of meditative calm in tai chi forms. Also the unification or middle road forms such as \"Wuxingheqidao\" that seeks the unification of internal alchemical forms with more external forms.`\nAbrahamic religions.\nJudaism.\nJudaism has made use of meditative practices for thousands of years. For instance, in the Torah, the patriarch Isaac is described as going \"\u05dc\u05e9\u05d5\u05d7\" (\"lasuach\") in the field\u00a0\u2013 a term understood by all commentators as some type of meditative practice (Genesis 24:63). Similarly, there are indications throughout the Tanakh (the Hebrew Bible) that the prophets meditated. In the Old Testament, there are two Hebrew words for meditation: \"h\u0101g\u00e2\" (), \"to sigh\" or \"murmur\", but also \"to meditate\", and \"s\u00ee\u1e25\u00e2\" (), \"to muse\", or \"rehearse in one's mind\".\nClassical Jewish texts espouse a wide range of meditative practices, often associated with the cultivation of \"kavanah\" or intention. The first layer of rabbinic law, the Mishnah, describes ancient sages \"waiting\" for an hour before their prayers, \"in order to direct their hearts to the Omnipresent One\" (Mishnah Berakhot 5:1). Other early rabbinic texts include instructions for visualizing the Divine Presence (B. Talmud Sanhedrin 22a) and breathing with conscious gratitude for every breath (Genesis Rabba 14:9).\nOne of the best-known types of meditation in early Jewish mysticism was the work of the Merkabah, from the root /R-K-B/ meaning \"chariot\" (of God). Some meditative traditions have been encouraged in Kabbalah, and some Jews have described Kabbalah as an inherently meditative field of study. Kabbalistic meditation often involves the mental visualization of the supernal realms. Aryeh Kaplan has argued that the ultimate purpose of Kabbalistic meditation is to understand and cleave to the Divine.\nMeditation has been of interest to a wide variety of modern Jews. In modern Jewish practice, one of the best known meditative practices is called \"hitbodedut\" (\"\u05d4\u05ea\u05d1\u05d5\u05d3\u05d3\u05d5\u05ea\", alternatively transliterated as \"hisbodedus\"), and is explained in Kabbalistic, Hasidic, and Mussar writings, especially the Hasidic method of Rabbi Nachman of Breslav. The word derives from the Hebrew word \"boded\" (\u05d1\u05d5\u05d3\u05d3), meaning the state of being alone. Another Hasidic system is the Habad method of \"hisbonenus\", related to the Sephirah of \"Binah\", Hebrew for understanding. This practice is the analytical reflective process of making oneself understand a mystical concept well, that follows and internalises its study in Hasidic writings. The Musar Movement, founded by Rabbi Israel Salanter in the middle of the nineteenth-century, emphasized meditative practices of introspection and visualization that could help to improve moral character. Conservative rabbi Alan Lew has emphasized meditation playing an important role in the process of \"teshuvah\" (repentance). Jewish Buddhists have adopted Buddhist styles of meditation.\nChristianity.\nChristian meditation is a term for a form of prayer in which a structured attempt is made to get in touch with and deliberately reflect upon the revelations of God. In the Roman Empire, by 20 BCE Philo of Alexandria had written on some form of \"spiritual exercises\" involving attention (prosoche) and concentration and by the 3rd century Plotinus had developed meditative techniques. The word meditation comes from the Latin word \"meditatum\", which means to \"concentrate\" or \"to ponder\". Monk Guigo II introduced this terminology for the first time in the 12th century AD. Christian meditation is the process of deliberately focusing on specific thoughts (e.g. a biblical scene involving Jesus and the Virgin Mary) and reflecting on their meaning in the context of the love of God. Christian meditation is sometimes taken to mean the middle level in a broad three-stage characterization of prayer: it then involves more reflection than first level vocal prayer, but is more structured than the multiple layers of contemplation in Christianity.\nBetween the 10th and 14th centuries, hesychasm was developed, particularly on Mount Athos in Greece, and involves the repetition of the Jesus prayer. Interactions with Indians or the Sufis may have influenced the Eastern Christian meditation approach to hesychasm, but this is unproven.\nWestern Christian meditation contrasts with most other approaches in that it does not involve the repetition of any phrase or action and requires no specific posture. Western Christian meditation progressed from the 6th century practice of Bible reading among Benedictine monks called Lectio Divina, i.e. divine reading. Its four formal steps as a \"ladder\" were defined by the monk Guigo II in the 12th century with the Latin terms \"lectio\", \"meditatio\", \"oratio\", and \"contemplatio\" (i.e. read, ponder, pray, contemplate). Western Christian meditation was further developed by saints such as Ignatius of Loyola and Teresa of Avila in the 16th century.\nOn 28 April 2021, Pope Francis, in an address to the General Audience, said that meditation is a need for everyone. He stated that the term \"meditation\" has had many meanings throughout history, and that \"the ancients used to say that the organ of prayer is the heart.\"\nIn Catholic Christianity, the Rosary is a devotion for the meditation of the mysteries of Jesus and Mary. \"The gentle repetition of its prayers makes it an excellent means to moving into deeper meditation. It gives us an opportunity to open ourselves to God's word, to refine our interior gaze by turning our minds to the life of Christ. The first principle is that meditation is learned through practice. Many people who practice rosary meditation begin very simply and gradually develop a more sophisticated meditation. The meditator learns to hear an interior voice, the voice of God. Similarly, the chotki of the Eastern Orthodox denomination, the Wreath of Christ of the Lutheran faith, and the Anglican prayer beads of the Episcopalian tradition are used for Christian prayer and meditation.\nAccording to Edmund P. Clowney, Christian meditation contrasts with Eastern forms of meditation as radically as the portrayal of God the Father in the Bible contrasts with depictions of Krishna or Brahman in Indian teachings. Unlike some Eastern styles, most styles of Christian meditation do not rely on the repeated use of mantras, and yet are also intended to stimulate thought and deepen meaning. Christian meditation aims to heighten the personal relationship based on the love of God that marks Christian communion. In \"Aspects of Christian meditation\", the Catholic Church warned of potential incompatibilities in mixing Christian and Eastern styles of meditation. In 2003, in \"A Christian reflection on the New Age\" the Vatican announced that the \"Church avoids any concept that is close to those of the New Age\".\nIslam.\n\"Dhikr\" (\"zikr\") is a type of meditation within Islam, meaning remembering and mentioning God, which involves the repetition of the 99 Names of God since the 8th or 9th century. It is interpreted in different meditative techniques in Sufism or Islamic mysticism. This became one of the essential elements of Sufism as it was systematized traditionally. It is juxtaposed with \"fikr\" (thinking) which leads to knowledge. By the 12th century, the practice of Sufism included specific meditative techniques, and its followers practiced breathing controls and the repetition of holy words.\nSufism uses a meditative procedure like Buddhist concentration, involving high-intensity and sharply focused introspection. In the Oveyssi-Shahmaghsoudi Sufi order, for example, \"muraqabah\" takes the form of \"tamarkoz\", \"concentration\" in Persian.\n\"Tafakkur\" or \"tadabbur\" in Sufism literally means \"reflection upon the universe\": this is considered to permit access to a form of cognitive and emotional development that can emanate only from the higher level, i.e. from God. The sensation of receiving divine inspiration awakens and liberates both heart and intellect, permitting such inner growth that the apparently mundane actually takes on the quality of the infinite. Muslim teachings embrace life as a test of one's submission to God.\nDervishes of certain Sufi orders practice whirling, a form of physically active meditation.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nIn the teachings of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, which derives from an Islamic context but is universalist in orientation, meditation is a primary tool for spiritual development, involving reflection on the words of God. While prayer and meditation are linked, where meditation happens generally in a prayerful attitude, prayer is seen specifically as turning toward God, and meditation is seen as a communion with one's self where one focuses on the divine.\nIn Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings the purpose of meditation is to strengthen one's understanding of the words of God, and to make one's soul more susceptible to their potentially transformative power, more receptive to the need for both prayer and meditation to bring about and maintain a spiritual communion with God.\nBah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h, the founder of the religion, never specified any particular form of meditation, and thus each person is free to choose their own form. However, he did state that Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds should read a passage of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings twice a day, once in the morning, and once in the evening, and meditate on it. He also encouraged people to reflect on one's actions and worth at the end of each day. During the Nineteen Day Fast, a period of the year during which Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds adhere to a sunrise-to-sunset fast, they meditate and pray to reinvigorate their spiritual forces.\nModern spirituality.\nModern dissemination in the West.\nMeditation has spread in the West since the late 19th century, accompanying increased travel and communication among cultures worldwide. Most prominent has been the transmission of Asian-derived practices to the West. In addition, interest in some Western-based meditative practices has been revived, and these have been disseminated to a limited extent to Asian countries.\nIdeas about Eastern meditation had begun \"seeping into American popular culture even before the American Revolution through the various sects of European occult Christianity\", and such ideas \"came pouring in [to America] during the era of the transcendentalists, especially between the 1840s and the 1880s.\" The following decades saw further spread of these ideas to America:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The World Parliament of Religions, held in Chicago in 1893, was the landmark event that increased Western awareness of meditation. This was the first time that Western audiences on American soil received Asian spiritual teachings from Asians themselves. Thereafter, Swami Vivekananda [...] [founded] various Vedanta ashrams [...] Anagarika Dharmapala lectured at Harvard on Theravada Buddhist meditation in 1904; Abdul Baha [...] [toured] the US teaching the principles of Bahai [\"sic\"], and Soyen Shaku toured in 1907 teaching Zen.\nMore recently, in the 1960s, another surge in Western interest in meditative practices began. The rise of communist political power in Asia led to many Asian spiritual teachers taking refuge in Western countries, oftentimes as refugees. In addition to spiritual forms of meditation, secular forms of meditation have taken root. Rather than focusing on spiritual growth, secular meditation emphasizes stress reduction, relaxation and self-improvement.\nThe 2012 US National Health Interview Survey of 34,525 subjects found that 8% of US adults used meditation, with lifetime and 12-month prevalence of meditation use of 5.2% and 4.1% respectively. Meditation use among workers was 10% (up from 8% in 2002).\nMantra meditation, with the use of a \"japa mala\" and especially with focus on the Hare Krishna maha-mantra, is a central practice of the Gaudiya Vaishnava faith tradition and the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, also known as the Hare Krishna movement. Other popular New Religious Movements include the Ramakrishna Mission, Vedanta Society, Divine Light Mission, Chinmaya Mission, Osho, Sahaja Yoga, Transcendental Meditation, Oneness University, Brahma Kumaris, Vihangam Yoga and Heartfulness Meditation (Sahaj Marg).\nNew Age.\nNew Age meditations are often influenced by Eastern philosophy, mysticism, yoga, Hinduism and Buddhism, yet may contain some degree of Western influence. In the West, meditation found its mainstream roots through the social revolution of the 1960s and 1970s, when many of the youth of the day rebelled against traditional western religion as a reaction against what some perceived as the failure of Christianity to provide spiritual and ethical guidance. New Age meditation as practised by the early hippies is regarded for its techniques of blanking out the mind and releasing oneself from religious, politically and socially patterned thinking. This is often aided by repetitive chanting of a mantra, or focusing on an object. New Age meditation evolved into a range of purposes and practices, from serenity and balance, stress management and to access to other realms of consciousness, involving the concentration of energy in group or individual meditation to the supreme goal of \"samadhi\", as in the ancient yogic practice of meditation.\nGuided meditation.\nGuided meditation is a form of meditation which uses a number of different techniques to achieve or enhance the meditative state. It may simply be meditation done under the guidance of a trained practitioner or teacher, or it may be through the use of imagery, music, and other techniques. The session can be either in person, via media comprising music or verbal instruction, or a combination of both. The most common form is a combination of meditation music and receptive music therapy, guided imagery, relaxation, mindfulness, and journaling.\nBecause of the different combinations used under the one term, it can be difficult to attribute positive or negative outcomes to any of the various techniques. Furthermore, the term is frequently used interchangeably with \"guided imagery\" and sometimes with \"creative visualization\" in popular psychology and self-help literature. It is less commonly used in scholarly and scientific publications. Consequently, guided meditation cannot be understood as a single technique but rather multiple techniques that are integral to its practice.\nGuided meditation as an aggregate or synthesis of techniques includes meditation music, receptive music therapy, guided imagery, relaxation, meditative praxis, and self-reflective journaling, all of which have been shown to have therapeutic benefits when employed as an adjunct to primary strategies. Benefits include lower levels of stress, reducing asthmatic episodes, physical pain, insomnia, episodic anger, negative or irrational thinking, and anxiety, as well as improving coping skills, focus, and a general feeling of well-being.\nEffects.\nResearch on the processes and effects of meditation is a subfield of neurological research. Modern scientific techniques, such as functional magnetic resonance imaging and electroencephalography, were used to observe neurological responses during meditation. Concerns have been raised on the quality of meditation research, including the particular characteristics of individuals who tend to participate.\nMeditation lowers heart rate, oxygen consumption, breathing frequency, stress hormones, lactate levels, and sympathetic nervous system activity (associated with the fight-or-flight response), along with a modest decline in blood pressure. However, those who have meditated for two or three years were found to already have low blood pressure. During meditation, the oxygen consumption decrease averages 10 to 20 percent over the first three minutes. During sleep for example, oxygen consumption decreases around 8 percent over four or five hours. For meditators who have practiced for years, breath rate can drop to three or four breaths per minute and \"brain waves slow from the usual beta (seen in waking activity) or alpha (seen in normal relaxation) to much slower delta and theta waves\".\nStudies demonstrate that meditation has a moderate effect to reduce pain. There is insufficient evidence for any effect of meditation on positive mood, attention, eating habits, sleep, or body weight.\nLuberto er all (2017), in a systematic review and meta-analysis of the effects of meditation on empathy, compassion, and prosocial behaviors, found that meditation practices had small to medium effects on self-reported and observable outcomes, concluding that such practices can \"improve positive prosocial emotions and behaviors\". However, a meta-review published on \"Scientific Reports\" showed that the evidence is very weak and \"that the effects of meditation on compassion were only significant when compared to passive control groups suggests that other forms of active interventions (like watching a nature video) might produce similar outcomes to meditation\".\nMeditation has also been found to support the development of psychological resilience. Regular practice can help individuals manage chronic stress, trauma, and emotional challenges by fostering greater emotional regulation, reducing rumination, and enhancing adaptive coping strategies.\n\"Challenging\" and adverse effects.\nContemplative traditions.\nThroughout East Asia the detrimental and undesirable effects of incorrect meditation and mindfulness practice are well documented due to the long varied history of cultivation in these fields. Many traditional herbal, intentional and manual treatments have been prescribed from the past to present day for what is diagnosed as \"zouhuorumo\" ().\nMeditation may induce \"challenging\" and \"unwanted\" experiences, and adverse effects to physical and mental health. Some of these experiences and effects are documented in the contemplative traditions, but can be quite perplexing and burdensome when the outcomes of meditation are expected to result in more advantageous and beneficial health outcomes than detrimental ones. By extension this problem is compounded with little or no accessible support or explanatory framework for novice or laity practitioners to know when it is appropriate to self manage or when it is advisable to seek professional advice on practice or the management or intervention on adverse symptomatology that may arise in this field of self-cultivation .\nAccording to Farias et al. (2020), the most common adverse effects are in people with a history of anxiety and depression. Other adverse psychological symptoms may include narcissistic, sociopathic behaviour and depersonalization or altered sense of self or the world, distorted emotions or thoughts, a mild form of psychosis including auditory and visual hallucinations. In extreme cases in patients with underlying undiagnosed or historical emotional conditions there have been instances of self-harm.\nAccording to Schlosser et al. (2019), \"preliminary findings suggest that their occurrence is highly dependent on a complex interaction of contextual factors.\" For instance, meditation-related psychosis has been linked to sleep deprivation, preceding mental dispositions, and meditation without sufficient social support or any explanatory framework. However, according to Farias et al. (2020), \"minor adverse effects have been observed in individuals with no previous history of mental health problems\") Farias et al. (2020) further note that \"it is also possible that participants predisposed to heightened levels of anxiety and depression are more likely to begin or maintain a meditation practice to manage their symptoms.\"\nAccording to Farias et al. (2020) there is a prevalence of 8.3% adverse effects, \"similar to those reported for psychotherapy practice in general.\" Schlosser et al. (2019) reported that of 1,232 regular meditators with at least two months of meditation experience, about a quarter reported having had particularly unpleasant meditation-related experiences which they thought may have been caused by their meditation practice. Meditators with high levels of repetitive negative thinking, forced breathing causing hypoxia and those who only engage in deconstructive meditation (vipassana/insight meditation) were more likely to report unpleasant side effects.\nSchlosser et al. \"found strong evidence that religious participants have lower odds of having particularly unpleasant meditation-related experiences,\" and \"found weak evidence that female participants were less likely to have unpleasant meditation-related experiences,\" and note the importance of \"understanding when these experiences are constitutive elements of meditative practice rather than merely negative effects.\"\nDifficult experiences encountered in meditation are mentioned in traditional sources, and some may be considered to be an expected part of the process. According to Salguero,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Problematic experiences such as strange sensations, unexplained pains, psychological instability, undesired hallucinations, sexual anomalies, uncontrollable behaviors, demonic possession, suicidality, and so forth seem to be quite well-known and well-documented across traditions.\nThe Visuddhimagga mentions various unpleasant stages, and possible \"unwholesome or frightening visions\" are mentioned in \"Practical Insight Meditation: Basic and Progressive Stages\", a practical manual on vipassan\u0101 meditation by Mah\u0101si Say\u0101daw. Classical sources mention \"maky\u014d\", Zen sickness (Chinese and Japanese: \u79aa\u75c5: r\u014dmaji: ) and related difficulties, such as \"zouhuorumo\" (), and \"mojing\" (). Traditional sources also precribe cures against these experiences, for example Hakuin Ekaku's treatment of Zen-sickness.\nMindfulness.\nBoth the soundness of the scientific foundations of mindfulness, and the desirability of its social effects, have been questioned. Hafenbrack et al. (2022), in a study on mindfulness with 1400 participants, found that focused-breathing meditation can dampen the relationship between transgressions and the desire to engage in reparative prosocial behaviors. Poullin et al. (2021) found that mindfulness can increase the trait of selfishness. The study, consisting of two interrelated parts and totaling 691 participants, found that a mindfulness induction, compared to a control condition, led to decreased prosocial behavior. This effect was moderated by self-construals such that people with relatively independent self-construals became less prosocial while people with relatively interdependent self-construals became more so. In the western world where independent self-construals generally predominate (self centric orientated) meditation may thus have potentially detrimental effects. These new findings about meditations socially problematic effects imply that it can be contraindicated to use meditation as a tool to handle acute personal conflicts or relational difficulties; in the words of Andrew Hafenbrack, one of the authors of the study, \"If we 'artificially' reduce our guilt by meditating it away, we may end up with worse relationships, or even fewer relationships\".\nSecular applications.\nPsychotherapy.\nCarl Jung (1875\u20131961) was an early western explorer of eastern religious practices. He clearly advocated ways to increase the conscious awareness of an individual. Yet he expressed some caution concerning a westerner's direct immersion in eastern practices without some prior appreciation of the differing spiritual and cultural contexts. Erich Fromm (1900\u20131980) later explored spiritual practices of the east.\nClinical.\nSince the 1970s, clinical psychology and psychiatry have developed meditation techniques for numerous psychological conditions. Mindfulness practice is employed in psychology to alleviate mental and physical conditions, such as affecting the endocrine system therefore reducing depression, and helping to alleviate stress, and anxiety. Mindfulness is also used as a form of interventional therapy in the treatment of addiction including drug addiction, although the quantity and quality of evidence based research has been poor.\nThe US National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health states that \"Meditation and mindfulness practices may have a variety of health benefits and may help people improve the quality of their lives. Recent studies have investigated if meditation or mindfulness helps people manage anxiety, stress, depression, pain, or symptoms related to withdrawal from nicotine, alcohol, or opioids.\" However, the NCCIC goes on to caution that, \"results from the studies have been difficult to analyze and may have been interpreted too optimistically.\"\nA 2014 review found that practice of mindfulness meditation for two to six months by people undergoing long-term psychiatric or medical therapy could produce moderate improvements in pain management, anxiety, depression. In 2017, the American Heart Association issued a scientific statement that meditation may be a reasonable adjunct practice and intervention to help reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases, with the qualification that meditation needs to be better defined in higher-quality clinical research of these disorders. Recent findings have also found evidence of meditation affecting migraines in adults. Mindfulness meditation may allow for a decrease in migraine episodes, and a drop in migraine medication usage.\nEarly low-quality and low- quantity evidence indicates that the mechanism of meditation may help with irritable bowel syndrome, insomnia, cognitive decline in the elderly, and post-traumatic stress disorder. Sitting in silence, body scan meditation and concentrating on breathing was shown in a 2016 review to moderately decrease symptoms of PTSD and depression in war veterans and creating resilience to stresses in active service. Researchers have found that participating in mindfulness meditation can aid insomnia patients by improving sleep quality and total wake time. Mindfulness meditation is a supportive therapy that aides in the treatment for patients diagnosed with insomnia.\nIn the workplace.\nA 2010 review of the literature on spirituality and performance in organizations found an increase in corporate meditation programs.\nAs of 2016 around a quarter of U.S. employers were using stress reduction initiatives. The goal was to help reduce stress and improve reactions to stress. Aetna now offers its program to its customers. Google also implements mindfulness, offering more than a dozen meditation courses, with the most prominent one, \"Search Inside Yourself\", having been implemented since 2007. General Mills offers the Mindful Leadership Program Series, a course which uses a combination of mindfulness meditation, yoga and dialogue with the intention of developing the mind's capacity to pay attention.\nMany military organizations around the world have found meditation and mindfulness practice can support a range of benefits related to combat, including support for mental health, mental clarity, focus and stress control.\nIn school.\nA review of 15 peer-reviewed studies of youth meditation in schools indicated transcendental meditation a moderate effect on wellbeing and a small effect on social competence. Insufficient research has been done on the effect of meditation on academic achievement. Evidence has also shown possible improvement to stress, cognitive performance in school taught meditation.\nPositive effects on emotion regulation, stress and anxiety can also be seen in students in university and nursing.\nRelaxation response and biofeedback.\nHerbert Benson of Harvard Medical School conducted a series of clinical tests on meditators from various disciplines, including the Transcendental Meditation technique and Tibetan Buddhism. In 1975, Benson published a book titled \"The Relaxation Response\" where he outlined his own version of meditation for relaxation. Also in the 1970s, the American psychologist Patricia Carrington developed a similar technique called Clinically Standardized Meditation (CSM). In Norway, another sound-based method called Acem Meditation developed a psychology of meditation and has been the subject of several scientific studies.\nBiofeedback has been used by many researchers since the 1950s in an effort to enter deeper states of mind.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrinted sources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWeb sources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20063", "revid": "50912462", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20063", "title": "MPEG-4", "text": "Video encoding standard\nMPEG-4 is a group of international standards for the compression of digital audio and visual data, multimedia systems, and file storage formats. It was originally introduced in late 1998 as a group of audio and video coding formats and related technology agreed upon by the ISO/IEC Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG) (ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC29/WG11) under the formal standard ISO/IEC 14496\u00a0\u2013 \"Coding of audio-visual objects\". Uses of MPEG-4 include compression of audiovisual data for Internet video and CD distribution, voice (telephone, videophone) and broadcast television applications. The MPEG-4 standard was developed by a group led by Touradj Ebrahimi (later the JPEG president) and Fernando Pereira.\nBackground.\nMPEG-4 absorbs many of the features of MPEG-1 and MPEG-2 and other related standards, adding new features such as (extended) VRML support for 3D rendering, object-oriented composite files (including audio, video and VRML objects), support for externally specified digital rights management and various types of interactivity. AAC (Advanced Audio Coding) was standardized as an adjunct to MPEG-2 (as Part 1) before MPEG-4 was issued.\nMPEG-4 is still an evolving standard and is divided into a number of parts. Companies promoting MPEG-4 compatibility do not always clearly state which \"part\" level compatibility they are referring to. The key parts to be aware of are MPEG-4 Part 2 (including Advanced Simple Profile, used by codecs such as DivX, Xvid, Nero Digital, RealMedia, 3ivx, H.263 and by QuickTime 6) and MPEG-4 part 10 (MPEG-4 AVC/H.264 or Advanced Video Coding, used by the x264 encoder, Nero Digital AVC, QuickTime 7, Flash Video, and high-definition video media like Blu-ray Disc).\nMost of the features included in MPEG-4 are left to individual developers to decide whether or not to implement. This means that there are probably no complete implementations of the entire MPEG-4 set of standards. To deal with this, the standard includes the concept of \"profiles\" and \"levels\", allowing a specific set of capabilities to be defined in a manner appropriate for a subset of applications.\nInitially, MPEG-4 was aimed primarily at low-bit-rate video communications; however, its scope as a multimedia coding standard was later expanded. MPEG-4 is efficient across a variety of bit rates ranging from a few kilobits per second to tens of megabits per second. MPEG-4 provides the following functions:\nOverview.\nMPEG-4 provides a series of technologies for developers, for various service-providers and for end users:\nThe MPEG-4 format can perform various functions, among which might be the following:\nProfiles and Levels.\nMPEG-4 provides a large and rich set of tools for encoding.\nSubsets of the MPEG-4 tool sets have been provided for use in specific applications.\nThese subsets, called 'Profiles', limit the size of the tool set a decoder is required to implement. In order to restrict computational complexity, one or more 'Levels' are set for each Profile. A Profile and Level combination allows:\nMPEG-4 Parts.\nMPEG-4 consists of several standards\u2014termed \"parts\"\u2014including the following (each part covers a certain aspect of the whole specification):\nProfiles are also defined within the individual \"parts\", so an implementation of a part is ordinarily not an implementation of an entire part.\nMPEG-1, MPEG-2, MPEG-7 and MPEG-21 are other suites of MPEG standards.\nLicensing.\nMPEG-4 contains patented technologies, the use of which requires licensing in countries that acknowledge software algorithm patents. Over two dozen companies claim to have patents covering MPEG-4. MPEG LA licenses patents required for MPEG-4 Part 2 Visual from a wide range of companies (audio is licensed separately) and lists all of its licensors and licensees on the site. New licenses for MPEG-4 System patents are under development and no new licenses are being offered while holders of its old MPEG-4 Systems license are still covered under the terms of that license for the patents listed.\nThe majority of patents used for the MPEG-4 Visual format are held by three Japanese companies: Mitsubishi Electric (255 patents), Hitachi (206 patents), and Panasonic (200 patents).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20064", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20064", "title": "Maritime archaeology", "text": "Archaeological study of human interaction with the sea\nMaritime archaeology (also known as marine archaeology) is a discipline within archaeology as a whole that specifically studies human interaction with the sea, lakes and rivers through the study of associated physical remains, be they vessels, shore-side facilities, port-related structures, cargoes, human remains and submerged landscapes. A specialty within maritime archaeology is nautical archaeology, which studies ship construction and use.\nAs with archaeology as a whole, maritime archaeology can be practised within the historical, industrial, or prehistoric periods. An associated discipline, and again one that lies within archaeology itself, is underwater archaeology, which studies the past through any submerged remains be they of maritime interest or not. An example from the prehistoric era would be the remains of submerged settlements or deposits now lying under water despite having been dry land when sea levels were lower. The study of submerged aircraft lost in lakes, rivers or in the sea is an example from the historical, industrial or modern era. Another example are the remains of discovered and potential medieval bridges connecting the islands on the lake with the mainland. Many specialist sub-disciplines within the broader maritime and underwater archaeological categories have emerged in recent years.\nMaritime archaeological sites often result from shipwrecks or sometimes seismic activity, and thus represent a moment in time rather than a slow deposition of material accumulated over a period of years, as is the case with port-related structures (such as piers, wharves, docks and jetties) where objects are lost or thrown off structures over extended periods of time. This fact has led to shipwrecks often being described in the media and in popular accounts as 'time capsules'.\nArchaeological material in the sea or in other underwater environments is typically subject to different factors than artifacts on land. However, as with terrestrial archaeology, what survives to be investigated by modern archaeologists can often be a tiny fraction of the material originally deposited. A feature of maritime archaeology is that despite all the material that is lost, there are occasional rare examples of substantial survival, from which a great deal can be learned, due to the difficulties often experienced in accessing the sites.\nThere are those in the archaeology community who see maritime archaeology as a separate discipline with its own concerns (such as shipwrecks) and requiring the specialized skills of the underwater archaeologist. Others value an integrated approach, stressing that nautical activity has economic and social links to communities on land and that archaeology is archaeology no matter where the study is conducted. All that is required is the mastering of skills specific to the environment in which the work occurs.\nIntegrating land and sea.\nBefore the industrial era, travel by water was often easier than over land. As a result, marine channels, navigable rivers and sea crossings formed the trade routes of historic and ancient civilisations. For example, the Mediterranean Sea was known to the Romans as the inner sea because the Roman Empire spread around its coasts.\nThe historic record as well as the remains of harbours, ships and cargoes, testify to the volume of trade that crossed it. Later, nations with a strong maritime culture such as the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Denmark, Portugal and Spain were able to establish colonies on other continents. Wars were fought at sea over the control of important resources.\nThe material cultural remains that are discovered by maritime archaeologists along former trade routes can be combined with historical documents and material cultural remains found on land to understand the economic, social and political environment of the past. Of late maritime archaeologists have been examining the submerged cultural remains of China, India, Korea and other Asian nations.\nPreservation of material underwater.\nThere are significant differences in the survival of archaeological material depending on whether a site is wet or dry, on the nature of the chemical environment, on the presence of biological organisms and on the dynamic forces present. Thus rocky coastlines, especially in shallow water, are typically inimical to the survival of artifacts, which can be dispersed, smashed or ground by the effect of currents and surf, possibly (but not always) leaving an artifact pattern but little if any wreck structure.\nSaltwater is particularly inimical to iron artefacts including metal shipwrecks, and sea organisms will readily consume organic material such as wooden shipwrecks. On the other hand, out of all the thousands of potential archaeological sites destroyed or grossly eroded by such natural processes, occasionally sites survive with exceptional preservation of a related collection of artifacts. An example of such a collection is . Survival in this instance is largely due to the remains being buried in sediment.\nOf the many examples where the sea bed provides an extremely hostile environment for submerged evidence of history, one of the most notable, , though a relatively young wreck and in deep water so calcium-starved that concretion does not occur, appears strong and relatively intact, though indications are that it has already incurred irreversible degradation of her steel and iron hull. As such degradation inevitably continues, data will be forever lost, objects' context will be destroyed and the bulk of the wreck will over centuries completely deteriorate on the floor of the Atlantic Ocean. Comparative evidence shows that all iron and steel ships, especially those in a highly oxygenated environment, continue to degrade and will continue to do so until only their engines and other machinery project much above the sea-floor. Where it remains even after the passage of time, the iron or steel hull is often fragile with no remaining metal within the layer of concretion and corrosion products. , having been found in the 1970s, was subjected to a program of attempted \"in situ\" preservation, for example, but deterioration of the vessel progressed at such a rate that the rescue of her turret was undertaken lest nothing be saved from the wreck.\nSome wrecks, lost to natural obstacles to navigation, are at risk of being smashed by subsequent wrecks sunk by the same hazard, or are deliberately destroyed because they present a hazard to navigation. Even in deep water, commercial activities such as pipe-laying operations and deep sea trawling can place a wreck at risk. Such a wreck is the \"Mardi Gras\" shipwreck sunk in the Gulf of Mexico in of water. The shipwreck lay forgotten at the bottom of the sea until it was discovered in 2002 by an oilfield inspection crew working for the Okeanos Gas Gathering Company (OGGC). Large pipelines can crush sites and render some of their remnants inaccessible as pipe is dropped from the ocean surface to the substrate thousands of feet below. Trawl nets snag and tear superstructures and separate artifacts from their context.\nThe wrecks, and other archaeological sites that have been preserved have generally survived because the dynamic nature of the sea bed can result in artifacts becoming rapidly buried in sediments. These sediments then provide an anaerobic environment which protects from further degradation. Wet environments, whether on land in the form of peat bogs and wells, or underwater are particularly important for the survival of organic material, such as wood, leather, fabric and horn. Cold and absence of light also aid survival of artifacts, because there is little energy available for either organic activity or chemical reactions. Salt water provides for greater organic activity than freshwater, and in particular, the shipworm, \"Teredo navalis\", lives only in salt water, so some of the best preservation in the absence of sediments has been found in the cold, dark waters of the Great Lakes in North America and in the (low salinity) Baltic Sea (where \"Vasa\" was preserved).\nWhile the land surface is continuously reused by societies, the sea bed was largely inaccessible until the advent of submarines, scuba equipment and remotely operated underwater vehicles (ROVs) in the twentieth century. Salvagers have operated in much earlier times, but much of the material was beyond the reach of anyone. Thus \"Mary Rose\" was subject to salvage from the sixteenth century and later, but a very large amount of material, buried in the sediments, remained to be found by maritime archaeologists of the twentieth century.\nWhile preservation in situ is not assured, material that has survived underwater and is then recovered to land is typically in an unstable state and can only be preserved using highly specialised conservation processes. While the wooden structure of \"Mary Rose\" and the individual artifacts have been undergoing conservation since their recovery, provides an example of a relatively recent (metal) wreck for which extensive conservation has been necessary to preserve the hull. While the hull remains intact, its machinery remains inoperable. The engine of that was recovered in 1985 from a saline environment after over a century underwater is presently considered somewhat anomalous, in that after two decades of treatment it can now be turned over by hand.\nA challenge for the modern archaeologist is to consider whether \"in-situ\" preservation, or recovery and conservation on land is the preferable option; or to face the fact that preservation in any form, other than as an archaeological record is not feasible. A site that has been discovered has typically been subjected to disturbance of the very factors that caused its survival in the first place, for example, when a covering of sediment has been removed by storms or the action of man. Active monitoring and deliberate protection may mitigate further rapid destruction making \"in situ\" preservation an option, but long-term survival can never be guaranteed. For very many sites, the costs are too great for either active measures to ensure \"in situ\" preservation or to provide for satisfactory conservation on recovery. Even the cost of proper and complete archaeological investigation may be too great to enable this to occur within a timescale that ensures that an archaeological record is made before data is inevitably lost.\nSubmerged sites.\nPrehistoric landscapes.\nMaritime archaeology studies prehistorical objects and sites that are, because of changes in climate and geology, now underwater.\nBodies of water, fresh and saline, have been important sources of food for people for as long as we have existed. It should be no surprise that ancient villages were located at the water's edge. Since the last ice age sea level has risen as much as .\nTherefore, a great deal of the record of human activity throughout the Ice Age is now to be found under water.\nThe flooding of the area now known as the Black Sea (when a land bridge, where the Bosporus is now, collapsed under the pressure of rising water in the Mediterranean Sea) submerged a great deal of human activity that had been gathered round what had been an enormous, fresh-water lake.\nSignificant cave art sites off the coast of western Europe such as the Grotto Cosquer can be reached only by diving, because the cave entrances are underwater, though the upper portions of the caves themselves are not flooded.\nHistoric sites.\nThroughout history, seismic events have at times caused submergence of human settlements. The remains of such catastrophes exist all over the world, and sites such as Alexandria, Port Royal and Mary Rose now form important archaeological sites that are being protected, managed and conserved. As with shipwrecks, archaeological research can follow multiple themes, including evidence of the final catastrophe, the structures and landscape before the catastrophe and the culture and economy of which it formed a part. Unlike the wrecking of a ship, the destruction of a town by a seismic event can take place over many years and there may be evidence for several phases of damage, sometimes with rebuilding in between.\nArchaeological diving.\nArchaeological diving is a type of scientific diving used as a method of survey and excavation in underwater archaeology. The first known use of the method comes from 1446, when Leon Battista Alberti explored and attempted to lift the ships of Emperor Caligula in Lake Nemi, Italy. Just a few decades later, in 1535, the same site saw the first use of a sophisticated breathing apparatus for archaeological purposes, when Guglielmo de Lorena and Frances de Marchi used an early diving bell to explore and retrieve material from the lake, although they decided to keep the blueprint of the exact mechanism secret. The following three centuries saw the gradual extension of diving time through the use of bells and submersing barrels filled with air. In the 19th century, the standard copper helmet diving gear was developed, allowing divers to stay underwater for extended periods through a constant air supply pumped down from the surface through a hose.\nNevertheless, the widespread utilisation of diving gear for archaeological purposes had to wait until the 20th century, when archaeologists began to appreciate the wealth of material that could be found under the water. This century also saw further advances in technology, most important being the invention of the aqualung by \u00c9mile Gagnan and Jacques-Yves Cousteau, the latter of whom would go on to use the technology for underwater excavation by 1948. Modern archaeologists use two kinds of equipment to provide breathing gas underwater: self-contained underwater breathing apparatus (SCUBA), which allows for greater mobility but limits the time the diver can spend in the water, and Surface-supplied diving equipment (SSDE or SSBA), which is safer but more expensive, and airline, or hookah equipment, a basic form of surface supplied equipment with limited depth applications. Both open circuit and rebreather scuba have been used, depending on which is best suited to the site.\nEquipment and procedures.\nRelatively recent developments, mainly for special circumstances:\nDepth of sites.\nThe depth of sites can vary within the range of ocean depth, but most sites that are accessible to diving work are relatively shallow.\nThe wreck of a Phoenician ship off the coast of Malta at a depth of about has been partially excavated by divers using rebreather equipment, using techniques developed for the purpose to make the most effective use of time on site, which was restricted to 3 shifts of 12 minute each per day on site. The site of the wreck of the USS Monitor is near Cape Hatteras at depth at coordinates . When it was realised that recovering the whole vessel was not economically viable, work was done by saturation divers to recover the propeller, engine and turret.\nThe Exosuit, a relatively lightweight Atmospheic Diving System for marine research was first used in 2014 at the Antikythera underwater archaeology expeditions. Exosuit is like a space suit that is depth-rated for use in depths up to 1000 feet of sea water, and is tethered to the surface by an umbilical.\nCoastal and foreshore.\nNot all maritime sites are underwater. There are many structures at the margin of land and water that provide evidence of the human societies of the past. Some are deliberately created for access - such as bridges and walkways. Other structures remain from exploitation of resources, such as dams and fish traps. Nautical remains include early harbours and places where ships were built or repaired. At the end of their life, ships were often beached. Valuable or easily accessed timber has often been salvaged, leaving just a few frames and bottom planking.\nArchaeological sites can also be found on the foreshore today that would have been on dry land when they were constructed. An example of such a site is Seahenge, a Bronze Age timber circle.\nShips and shipwrecks.\nThe archaeology of shipwrecks can be divided into a three-tier hierarchy, of which the first tier considers the wrecking process itself: how does a ship break up, how does a ship sink to the bottom, and how do the remains of the ship, cargo and the surrounding environment evolve over time? The second tier studies the ship as a machine, both in itself and in a military or economic system. The third tier consists of the archaeology of maritime cultures, in which nautical technology, naval warfare, trade and shipboard societies are studied. Some consider this to be the most important tier. Ships and boats are not necessarily wrecked: some are deliberately abandoned, scuttled or beached. Many such abandoned vessels have been extensively salvaged.\nBronze Age.\nThe earliest boats discovered date from the Bronze Age and are constructed of hollowed out logs or sewn planks. Vessels have been discovered where they have been preserved in sediments underwater or in waterlogged land sites, such as the discovery of a canoe near St Botolphs. Examples of sewn-plank boats include those found at North Ferriby and the Dover Bronze Age Boat which is now displayed at Dover Museum. These may be an evolution from boats made of sewn hides, but it is highly unlikely that hide boats could have survived.\nShips wrecked in the sea have probably not survived, although remains of cargo (particularly bronze material) have been discovered, such as those at the Salcombe B site. A close collection of artefacts on the sea bed may imply that artefacts were from a ship, even if there are no remains of the actual vessel.\nLate Bronze Age ships, such as the Uluburun Shipwreck have been discovered in the Mediterranean, constructed of edge joined planks. This shipbuilding technology continued through the classical period. The 2023 announcement of the Orca Shipwreck is considered the earliest deep-sea shipwreck to be discovered.\nMaritime archaeology by region.\nPacific.\nAn example of maritime archaeology in the Pacific Ocean is the discovery of the wreck of \"Two Brothers\", discovered in 2008 by a team of marine archaeologists working on an expedition for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The identity of the ship was not immediately known so it was called the \"Shark Island Whaler\"; the ship's identification as \"Two Brothers\" was announced by NOAA on February 11, 2011, the 188th anniversary of her sinking. The wreck is the first discovery of a wrecked Nantucket whaling ship.\nNine historic trade ships carrying ceramics dating back to the 10th century until the 19th century were excavated under Swedish engineer Sten Sj\u00f6strand in the South China Sea.\nMediterranean area.\nIn the Mediterranean area, maritime archaeologists have investigated several ancient cultures. Notable early Iron Age shipwrecks include two Phoenician ships of c. 750 BC that foundered off Gaza with cargoes of wine in amphoras. The crew of the U.S. Navy deep submergence research submarine NR-1 discovered the sites in 1997. In 1999 a team led by Robert Ballard and Harvard University archaeology Professor Lawrence Stager investigated the wrecks.\nExtensive research has been carried out on the Mediterranean and Aegean coastlines of Turkey. Complete excavations have been performed on several wrecks from the Classical, Hellenistic, Byzantine, and Ottoman periods.\nMaritime archaeological studies in Italy illuminate the naval and maritime activities of the Etruscans, Greek colonists, and Romans. After the 2nd century BC, the Roman fleet ruled the Mediterranean and actively suppressed piracy. During this Pax Romana, seaborne trade increased significantly throughout the region. Though sailing was the safest, fastest, and most efficient method of transportation in the ancient world, some fractional percentage of voyages ended in shipwreck. With the significantly increased sea traffic during the Roman era came a corresponding increase in shipwrecks. These wrecks and their cargo remains offer glimpses through time of the economy, culture, and politics of the ancient world. Particularly useful to archaeologists are studies of amphoras, the ceramic shipping containers used in the Mediterranean region from the 15th century BC through the Medieval period.\nIn addition to many discoveries in the sea, some wrecks have been examined in lakes. Most notable are Caligula's pleasure barges in Lake Nemi, Italy. The Nemi ships and other shipwreck sites occasionally yield objects of unique artistic value. For instance, the Antikythera wreck contained a staggering collection of marble and bronze statues including the Antikythera Youth. Discovered in 1900 by Greek sponge divers, the ship probably sank in the 1st century BC and may have been dispatched by the Roman general, Sulla, to carry booty back to Rome. The sponge divers also recovered from the wreck the famous Antikythera mechanism, believed to be an astronomical calculator. Further examples of fabulous works of art recovered from the sea floor are the two \"bronzi\" found in Riace (Calabria), Italy. In the cases of Antikythera and Riace, however, the artifacts were recovered without the direct participation of maritime archaeologists.\nRecent studies in the Sarno river (near Pompeii) show other interesting elements of ancient life. The Sarno projects suggests that on the Tyrrhenian shore there were little towns with palafittes, similar to ancient Venice. In the same area, the submerged town of Puteoli (Pozzuoli, close to Naples) contains the \"portus Julius\" created by Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa in 37 BC, later sunk due to bradyseism.\nThe sea floor elsewhere in the Mediterranean holds countless archaeological sites. In Israel, Herod the Great's port at Caesarea Maritima has been extensively studied. Other finds are consistent with some passages of the Bible (like the so-called Jesus boat, which appears to have been in use during the first century AD).\nAustralia.\nMaritime archaeology in Australia commenced in the 1970s with the advent of Jeremy Green due to concerns expressed by academics and politicians with the rampant destruction of the Dutch and British East India ships lost on the west coast. As Commonwealth legislation was enacted and enforced after 1976 and as States enacted their own legislation the sub-discipline spread throughout Australia concentrating initially on shipwrecks due to on-going funding by both the States and the Commonwealth under their shipwreck legislation. Studies now include as an element of underwater archaeology, as a whole, the study of submerged indigenous sites. Nautical Archaeology, (the specialised study of boat and ship construction) is also practised in the region. Often the sites or relics studied in Australia as in the rest of the world are not inundated. The study of historic submerged aircraft, better known as a sub-discipline of aviation archaeology, underwater aviation archaeology is also practised in the region. In some states maritime and underwater archaeology is practised out of Museums and in others out of cultural heritage management units, and all practitioners operate under the aegis of the Australasian Institute for Maritime Archaeology (AIMA).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20069", "revid": "50939727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20069", "title": "Morihei Ueshiba", "text": "Founder of Aikido\n was a Japanese martial artist and founder of the martial art of aikido. He is often referred to as \"the founder\" or , \"Great Teacher\".\nThe son of a landowner from Tanabe, Ueshiba studied a number of martial arts in his youth, and served in the Japanese Army during the Russo-Japanese War. After being discharged in 1907, he moved to Hokkaido as the head of a pioneer settlement; here he met and studied with Takeda S\u014dkaku, the headmaster of Dait\u014d-ry\u016b Aiki-j\u016bjutsu. On leaving Hokkaido in 1919, Ueshiba joined the \u014cmoto-ky\u014d movement, a Shinto sect, in Ayabe, where he served as a martial arts instructor and opened his first dojo. He accompanied the head of the \u014cmoto-ky\u014d group, Onisaburo Deguchi, on an expedition to Mongolia in 1924, where they were captured by Chinese troops and returned to Japan. The following year, he had a profound spiritual experience, stating that, \"a golden spirit sprang up from the ground, veiled my body, and changed my body into a golden one.\" After this experience, his martial arts technique became gentler, with a greater emphasis on the control of ki.\nUeshiba moved to Tokyo in 1926, where he set up what would become the Aikikai Hombu Dojo. By this point he was comparatively famous in martial arts circles, and taught at this dojo and others around Japan, including in several military academies. In the aftermath of World War II the Hombu dojo was temporarily closed, but Ueshiba had by this point left Tokyo and retired to Iwama, and he continued training at the dojo he had set up there. From the end of the war until the 1960s, he worked to promote aikido throughout Japan and abroad. He died from liver cancer in 1969.\nAfter Ueshiba's death, aikido continued to be promulgated by his students (many of whom became noted martial artists in their own right). It is now practiced around the world.\nTanabe, 1883\u20131912.\nMorihei Ueshiba was born in Nishinotani village (now part of the city of Tanabe), Wakayama Prefecture, Japan, on December 14, 1883, the fourth child (and only son) born to Yoroku Ueshiba and his wife Yuki.\nThe young Ueshiba was raised in a somewhat privileged setting. His father Yoroku was a wealthy gentleman farmer and minor politician, being an elected member of the Nishinotani village council for 22 consecutive years. His mother Yuki was from the Itokawa clan, a prominent local family who could trace their lineage back to the Heian period. Ueshiba was a rather weak, sickly child and bookish in his inclinations. At a young age his father encouraged him to take up sumo wrestling and swimming and entertained him with stories of his great-grandfather Kichiemon, who was considered a very strong samurai in his era. The need for such strength was further emphasized when the young Ueshiba witnessed his father being attacked by followers of a competing politician.\nA major influence on Ueshiba's early education was his elementary schoolteacher Tasaburo Nasu, who was a Shinto priest and who introduced Ueshiba to the religion. At the age of six Ueshiba was sent to study at the Jiz\u014dderu Temple, but had little interest in the rote learning of Confucian education. However, his schoolmaster Mitsujo Fujimoto was also a priest of Shingon Buddhism, and taught the young Ueshiba some of the esoteric chants and ritual observances of the sect, which Ueshiba found intriguing. His interest in Buddhism was sufficiently great that his mother considered enrolling him in the priesthood, but his father Yoroku vetoed the idea. Ueshiba went to Tanabe Higher Elementary School and then to Tanabe Prefectural Middle School, but left formal education in his early teens, enrolling instead at a private abacus academy, the Yoshida Institute, to study accountancy. On graduating from the academy, he worked at a local tax office for a few months, but the job did not suit him and in 1901 he left for Tokyo, funded by his father. Ueshiba Trading, the stationery business which he opened there, was short-lived; unhappy with life in the capital, he returned to Tanabe less than a year later after suffering a bout of beri-beri. Shortly thereafter he married his childhood acquaintance Hatsu Itokawa.\nIn 1903, Ueshiba was called up for military service. He failed the initial physical examination, being shorter than the regulation . To overcome this, he stretched his spine by attaching heavy weights to his legs and suspending himself from tree branches; when he re-took the physical exam he had increased his height by the necessary half-inch to pass. He was assigned to the Osaka Fourth Division, 37th Regiment, and was promoted to corporal of the 61st Wakayama regiment by the following year; after serving on the front lines during the Russo-Japanese War he was promoted to sergeant. He was discharged in 1907, and again returned to his father's farm in Tanabe. Here he befriended the writer and philosopher Minakata Kumagusu, becoming involved with Minakata's opposition to the Meiji government's Shrine Consolidation Policy. He and his wife had their first child, a daughter named Matsuko, in 1911.\nUeshiba studied several martial arts during his early life, and was renowned for his physical strength during his youth. During his sojourn in Tokyo he studied Kit\u014d-ry\u016b jujutsu under Takisaburo Tobari, and briefly enrolled in a school teaching Shinkage-ry\u016b. His training in Got\u014d-ha Yagy\u016b-ryu under Masakatsu Nakai started in 1903 and continued until 1908; although this training was sporadic due to his military service, Ueshiba was granted a Menkyo Kaiden (certificate of \"Total Transmission\") in 1908. In 1901 he received some instruction from Tozawa Tokusabur\u014din in Tenjin Shin'y\u014d-ry\u016b jujutsu and he studied judo with Kiyoichi Takagi in Tanabe in 1911, after his father had a dojo built on the family compound to encourage his son's training. In 1907, after his return from the war, he was also presented with a certificate of enlightenment (\"shingon inkyo\") by his childhood teacher Mitsujo Fujimoto.\nHokkaido, 1912\u20131920.\nIn the early part of the 20th century, the prefectural government of Hokkaido, Japan's northernmost island, were offering various grants and incentives for mainland Japanese groups willing to relocate there. At the time, Hokkaido was still largely unsettled by the Japanese, being occupied primarily by the indigenous Ainu. In 1910, Ueshiba travelled to Hokkaido in the company of his acquaintance Denzaburo Kurahashi, who had lived on the northern island before. His intent was to scout out a propitious location for a new settlement, and he found the site at Shirataki suitable for his plans. Despite the hardships he suffered on this journey (which included getting lost in snowstorms several times and an incident in which he nearly drowned in a freezing river), Ueshiba returned to Tanabe filled with enthusiasm for the project, and began recruiting families to join him. He became the leader of the Kish\u016b Settlement Group, a collective of eighty-five pioneers who intended to settle in the Shirataki district and live as farmers; the group founded the village of Yubetsu (later Shirataki village) in August, 1912. Much of the funding for this project came from Ueshiba's father and his brothers-in-law Zenzo and Koshiro Inoue. Zenzo's son Noriaki was also a member of the settlement group.\nPoor soil conditions and bad weather led to crop failures during the first three years of the project, but the group still managed to cultivate mint and farm livestock. The burgeoning timber industry provided a boost to the settlement's economy, and by 1918 there were over 500 families residing there. A fire in 1917 razed the entire village, leading to the departure of around twenty families. Ueshiba was attending a meeting over railway construction around 50 miles away, but on learning of the fire travelled back the entire distance on foot. He was elected to the village council that year, and took a prominent role in leading the reconstruction efforts. In the summer of 1918, Hatsu gave birth to their first son, Takemori.\nThe young Ueshiba met Takeda S\u014dkaku, the founder of Dait\u014d-ry\u016b Aiki-j\u016bjutsu, at the Hisada Inn in Engaru, in March 1915. Ueshiba was deeply impressed with Takeda's martial art, and despite being on an important mission for his village at the time, abandoned his journey to spend the next month studying with Takeda. He requested formal instruction and began studying Takeda's style of j\u016bjutsu in earnest, going so far as to construct a dojo at his home and inviting his new teacher to be a permanent house guest. He received a \"ky\u014dju dairi\" certificate, a teaching license, for the system from Takeda in 1922, when Takeda visited him in Ayabe. Takeda also gave him a Yagy\u016b Shinkage-ry\u016b sword transmission scroll. Ueshiba then became a representative of Dait\u014d-ry\u016b, toured with Takeda as a teaching assistant and taught the system to others. The relationship between Ueshiba and Takeda was a complicated one. Ueshiba was an extremely dedicated student, dutifully attending to his teacher's needs and displaying great respect. However, Takeda overshadowed him throughout his early martial arts career, and Ueshiba's own students recorded the need to address what they referred to as \"the Takeda problem\".\nAyabe, 1920\u20131927.\nIn November 1919, Ueshiba learned that his father Yoroku was ill, and was not expected to survive. Leaving most of his possessions to Takeda, Ueshiba left Shirataki with the apparent intention of returning to Tanabe to visit his ailing parent. En route he made a detour to Ayabe, near Kyoto, intending to visit Onisaburo Deguchi, the spiritual leader of the \u014cmoto-ky\u014d religion (Ueshiba's nephew Noriaki Inoue had already joined the religion and may have recommended it to his uncle). Ueshiba stayed at the \u014cmoto-ky\u014d headquarters for several days, and met with Deguchi, who told him that, \"There is nothing to worry about with your father\". On his return to Tanabe, Ueshiba found that Yoroku had died. Criticised by family and friends for arriving too late to see his father, Ueshiba went into the mountains with a sword and practised solo sword exercises for several days; this almost led to his arrest when the police were informed of a sword-wielding madman on the loose.\nWithin a few months, Ueshiba was back in Ayabe, having decided to become a full-time student of \u014cmoto-ky\u014d. In 1920 he moved his entire family, including his mother, to the \u014cmoto compound; at the same time he also purchased enough rice to feed himself and his family for several years. That same year, Deguchi asked Ueshiba to become the group's martial arts instructor, and a dojo\u2014the first of several that Ueshiba was to lead\u2014was constructed on the centre's grounds. Ueshiba also taught Takeda's Dait\u014d-ry\u016b in neighbouring Hy\u014dgo Prefecture during this period. His second son, Kuniharu, was born in 1920 in Ayabe, but died from illness the same year, along with three-year-old Takemori.\nTakeda visited Ueshiba in Ayabe to provide instruction, although he was not a follower of \u014cmoto and did not get along with Deguchi, which led to a cooling of the relationship between him and Ueshiba. Ueshiba continued to teach his martial art under the name \"Dait\u014d-ry\u016b Aiki-j\u016bjutsu\", at the behest of his teacher. However, Deguchi encouraged Ueshiba to create his own style of martial arts, \"Ueshiba-ry\u016b\", and sent many \u014cmoto followers to study at the dojo. He also brought Ueshiba into the highest levels of the group's bureaucracy, making Ueshiba his executive assistant and putting him in charge of the Showa Seinenkai (\u014cmoto-ky\u014d's national youth organisation) and the \u014cmoto Shobotai, a volunteer fire service.\nHis close relationship with Deguchi introduced Ueshiba to various members of Japan's far-right; members of the ultranationalist group the Sakurakai would hold meetings at Ueshiba's dojo, and he developed a friendship with the philosopher Sh\u016bmei \u014ckawa during this period, as well as meeting with Nissh\u014d Inoue and Kozabur\u014d Tachibana. Deguchi also offered Ueshiba's services as a bodyguard to Kingoro Hashimoto, the Sakurakai's founder. Ueshiba's commitment to the goal of world peace, stressed by many biographers, must be viewed in the light of these relationships and his \u014cmoto-ky\u014d beliefs. His association with the extreme right-wing is understandable when one considers that \u014cmoto-ky\u014d's view of world peace was of a benevolent dictatorship by the Emperor of Japan, with other nations being subjugated under Japanese rule.\nIn 1921, in an event known as the , the Japanese authorities raided the compound, destroying the main buildings on the site and arresting Deguchi on charges of l\u00e8se-majest\u00e9. Ueshiba's dojo was undamaged and, over the following two years, he worked closely with Deguchi to reconstruct the group's centre, becoming heavily involved in farming work and serving as the group's \"Caretaker of Forms\", a role which placed him in charge of overseeing \u014cmoto's move towards self-sufficiency. His son Kisshomaru was born in the summer of 1921.\nThree years later, in 1924, Deguchi led a small group of \u014cmoto-ky\u014d disciples, including Ueshiba, on a journey to Mongolia at the invitation of retired naval captain Yutaro Yano and his associates within the ultra-nationalist Black Dragon Society. Deguchi's intent was to establish a new religious kingdom in Mongolia, and to this end he had distributed propaganda suggesting that he was the reincarnation of Genghis Khan. Allied with the Mongolian bandit Lu Zhankui, Deguchi's group were arrested in Tongliao by the Chinese authorities. Fortunately for Ueshiba, whilst Lu and his men were executed by firing squad, the Japanese group was released into the custody of the Japanese consul. They were returned under guard to Japan, where Deguchi was imprisoned for breaking the terms of his bail. During this expedition Ueshiba was given the Chinese alias Wang Shou-gao, rendered in Japanese as \"Moritaka\" \u2013 he was reportedly very taken with this name and continued to use it intermittently for the rest of his life.\nAfter returning to Ayabe, Ueshiba began a regimen of spiritual training, regularly retreating to the mountains or performing \"misogi\" in the Nachi Falls. As his prowess as a martial artist increased, his fame began to spread. He was challenged by many established martial artists, some of whom later became his students after being defeated by him. In the autumn of 1925 he was asked to give a demonstration of his art in Tokyo, at the behest of Admiral Isamu Takeshita; one of the spectators was Yamamoto Gonnohy\u014de, who requested that Ueshiba stay in the capital to instruct the Imperial Guard in his martial art. After a couple of weeks, however, Ueshiba took issue with several government officials who voiced concerns about his connections to Deguchi; he cancelled the training and returned to Ayabe.\nTokyo, 1927\u20131942.\nIn 1926 Takeshita invited Ueshiba to visit Tokyo again. Ueshiba relented and returned to the capital, but while residing there was stricken with a serious illness. Deguchi visited his ailing student and, concerned for his health, commanded Ueshiba to return to Ayabe. The appeal of returning increased after Ueshiba was questioned by the police following his meeting with Deguchi; the authorities were keeping the \u014cmoto-ky\u014d leader under close surveillance. Angered at the treatment he had received, Ueshiba went back to Ayabe again. Six months later, this time with Deguchi's blessing, he and his family moved permanently to Tokyo. This move allowed Ueshiba to teach politicians, high-ranking military personnel, and members of the Imperial household; suddenly he was no longer an obscure provincial martial artist, but a sensei to some of Japan's most important citizens. Arriving in October 1927, the Ueshiba family set up home in the Shirokane district. The building proved too small to house the growing number of aikido students, and so the Ueshibas moved to larger premises, first in Mita district, then in Takanawa, and finally to a purpose-built hall in Shinjuku. This last location, originally named the Kobukan (), would eventually become the Aikikai Hombu Dojo. During its construction, Ueshiba rented a property nearby, where he was visited by Kan\u014d Jigor\u014d, the founder of judo.\nDuring this period, Ueshiba was invited to teach at a number of military institutes, due to his close personal relationships with key figures in the military (among them Sadao Araki, the Japanese Minister of War). He accepted an invitation from Admiral Sankichi Takahashi to be the martial arts instructor at the Imperial Japanese Naval Academy, and also taught at the Nakano Spy School, although aikido was later judged to be too technical for the students there and karate was adopted instead. He also became a visiting instructor at the Imperial Japanese Army Academy after being challenged by (and defeating) General Makoto Miura, another student of Takeda S\u014dkaku's Dait\u014d-ry\u016b. Takeda himself met Ueshiba for the last time around 1935, while Ueshiba was teaching at the Osaka headquarters of the \"Asahi Shimbun\" newspaper. Frustrated by the appearance of his teacher, who was openly critical of Ueshiba's martial arts and who appeared intent on taking over the classes there, Ueshiba left Osaka during the night, bowing to the residence in which Takeda was staying and thereafter avoiding all contact with him. Between 1940 and 1942 he made several visits to Manchukuo (Japanese occupied Manchuria) where he was the principal martial arts instructor at Kenkoku University. Whilst in Manchuria, he met and defeated the sumo wrestler Tenry\u016b Sabur\u014d during a demonstration.\nThe \"Second \u014cmoto Incident\" in 1935 saw another government crackdown on Deguchi's sect, in which the Ayabe compound was destroyed and most of the group's leaders imprisoned. Although he had relocated to Tokyo, Ueshiba had retained links with the \u014cmoto-ky\u014d group (he had in fact helped Deguchi to establish a paramilitary branch of the sect only three years earlier) and expected to be arrested as one of its senior members. However, he had a good relationship with the local police commissioner Kenji Tomita and the chief of police G\u012bchi Morita, both of whom had been his students. As a result, although he was taken in for interrogation, he was released without charge on Morita's authority.\nIn 1932, Ueshiba's daughter Matsuko was married to the swordsman Kiyoshi Nakakura, who was adopted as Ueshiba's heir under the name Morihiro Ueshiba. The marriage ended after a few years, and Nakakura left the family in 1937. Ueshiba later designated his son Kisshomaru as the heir to his martial art.\nThe 1930s saw Japan's invasion of mainland Asia and increased military activity in Europe. Ueshiba was concerned about the prospect of war, and became involved in a number of efforts to try and forestall the conflict that would eventually become World War II. He was part of a group, along with Sh\u016bmei \u014ckawa and several wealthy Japanese backers, that tried to broker a deal with Harry Chandler to export aviation fuel from the United States to Japan (in contravention of the ), although this effort ultimately failed. In 1941 Ueshiba also undertook a secret diplomatic mission to China at the behest of Prince Fumimaro Konoe. The intended goal was a meeting with Chiang Kai-shek to establish peace talks, but Ueshiba was unable to meet with the Chinese leader, arriving too late to fulfil his mission.\nIwama, 1942\u20131969.\nFrom 1935 onwards, Ueshiba had been purchasing land in Iwama in Ibaraki Prefecture, and by the early 1940s had acquired around of farmland there. In 1942, disenchanted with the war-mongering and political manoeuvring in the capital, he left Tokyo and moved to Iwama permanently, settling in a small farmer's cottage. Here he founded the Aiki Shuren Dojo, also known as the Iwama dojo, and the Aiki Shrine, a devotional shrine to the \"Great Spirit of Aiki\". During this time he travelled extensively in Japan, particularly in the Kansai region, teaching his aikido. Despite the prohibition on the teaching of martial arts after World War II, Ueshiba and his students continued to practice in secret at the Iwama dojo; the Hombu dojo in Tokyo was in any case being used as a refugee centre for citizens displaced by the severe firebombing. It was during this period that Ueshiba met and befriended Koun Nakanishi, an expert in kotodama. The study of kotodama was to become one of Ueshiba's passions in later life, and Nakanishi's work inspired Ueshiba's concept of \"takemusu aiki\".\nThe rural nature of his new home in Iwama allowed Ueshiba to concentrate on the second great passion of his life: farming. He had been born into a farming family and spent much of his life cultivating the land, from his settlement days in Hokkaido to his work in Ayabe trying to make the \u014cmoto-ky\u014d compound self-sufficient. He viewed farming as a logical complement to martial arts; both were physically demanding and required single-minded dedication. Not only did his farming activities provide a useful cover for martial arts training under the government's restrictions, it also provided food for Ueshiba, his students and other local families at a time when food shortages were commonplace.\nThe government prohibition (on aikido, at least) was lifted in 1948 with the creation of the Aiki Foundation, established by the Japanese Ministry of Education with permission from the Occupation forces. The Hombu dojo re-opened the following year. After the war Ueshiba effectively retired from aikido. He delegated most of the work of running the Hombu dojo and the Aiki Federation to his son Kisshomaru, and instead chose to spend much of his time in prayer, meditation, calligraphy and farming. He still travelled extensively to promote aikido, even visiting Hawaii in 1961. He also appeared in a television documentary on aikido: NTV's \"The Master of Aikido\", broadcast in January 1960. Ueshiba maintained links with the Japanese nationalist movement even in later life; his student Kanshu Sunadomari reported that Ueshiba temporarily sheltered Mikami Taku, one of the naval officers involved in the May 15 Incident, at Iwama.\nIn 1969, Ueshiba became ill. He led his last training session on March 10, and was taken to hospital where he was diagnosed with cancer of the liver. He died suddenly on April 26, 1969. His body was buried at Kozan-ji Temple Tanabe-shi Wakayama Japan, and he was given the posthumous Buddhist title \"Aiki-in Moritake En'y\u016b Daid\u014dshi\" (); parts of his hair were enshrined at Ayabe, Iwama and Kumano. Two months later, his wife Hatsu ( \"Ueshiba Hatsu\", n\u00e9e \"Itokawa Hatsu\"; 1881\u20131969) also died.\nDevelopment of aikido.\nAikido\u2014usually translated as the \"Way of Unifying Spirit\" or the \"Way of Spiritual Harmony\"\u2014is a fighting system that focuses on throws, pins, and joint locks together with some striking techniques. It emphasizes protecting the opponent and promotes spiritual and social development.\nThe technical curriculum of aikido was derived from the teachings of Takeda S\u014dkaku; the basic techniques of aikido stem from his Dait\u014d-ry\u016b system. In the earlier years of his teaching, from the 1920s to the mid-1930s, Ueshiba taught the Dait\u014d-ry\u016b Aiki-j\u016bjutsu system; his early students' documents bear the term Dait\u014d-ry\u016b. Indeed, Ueshiba trained one of the future highest grade earners in Dait\u014d-ry\u016b, Takuma Hisa, in the art before Takeda took charge of Hisa's training.\nThe early form of training under Ueshiba was noticeably different from later forms of aikido. It had a larger curriculum, increased use of strikes to vital points (\"atemi\"), and greater use of weapons. The schools of aikido developed by Ueshiba's students from the pre-war period tend to reflect the harder style of the early training. These students included Kenji Tomiki (who founded the Shodokan Aikido sometimes called Tomiki-ry\u016b), Noriaki Inoue (who founded Shin'ei Taid\u014d), Minoru Mochizuki (who founded Yoseikan Budo) and Gozo Shioda (who founded Yoshinkan Aikido). Many of these styles are therefore considered \"pre-war styles\", although some of these teachers continued to train with Ueshiba in the years after World War II.\nDuring his lifetime, Ueshiba had three spiritual experiences that impacted greatly his understanding of the martial arts. The first occurred in 1925, after Ueshiba had defeated a naval officer's \"bokken\" (wooden katana) attacks unarmed and without hurting the officer. Ueshiba then walked to his garden, where he had the following realization:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I felt the universe suddenly quake and a golden spirit sprang up from the ground, veiled my body, and changed my body into a golden one. At the same time, my body became light. I was able to understand the whispering of the birds and was aware of the mind of God, the creator of the universe. At that moment I was enlightened: the source of bud\u014d [\"the martial way\"] is God's love \u2013 the spirit of loving protection for all beings\u00a0...\nBud\u014d is not the felling of an opponent by force; nor is it a tool to lead the world to destruction with arms. True Bud\u014d is to accept the spirit of the universe, keep the peace of the world, correctly produce, protect and cultivate all beings in nature.\nHis second experience occurred in 1940 when engaged in the ritual purification process of \"misogi\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHis third experience was in 1942 during the worst fighting of World War II when Ueshiba had a vision of the \"Great Spirit of Peace\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter these events, Ueshiba seemed to slowly grow away from Takeda, and he began to change his art. These changes are reflected in the differing names with which he referred to his system, first as \"aiki-j\u016bjutsu\", then Ueshiba-ry\u016b, Asahi-ry\u016b, and \"aiki bud\u014d\". In 1942, when Ueshiba's group joined the Dai Nippon Butoku Kai, the martial art that he developed finally came to be known as aikido.\nAs Ueshiba grew older, more skilled, and more spiritual in his outlook, his art also changed and became softer and more gentle. Martial techniques became less important, and more focus was given to the control of ki. In his expression of the art there was a greater emphasis on what is referred to as \"koky\u016b-nage\", or \"breath throws\" which are soft and blending, utilizing the opponent's movement to throw them. Ueshiba regularly practiced cold water \"misogi\", as well as other spiritual and religious rites, and viewed his studies of aikido as part of this spiritual training.\nOver the years, Ueshiba trained a large number of students, many of whom later became famous teachers in their own right and developed their styles of aikido. Some of them were \"uchi-deshi\", live-in students. Ueshiba placed many demands on his \"uchi-deshi\", expecting them to attend to him at all times, act as training partners (even in the middle of the night), arrange his travel plans, massage, and bathe him, and assist with household chores.\nThere were roughly four generations of students, comprising the pre-war students (training c.1921\u20131935), students who trained during the Second World War (c.1936\u20131945), the post-war students in Iwama (c.1946\u20131955) and the students who trained with Ueshiba during his final years (c.1956\u2013c.1969). As a result of Ueshiba's martial development throughout his life, students from each of these generations tend to have markedly different approaches to aikido. These variations are compounded by the fact that few students trained with Ueshiba for a protracted period; only Yoichiro Inoue, Kenji Tomiki, Gozo Shioda, Morihiro Saito, Tsutomu Yukawa and Mitsugi Saotome studied directly under Ueshiba for more than five or six years. After the war, Ueshiba and the Hombu Dojo dispatched some of their students to various other countries, resulting in aikido spreading around the world.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20070", "revid": "46976851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20070", "title": "Memory address register", "text": "CPU register\nIn a computer, the memory address register (MAR) is the CPU register that either stores the memory address from which data will be fetched to the CPU registers, or the address to which data will be sent and stored via system bus.\nIn other words, this register is used to access data and instructions from memory during the execution phase of instruction. MAR holds the memory location of data that needs to be accessed. When reading from memory, data addressed by MAR is fed into the MDR (memory data register) and then used by the CPU. When writing to memory, the CPU writes data from MDR to the memory location whose address is stored in MAR. MAR, which is found inside the CPU, goes either to the RAM (random-access memory) or cache.\nThe MAR register is half of a minimal interface between a microprogram and computer storage; the other half is a MDR.\nIn general, MAR is a parallel load register that contains the next memory address to be manipulated, for example the next address to be read or written.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20071", "revid": "11677590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20071", "title": "Memory data register", "text": ""}
{"id": "20072", "revid": "40820929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20072", "title": "Microassembler", "text": "A microassembler is a computer program that helps prepare a microprogram, called \"firmware\", to control the low level operation of a computer in much the same way an assembler helps prepare higher level code for a processor. The difference is that the microprogram is usually only developed by the processor manufacturer and works intimately with the computer hardware. On a microprogrammed computer the microprogram implements the operations of the instruction set in which any normal program (including both application programs and operating systems) is written. The use of a microprogram allows the manufacturer to fix certain mistakes, including working around hardware design errors, without modifying the hardware. Another means of employing microassembler-generated microprograms is in allowing the same hardware to run different instruction sets. After it is assembled, the microprogram is then loaded to a control store to become part of the logic of a CPU's control unit.\nSome microassemblers are more generalized and are not targeted at a single computer architecture. For example, through the use of macro-assembler-like capabilities, Digital Equipment Corporation used their \"MICRO2\" microassembler for a very wide range of computer architectures and implementations.\nIf a given computer implementation supports a writeable control store, the microassembler is usually provided to customers as a means of writing customized microcode.\nIn the process of microcode assembly it is helpful to verify the microprogram with emulation tools before distribution. Nowadays, microcoding has experienced a revival, since it is possible to correct and optimize the firmware of processing units already manufactured or sold, in order to adapt to specific operating systems or to fix hardware bugs. However, a commonly usable microassembler for today's CPUs is not available to manipulate the microcode. Knowledge of a processor's microcode is usually considered proprietary information so it is difficult to obtain information about how to modify it."}
{"id": "20073", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20073", "title": "Manual alphabet", "text": ""}
{"id": "20074", "revid": "50045527", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20074", "title": "Machine pistol", "text": "Fully automatic handgun\nA machine pistol is a handgun that is capable of fully automatic fire, including stockless handgun-style submachine guns.\nThe Austrians introduced the world's first machine pistol, the \"Steyr Repetierpistole\" M1912/P16, during World War I. The Germans also experimented with machine pistols, by converting various types of semi-automatic pistols to full-auto, leading to the development of the first practical submachine guns. During World War II, machine pistol development was widely disregarded in favor of submachine gun mass-production. After the war, machine pistol development was limited and only a handful of manufacturers would develop new designs, with varying degrees of success. This concept would eventually lead to the development of the personal defense weapon or PDW.\nToday, machine pistols are considered special-purpose weapons with limited utility, with their original niche being filled with either the PDW, carbines, or simply more modern semi-automatic sidearms. Contributing to their already-fringe use, without a shoulder stock and training, machine pistols can be difficult to control for all but the best shooters.\nHistory.\nIn 1896 a select-fire pistol was patented by the British inventor Hugh Gabbett-Fairfax.\nWorld War I.\nDuring World War I, a machine pistol version of the Steyr M1912 called the \"Repetierpistole M1912/P16\" was produced. It used a 16-round fixed magazine loaded via 8 round stripper clips, a detachable shoulder stock and a rather large exposed semi-auto/full-auto selector switch on the right side of the frame above the trigger (down = semi &amp; up = full). It fired the 9\u00d723mm Steyr cartridge, with a full-auto rate-of-fire of about 800 to 1,000 rounds per minute (RPM). It weighed about 2.6 pounds. Introduced in 1916, it is considered one of the world's first full-auto capable pistols. Only 960 M1912/P16 were made.\nAn automatic version of the Frommer Stop pistol was also tested, including a variant known as the \"Doppelpistole\" where two guns were joined together and mounted upside down on a tripod.\nIn 1916, Heinrich Senn of Bern designed a modification of the Swiss Luger pistol to fire in single shots or in full-automatic. Around the same time Georg Luger demonstrated a similar Luger machine-pistol which inspired the German Army to develop submachine guns.\n1920s\u20131930s.\nThe Mauser C96 was introduced in 1896, it being one of the first commercially successful and practical semi-automatic pistols. During World War I, the Germans experimented with machine pistols by converting both 7.63mm Mauser and 9\u00a0mm Parabellum semi-automatic C96 pistols to full-auto. In the late 1920s, Spanish gunmakers expanded upon this idea by introducing select fire copies of the C96 with 20-round detachable magazines. In the early 1930s, Mauser engineers finally followed suit, and introduced the Model 1932 or Model 712 \"Schnellfeuer\" variant, which also included 20 round detachable magazines and a select fire mechanism allowing for fully automatic fire at a rate of 1,000 RPM.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, machine pistol development was more or less ignored as the major powers were focused on mass-producing submachine guns. Mauser Model 1932 or Model 712 \"Schnellfeuer\" variant was used mainly by Waffen-SS personnel.\n1950s\u20131960s.\nThe 9\u00d718mm Makarov Stechkin automatic pistol (APS) is a Russian select-fire machine pistol introduced into the Russian army in 1951. Like the other common Russian army pistol of this era, the Makarov, the Stechkin uses a simple unlocked blowback mechanism and the double action trigger. What makes the Stechkin APS a machine pistol is that it has an automatic fire mode, which is selected using the safety lever. In burst or automatic fire, the pistol should be fitted with the wooden shoulder stock; otherwise, the weapon quickly becomes uncontrollable. The Stechkin was intended as a sidearm for artillery soldiers and tank crews, but in practice, it ended up earning a strong following in the ranks of political and criminal police forces. Many KGB and GRU operatives favored the Stechkin for its firepower and 20-round magazine.\nThe \u0160korpion vz. 61 is a Czechoslovak 7.65 mm or .32 ACP machine pistol developed in 1959 and produced from 1961 to 1979. Although it was developed for use with security and special forces, the weapon was also accepted into service with the Czechoslovak Army, as a personal sidearm for lower-ranking army staff, vehicle drivers, armored vehicle personnel and special forces. The Skorpion's lower-powered .32 ACP cartridge, coupled with a rate-of-fire limiting device housed in the grip (which allows a reasonable rate of 850 RPM with a relatively light bolt), also makes it easier to control in full-auto than the more common 9\u00a0mm Parabellum designs. Currently the weapon is in use with the armed forces of several countries as a sidearm. The \u0160korpion was also license-built in Yugoslavia, designated M84.\nThe Beretta M1951R was based on the 9\u00a0mm Parabellum Beretta M1951 pistol and produced during the 1960s in response to a request made by the Italian special forces. The primary difference between the M951R and the original M1951 lay in the fire selector lever mounted on the right side of the weapon's frame, enabling either semi-automatic or continuous fire \u2013 labelled \"SEM\" and \"AUT\", respectively. Additionally, the weapon has a heavier slide, a folding wooden forward grip, an extended barrel and an extended magazine, increasing the capacity to 10 rounds.\n1970s\u20131980s.\nThe MAC-10 and MAC-11 were 1970s blowback-designed weapons with the magazine carried in the pistol grip and a select-fire switch. The .45 ACP MAC-10 had a rate of fire of 1,100 RPM, and the 9\u00d719mm version 1,200-1,500 RPM. The MAC-11 could also fire 1,200-1,500 RPM with its lighter .380 ACP cartridges. These guns were designed by Gordon Ingram and Military Armament Corporation in the US. The weapons were used in special operations and covert applications in Vietnam and by Brazilian anti-terrorist units, most people fitting it with a silencer using its threaded barrel. While some sources call the MAC-10 and MAC-11 machine pistols, the guns are also referred to as compact submachine guns.\nSince it is difficult to control machine pistols when they are fired in fully automatic mode, some manufacturers developed an \"intermittent-fire\" setting that fires a burst of three rounds instead of a continuous stream. The first of these guns is the Heckler &amp; Koch VP70, the 70 designating the year of origin; 1970. That is a 9\u00a0mm Parabellum, 18-round, double action only, select fire-capable polymer frame pistol. It is the first polymer-framed pistol, predating the Glock 17. The stock incorporates the semi-auto/three-round burst selector, therefore it will only fire a three-round burst with the stock attached. Cyclic rounds per minute for the three-round bursts is 2,200 RPM. Despite the VP70's potential, it was never adopted by the \"Bundeswehr\".\nIn 1976, a shortened version of the 9\u00a0mm Parabellum Heckler &amp; Koch MP5 was introduced; the MP5K (K from the German \"Kurz\" = \"short\") was designed for close quarters battle use by clandestine operations and special services. The MP5K does not have a shoulder stock, and the bolt and receiver were shortened at the rear. The resultant lighter bolt led to a higher rate of fire than the standard MP5 (900-1000 RPM vs. 800). The barrel, cocking handle and its cover were shortened and a vertical foregrip was used to replace the standard handguard. The barrel ends at the base of the front sight, which prevents the use of any sort of muzzle device.\nAnother popular machine pistol using the three-shot burst system is the 9\u00a0mm Parabellum Beretta Model 93R. Introduced in 1979 the Beretta Model 93R, it is a select-fire machine pistol meant for police and military use. It offered extra firepower in a smaller package and is suited for concealed carry purposes such as VIP protection, or for close quarters maneuvers such as room-to-room searches. A selector switch and the foldable foregrip allow the pistol to fire three-round bursts with each trigger pull for a cyclic rate of 1100 rounds per minute. The designers limited it to three round bursts for ease of control. A 20-round magazine and a metal shoulder stock may also be fitted.\nThe Stechkin APS made a comeback in the late 1970s when Russian Spetsnaz special forces units in Afghanistan used the suppressor-equipped APB variant for clandestine missions in enemy territory, such as during the Soviet\u2013Afghan War.\nThe 9\u00a0mm Parabellum Micro Uzi is a scaled-down version of the Uzi submachine gun, first introduced in 1983. It is 460\u00a0mm (18.11\u00a0inches) long with the stock extended, and just 250\u00a0mm (9.84\u00a0inches) long with the stock folded. Its barrel length is 117\u00a0mm and its muzzle velocity is 350\u00a0m/s. Used by the Israeli Isayeret and the US Secret Service, Micro-Uzis are available in open-bolt or closed-bolt versions. The weapon has an additional tungsten weight on the bolt to slow the rate of fire, which would otherwise make such a lightweight weapon uncontrollable.\nThe 9\u00a0mm Parabellum Glock 18 is a select-fire variant of the Glock 17, developed in 1986 at the request of the Austrian counter-terrorist unit EKO Cobra. This machine pistol has a lever-type select-fire switch, installed on the left side, at the rear of the serrated portion of the slide (selector lever in the bottom position for continuous fire, top setting for single fire). The firearm is typically used with an extended 33-round capacity magazine and may be fired with or without a shoulder stock. The pistol's rate of fire in fully automatic mode is approximately 1,100\u20131,400 RPM.\n1990s\u20132000s.\nIntroduced in 1992, the Steyr TMP (\"Taktische Maschinenpistole\" \"tactical machine pistol\") is a select-fire 9\u00d719mm Parabellum machine pistol manufactured by Steyr Mannlicher of Austria. The magazines come in 15-, 20-, 25-, or 30-round detachable box types. A suppressor can also be fitted.\nAlso introduced in 1992, the 9\u00a0mm Parabellum CZ 75 AUTOMATIC is the full-auto version of the CZ75. It has a longer barrel with three vent ports. This machine pistol has a horizontal rail in front of the trigger guard through which a spare 16- or 20-round magazine can be attached and be used as a fore-grip for better control during full automatic firing.\nDuring the 1990s, the Russian Stechkin APS was once again put into service, as a weapon for VIP bodyguards and for anti-terrorist hostage rescue teams that needed the capability for full automatic fire in emergencies.\nDeveloped in the 1990s and 2000s, the personal defense weapon (PDW), a compact submachine gun-like firearm which can fire armor-piercing, higher-powered ammunition, began to replace the machine pistol as a self-defense side arm for artillery crews, tank crews, and helicopter pilots. Introduced in 2001, the Heckler &amp; Koch MP7 is often called a machine pistol, despite it being a PDW. The MP7 uses a short-stroke piston gas system as used on H&amp;K's G36 and HK416 assault rifles, in place of a blowback system traditionally seen on machine pistols. The MP7 uses 20-, 30- and 40-round magazines and fires 4.6\u00d730mm ammunition which can penetrate soft body armor. Due to the heavy use of polymers in its construction, the MP7 is much lighter than older designs, only with an empty 20-round magazine.\nComparison with compact submachine guns.\nThe dividing line between machine pistols and compact submachine guns is difficult to determine with any precision. The term \"submachine gun\" usually refers to magazine-fed, fully automatic carbines designed to fire pistol cartridges, while the term \"machine pistol\" usually refers to fully automatic handgun based weapons. However, many weapons fall into both categories.\nAn example of this is the \u0160korpion vz. 61, often called a submachine gun. However, it is small enough to be carried in a pistol holster and so is also often referred to as a machine pistol. The MAC-10 and MAC-11 are compact and have been placed in both classes due to their sizes. The Steyr TMP (Tactical Machine Pistol) is also referred to as a compact submachine gun. Likewise, the German Heckler &amp; Koch MP5K falls in both categories. PDWs such as the Heckler &amp; Koch MP7 are also often called machine pistols.\nThe difference is also blurred by the fact that several languages use what would be literally translated as \"machine pistol\" as the term for submachine guns; for example the \"MP\" in MP 40 stands for \"Maschinenpistole\".\nCriticisms.\nMachine pistols are considered a special purpose weapon with limited utility. Due to their small size and high rate of fire, machine pistols are difficult to control accurately. As a result, most machine pistols are fitted with a detachable shoulder stock. Some, such as the Heckler &amp; Koch VP70, will fire only in semi-automatic when the stock is removed because the select-fire mechanism is incorporated into the stock. The VP70 introduced a three-round-burst limiter in the same way to improve controllability. The Beretta 93R not only uses a detachable shoulder stock and a three-round-burst limiter, but also a folding forward hand-grip to improve controllability in full auto. The MAC-10 and MAC-11 use suppressors to reduce muzzle rise, while other designs use a combination of burst limiters, forward hand-grips, ported barrels and muzzle brakes.\nGunsite, a US firearms training facility, decided against teaching machine pistol firing when it was founded in 1976. Facility experts believed that it is \"a slob's weapon, useful only by half-trained or poorly motivated troops\"; they claimed that the machine pistol \"hits no harder than a pistol and is no more portable than a rifle.\" Nevertheless, even the critics from Gunsite concede that the machine pistol is useful for a few situations, such as boarding an enemy boat in low light or when repelling boarders in a naval situation. In the 1970s, International Association of Chiefs of Police weapons researcher David Steele criticized the MAC-10's accuracy when he hyperbolically described the MAC series as \"fit only for combat in a phone booth\".\nWalt Rauch notes that \"...\u00a0despite the 50 to 70 years of bad press that has accrued to the concept of shooting a hand-held machine pistol\", in which critics contend that the weapon will \"spray bullets indiscriminately all over the area\", he believes that the 2000s-era models such as the Glock 18 are controllable and accurate in full-auto shooting. Leroy Thompson states that \"...machine pistols were reasonably good for use from within a vehicle or for issue to VIP [bodyguard] drivers to give them a marginally more effective weapon during an evacuation under fire\". However, he also stated that machine pistols are \"...(h)ard to control in full-auto fire\", which means that there is nothing that a machine pistol \"...can do that other weapons available today can't do more efficiently.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20076", "revid": "8719036", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20076", "title": "Martin Luther King Jr.", "text": "American civil rights leader (1929\u20131968)\nMartin Luther King Jr. (born Michael King Jr.; January 15, 1929\u00a0\u2013 April 4, 1968) was an American Baptist minister, civil rights activist and political philosopher who was a leader of the civil rights movement from 1955 until his assassination in 1968. He advanced civil rights for people of color in the United States through the use of nonviolent resistance and civil disobedience against Jim Crow laws and other forms of legalized discrimination, which most commonly affected African Americans.\nA Black church leader, King participated in and led marches for the right to vote, desegregation, labor rights, and other civil rights. He oversaw the 1955 Montgomery bus boycott and became the first president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). As president of the SCLC, he led the unsuccessful Albany Movement in Albany, Georgia, and helped organize nonviolent 1963 protests in Birmingham, Alabama. King was one of the leaders of the 1963 March on Washington, where he delivered his \"I Have a Dream\" speech on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial, and helped organize two of the three Selma to Montgomery marches during the 1965 Selma voting rights movement. There were dramatic standoffs with segregationist authorities, who often responded violently. The civil rights movement achieved pivotal legislative gains in the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and the Fair Housing Act of 1968.\nKing was jailed several times. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) director J. Edgar Hoover considered King a radical and made him an object of COINTELPRO from 1963. FBI agents investigated him for possible communist ties, spied on his personal life, and secretly recorded him. In 1964, the FBI mailed King a threatening anonymous letter, which he interpreted as an attempt to make him commit suicide. King won the 1964 Nobel Peace Prize for combating racial inequality through nonviolent resistance. In his final years, he expanded his focus to include opposition towards poverty and the Vietnam War.\nIn 1968, King was planning a national occupation of Washington, D.C., to be called the Poor People's Campaign, when he was assassinated on April 4 in Memphis, Tennessee. James Earl Ray was convicted of the assassination, though it remains the subject of conspiracy theories. King's death led to riots in US cities. King was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1977 and Congressional Gold Medal in 2003. Martin Luther King Jr. Day was established as a holiday in cities and states throughout the United States beginning in 1971; the federal holiday was first observed in 1986. The Martin Luther King\u00a0Jr. Memorial on the National Mall in Washington, D.C., was dedicated in 2011.\nEarly life and education.\nBirth.\nMichael King Jr. was born on January 15, 1929, in Atlanta, the second of three children born to Michael King Sr. and Alberta King (n\u00e9e\u00a0Williams). Alberta's father, Adam Daniel Williams, was a minister in rural Georgia, moved to Atlanta in 1893, and became pastor of the Ebenezer Baptist Church in the following year. Williams married Jennie Celeste Parks. Michael Sr. was born to sharecroppers James Albert and Delia King of Stockbridge, Georgia; he was likely of Mende (Sierra Leone) descent. He enrolled in Morehouse College to study for entry to the ministry. Michael Sr. and Alberta began dating in 1920, and married on November 25, 1926. Until Jennie's death in 1941, their home was on the second floor of Alberta's parents' home, where King was born. Michael Jr. had an older sister, Christine King Farris, and a younger brother, Alfred Daniel King.\nShortly after marrying Alberta, Michael King Sr. became assistant pastor of the Ebenezer church. Senior pastor Williams died in the spring of 1931 and that fall Michael Sr. took the role. With support from his wife, he raised attendance from six hundred to several thousand. In 1934, the church sent King Sr. on a multinational trip; one of the stops being Berlin for the Fifth Congress of the Baptist World Alliance (BWA). He also visited sites in Germany that are associated with the Reformation leader Martin Luther. In reaction to the rise of Nazism, the Congress of the BWA adopted, in August 1934, a resolution saying, \"This Congress deplores and condemns as a violation of the law of God the Heavenly Father, all racial animosity, and every form of oppression or unfair discrimination toward the Jews, toward colored people, or toward subject races in any part of the world.\" After returning home in August 1934, Michael Sr. changed his name to Martin Luther King Sr. and his five-year-old son's name to Martin Luther King Jr.\nEarly childhood.\nAt his childhood home, Martin King Jr. and his two siblings read aloud the Bible as instructed by their father. After dinners, Martin Jr.'s grandmother Jennie, whom he affectionately referred to as \"Mama\", told lively stories from the Bible. Martin Jr.'s father regularly used whippings to discipline his children, sometimes having them whip each other. Martin Sr. later remarked, \"[Martin Jr.] was the most peculiar child whenever you whipped him. He'd stand there, and the tears would run down, and he'd never cry.\" Once, when Martin Jr. witnessed his brother A.D. emotionally upset his sister Christine, he took a telephone and knocked A.D. unconscious with it. When Martin Jr. and his brother were playing at their home, A.D. slid from a banister and hit Jennie, causing her to fall unresponsive. Martin Jr., believing her dead, blamed himself and attempted suicide by jumping from a second-story window, but rose from the ground after hearing that she was alive.\nMartin King Jr. became friends with a white boy whose father owned a business across the street from his home. In September 1935, when the boys were about six years old, they started school. King had to attend a school for black children, Yonge Street Elementary School, while his playmate went to a separate school for white children only. Soon afterwards, the parents of the white boy stopped allowing King to play with their son, stating to him, \"we are white, and you are colored\". When King relayed this to his parents, they talked with him about the history of slavery and racism in America, which King would later say made him \"determined to hate every white person\". His parents instructed him that it was his Christian duty to love everyone.\nMartin King Jr. witnessed his father stand up against segregation and discrimination. Once, when stopped by a police officer who referred to Martin Sr. as \"boy\", Martin Sr. responded sharply that Martin Jr. was a boy but he was a man. When Martin Jr's father took him into a shoe store in downtown Atlanta, the clerk told them they needed to sit in the back. Martin Sr. refused, asserting \"We'll either buy shoes sitting here or we won't buy any shoes at all\", before leaving the store with Martin Jr. He told Martin Jr. afterward, \"I don't care how long I have to live with this system, I will never accept it.\" In 1936, Martin Sr. led hundreds of African Americans in a civil rights march to the city hall in Atlanta to protest voting rights discrimination. Martin Jr. later remarked that Martin Sr. was \"a real father\" to him.\nMartin King Jr. memorized hymns and Bible verses by the time he was five years old. Beginning at six years old, he attended church events with his mother and sang hymns while she played piano. His favorite hymn was \"I Want to Be More and More Like Jesus\". King later became a member of the junior choir in his church. He enjoyed opera, and played the piano. King garnered a large vocabulary from reading dictionaries. He got into physical altercations with boys in his neighborhood, but oftentimes used his knowledge of words to stop or avoid fights. King showed a lack of interest in grammar and spelling, a trait that persisted throughout his life. In 1939, King sang as a member of his church choir dressed as a slave for the all-white audience at the Atlanta premiere of the film \"Gone with the Wind\". In September 1940, at the age of 11, King was enrolled at the Atlanta University Laboratory School for the seventh grade. While there, King took violin and piano lessons and showed keen interest in history and English classes.\nOn May 18, 1941, when King had sneaked away from studying at home to watch a parade, he was informed that something had happened to his maternal grandmother. After returning home, he learned she had a heart attack and died while being transported to a hospital. He took her death very hard and believed that his deception in going to see the parade may have been responsible for God taking her. King again jumped out of a second-story window at his home but again survived. His father instructed him that Martin Jr. should not blame himself and that she had been called home to God as part of God's plan. Martin Jr. struggled with this. Shortly thereafter, Martin Sr. decided to move the family to a two-story brick home on a hill overlooking downtown Atlanta.\nAdolescence.\nAs an adolescent, he initially felt resentment against whites due to the \"racial humiliation\" that he, his family, and his neighbors often had to endure. In 1942, when King was 13, he became the youngest assistant manager of a newspaper delivery station for the \"Atlanta Journal\". In the same year, King skipped the ninth grade and enrolled in Booker T. Washington High School, where he maintained a B-plus average. The high school was the only one in the city for African-American students.\nMartin Jr. was brought up in a Baptist home; as he entered adolescence he began to question the literalist teachings preached at his father's church. At the age of 13, he denied the bodily resurrection of Jesus during Sunday school. Martin Jr. said that he found himself unable to identify with the emotional displays from congregants who were frequent at his church; he doubted if he would ever attain personal satisfaction from religion. He later said of this point in his life, \"doubts began to spring forth unrelentingly.\"\nIn high school, Martin King Jr. became known for his public-speaking ability, with a voice that had grown into an orotund baritone. He joined the school's debate team. King continued to be most drawn to history and English, and chose English and sociology as his main subjects. King maintained an abundant vocabulary. However, he relied on his sister Christine to help him with spelling, while King assisted her with math. King also developed an interest in fashion, commonly wearing polished patent leather shoes and tweed suits, which gained him the nickname \"Tweed\" or \"Tweedie\" among his friends. He liked flirting with girls and dancing. His brother A.D. later remarked, \"He kept flitting from chick to chick, and I decided I couldn't keep up with him. Especially since he was crazy about dances, and just about the best jitterbug in town.\"\nOn April 13, 1944, in his junior year, King gave his first public speech during an oratorical contest. In his speech he stated, \"black America still wears chains. The finest negro is at the mercy of the meanest white man.\" King was selected as the winner of the contest. On the ride home to Atlanta by bus, he and his teacher were ordered by the driver to stand so that white passengers could sit. The driver of the bus called King a \"black son-of-a-bitch\". King initially refused but complied after his teacher told him that he would be breaking the law if he did not. As all the seats were occupied, he and his teacher were forced to stand the rest of the way to Atlanta. Later King wrote of the incident: \"That night will never leave my memory. It was the angriest I have ever been in my life.\"\nMorehouse College.\nDuring King's junior year in high school, Morehouse College\u2014an all-male historically black college that King's father and maternal grandfather had attended\u2014began accepting high school juniors who passed the entrance examination. As World War II was underway, many black college students had been enlisted, so the university aimed to increase their enrollment by allowing juniors to apply. In 1944, aged 15, King passed the examination and was enrolled at the university that autumn.\nIn the summer before King started at Morehouse, he boarded a train with his friend\u2014Emmett \"Weasel\" Proctor\u2014and a group of other Morehouse College students to work in Simsbury, Connecticut, at the tobacco farm of Cullman Brothers Tobacco. This was King's first trip into the integrated north. In a June 1944 letter to his father, King wrote about the differences that struck him: \"On our way here we saw some things I had never anticipated to see. After we passed Washington there was no discrimination at all. The white people here are very nice. We go to any place we want to and sit anywhere we want to.\" The farm had partnered with Morehouse College to allot their wages towards the university's tuition, housing, and fees. On weekdays King and the other students worked in the fields, picking tobacco from 7:00 am to at least 5:00 pm, enduring temperatures above 100\u00a0\u00b0F, to earn roughly USD$4 per day. On Friday evenings, the students visited downtown Simsbury to get milkshakes and watch movies, and on Saturdays they would travel to Hartford, Connecticut, to see theatre performances, shop, and eat in restaurants. On Sundays, they attended church services in Hartford at a church filled with white congregants. King wrote to his parents about the lack of segregation, relaying how he was amazed they could go to \"one of the finest restaurants in Hartford\" and that \"Negroes and whites go to the same church\".\nHe played freshman football there. The summer before his last year at Morehouse, in 1947, the 18-year-old King chose to enter the ministry. He would later credit the college's president, Baptist minister Benjamin Mays, with being his \"spiritual mentor\". King had concluded that the church offered the most assuring way to answer \"an inner urge to serve humanity\", and he made peace with the Baptist Church, as he believed he would be a \"rational\" minister with sermons that were \"a respectful force for ideas, even social protest.\" King graduated from Morehouse with a Bachelor of Arts in sociology in 1948, aged nineteen.\nReligious education.\nKing enrolled in Crozer Theological Seminary in Upland, Pennsylvania, and took several courses at the University of Pennsylvania. At Crozer, King was elected president of the student body. At Penn, King took courses with William Fontaine, Penn's first African-American professor, and Elizabeth F. Flower, a professor of philosophy. King's father supported his decision to continue his education and made arrangements for King to work with J. Pius Barbour, a family friend and Crozer alumnus who pastored at Calvary Baptist Church in nearby Chester, Pennsylvania. King became known as one of the \"Sons of Calvary\", an honor he shared with William Augustus Jones Jr. and Samuel D. Proctor, who both went on to become well-known preachers.\nKing reproved another student for keeping beer in his room once, saying they shared responsibility as African Americans to bear \"the burdens of the Negro race\". For a time, he was interested in Walter Rauschenbusch's \"social gospel\". In his third year at Crozer, King became romantically involved with Betty Moitz, the white daughter of an immigrant German woman who worked in the cafeteria. King planned to marry her, but friends, as well as King's father, advised against it, saying that an interracial marriage would provoke animosity from both blacks and whites, potentially damaging his chances of ever pastoring a church in the South. King tearfully told a friend that he could not endure his mother's pain over the marriage and broke the relationship off six months later. One friend was quoted as saying, \"He never recovered.\" Other friends, including Harry Belafonte, said Betty had been \"the love of King's life.\" King graduated with a Bachelor of Divinity in 1951. He applied to the University of Edinburgh for a doctorate in the School of Divinity but ultimately chose Boston instead.\nIn 1951, King began doctoral studies in systematic theology at Boston University, and worked as an assistant minister at Boston's historic Twelfth Baptist Church with William Hunter Hester. Hester was an old friend of King's father and was an important influence on King. In Boston, King befriended a small cadre of local ministers his age, and sometimes guest pastored at their churches, including Michael E. Haynes, associate pastor at Twelfth Baptist Church in Roxbury. The young men often held bull sessions in their apartments, discussing theology, sermon style, and social issues.\nAt the age of 25 in 1954, King was called as pastor of the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery, Alabama. King received his PhD on June 5, 1955, with a dissertation (initially supervised by Edgar S. Brightman and, upon the latter's death, by Lotan Harold DeWolf) titled \"A Comparison of the Conceptions of God in the Thinking of Paul Tillich and Henry Nelson Wieman\".\nAn academic inquiry in October 1991 concluded that portions of his doctoral dissertation were plagiarisms and he had acted improperly. However, \"[d]espite its finding, the committee said that 'no thought should be given to the revocation of Dr. King's doctoral degree,' an action that the panel said would serve no purpose.\" The committee found that the dissertation still \"makes an intelligent contribution to scholarship.\" A letter is now attached to the copy of King's dissertation in the university library, noting that numerous passages were included without the appropriate quotations and citations of sources. Significant debate exists on how to interpret King's plagiarism.\nMarriage and family.\nWhile studying at Boston University, King asked a friend from Atlanta named Mary Powell, a student at the New England Conservatory of Music, if she knew any nice Southern girls. Powell spoke to fellow student Coretta Scott; Scott was not interested in dating preachers but eventually agreed to allow King to telephone her based on Powell's description and vouching. On their first call, King told Scott, \"I am like Napoleon at Waterloo before your charms,\" to which she replied: \"You haven't even met me.\"\nKing married Scott on June 18, 1953, on the lawn of her parents' house, in Heiberger, Alabama. They had four children: Yolanda King (1955\u20132007), Martin Luther King III (b. 1957), Dexter Scott King (1961\u20132024), and Bernice King (b. 1963). King limited Coretta's role in the civil rights movement, expecting her to be a housewife and mother.\nActivism and organizational leadership.\nMary's Cafe Sit-In, 1950.\nOn Sunday, June 11, 1950, King, classmate at Crozer Seminary and housemate Walter McCall, and their dates Doris Wilson and Pearl Smith attended church services in Merchantville. Afterwards they stopped at tavern Mary's Cafe in Maple Shade for beers. The foursome were left waiting without anyone approaching them for service, not unexpectedly. A friend's father and King and McCall's landlord Jesthroe Hunt had warned them Black people were not welcome at Mary's. King replied to the effect of maybe they needed to go, so they could start to go anywhere they wanted. The seminarians had opted for Mary's Cafe with full knowledge of its reputation. After waiting without service, McCall approached the bar.\nMcCall asked bartender and Mary's Cafe owner Ernest Nichols for packaged goods (beer for takeaway). Nichols refused, explaining he could not sell packaged goods on Sundays or any day after 10pm, by law. McCall then requested 4 glasses of beer to which Nichols answered \"no beer, Mr! Today is Sunday\u201d. Nichols would claim they sought him to violate New Jersey's blue law (a restriction common in South Jersey and Pennsylvania as a remnant of the influence of their Quakers roots). McCall requested ginger ales as non-alcoholic beverages were not subject to the blue law. Nichols refused the group even ginger ales and reportedly stated \"the best thing would be for you to leave\". King and company met refusal with refusal, and remained in their seats as was their right per New Jersey's 1945 anti-discrimination law, which guaranteed non-discrimination by race in public accommodations. Nichols stomped out and returned with a gun standing outside firing into the air reportedly shouting \"I'd kill for less\". Fearing for their lives, the four activists ran from the tavern. The group went to the Maple Shade Police Department where officers refused to file their complaint. King and McCall contacted Ulysses Simpson Wiggins then President of the Camden County Branch NAACP, who helped them successfully file a police report. The \"New York Times\" confirms \"The complaint was against Ernest Nichols, a white tavern owner in Maple Shade, N.J., and said that he had refused to serve the black students and their dates in June 1950, and had threatened them by firing a gun in the air. The complaint was signed by the two students. One of the signatures, in a loopy, slanted cursive, reads 'M. L. King Jr.'\" \nNichols was charged with disorderly conduct and violation of the anti-discrimination law. He was found guilty and fined $50, however the racial discrimination count was dismissed. In a statement submitted \"in the spirit of assisting the Prosecutor\" Nichol's attorney noted: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mr. Nichols claims that this act was not intended as a threat to his colored patrons. The colored patrons, on the other hand, while they admit that the gun was not pointed at them or any of them, seemed to think that it was a threat. Mr. Nichols on the other hand states that he has been held up before and he wanted to alert his watchdog who was somewhere outside on the tavern grounds.\u2014\u200a\nKing cited the incident saying it was \u201ca formative step\u201d in his \u201ccommitment to a more just society.\u201d The Mary's Cafe sit-in demonstrated the power of non-violent civil disobedience. Nichols' reaction in retrieving a weapon and discharging it to scare the group, or summon his guard dog, to young people's refusal to leave unserved, showed King the potency of such tactics. This sit-in is believed to be the first deployment of the non-violence and civil disobedience tactics which would distinguish King's activism and legacy.\nThe Mary's Cafe sit-in occurred six months prior to Mordecai Johnson's Lecture on Gandi at the First Unitarian Church of Philadelphia on November 19, 1950 where King would be formally exposed to these tactics. At that lecture and in discussions with Dr. Johnson at the Fellowship House, Dr. King would be inspired and galvanized by how Mahatma Gandhi integrated Henry David Thoreau's theory of Nonviolent resistance and civil disobedience tactics. Patrick Duff, a South Jersey resident, discovered the police report detailing the events at Mary's after searching the archive at The Martin Luther King, Jr. Research and Education Institute.\nMontgomery bus boycott, 1955.\nThe Dexter Avenue Baptist Church was influential in the Montgomery African-American community. As the church's pastor, King became known for his oratorical preaching in Montgomery and surrounding region.\nIn March 1955, Claudette Colvin\u2014a black schoolgirl in Montgomery\u2014refused to give up her bus seat to a white man in violation of Jim Crow laws, local laws in the Southern US that enforced racial segregation. On December 1, 1955, Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to give up her seat on a city bus. These incidents led to the Montgomery bus boycott, which was urged and planned by Edgar Nixon and led by King. The other ministers asked him to take a leadership role because his relative newness to community leadership made it easier for him to speak out. King was hesitant but decided to do so if no one else wanted it.\nThe boycott lasted for 385 days, and the situation became so tense that King's house was bombed. King was arrested for traveling 30\u00a0mph in a 25\u00a0mph zone and jailed, which drew the attention of national media, and increased King's public stature. The controversy ended when the US District Court issued a ruling in \"Browder v. Gayle\" that prohibited racial segregation on Montgomery public buses.\nKing's role in the bus boycott transformed him into a national figure and the best-known spokesman of the civil rights movement.\nSouthern Christian Leadership Conference.\nIn 1957, King, Ralph Abernathy, Fred Shuttlesworth, Joseph Lowery, and other activists founded the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). The group was created to harness the moral authority and organizing power of black churches to conduct nonviolent protests in the service of civil rights reform. The group was inspired by the crusades of evangelist Billy Graham, who befriended King, as well as the national organizing of the group In Friendship, founded by King allies Stanley Levison and Ella Baker. King led the SCLC until his death. The SCLC's 1957 Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom was the first time King addressed a national audience.\nHarry Wachtel joined King's legal advisor Clarence B. Jones in defending four ministers of the SCLC in the libel case \"Abernathy et al. v. Sullivan\"; the case was litigated about the newspaper advertisement \"Heed Their Rising Voices\". Wachtel founded a tax-exempt fund to cover the suit's expenses and assist the civil rights movement through more effective fundraising. King served as honorary president of this organization, named the \"Gandhi Society for Human Rights\". In 1962, King and the Gandhi Society produced a document that called on President Kennedy to issue an executive order to deliver a blow for civil rights as a kind of Second Emancipation Proclamation. Kennedy did not execute the order. The FBI, under written directive from Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, began tapping King's telephone line in the fall of 1963. Kennedy was concerned that public allegations of communists in the SCLC would derail the administration's civil rights initiatives. He warned King to discontinue these associations and felt compelled to issue the directive that authorized the FBI to wiretap King and other SCLC leaders. FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover feared the civil rights movement and investigated the allegations of communist infiltration. When no evidence emerged to support this, the FBI used the incidental details caught on tape over the next five years, as part of its COINTELPRO program, in attempts to force King out of his leadership position.\nKing believed that organized, nonviolent protest against the system of southern segregation known as Jim Crow laws would lead to extensive media coverage of the struggle for black equality. Journalistic accounts and televised footage of the daily indignities suffered by southern blacks, and of segregationist violence and harassment, produced a wave of sympathetic public opinion that convinced most Americans that the civil rights movement was the most important political issue in the early 1960s.\nKing organized and led marches for blacks' right to vote, desegregation, labor rights, and other basic civil rights. Most of these rights were successfully enacted into law with the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the 1965 Voting Rights Act. The SCLC used tactics of nonviolent protest with success, by strategically choosing the methods and places in which protests were carried out. There were often dramatic stand-offs with segregationist authorities, who sometimes turned violent.\nSurvived knife attack, 1958.\nOn September 20, 1958, King was signing copies of his book \"Stride Toward Freedom\" in Blumstein's department store in Harlem when Izola Curry\u2014a mentally ill black woman who thought King was conspiring against her with communists\u2014stabbed him in the chest with a letter opener, which nearly impinged on the aorta. King received first aid by police officers Al Howard and Philip Romano. King underwent surgery by Aubre de Lambert Maynard, Emil Naclerio and John W. V. Cordice; he remained hospitalized for weeks. Curry was later found mentally incompetent to stand trial.\nAtlanta sit-ins, prison sentence, and the 1960 elections.\nIn December 1959, after being based in Montgomery for five years, King announced his return to Atlanta at the request of the SCLC. In Atlanta, King served until his death as co-pastor with his father at the Ebenezer Baptist Church. Georgia governor Ernest Vandiver expressed open hostility towards King's return. He claimed that \"wherever M. L. King Jr., has been there has followed in his wake a wave of crimes\", and vowed to keep King under surveillance. On May 4, 1960, King drove writer Lillian Smith to Emory University when police stopped them. King was cited for \"driving without a license\" because he had not yet been issued a Georgia license. King's Alabama license was still valid, and Georgia law did not mandate any time limit for issuing a local license. King paid a fine but was unaware his lawyer agreed to a plea deal that included probation.\nMeanwhile, the Atlanta Student Movement had been acting to desegregate businesses and public spaces, organizing the Atlanta sit-ins from March 1960 onwards. In August the movement asked King to participate in a mass October sit-in, timed to highlight how 1960's Presidential election campaigns had ignored civil rights. The coordinated day of action took place on October 19. King participated in a sit-in at the restaurant inside Rich's, Atlanta's largest department store, and was among the many arrested. The authorities released everyone over the next few days, except King. Invoking his probationary plea deal, Judge J. Oscar Mitchell sentenced King on October 25 to four months of hard labor. Before dawn the next day, King was transported to Georgia State Prison.\nThe arrest and harsh sentence drew nationwide attention. Many feared for King's safety, as he started a sentence with people convicted of violent crimes, many white and hostile to his activism. Presidential candidates were asked to weigh in, at a time when parties were courting the support of Southern Whites and their political leadership including Governor Vandiver. Nixon, with whom King had a closer relationship before, declined to make a statement despite a visit from Jackie Robinson requesting his intervention. Nixon's opponent John F. Kennedy called the governor, enlisted his brother Robert to exert more pressure on state authorities, and, at the request of Sargent Shriver, called King's wife to offer his help. The pressure from Kennedy and others proved effective, and King was released two days later. King's father decided to openly endorse Kennedy's candidacy for the November 8 election which he narrowly won.\nAfter the October 19 sit-ins and following unrest, a 30-day truce was declared in Atlanta for desegregation negotiations. However, negotiations failed and sit-ins and boycotts resumed for several months. On March 7, 1961, a group of Black elders including King notified student leaders that a deal had been reached: the city's lunch counters would desegregate in fall 1961, in conjunction with the court-mandated desegregation of schools. Many students were disappointed at the compromise. In a meeting on March 10 at Warren Memorial Methodist Church, the audience was hostile and frustrated. King gave an impassioned speech calling participants to resist the \"cancerous disease of disunity\", helping to calm tensions.\nAlbany Movement, 1961.\nThe Albany Movement was a desegregation coalition formed in Albany, Georgia, in November 1961. In December, King and the SCLC became involved. The movement mobilized thousands of citizens for a nonviolent attack on segregation in the city and attracted nationwide attention. When King first visited on December 15, 1961, he \"had planned to stay a day or so and return home after giving counsel.\" The following day he was swept up in a mass arrest of peaceful demonstrators, and he declined bail until the city made concessions. According to King, \"that agreement was dishonored and violated by the city\" after he left.\nKing returned in July 1962 and was given the option of 45 days in jail or a $178 fine (); he chose jail. Three days into his sentence, Police Chief Laurie Pritchett discreetly arranged for King's fine to be paid and ordered his release. \"We had witnessed persons being kicked off lunch counter stools\u00a0... ejected from churches\u00a0... and thrown into jail\u00a0... But for the first time, we witnessed being kicked out of jail.\" It was later acknowledged by the King Center that Billy Graham was the one who bailed King out.\nAfter nearly a year of intense activism with few tangible results, the movement began to deteriorate. King requested a halt to all demonstrations and a \"Day of Penance\" to promote nonviolence and maintain the moral high ground. Divisions within the black community and the canny, low-key response by local government defeated efforts. Though the Albany effort proved a key lesson in tactics for King and the civil rights movement, the national media was highly critical of King's role in the defeat, and the SCLC's lack of results contributed to a growing gulf between the organization and the more radical SNCC. After Albany, King sought to choose engagements for the SCLC in which he could control the circumstances, rather than entering into pre-existing situations.\nBirmingham campaign, 1963.\nIn April 1963, the SCLC began a campaign against racial segregation and economic injustice in Birmingham, Alabama. The campaign used nonviolent but intentionally confrontational tactics, developed in part by Wyatt Tee Walker. Black people in Birmingham, organizing with the SCLC, occupied public spaces with marches and sit-ins, openly violating laws that they considered unjust.\nKing's intent was to provoke mass arrests and \"create a situation so crisis-packed that it will inevitably open the door to negotiation.\" The campaign's early volunteers did not succeed in shutting down the city, or in drawing media attention to the police's actions. Over the concerns of an uncertain King, SCLC strategist James Bevel changed the course of the campaign by recruiting children and young adults to join the demonstrations. \"Newsweek\" called this strategy a Children's Crusade.\nThe Birmingham Police Department, led by Eugene \"Bull\" Connor, used high-pressure water jets and police dogs against protesters, including children. Footage of the police response was broadcast on national television, shocking many white Americans and consolidating black Americans behind the movement. Not all demonstrators were peaceful, despite the avowed intentions of the SCLC. In some cases, bystanders attacked the police, who responded with force. King and the SCLC were criticized for putting children in harm's way. But the campaign was a success: Connor lost his job, the \"Jim Crow\" signs came down, and public places became more open to blacks. King's reputation improved immensely.\nKing was arrested and jailed early in the campaign\u2014his 13th arrest out of 29. From his cell, he composed the now-famous \"Letter from Birmingham Jail\" that responds to calls to pursue legal channels for social change. The letter has been described as \"one of the most important historical documents penned by a modern political prisoner\". King argues that the crisis of racism is too urgent, and the current system too entrenched: \"We know through painful experience that freedom is never voluntarily given by the oppressor; it must be demanded by the oppressed.\" He points out that the Boston Tea Party, a celebrated act of rebellion in the American colonies, was illegal civil disobedience, and that, conversely, \"everything Adolf Hitler did in Germany was 'legal'.\" Walter Reuther, president of the United Auto Workers, arranged for $160,000 to bail out King and his fellow protestors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I have almost reached the regrettable conclusion that the Negro's great stumbling block in his stride toward freedom is not the White Citizen's Councilor or the Ku Klux Klanner, but the white moderate, who is more devoted to \"order\" than to justice; who prefers a negative peace which is the absence of tension to a positive peace which is the presence of justice; who constantly says: \"I agree with you in the goal you seek, but I cannot agree with your methods of direct action\"; who paternalistically believes he can set the timetable for another man's freedom; who lives by a mythical concept of time and who constantly advises the Negro to wait for a \"more convenient season.\"\n\u2014Martin Luther King Jr.\nMarch on Washington, 1963.\nKing, representing the SCLC, was among the leaders of the \"Big Six\" civil rights organizations who were instrumental in the organization of the \"March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom\", which took place on August 28, 1963. The other leaders and organizations comprising the Big Six were Roy Wilkins from the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People; Whitney Young, National Urban League; A. Philip Randolph, Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters; John Lewis, SNCC; and James L. Farmer Jr., Congress of Racial Equality.\nBayard Rustin's open homosexuality, support of socialism, and former ties to the Communist Party USA caused many white and African-American leaders to demand King distance himself, which King agreed to do. However, he did collaborate in the 1963 March on Washington, for which Rustin was the primary organizer. For King, this role was another which courted controversy, since he was a key figure who acceded to the wishes of President Kennedy in changing the focus of the march. Kennedy initially opposed the march outright, because he was concerned it would negatively impact the drive for passage of civil rights legislation. However, the organizers were firm the march would proceed. With the march going forward, the Kennedys decided it was important to ensure its success. President Kennedy was concerned the turnout would be less than 100,000 and enlisted the aid of additional church leaders and Walter Reuther, president of the United Automobile Workers, to help mobilize demonstrators.\nThe march originally was planned to dramatize the desperate condition of blacks in the southern US and place organizers' concerns and grievances squarely before the seat of power in the capital. Organizers intended to denounce the federal government for its failure to safeguard the civil rights and physical safety of civil rights workers and blacks. The group acquiesced to presidential pressure, and the event ultimately took on a less strident tone. As a result, some civil rights activists felt it presented an inaccurate, sanitized pageant of racial harmony; Malcolm X called it the \"Farce on Washington\", and the Nation of Islam forbade its members from attending.\nThe march made specific demands: an end to racial segregation in public schools; meaningful civil rights legislation, including a law prohibiting racial discrimination in employment; protection of civil rights workers from police brutality; a $2 minimum wage for all workers (); and self-government for Washington, D.C., then governed by congressional committee. Despite tensions, the march was a resounding success. More than a quarter of a million people of diverse ethnicities attended, sprawling from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial onto the National Mall. At the time, it was the largest gathering of protesters in Washington, D.C.'s history.\nKing delivered a 17-minute speech, later known as \"I Have a Dream\". In the speech's most famous passage\u00a0\u2013 in which he departed from his prepared text, possibly at the prompting of Mahalia Jackson, who shouted behind him, \"Tell them about the dream!\"\u00a0\u2013 King said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I Have a Dream\" came to be regarded as one of the finest speeches in the history of oratory. The March, and especially King's speech, helped put civil rights at the top of the agenda of reformers and facilitated passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.\nSt. Augustine, Florida, 1964.\nIn March 1964, King and the SCLC joined forces with Robert Hayling's then-controversial movement in St. Augustine, Florida. Hayling's group had been affiliated with the NAACP but was forced out of the organization for advocating armed self-defense alongside nonviolent tactics. However, the pacifist SCLC accepted them. King and the SCLC worked to bring white Northern activists to St. Augustine, including a delegation of rabbis and the 72-year-old mother of the governor of Massachusetts, all of whom were arrested. During June, the movement marched nightly through the city, \"often facing counter demonstrations by the Klan, and provoking violence that garnered national media attention.\" Hundreds of the marchers were arrested and jailed. During this movement, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was passed.\nBiddeford, Maine, 1964.\nOn May 7, 1964, King spoke at Saint Francis College's \"The Negro and the Quest for Identity\", in Biddeford, Maine. This was a symposium that brought together many civil rights leaders. King spoke about how \"We must get rid of the idea of superior and inferior races,\" through nonviolent tactics.\nNew York City, 1964.\nOn February 6, 1964, King delivered the inaugural speech of a lecture series initiated at the New School called \"The American Race Crisis\". In his remarks, King referred to a conversation he had recently had with Jawaharlal Nehru in which he compared the sad condition of many African Americans to that of India's untouchables. In his March 18, 1964, interview with Robert Penn Warren, King compared his activism to his father's, citing his training in non-violence as a key difference. He also discusses the next phase of the civil rights movement and integration.\nScripto strike in Atlanta, 1964.\nStarting in November 1964, King supported a labor strike by several hundred workers at the Scripto factory in Atlanta, just a few blocks from Ebenezer Baptist. Many of the strikers were congregants of his church, and the strike was supported by other civil rights leaders. King helped elevate the labor dispute from a local to nationally known event and led the SCLC to organize a nationwide boycott of Scripto products. However, as the strike stretched into December, King, who was wanting to focus more on a civil rights campaign in Selma, Alabama, began to negotiate in secret with Scripto's president Carl Singer and eventually brokered a deal where the SCLC would call off their boycott in exchange for the company giving the striking employees their Christmas bonuses. King's involvement in the strike ended on December 24 and a contract between the company and union was signed on January 9.\nSelma voting rights movement and \"Bloody Sunday\", 1965.\nIn December 1964, King and the SCLC joined forces with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) in Selma, Alabama, where the SNCC had been working on voter registration for several months. A local judge issued an injunction that barred any gathering of three or more people affiliated with the SNCC, SCLC, DCVL, or any of 41 named civil rights leaders. This injunction temporarily halted civil rights activity until King defied it by speaking at Brown Chapel on January 2, 1965. During the 1965 march to Montgomery, Alabama, violence by state police and others against the peaceful marchers resulted in much publicity, which made racism in Alabama visible nationwide.\nActing on James Bevel's call for a march from Selma to Montgomery, Bevel and other SCLC members, in partial collaboration with SNCC, attempted to organize a march to the state's capital. The first attempt to march on March 7, 1965, at which King was not present, was aborted because of mob and police violence against the demonstrators. This day has become known as Bloody Sunday and was a turning point in the effort to gain public support for the civil rights movement. It was the clearest demonstration up to that time of the dramatic potential of King and Bevel's nonviolence strategy.\nOn March 5, King met with officials in the Johnson Administration to request an injunction against any prosecution of the demonstrators. He did not attend the march due to church duties, but later wrote, \"If I had any idea that the state troopers would use the kind of brutality they did, I would have felt compelled to give up my church duties altogether to lead the line.\" Footage of police brutality against the protesters was broadcast extensively and aroused public outrage.\nKing next attempted to organize a march for March 9. The SCLC petitioned for an injunction in federal court against Alabama; this was denied and the judge issued an order blocking the march until after a hearing. Nonetheless, King led marchers on March 9 to the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, then held a prayer session before turning the marchers around and asking them to disperse so as not to violate the court order. The unexpected ending of this second march aroused the surprise and anger of many within the local movement. The march finally went ahead fully on March 25, 1965. At the conclusion of the march on the steps of the state capitol, King delivered a speech that became known as \"How Long, Not Long\". King stated that equal rights for African Americans could not be far away, \"because the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice\" and \"you shall reap what you sow\".\nChicago open housing movement, 1966.\nIn 1966, after several successes in the south, King, Bevel, and others in the civil rights organizations took the movement to the North. King and Ralph Abernathy, both from the middle class, moved into a building at 1550 S. Hamlin Avenue, in the slums of North Lawndale on Chicago's West Side, as an educational experience and to demonstrate their support and empathy for the poor.\nThe SCLC formed a coalition with Coordinating Council of Community Organizations (CCCO), an organization founded by Albert Raby, and the combined organizations' efforts were fostered under the aegis of the Chicago Freedom Movement.\nDuring that spring, several white couple/black couple tests of real estate offices uncovered racial steering, discriminatory processing of housing requests by couples who were exact matches in income and background. Larger marches were planned and executed: in Bogan, Belmont Cragin, Jefferson Park, Evergreen Park, Gage Park, Marquette Park, and others.\nKing later stated and Abernathy wrote that the movement received a worse reception in Chicago than in the South. Marches, especially the one through Marquette Park on August 5, 1966, were met by thrown bottles and screaming throngs. Rioting seemed very possible. King's beliefs militated against his staging a violent event, and he negotiated an agreement with Mayor Richard J. Daley to cancel a march to avoid the violence he feared would result. King was hit by a brick during one march, but continued to lead marches in the face of personal danger.\nWhen King and his allies returned to the South, they left Jesse Jackson, a seminary student who had previously joined the movement in the South, in charge of their organization. Jackson continued their struggle for civil rights by organizing the Operation Breadbasket movement that targeted chain stores that did not deal fairly with blacks. A 1967 CIA document declassified in 2017 downplayed King's role in the \"black militant situation\" in Chicago, with a source stating that King \"sought at least constructive, positive projects.\"\nOpposition to the Vietnam War.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe black revolution is much more than a struggle for the rights of Negroes. It is forcing America to face all its interrelated flaws\u2014racism, poverty, militarism, and materialism. It is exposing evils that are rooted deeply in the whole structure of our society. It reveals systemic rather than superficial flaws and suggests that radical reconstruction of society itself is the real issue to be faced\n\u2013Martin Luther King Jr.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe must recognize that we can't solve our problem now until there is a radical redistribution of economic and political power... this means a revolution of values and other things. We must see now that the evils of racism, economic exploitation, and militarism are all tied together\u2026 you can't really get rid of one without getting rid of the others\u2026 the whole structure of American life must be changed. America is a hypocritical nation and [we] must put [our] own house in order.\n\u2014Martin Luther King Jr.\nKing was long opposed to American involvement in the Vietnam War, but at first avoided the topic in speeches to avoid interference with civil rights goals that criticism of President Johnson's policies might have created. At the urging of SCLC's former Director of Direct Action and now the head of the Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam, James Bevel, and inspired by the outspokenness of Muhammad Ali, King eventually agreed to publicly oppose the war, as opposition was growing among the public.\nDuring an April 1967 appearance at the New York City Riverside Church, King delivered a speech titled \". He spoke against America's role in the war, arguing the US was in Vietnam \"to occupy it as an American colony\" and calling the US government \"the greatest purveyor of violence in the world today\". He connected the war with economic injustice, arguing that the country needed serious moral change:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A true revolution of values will soon look uneasily on the glaring contrast of poverty and wealth. With righteous indignation, it will look across the seas and see individual capitalists of the West investing huge sums of money in Asia, Africa and South America, only to take the profits out with no concern for the social betterment of the countries, and say: \"This is not just.\"\nKing opposed the war because it took resources away from social welfare at home: \"A nation that continues year after year to spend more money on military defense than on programs of social uplift is approaching spiritual death.\" He stated that North Vietnam \"did not begin to send in any large number of supplies or men until American forces had arrived in the tens of thousands\", and accused the U.S. of having killed a million Vietnamese, \"mostly children\". King also criticized American opposition to North Vietnam's land reforms.\nKing's opposition cost him significant support among white allies including Johnson, Billy Graham, union leaders, and powerful publishers. \"The press is being stacked against me\", King said, complaining of what he described as a double standard that applauded his nonviolence at home, but deplored it when applied \"toward little brown Vietnamese children\". \"Life\" magazine called the speech \"demagogic slander that sounded like a script for Radio Hanoi\", and \"The Washington Post\" declared that King had \"diminished his usefulness to his cause, his country, his people.\"\nThe \"Beyond Vietnam\" speech reflected King's evolving political advocacy in his later years, which paralleled the teachings of the progressive Highlander Research and Education Center, with which he was affiliated. King began to speak of the need for fundamental changes in the American political and economic situation, and more frequently expressed his opposition to the war and his desire to see a redistribution of resources to correct injustice. He guarded his language in public to avoid being linked to communism, but in private sometimes spoke of his support for democratic socialism.\nKing stated in \"Beyond Vietnam\" that \"true compassion is more than flinging a coin to a beggar\u00a0... it comes to see that an edifice which produces beggars needs restructuring.\" King quoted a US official who said that from Vietnam to Latin America, the country was \"on the wrong side of a world revolution.\" King condemned America's \"alliance with the landed gentry of Latin America\", and said the US should support \"the shirtless and barefoot people\" in the Third World rather than suppressing their attempts at revolution.\nKing's stance on Vietnam encouraged Allard K. Lowenstein, William Sloane Coffin and Norman Thomas, with the support of anti-war Democrats, to attempt to persuade King to run against President Johnson in the 1968 presidential election. King contemplated but decided against this as he felt uneasy with politics and considered himself better suited to activism.\nOn April 15, 1967, King spoke at an anti-war march from Manhattan's Central Park to the UN. The march was organized by the Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam under chairman James Bevel. At the UN King brought up issues of civil rights and the draft:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have not urged a mechanical fusion of the civil rights and peace movements. There are people who have come to see the moral imperative of equality, but who cannot yet see the moral imperative of world brotherhood. I would like to see the fervor of the civil-rights movement imbued into the peace movement to instill it with greater strength. And I believe everyone has a duty to be in both the civil-rights and peace movements. But for those who presently choose but one, I would hope they will finally come to see the moral roots common to both.\nSeeing an opportunity to unite civil rights and anti-war activists, Bevel convinced King to become even more active in the anti-war effort. Despite his growing public opposition to the war, King was not fond of the hippie culture developed from the anti-war movement. In his 1967 Massey Lecture, King stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOn January 13, 1968, King called for a large march on Washington against \"one of history's most cruel and senseless wars\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCorrespondence with Th\u00edch Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh.\nTh\u00edch Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh was an influential Vietnamese Buddhist who wrote a letter to King in 1965 entitled: \"In Search of the Enemy of Man\". It was during his 1966 stay in the US that Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh met with King and urged him to publicly denounce the war. On 4 April 1967, King gave a speech in New York City, his first to publicly question U.S. involvement in Vietnam. Later that year, King nominated Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh for the Nobel Peace Prize. In his nomination, King said, \"I do not personally know of anyone more worthy of [this prize] than this gentle monk from Vietnam. His ideas for peace, if applied, would build a monument to ecumenism, to world brotherhood, to humanity\".\nPoor People's Campaign, 1968.\nIn 1968, King and the SCLC organized the \"Poor People's Campaign\" to address issues of economic justice. King traveled the country to assemble \"a multiracial army of the poor\" that would march on Washington to engage in nonviolent civil disobedience at the Capitol until Congress created an \"economic bill of rights\".\nThe campaign was preceded by King's final book, \"\" which laid out his view of how to address social issues and poverty. King quoted from Henry George's book \"Progress and Poverty\", particularly in support of a guaranteed basic income. The campaign culminated in a march on Washington, D.C., demanding economic aid to the poorest communities of the U.S.\nKing and the SCLC called on the government to invest in rebuilding America's cities. He felt that Congress had shown \"hostility to the poor\" by spending \"military funds with alacrity and generosity\". He contrasted this with the situation faced by poor Americans, claiming that Congress had merely provided \"poverty funds with miserliness\". His vision was for change that was more revolutionary than mere reform: he cited systematic flaws of \"racism, poverty, militarism and materialism\", and argued that \"reconstruction of society itself is the real issue to be faced.\"\nThe Poor People's Campaign was controversial even within the civil rights movement. Rustin resigned from the march, stating that the goals of the campaign were too broad, that its demands were unrealizable, and that he thought that these campaigns would accelerate repression on the poor and the black.\nGlobal policy.\nKing was one of the signatories of the agreement to convene a convention for drafting a world constitution. As a result, in 1968 a World Constituent Assembly convened to draft and adopt the Constitution for the Federation of Earth.\nAssassination and aftermath.\nOn March 29, 1968, King went to Memphis, Tennessee, in support of the black sanitation workers, who were represented by American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) Local 1733. The workers had been on strike since March 12 for higher wages and better treatment. In one incident, black street repairmen received pay for two hours when they were sent home because of bad weather, but white employees were paid for the full day.\nOn April 3, King addressed a rally and delivered his \"I've Been to the Mountaintop\" address at Mason Temple. King's flight to Memphis had been delayed by a bomb threat against his plane. In reference to the bomb threat, King said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And then I got to Memphis. And some began to say the threats, or talk about the threats that were out. What would happen to me from some of our sick white brothers?\nWell, I don't know what will happen now. We've got some difficult days ahead. But it doesn't matter with me now. Because I've been to the mountaintop. And I don't mind. Like anybody, I would like to live a long life. Longevity has its place. But I'm not concerned about that now. I just want to do God's will. And He's allowed me to go up to the mountain. And I've looked over. And I've seen the promised land. I may not get there with you. But I want you to know tonight, that we, as a people, will get to the promised land. So I'm happy, tonight. I'm not worried about anything. I'm not fearing any man. Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord.\nKing was booked in Room 306 at the Lorraine Motel in Memphis. Ralph Abernathy, who was present at the assassination, testified to the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations that King and his entourage stayed at Room 306 so often that it was known as the \"King-Abernathy suite\". According to Jesse Jackson, who was present, King's last words were spoken to musician Ben Branch, who was scheduled to perform that night at an event King was attending: \"Ben, make sure you play 'Take My Hand, Precious Lord' in the meeting tonight. Play it real pretty.\"\nKing was fatally shot by James Earl Ray at 6:01\u00a0p.m., Thursday, April 4, 1968, as he stood on the motel's second-floor balcony. The bullet entered through his right cheek, smashing his jaw, then traveled down his spinal cord before lodging in his shoulder. Abernathy heard the shot from inside the motel room and ran to the balcony to find King on the floor.\nAfter emergency surgery, King died at St. Joseph's Hospital at 7:05\u00a0p.m. According to biographer Taylor Branch, King's autopsy revealed that though only 39 years old, he \"had the heart of a 60 year old\", which Branch attributed to stress. King was initially interred in South View Cemetery in South Atlanta, but in 1977, his remains were transferred to a tomb on the site of the Martin Luther King Jr. National Historical Park.\nAftermath.\nThe assassination led to race riots in Washington, D.C., Chicago, Baltimore, Louisville, Kansas City, and dozens of other cities. Presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy was on his way to Indianapolis for a campaign rally when he was informed of King's death. He gave a short, improvised speech to the gathering of supporters informing them of the tragedy and urging them to continue King's ideal of nonviolence. The following day, he delivered a prepared response in Cleveland. James Farmer Jr. and other civil rights leaders also called for non-violent action, while the more militant Stokely Carmichael called for a more forceful response. The city of Memphis quickly settled the strike on terms favorable to the sanitation workers.\nThe plan to set up a shantytown in Washington, D.C., was carried out soon after the April 4 assassination. Criticism of King's plan was subdued in the wake of his death, and the SCLC received an unprecedented wave of donations to carry it out. The campaign officially began in Memphis, on May 2, at the hotel where King was murdered. Thousands of demonstrators arrived on the National Mall and stayed for six weeks, establishing a camp they called \"Resurrection City\".\nPresident Johnson tried to quell the riots by making telephone calls to civil rights leaders, mayors and governors and told politicians that they should warn the police against the unwarranted use of force. \"I'm not getting through,\" Johnson told his aides. \"They're all holing up like generals in a dugout getting ready to watch a war.\" Johnson declared April 7 a national day of mourning for King. Vice President Hubert Humphrey attended King's funeral on behalf of the President, as there were fears that Johnson's presence might incite protests and perhaps violence. At his widow's request, King's last sermon at Ebenezer Baptist Church, given on February 4, 1968, was played at the funeral,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I'd like somebody to mention that day that Martin Luther King Jr. tried to give his life serving others. I'd like for somebody to say that day that Martin Luther King Jr. tried to love somebody. I want you to say that day that I tried to be right on the war question. I want you to be able to say that day that I did try to feed the hungry. I want you to be able to say that day that I did try in my life to clothe those who were naked. I want you to say on that day that I did try in my life to visit those who were in prison. And I want you to say that I tried to love and serve humanity.\nYes, if you want to say that I was a drum major. Say that I was a drum major for justice. Say that I was a drum major for peace. I was a drum major for righteousness. And all of the other shallow things will not matter. I won't have any money to leave behind. I won't have the fine and luxurious things of life to leave behind. But I just want to leave a committed life behind.\nHis good friend Mahalia Jackson sang his favorite hymn, \"Take My Hand, Precious Lord\", at the funeral. The assassination helped to spur the enactment of the Civil Rights Act of 1968. Two months after King's death, James Earl Ray\u2014on the loose from a previous prison escape\u2014was captured at London Heathrow Airport while trying to reach white-ruled Rhodesia on a false Canadian passport. He was using the alias Ramon George Sneyd. Ray was quickly extradited to Tennessee and charged with King's murder. He confessed on March 10, 1969, though he recanted this confession three days later. On the advice of his attorney Percy Foreman, Ray pleaded guilty to avoid the possibility of the death penalty. He was sentenced to a 99-year prison term. Ray later claimed a man he met in Montreal, Quebec, with the alias \"Raoul\" was involved and that the assassination was the result of a conspiracy. He spent the remainder of his life attempting, unsuccessfully, to withdraw his guilty plea and secure the trial he never had. Ray died in 1998 at age 70.\nAllegations of conspiracy.\nRay's lawyers maintained he was a scapegoat similar to the way that John F. Kennedy's assassin Lee Harvey Oswald is seen by conspiracy theorists. Supporters of this assertion said that Ray's confession was given under pressure and that he had been threatened with the death penalty. They admitted that Ray was a thief and burglar, but claimed that he had no record of committing violent crimes with a weapon. However, prison records in different U.S. cities have shown that he was incarcerated on numerous occasions for armed robbery. In a 2008 interview with CNN, Jerry Ray, the younger brother of James Earl Ray, claimed that James was smart and was sometimes able to get away with armed robbery. \"I never been with nobody as bold as he is,\" Jerry said. \"He just walked in and put that gun on somebody, it was just like it's an everyday thing.\"\nThose suspecting a conspiracy point to the two successive ballistics tests which proved that a rifle similar to Ray's Remington Gamemaster had been the murder weapon. Those tests did not implicate Ray's specific rifle. Witnesses near King said that the shot came from another location, from behind thick shrubbery near the boarding house\u2014which had been cut away in the days following the assassination\u2014and not from the boarding house window. However, Ray's fingerprints were found on various objects in the bathroom where it was determined the gunfire came from. An examination of the rifle containing Ray's fingerprints determined that at least one shot was fired from the firearm at the time of the assassination.\nIn 1997, King's son Dexter Scott King met with Ray, and publicly supported Ray's efforts to obtain a new trial. Two years later, King's widow Coretta Scott King and the couple's children, represented by William F. Pepper, won a wrongful death claim against Loyd Jowers and \"other unknown co-conspirators\". Jowers claimed to have received $100,000 to arrange King's assassination. The jury found Jowers to be complicit in a conspiracy and that government agencies were party to the assassination.\u00a0\nIn 2000, the U.S. Department of Justice completed the investigation into Jowers' claims but did not find evidence of conspiracy. The investigation report recommended no further investigation unless new reliable facts are presented. A sister of Jowers admitted that he had fabricated the story so he could make $300,000 from selling the story, and she corroborated his story to get money to pay her income tax.\nIn 2002, \"The New York Times\" reported that a church minister, Ronald Denton Wilson, claimed his father, Henry Clay Wilson, assassinated King. He stated, \"It wasn't a racist thing; he thought Martin Luther King was connected with communism, and he wanted to get him out of the way.\" Wilson provided no evidence to back up his claims.\nKing researchers David Garrow and Gerald Posner disagreed with Pepper's claims that the government killed King. In 2003, Pepper published a book about the investigation and trial, as well as his representation of James Earl Ray in his bid for a trial. James Bevel also disputed the argument that Ray acted alone, stating, \"There is no way a ten-cent white boy could develop a plan to kill a million-dollar black man.\" In 2004, Jesse Jackson stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOn January 23 2025, President Donald Trump signed an Executive Order declassifying the records concerning the assassination.\nLegacy.\nSouth Africa.\nKing's legacy includes influences on the Black Consciousness Movement and civil rights movement in South Africa. King's work was cited by, and served as, an inspiration for South African leader Albert Luthuli, who fought for racial justice in his country during apartheid and was later awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.\nUnited Kingdom.\nJohn Hume, the former leader of the Social Democratic and Labour Party, cited King's legacy as quintessential to the Northern Ireland civil rights movement and the signing of the Good Friday Agreement, calling him \"one of my great heroes of the century\".\nThe Martin Luther King Fund and Foundation in the UK was set up as a charity on December 30, 1969, after King's assassination and following a visit to the UK in 1969 by his widow, Coretta King. The Foundation's first chairman, Canon John Collins, stated that the Foundation was to be an active UK national campaign for racial equality, its work also to include community projects in areas of social need, and education. International Personnel (IP), an employment agency, was formed in 1970 out of the foundation's base in Balham, to find employment for professionally qualified black people. In its first year, the agency placed ten percent of its applicants in jobs equal to their ability. The Balham Training Scheme operated an evening school with lecturers in Typing, Shorthand, English and Math. The foundation was removed from the Charity Commission list on November 18, 1996, as it had ceased to exist.\nThe Northumbria and Newcastle Universities Martin Luther King Peace Committee still exists to honor King's legacy, as represented by his final visit to the UK to receive an honorary degree from Newcastle University in 1967. Northumbria and Newcastle remain centers for the study of Martin Luther King and the US civil rights movement. Inspired by King's vision, the committee undertakes a range of activities across the UK to \"build cultures of peace\".\nIn 2017, Newcastle University unveiled a bronze statue of King to celebrate the 50th anniversary of his honorary doctorate ceremony. The Students Union also voted to rename their bar \"Luther's\".\nUnited States.\nKing has become a national icon in the history of American liberalism and American progressivism. His main legacy was to secure progress on civil rights in the U.S. Just days after King's assassination, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1968. Title VIII of the Act, commonly known as the Fair Housing Act, prohibited discrimination in housing and housing-related transactions on the basis of race, religion, or national origin (later expanded to include sex, familial status, and disability). This legislation was seen as a tribute to King's struggle in his final years to combat residential discrimination. The day following King's assassination, teacher Jane Elliott conducted her first \"Blue Eyes/Brown Eyes\" exercise with her class of elementary school students to help them understand King's death as it related to racism.\nKing's wife Coretta Scott King was active in matters of social justice and civil rights until her death in 2006. The same year that King was assassinated, she established the King Center in Atlanta, Georgia, dedicated to preserving his legacy and the work of championing nonviolent conflict resolution and tolerance worldwide. Their son, Dexter King, who died in 2024, served as the center's chairman until 2010. In 2010, Martin Luther King III became president. In 2012, King's youngest child, Bernice King, became the CEO. Daughter Yolanda King, who died in 2007, was a motivational speaker, author and founder of Higher Ground Productions, an organization specializing in diversity training.\nKing family members disagree about his views about LGBTQ people. King's widow Coretta said that she believed her husband would have supported them. However, King's youngest child, Bernice, said that he would have been opposed to gay marriage. King himself, in a 1958 advice column written for \"Ebony\", called homosexuality a \"problem\" and suggested that it could be resolved through psychiatric treatment.\nMartin Luther King Jr. Day.\nBeginning in 1971, cities and states established annual holidays to honor King. On November 2, 1983, President Ronald Reagan signed a bill creating a federal holiday to honor King. Observed for the first time on January 20, 1986, it is called Martin Luther King Jr. Day. Following President George H. W. Bush's 1992 proclamation, the holiday is observed on the third Monday of January each year, near the time of King's birthday. On January 17, 2000, for the first time, Martin Luther King Jr. Day was officially observed in all fifty U.S. states. Arizona (1992), New Hampshire (1999) and Utah (2000) were the last states to recognize the holiday. Utah previously celebrated the holiday under the name Human Rights Day.\nVeneration.\nKing was canonized by Archbishop Timothy Paul of the Holy Christian Orthodox Church on September 9, 2016. His feast day was set as April 4, the date of his assassination. King is also honored with a Lesser Feast on the liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church on April 4 or January 15, the anniversary of his birth. The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America commemorates King liturgically on January 15.\nIdeas, influences, and political stances.\nChristianity.\nAs a Christian minister, King's main influence was Jesus Christ and the Christian gospels, which he would almost always quote in his speeches. King's faith was strongly based in the Golden Rule, loving God above all, and loving your enemies. His nonviolent thought was also based in the injunction to \"turn the other cheek\" in the Sermon on the Mount, and Jesus' teaching of putting the sword back into its place (Matthew 26:52). In his Letter from Birmingham Jail, King urged action consistent with what he describes as Jesus' \"extremist\" love, and also quoted numerous other Christian pacifist authors. In another sermon, he stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Before I was a civil rights leader, I was a preacher of the Gospel. This was my first calling and it still remains my greatest commitment. You know, actually all that I do in civil rights I do because I consider it a part of my ministry. I have no other ambitions in life but to achieve excellence in the Christian ministry. I don't plan to run for any political office. I don't plan to do anything but remain a preacher. And what I'm doing in this struggle, along with many others, grows out of my feeling that the preacher must be concerned about the whole man.\nKing's private writings show that he rejected biblical literalism; he described the Bible as \"mythological\", doubted that Jesus was born of a virgin and did not believe that the story of Jonah and the whale was true.\nAmong the thinkers who influenced King's theological outlook were L. Harold DeWolf, Edgar Brightman, Peter Bertocci, Walter George Muelder, Walter Rauschenbusch, and Reinhold Niebuhr.\n\"The Measure of a Man\".\nIn 1959, King published a short book called \"The Measure of a Man\", which contained his sermons \"What is Man?\" and \"The Dimensions of a Complete Life\". The sermons argued for man's need for God's love and criticized the racial injustices of Western civilization.\nNonviolence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorld peace through nonviolent means is neither absurd nor unattainable. All other methods have failed. Thus we must begin anew. Nonviolence is a good starting point. Those of us who believe in this method can be voices of reason, sanity, and understanding amid the voices of violence, hatred, and emotion. We can very well set a mood of peace out of which a system of peace can be built.\n\u2014Martin Luther King Jr.\nAfrican-American civil rights activist Bayard Rustin was King's first regular advisor on nonviolence. King was also advised by the white activists Harris Wofford and Glenn Smiley. Rustin and Smiley came from the Christian pacifist tradition, and Wofford and Rustin both studied Mahatma Gandhi's teachings. Rustin had applied nonviolence with the Journey of Reconciliation campaign in the 1940s, and Wofford had been promoting Gandhism to Southern blacks since the early 1950s.\nKing initially knew little about Gandhi and rarely used the term \"nonviolence\" during his early activism. King initially believed in and practiced self-defense, even obtaining guns to defend against possible attackers. The pacifists showed him the alternative of nonviolent resistance, arguing that this would be a better means to accomplish his goals. King then vowed to no longer personally use arms.\nIn a chapter of \"Stride Toward Freedom\", King outlined his understanding of nonviolence, which seeks to win an opponent to friendship, rather than to humiliate or defeat him. The chapter draws from an address by Wofford, with Rustin and Stanley Levison also providing guidance and ghostwriting.\nKing was inspired by Gandhi and his success with nonviolent activism, and as a theology student, King described Gandhi as being one of the \"individuals who greatly reveal the working of the Spirit of God\". King had \"for a long time\u00a0... wanted to take a trip to India.\" With assistance from Harris Wofford, the American Friends Service Committee, and other supporters, he was able to fund the journey in February 1959. The trip deepened his understanding of nonviolent resistance and his commitment to America's struggle for civil rights. In a radio address made during his final evening in India, King reflected, \"Since being in India, I am more convinced than ever before that the method of nonviolent resistance is the most potent weapon available to oppressed people in their struggle for justice and human dignity.\"\nWhen receiving the Nobel Peace Prize in 1964, King hailed the \"successful precedent\" of using nonviolence \"in a magnificent way by Mohandas K. Gandhi to challenge the might of the British Empire\u00a0... He struggled only with the weapons of truth, soul force, non-injury and courage.\"\nAnother influence for King's nonviolent method was Henry David Thoreau's essay \"On Civil Disobedience\" and its theme of refusing to cooperate with an evil system. He also was greatly influenced by the works of Protestant theologians Reinhold Niebuhr and Paul Tillich, and said that Walter Rauschenbusch's \"Christianity and the Social Crisis\" left an \"indelible imprint\" on his thinking by giving him a theological grounding for his social concerns. King was moved by Rauschenbusch's vision of Christians spreading social unrest in \"perpetual but friendly conflict\" with the state, simultaneously critiquing it and calling it to act as an instrument of justice. However, he was apparently unaware of the American tradition of Christian pacifism exemplified by Adin Ballou and William Lloyd Garrison. King frequently referred to Jesus' Sermon on the Mount as central for his work. Before 1960, King also sometimes used the concept of \"agape\" (brotherly Christian love).\nEven after renouncing personal use of guns, King had a complex relationship with self-defense in the movement. He publicly discouraged it as a widespread practice but acknowledged that it was sometimes necessary. Throughout his career King was frequently protected by other civil rights activists who carried arms, such as Colonel Stone Johnson, Robert Hayling, and the Deacons for Defense and Justice.\nAmid recurring riots in the mid-1960s, King reaffirmed his commitment to nonviolence. He stated that riots were \"the language of the unheard\", the result of a failure to improve economic conditions and address racial injustice, but condemned them as \"self-defeating and socially destructive\".\nCriticism within the movement.\nKing was criticized by other black leaders in the civil rights movement. This included more militant thinkers such as Nation of Islam member Malcolm X. Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee founder Ella Baker regarded King as a charismatic media figure who lost touch with the grassroots of the movement as he became close to elite figures like Nelson Rockefeller. Stokely Carmichael, a protege of Baker's, became a black separatist and disagreed with King's plea for racial integration because he considered it an insult to a uniquely African-American culture. He also took issue that King's non-violence approach depended on appealing to America's conscience, feeling America had none to appeal to.\nActivism and involvement with Native Americans.\nKing was an avid supporter of Native American rights and Native Americans were active supporters of King's civil rights movement. The Native American Rights Fund (NARF) was patterned after the NAACP's Legal Defense and Education Fund. The National Indian Youth Council (NIYC) was especially supportive in King's campaigns especially the Poor People's Campaign in 1968. In King's book \"Why We Can't Wait\" he writes:\nOur nation was born in genocide when it embraced the doctrine that the original American, the Indian, was an inferior race. Even before there were large numbers of Negroes on our shores, the scar of racial hatred had already disfigured colonial society. From the sixteenth century forward, blood flowed in battles over racial supremacy. We are perhaps the only nation which tried as a matter of national policy to wipe out its indigenous population. Moreover, we elevated that tragic experience into a noble crusade. Indeed, even today we have not permitted ourselves to reject or to feel remorse for this shameful episode. Our literature, our films, our drama, our folklore all exalt it.\nIn the late 1950's, the remaining Creek in Alabama were trying to completely desegregate schools. Light-complexioned Native children were allowed to ride buses to previously all-white schools, while dark-skinned Native children from the same band were barred from the same buses. Tribal leaders, hearing of King's desegregation campaign in Birmingham, contacted him for assistance. Through his intervention the problem was quickly resolved.\nIn September 1959, after giving a speech at the University of Arizona on the ideals of using nonviolent methods in creating social change, King stated his belief that one must not use force in this struggle \"but match the violence of his opponents with his suffering.\" King then went to Southside Presbyterian, a predominantly Native American church, and was fascinated by their photos; he wanted to go to an Indian Reservation to meet the people so Casper Glenn took King to the Papago Indian Reservation. He met with all the tribal leaders, visited another Presbyterian church near the reservation, and preached there, attracting a Native American crowd. He later returned to Old Pueblo in March 1962 where he preached again to a Native American congregation. King would continue to attract the attention of Native Americans throughout the civil rights movement. During the 1963 March on Washington there was a sizable Native American contingent, including many from South Dakota and from the Navajo nation.\nKing was a major inspiration, along with the civil rights movement, of the Native American rights movement of the 1960s and many of its leaders. John Echohawk, a member of the Pawnee tribe who was the executive director and a founder of the Native American Rights Fund, stated:\nInspired by Dr. King, who was advancing the civil rights agenda of equality under the laws of this country, we thought that we could also use the laws to advance our Indianship, to live as tribes in our territories governed by our own laws under the principles of tribal sovereignty that had been with us ever since 1831. We believed that we could fight for a policy of self-determination that was consistent with U.S. law and that we could govern our own affairs, define our own ways and continue to survive in this society.\nPolitics.\nAs the leader of the SCLC, King maintained a policy of not publicly endorsing a U.S. political party or candidate: \"I feel someone must remain in the position of non-alignment, so that he can look objectively at both parties and be the conscience of both\u2014not the servant or master of either.\" In a 1958 interview, he expressed his view that neither party was perfect, saying, \"I don't think the Republican party is a party full of the almighty God nor is the Democratic party. They both have weaknesses\u00a0... And I'm not inextricably bound to either party.\" King did praise Democratic Senator Paul Douglas of Illinois as being the \"greatest of all senators\" because of his fierce advocacy for civil rights causes.\nKing critiqued both parties' performance on promoting racial equality:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlthough King never publicly supported a political party or candidate for president, in a letter to a civil rights supporter in October 1956 he said that he had not decided whether he would vote for Democrat Adlai Stevenson II or Republican Dwight D. Eisenhower at the 1956 presidential election, but that \"In the past, I always voted the Democratic ticket.\" In his autobiography, King says that in 1960 he privately voted for Democratic candidate John F. Kennedy: \"I felt that Kennedy would make the best president. I never came out with an endorsement. My father did, but I never made one.\" King adds that he likely would have made an exception to his non-endorsement policy for a second Kennedy term, saying \"Had President Kennedy lived, I would probably have endorsed him in 1964.\"\nIn 1964, King urged his supporters \"and all people of goodwill\" to vote against Republican Senator Barry Goldwater for president, saying that his election \"would be a tragedy, and certainly suicidal almost, for the nation and the world.\" King believed Robert F. Kennedy would make for a good president, but also believed that he wouldn't beat Johnson in the 1968 Democratic Party presidential primaries. He also expressed support for the possible presidential candidacies of Republicans Nelson Rockefeller, George Romney and Charles Percy.\nKing rejected both \"laissez-faire\" capitalism and communism; King had read Marx while at Morehouse but rejected communism because of its \"materialistic interpretation of history\" that denied religion, its \"ethical relativism\", and its \"political totalitarianism\". He stated that one focused too much on the individual while the other focused too much on the collective.\nIn a 1952 letter to Coretta Scott, he said: \"I imagine you already know that I am much more socialistic in my economic theory than capitalistic\u00a0...\" In one speech, he stated that \"something is wrong with capitalism\" and said, \"There must be a better distribution of wealth, and maybe America must move toward a democratic socialism.\" King further said that \"capitalism has outlived its usefulness\" and \"failed to meet the needs of the masses\".\nKing was critical of American culture saying \"when machines and computers, profit motives and property rights are considered more important than people, the giant triplets of racism, materialism and militarism are incapable of being conquered\" and that America must undergo a \"radical revolution of values\". King considered that in America \"the problem is that we all too often have socialism for the rich and rugged free enterprise capitalism for the poor\".\nCompensation.\nKing stated that black Americans, as well as other disadvantaged Americans, should be compensated for historical wrongs. In an interview conducted for \"Playboy\" in 1965, he said that granting black Americans only equality could not realistically close the economic gap between them and whites. King said that he did not seek a full restitution of wages lost to slavery, which he believed impossible, but proposed a government compensatory program of $50\u00a0billion over ten years to all disadvantaged groups.\nHe posited that \"the money spent would be more than amply justified by the benefits that would accrue to the nation through a spectacular decline in school dropouts, family breakups, crime rates, illegitimacy, swollen relief rolls, rioting and other social evils.\" He presented this idea as an application of the common law regarding settlement of unpaid labor but clarified that he felt that the money should not be spent exclusively on blacks. He stated, \"It should benefit the disadvantaged of \"all\" races.\"\nTelevision.\nActress Nichelle Nichols planned to leave the science-fiction television series \"\" in 1967 after . She changed her mind after talking to King, who was a fan of the show. King explained that her character signified a future of greater racial cooperation. King told Nichols, \"You are our image of where we're going, you're 300 years from now, and that means that's where we are and it takes place now. Keep doing what you're doing, you are our inspiration.\" As Nichols recounted: \"Star Trek\" was one of the only shows that [King] and his wife Coretta would allow their little children to watch. And I thanked him and I told him I was leaving the show. All the smile came off his face. And he said, 'Don't you understand for the first time we're seen as we should be seen. You don't have a black role. You have an equal role.' The series' creator, Gene Roddenberry, was deeply moved upon learning of King's support.\nState surveillance and coercion.\nFBI surveillance and wiretapping.\nFBI director J. Edgar Hoover personally ordered surveillance of King, with the intent to undermine his power as a civil rights leader. The Church Committee, a 1975 investigation by the U.S. Congress, found that \"From December 1963 until his death in 1968, Martin Luther King Jr. was the target of an intensive campaign by the Federal Bureau of Investigation to 'neutralize' him as an effective civil rights leader.\"\nIn the fall of 1963, the FBI received authorization from Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy to proceed with wiretapping of King's phone lines, purportedly due to his association with Stanley Levison. The Bureau informed President John F. Kennedy. He and his brother unsuccessfully tried to persuade King to dissociate himself from Levison, a New York lawyer who had been involved with Communist Party USA. Although Robert Kennedy only gave written approval for limited wiretapping of King's telephone lines \"on a trial basis, for a month or so\", Hoover extended the clearance so his men were \"unshackled\" to look for evidence in any areas of King's life they deemed worthy.\nThe Bureau placed wiretaps on the home and office phone lines of both Levison and King, and bugged King's rooms in hotels as he traveled across the country. In 1967, Hoover listed the SCLC as a black nationalist hate group, with the instructions: \"No opportunity should be missed to exploit through counterintelligence techniques the organizational and personal conflicts of the leaderships of the groups\u00a0... to insure [\"sic\"] the targeted group is disrupted, ridiculed, or discredited.\"\nPolice surveillance.\nKing was also the subject of extensive surveillance by local police agencies throughout the United States. At the March on Washington, where King declared, \"We can never be satisfied as long as the Negro is the victim of the unspeakable horrors of police brutality\", undercover police from both the Birmingham Police Department and the Philadelphia Police Department were on hand to monitor the day's proceedings. Additional documented instances of local police that monitored King include the New York Police Department and the Chicago Police Department.\nThe Memphis Police Department also spied on King in the spring of 1968, as the civil rights leader was taking part in a campaign to support striking sanitation workers in the Tennessee city. A fire station was located across from the Lorraine Motel, next to the boarding house in which James Earl Ray was staying. Police officers were stationed in the fire station to keep King under surveillance. Agents were watching King at the time he was shot. Immediately following the shooting, officers rushed to the motel. Marrell McCollough, an undercover police officer, was the first person to administer first aid to King. The antagonism between King and the FBI, the lack of an all points bulletin to find the killer, and the police presence nearby led to speculation that the FBI was involved in the assassination.\nNSA monitoring of King's communications.\nIn a secret operation code-named \"Minaret\", the National Security Agency monitored the communications of leading Americans, including King, who were critical of the U.S. war in Vietnam. A review by the NSA itself concluded that Minaret was \"disreputable if not outright illegal\".\nAllegations of communism.\nFor years, Hoover had been suspicious of potential influence of communists in social movements such as labor unions and civil rights. Hoover directed the FBI to track King in 1957, and the SCLC when it was established.\nDue to the relationship between King and Stanley Levison, the FBI feared Levison was working as an \"agent of influence\" over King, in spite of its own reports in 1963 that Levison had left the Party and was no longer associated in business dealings with them. Another King lieutenant, Jack O'Dell, was also linked to the Communist Party by sworn testimony before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC).\nDespite the extensive surveillance, by 1976 the FBI had acknowledged that it had not obtained any evidence that King himself or the SCLC were actually involved with any communist organizations.\nFor his part, King adamantly denied having any connections to communism. In a 1965 \"Playboy\" interview, he stated that \"there are as many Communists in this freedom movement as there are Eskimos in Florida.\" He argued that Hoover was \"following the path of appeasement of political powers in the South\" and that his concern for communist infiltration of the civil rights movement was meant to \"aid and abet the salacious claims of southern racists and the extreme right-wing elements.\" Hoover replied by saying that King was \"the most notorious liar in the country\". After his \"I Have A Dream\" speech, the FBI described King as \"the most dangerous and effective Negro leader in the country\". It alleged that he was \"knowingly, willingly and regularly cooperating with and taking guidance from communists.\"\nThe attempts to prove that King was a communist were related to the feeling of many segregationists that blacks in the South were content with the status quo but had been stirred up by \"communists\" and \"outside agitators\". King said that \"the Negro revolution is a genuine revolution, born from the same womb that produces all massive social upheavals\u2014the womb of intolerable conditions and unendurable situations.\"\nCIA surveillance.\nCIA files declassified in 2017 revealed that the agency was investigating possible links between King and Communism after a \"Washington Post\" article dated November 4, 1964, claimed he was invited to the Soviet Union and that Ralph Abernathy, as spokesman for King, refused to comment on the source of the invitation. Mail belonging to King and other civil rights activists was intercepted by the CIA program HTLINGUAL.\nAllegations of adultery.\nThe FBI attempted to discredit King through revelations regarding his private life. FBI surveillance, some of it since made public, attempted to demonstrate that he had extramarital affairs. The FBI distributed reports regarding such affairs to the executive branch, friendly reporters, potential coalition partners and funding sources of the SCLC, and King's family. The bureau sent anonymous letters to King threatening to reveal information about his affairs. The FBI\u2013King letter sent to King just before he received the Nobel Peace Prize read, in part:\nThe American public, the church organizations that have been helping\u2014Protestants, Catholics and Jews will know you for what you are\u2014an evil beast. So will others who have backed you. You are done. King, there is only one thing left for you to do. You know what it is. You have just 34 days in which to do (this exact number has been selected for a specific reason, it has definite practical significant [\"sic\"]). You are done. There is but one way out for you. You better take it before your filthy fraudulent self is bared to the nation.\nThe letter was accompanied by a tape recording\u2014excerpted from FBI wiretaps\u2014of several of King's extramarital liaisons. King interpreted this package as an attempt to drive him to suicide, although William Sullivan, then head of the Domestic Intelligence Division, argued it may have only been intended to \"convince Dr. King to resign from the SCLC.\" Upon the release of the full letter in 2014, Yale history professor Beverly Gage noted in a \"New York Times\" article that the claim that the FBI \"simply meant to push King out, not induce suicide\" was a possibility, pointing out that \"Another uncovered portion of the note praises \"older leaders\" like the NAACP executive director Roy Wilkins, urging King to step aside and let other men lead the civil rights movement.\" King refused to succumb to the FBI's threats.\nIn 1977, district court judge John Lewis Smith Jr. ordered the recorded audiotapes and written transcripts resulting from the FBI's electronic surveillance of King between 1963-68 to be sealed from public access in the National Archives until 2027.\nIn 2019, an FBI file emerged on which a handwritten note alleged that King \"looked on, laughed and offered advice\" as one of his friends raped a woman. Historians who have examined this notional evidence have dismissed it as highly unreliable. David Garrow, a King biographer, wrote that \"the suggestion ... that he either actively tolerated or personally employed violence against any woman, even while drunk, poses so fundamental a challenge to his historical stature as to require the most complete and extensive historical review possible\". Garrow's reliance on a handwritten note appended to a typed report is considered poor scholarship by other authorities. The professor of American studies at the University of Nottingham, Peter Ling, pointed out that Garrow was excessively credulous, if not naive, in accepting the accuracy of FBI reports during a period when it was undertaking an operation to attempt to discredit King. Professors Jeanne Theoharis, Barbara Ransby, Nathan Connolly and Glenda Gilmore have expressed reservations about Garrow's scholarship. Theoharis commented \"Most scholars I know would penalize graduate students for doing this.\" It is not the first time the rigor of Garrow's work has been called into serious question. Clayborne Carson, King biographer and overseer of the Dr. King records at Stanford University states that he came to the opposite conclusion of Garrow:\nNone of this is new. Garrow is talking about a recently added summary of a transcript of a 1964 recording from the Willard Hotel that others, including Mrs. King, have said they did not hear Martin's voice on it. The added summary was four layers removed from the actual recording. This supposedly new information comes from an anonymous source in a single paragraph in an FBI report. You have to ask how could anyone conclude King looked at a rape from an audio recording in a room where he was not present. The tapes that could confirm or refute the allegation are scheduled to be declassified in 2027.\nIn his 1989 autobiography \"And the Walls Came Tumbling Down\", Ralph Abernathy stated that King had a \"weakness for women\", although they \"all understood and believed in the biblical prohibition against sex outside of marriage. It was just that he had a particularly difficult time with that temptation.\" In a later interview, Abernathy said he only wrote the term \"womanizing\", that he did not specifically say King had extramarital sex and that the infidelities were emotional rather than sexual. Abernathy criticized the media for sensationalizing the statements he wrote about King's affairs, such as the allegation King had a sexual affair the night before he was assassinated. In his 1986 book \"Bearing the Cross\", Garrow wrote about affairs, including one woman King saw almost daily. According to Garrow, \"that relationship\u00a0... increasingly became the emotional centerpiece of King's life, but it did not eliminate the incidental couplings\u00a0... of King's travels.\" He alleged that King explained his affairs as \"a form of anxiety reduction\". Garrow asserted that King's supposed promiscuity caused him \"painful and at times overwhelming guilt\". King's wife Coretta appeared to have accepted his affairs with equanimity, saying once that \"all that other business just doesn't have a place in the very high-level relationship we enjoyed.\" Shortly after \"Bearing the Cross\" was released, civil rights author Howell Raines gave the book a positive review but opined that Garrow's allegations about King's sex life were \"sensational\" and stated that Garrow was \"amassing facts rather than analyzing them\".\nAwards and recognition.\nKing was awarded at least fifty honorary degrees from colleges and universities. On October 14, 1964, King became the youngest winner of the Nobel Peace Prize, which was awarded to him for leading nonviolent resistance to racial prejudice in the U.S. In 1965, he was awarded the American Liberties Medallion by the American Jewish Committee for his \"exceptional advancement of the principles of human liberty.\" In his acceptance remarks, King said, \"Freedom is one thing. You have it all or you are not free.\"\nIn 1957, he was awarded the Spingarn Medal from the NAACP. Two years later, he won the Anisfield-Wolf Book Award for \"Stride Toward Freedom: The Montgomery Story\". In 1966, the Planned Parenthood Federation of America awarded King the Margaret Sanger Award for \"his courageous resistance to bigotry and his lifelong dedication to the advancement of social justice and human dignity.\" Also in 1966, King was elected as a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In November 1967, he made a 24-hour trip to the UK to receive an honorary Doctorate in Civil Law from Newcastle University, becoming the first African American the institution had recognized in this way. In an impromptu acceptance speech, he said:\nThere are three urgent and indeed great problems that we face not only in the United States of America but all over the world today. That is the problem of racism, the problem of poverty and the problem of war.\nIn addition to his nominations for three Grammy Awards, King posthumously won for Best Spoken Word Recording in 1971 for \"Why I Oppose The War In Vietnam\".\nIn 1977, President Jimmy Carter posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom to King. The citation read:\nMartin Luther King Jr. was the conscience of his generation. He gazed upon the great wall of segregation and saw that the power of love could bring it down. From the pain and exhaustion of his fight to fulfill the promises of our founding fathers for our humblest citizens, he wrung his eloquent statement of his dream for America. He made our nation stronger because he made it better. His dream sustains us yet.\nKing and his wife were also awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in 2004.\nKing was second in Gallup's List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th Century. In 1963, he was named \"Time\" Person of the Year, and, in 2000, he was voted sixth in an online \"Person of the Century\" poll by the same magazine. King placed third in \"The Greatest American\" conducted by the Discovery Channel and AOL.\nFive-dollar bill.\nOn April 20, 2016, Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew announced that the $5, $10, and $20 bills would all undergo redesign prior to 2020. Lew said that while Lincoln would remain on the front of the $5 bill, the reverse would be redesigned to depict various historical events that had occurred at the Lincoln Memorial. Among the planned designs are images from King's \"I Have a Dream\" speech.\nMemorials.\nMany memorial sites, buildings and sculptures have been created to honor Martin Luther King Jr, including the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Library in Washington, D.C., the Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Library in San Jose, California, and the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial in West Potomac Park next to the National Mall in Washington, D.C.\nHonorary doctorates.\nKing has received several honorary doctorates.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20077", "revid": "47049904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20077", "title": "MLK (disambiguation)", "text": "Martin Luther King Jr. (1929\u20131968) was an American civil rights activist.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMLK or mlk may also refer to: \nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20079", "revid": "47722236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20079", "title": "Martin Luther King (disambiguation)", "text": "Martin Luther King Jr. (1929\u20131968) was a Christian minister and civil rights activist. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMartin Luther King may also refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "20080", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20080", "title": "Marino Marini (sculptor)", "text": "Italian sculptor (1901\u20131980)\nMarino Marini (27 February 1901 \u2013 6 August 1980) was an Italian sculptor and educator.\nBiography.\nHe attended the Accademia di Belle Arti in Florence in 1917. Although he never abandoned painting, Marini devoted himself primarily to sculpture from about 1922. From this time his work was influenced by Etruscan art and the sculpture of Arturo Martini. Marini succeeded Martini as professor at the Scuola d\u2019Arte di Villa Reale in Monza, near Milan, in 1929, a position he retained until 1940.\nDuring this period, Marini traveled frequently to Paris, where he associated with Massimo Campigli, Giorgio de Chirico, Alberto Magnelli, and Filippo Tibertelli de Pisis. In 1936 he moved to Tenero-Locarno, in Ticino Canton, Switzerland; during the following few years the artist often visited Z\u00fcrich and Basel, where he became a friend of Alberto Giacometti, Germaine Richier, and Fritz Wotruba. In 1936, he received the Prize of the Quadriennale of Rome. In 1938, he married Mercedes Pedrazzini.\nIn 1940, he accepted a professorship in sculpture at the Accademia di Belle Arti di Brera (now Brera Academy) in Milan. Notable students of his include sculptor Parviz Tanavoli. In 1943, he went into exile in Switzerland, exhibiting in Basel, Bern, and Zurich. In 1946, the artist settled permanently in Milan.\nHe is buried at Cimitero Comunale of Pistoia, Toscana, Italy.\nCareer.\nHe participated in the 'Twentieth-Century Italian Art' show at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City in 1944. Curt Valentin began exhibiting Marini's work at his Buchholz Gallery in New York in 1950, on which occasion the sculptor visited the city and met Jean Arp, Max Beckmann, Alexander Calder, Lyonel Feininger, and Jacques Lipchitz. On his return to Europe, he stopped in London, where the Hanover Gallery had organized a solo show of his work, and there met Henry Moore. In 1951 a Marini exhibition traveled from the Kestner-Gesellschaft Hannover to the Kunstverein in Hamburg and the Haus der Kunst of Munich. He was awarded the Grand Prize for Sculpture at the Venice Biennale in 1952 and the Feltrinelli Prize at the Accademia dei Lincei in Rome in 1954. One of his monumental sculptures was installed in The Hague in 1959.\nRetrospectives of Marini's work took place at the Kunsthaus Z\u00fcrich in 1962 and at the Palazzo Venezia in Rome in 1966. His paintings were exhibited for the first time at Toninelli Arte Moderna in Milan in 1963\u201364. In 1973 a permanent installation of his work opened at the Galleria d\u2019Arte Moderna in Milan, and in 1978 a Marini show was presented at the National Museum of Modern Art in Tokyo.\nThere is a museum dedicated to his work in Florence in the former church of San Pancrazio.\nHis work may also be found in museums such as the Civic Gallery of Modern Art in Milan, the Tate Collection, \"The Angel of the City\" at the Peggy Guggenheim Collection, Venice, the Norton Simon Museum, Museum de Fundatie and the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in Washington, D.C.\nWork.\nMarini developed several themes in sculpture: equestrian, Pomonas (nudes), portraits, and circus figures. He drew on traditions of Etruscan and Northern European sculpture in developing these themes. His aim was to develop mythical images by interpreting classical themes in light of modern concerns and techniques.\nMarini is particularly famous for his series of stylised equestrian statues, which feature a man with outstretched arms on a horse. The evolution of the horse and rider as a subject in Marini's works reflects the artist's response to the changing context of the modern world. This theme appeared in his work in 1936. At first the proportions of horse and rider are slender and both are \"poised, formal, and calm.\" By the next year the horse is depicted rearing and the rider gesturing. By 1940 the forms are simpler and more archaic in spirit; the proportions squatter.\nAfter World War II, in the late 1940s, the horse is planted, immobile, with neck extended, ears pinned back, mouth open. An example, in the Peggy Guggenheim Collection in Venice, is \"The Angel of the City,\" depicting \"affirmation and charged strength associated explicitly with sexual potency.\" In later works, the rider is, increasingly, oblivious of his mount, \"involved in his own visions or anxieties.\" In the artist's final work, the rider is unseated as the horse falls to the ground in an \"apocalyptic image of lost control\" which parallels Marini's growing despair for the future of the world.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20087", "revid": "49038817", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20087", "title": "Modular arithmetic", "text": "Computation modulo a fixed integer\nIn mathematics, modular arithmetic is a system of arithmetic operations for integers, other than the usual ones from elementary arithmetic, where numbers \"wrap around\" when reaching a certain value, called the modulus. The modern approach to modular arithmetic was developed by Carl Friedrich Gauss in his book \"Disquisitiones Arithmeticae\", published in 1801.\nA familiar example of modular arithmetic is the hour hand on a 12-hour clock. If the hour hand points to 7 now, then 8 hours later it will point to 3. Ordinary addition would result in 7 + 8 \n 15, but 15 reads as 3 on the clock face. This is because the hour hand makes one rotation every 12 hours and the hour number starts over when the hour hand passes 12. We say that 15 is \"congruent\" to 3 modulo 12, written 15 \u2261 3 (mod 12), so that 7 + 8 \u2261 3 (mod 12). \nSimilarly, if one starts at 12 and waits 8 hours, the hour hand will be at 8. If one instead waited twice as long, 16 hours, the hour hand would be on 4. This can be written as 2 \u00d7 8 \u2261 4 (mod 12). Note that after a wait of exactly 12 hours, the hour hand will always be right where it was before, so 12 acts the same as zero, thus 12 \u2261 0 (mod 12).\nCongruence.\nGiven an integer \"m\" \u2265 1, called a modulus, two integers a and b are said to be congruent modulo m, if m is a divisor of their difference; that is, if there is an integer \"k\" such that\n \"a\" \u2212 \"b\" = \"k m\".\nCongruence modulo m is a congruence relation, meaning that it is an equivalence relation that is compatible with addition, subtraction, and multiplication. Congruence modulo m is denoted by\n \"a\" \u2261 \"b\" (mod \"m\").\nThe parentheses mean that (mod \"m\") applies to the entire equation, not just to the right-hand side (here, b). \nThis notation is not to be confused with the notation \"b\" mod \"m\" (without parentheses), which refers to the remainder of \"b\" when divided by \"m\", known as the modulo operation: that is, \"b\" mod \"m\" denotes the unique integer r such that 0 \u2264 \"r\" &lt; \"m\" and \"r\" \u2261 \"b\" (mod \"m\").\nThe congruence relation may be rewritten as\n \"a\" = \"k m\" + \"b\",\nexplicitly showing its relationship with Euclidean division. However, the \"b\" here need not be the remainder in the division of \"a\" by \"m\". Rather, \"a\" \u2261 \"b\" (mod \"m\") asserts that \"a\" and \"b\" have the same remainder when divided by \"m\". That is,\n \"a\" = \"p m\" + \"r\",\n \"b\" = \"q m\" + \"r\",\nwhere 0 \u2264 \"r\" &lt; \"m\" is the common remainder. We recover the previous relation (\"a\" \u2212 \"b\" = \"k m\") by subtracting these two expressions and setting \"k\" = \"p\" \u2212 \"q\".\nBecause the congruence modulo m is defined by the divisibility by m and because \u22121 is a unit in the ring of integers, a number is divisible by \u2212\"m\" exactly if it is divisible by m.\nThis means that every non-zero integer m may be taken as a modulus.\nExamples.\nIn modulus 12, one can assert that:\n 38 \u2261 14 (mod 12)\nbecause the difference is 38 \u2212 14 = 24 = 2 \u00d7 12, a multiple of 12. Equivalently, 38 and 14 have the same remainder 2 when divided by 12.\nThe definition of congruence also applies to negative values. For example:\n formula_1\nBasic properties.\nThe congruence relation satisfies all the conditions of an equivalence relation:\nIf \"a\"1 \u2261 \"b\"1 (mod \"m\") and \"a\"2 \u2261 \"b\"2 (mod \"m\"), or if \"a\" \u2261 \"b\" (mod \"m\"), then:\nIf \"a\" \u2261 \"b\" (mod \"m\"), then it is generally false that \"ka\" \u2261 \"kb\" (mod \"m\"). However, the following is true:\nIf \"a\" \u2261 \"b\" (mod \"mn\"), then \"a\" \u2261 \"b\" (mod \"m\") and \"a\" \u2261 \"b\" (mod \"n\"). \nFor cancellation of common terms, we have the following rules:\nThe last rule can be used to move modular arithmetic into division. If \"b\" divides \"a\", then (\"a\"/\"b\") mod \"m\" = (\"a\" mod \"b m\") / \"b\".\nThe modular multiplicative inverse is defined by the following rules:\nThe multiplicative inverse \"x\" \u2261 \"a\"\u22121 (mod \"m\") may be efficiently computed by solving B\u00e9zout's equation \"a x\" + \"m y\" = 1 for \"x\", \"y\", by using the Extended Euclidean algorithm.\nIn particular, if \"p\" is a prime number, then \"a\" is coprime with \"p\" for every \"a\" such that 0 &lt; \"a\" &lt; \"p\"; thus a multiplicative inverse exists for all \"a\" that is not congruent to zero modulo \"p\".\nAdvanced properties.\nSome of the more advanced properties of congruence relations are the following:\n \"a\"0 \"x\"\"d\" + ... + \"a\"\"d\" is a polynomial with integer coefficients such that p is not a divisor of \"a\"0, then the congruence \"f\" (\"x\") \u2261 0 (mod \"p\") has at most \"d\" non-congruent solutions.\nCongruence classes.\nThe congruence relation is an equivalence relation. The equivalence class modulo m of an integer \"a\" is the set of all integers of the form \"a\" + \"k m\", where k is any integer. It is called the congruence class or residue class of \"a\" modulo\u00a0\"m\", and may be denoted (\"a\" mod \"m\"), or as or [\"a\"] when the modulus \"m\" is known from the context.\nEach residue class modulo\u00a0\"m\" contains exactly one integer in the range formula_2. Thus, these formula_3 integers are representatives of their respective residue classes. \nIt is generally easier to work with integers than sets of integers; that is, the representatives most often considered, rather than their residue classes. \nConsequently, (\"a\" mod \"m\") denotes generally the unique integer r such that 0 \u2264 \"r\" &lt; \"m\" and \"r\" \u2261 \"a\" (mod \"m\"); it is called the residue of \"a\" modulo\u00a0\"m\".\nIn particular, (\"a\" mod \"m\") = (\"b\" mod \"m\") is equivalent to \"a\" \u2261 \"b\" (mod \"m\"), and this explains why \"=\" is often used instead of \"\u2261\" in this context.\nResidue systems.\nEach residue class modulo \"m\" may be represented by any one of its members, although we usually represent each residue class by the smallest nonnegative integer which belongs to that class (since this is the proper remainder which results from division). Any two members of different residue classes modulo \"m\" are incongruent modulo \"m\". Furthermore, every integer belongs to one and only one residue class modulo \"m\".\nThe set of integers {0, 1, 2, ..., \"m\" \u2212 1} is called the least residue system modulo \"m\". Any set of \"m\" integers, no two of which are congruent modulo \"m\", is called a complete residue system modulo \"m\".\nThe least residue system is a complete residue system, and a complete residue system is simply a set containing precisely one representative of each residue class modulo \"m\". For example, the least residue system modulo 4 is {0, 1, 2, 3}. Some other complete residue systems modulo 4 include:\nSome sets that are \"not\" complete residue systems modulo 4 are:\nReduced residue systems.\nGiven the Euler's totient function \"\u03c6\"(\"m\"), any set of \"\u03c6\"(\"m\") integers that are relatively prime to \"m\" and mutually incongruent under modulus \"m\" is called a reduced residue system modulo \"m\". The set {5, 15} from above, for example, is an instance of a reduced residue system modulo\u00a04.\nCovering systems.\nCovering systems represent yet another type of residue system that may contain residues with varying moduli.\nIntegers modulo \"m\".\nIn the context of this paragraph, the modulus \"m\" is almost always taken as positive.\nThe set of all congruence classes modulo \"m\" is a ring called the ring of integers modulo \"m\", and is denoted formula_4, formula_5, or formula_6. \nThe ring formula_7 is fundamental to various branches of mathematics (see \"\" below).\n(In some parts of number theory the notation formula_6 is avoided because it can be confused with the set of \"m\"-adic integers.) \nFor \"m\" &gt; 0 one has\n formula_9\nWhen \"m\" = 1, formula_7 is the zero ring; when \"m\" = 0, formula_7 is not an empty set; rather, it is isomorphic to formula_12, since \"a\"0 = {\"a\"}.\nAddition, subtraction, and multiplication are defined on formula_7 by the following rules:\nThe properties given before imply that, with these operations, formula_7 is a commutative ring. For example, in the ring formula_18, one has\n formula_19\nas in the arithmetic for the 24-hour clock.\nThe notation formula_7 is used because this ring is the quotient ring of formula_12 by the ideal formula_22, the set formed by all multiples of \"m\", that is, all numbers \"k m\" with formula_23\nUnder addition, formula_24 is a cyclic group. All finite cyclic groups are isomorphic with formula_25 for some m.\nThe ring of integers modulo \"m\" is a field; that is, every nonzero element has a multiplicative inverse, if and only if \"m\" is prime. If \"m\" = \"p\"\"k\" is a prime power with \"k\" &gt; 1, there exists a unique (up to isomorphism) finite field formula_26 with \"m\" elements, which is \"not\" isomorphic to formula_25, which fails to be a field because it has zero-divisors.\nIf \"m\" &gt; 1, formula_28 denotes the multiplicative group of the integers modulo \"m\" that are invertible. It consists of the congruence classes , where \"a\" is coprime to \"m\"; these are precisely the classes possessing a multiplicative inverse. They form an abelian group under multiplication; its order is \"\u03c6\"(\"m\"), where \u03c6 is Euler's totient function.\nApplications.\nIn pure mathematics, modular arithmetic is one of the foundations of number theory, touching on almost every aspect of its study, and it is also used extensively in group theory, ring theory, knot theory, and abstract algebra. In applied mathematics, it is used in computer algebra, cryptography, computer science, chemistry and the visual and musical arts.\nA very practical application is to calculate checksums within serial number identifiers. For example, International Standard Book Number (ISBN) uses modulo 11 (for 10-digit ISBN) or modulo 10 (for 13-digit ISBN) arithmetic for error detection. Likewise, International Bank Account Numbers (IBANs) use modulo 97 arithmetic to spot user input errors in bank account numbers. In chemistry, the last digit of the CAS registry number (a unique identifying number for each chemical compound) is a check digit, which is calculated by taking the last digit of the first two parts of the CAS registry number times 1, the previous digit times 2, the previous digit times 3 etc., adding all these up and computing the sum modulo 10.\nIn cryptography, modular arithmetic directly underpins public key systems such as RSA and Diffie\u2013Hellman, and provides finite fields which underlie elliptic curves, and is used in a variety of symmetric key algorithms including Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA), and RC4. RSA and Diffie\u2013Hellman use modular exponentiation.\nIn computer algebra, modular arithmetic is commonly used to limit the size of integer coefficients in intermediate calculations and data. It is used in polynomial factorization, a problem for which all known efficient algorithms use modular arithmetic. It is used by the most efficient implementations of polynomial greatest common divisor, exact linear algebra and Gr\u00f6bner basis algorithms over the integers and the rational numbers. As posted on Fidonet in the 1980s and archived at Rosetta Code, modular arithmetic was used to disprove Euler's sum of powers conjecture on a Sinclair QL microcomputer using just one-fourth of the integer precision used by a CDC 6600 supercomputer to disprove it two decades earlier via a brute force search.\nIn computer science, modular arithmetic is often applied in bitwise operations and other operations involving fixed-width, cyclic data structures. The modulo operation, as implemented in many programming languages and calculators, is an application of modular arithmetic that is often used in this context. The logical operator XOR sums 2 bits, modulo 2.\nThe use of long division to turn a fraction into a repeating decimal in any base b is equivalent to modular multiplication of b modulo the denominator. For example, for decimal, b = 10.\nIn music, arithmetic modulo 12 is used in the consideration of the system of twelve-tone equal temperament, where octave and enharmonic equivalency occurs (that is, pitches in a 1:2 or 2:1 ratio are equivalent, and C-sharp is considered the same as D-flat).\nThe method of casting out nines offers a quick check of decimal arithmetic computations performed by hand. It is based on modular arithmetic modulo 9, and specifically on the crucial property that 10 \u2261 1 (mod 9).\nArithmetic modulo 7 is used in algorithms that determine the day of the week for a given date. In particular, Zeller's congruence and the Doomsday algorithm make heavy use of modulo-7 arithmetic.\nMore generally, modular arithmetic also has application in disciplines such as law (for example, apportionment), economics (for example, game theory) and other areas of the social sciences, where proportional division and allocation of resources plays a central part of the analysis.\nComputational complexity.\nSince modular arithmetic has such a wide range of applications, it is important to know how hard it is to solve a system of congruences. A linear system of congruences can be solved in polynomial time with a form of Gaussian elimination, for details see linear congruence theorem. Algorithms, such as Montgomery reduction, also exist to allow simple arithmetic operations, such as multiplication and exponentiation modulo\u00a0\"m\", to be performed efficiently on large numbers.\nSome operations, like finding a discrete logarithm or a quadratic congruence appear to be as hard as integer factorization and thus are a starting point for cryptographic algorithms and encryption. These problems might be NP-intermediate.\nSolving a system of non-linear modular arithmetic equations is NP-complete.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20088", "revid": "1960810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20088", "title": "Myriad", "text": "Order of magnitude name for 10,000\nIn the context of numeric naming systems for powers of ten, myriad is the quantity ten thousand (10,000). Idiomatically, in English, \"myriad\" is an adjective used to mean that a group of things has indefinitely large quantity.\n\"Myriad\" derives from the ancient Greek for ten thousand () and is used with this meaning in literal translations from Greek, Latin or Sinospheric languages (Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese), and in reference to ancient Greek numerals.\nThe term \"myriad\" is also used in the form \"a myriad\" for a 100 km \u00d7 100 km square (10,000 km\u00b2) the grid size of the British Ordnance Survey National Grid and the US Military Grid Reference System. It contains 100 hectads.\nHistory.\nThe Aegean numerals of the Minoan and Mycenaean civilizations included a symbol composed of a circle with four dashes \ud800\udd2b to denote tens of thousands.\nIn classical Greek numerals, myriad was written as a capital mu: \u039c. To distinguish this numeral from letters, it was sometimes given an overbar: M. Multiples were written above this sign. For example is 4,582\u00d710,000 or 45,820,000. \nThe etymology of \"myriad\" is uncertain. It has been variously connected to PIE \"*meu-\" (\"damp\") in reference to the waves of the sea and to Greek \"myrmex\" (, \"ant\") in reference to their swarms.\nIn his \"Sand Reckoner\", Archimedes used \"myriad myriad\" (MM, one hundred million) as the basis for a numeration system of large powers of ten, which he used to count grains of sand.\nIn English.\n\"Myriad\" may be used either as an adjective (there are myriad people outside) or as a noun (there is a myriad of people outside), but there are small differences. The former might imply that it is a diverse group of people whereas the latter usually does not.\nDespite its usual meaning (a large, unspecified quantity), \"myriad\" is sometimes used in English to mean ten thousand although usually restricted to translation from other languages like ancient Greek and Chinese where quantities are grouped by 10,000. Such use permits the translator to remain closer to the original text and avoid unwieldy mentions of \"tens of thousands\". For example, \"the original number of the crews supplied by the several nations I find to have been twenty-four myriads\" and \"What is the distance between one bridge and another? Twelve myriads of parasangs\".\nIn European languages.\nMost European languages include a variation of \"myriad\" with a similar meaning to the English word.\nAdditionally, the prefix \"myria-\" indicating multiplication times ten thousand (\u00d7104), was part of the original metric system adopted by France in 1795. Although it was not retained after the 11th CGPM conference in 1960, \"myriameter\" is sometimes still encountered as a translation of the Scandinavian mile (Swedish\u00a0&amp; Norwegian:\u00a0\"mil\") of , or in some classifications of wavelengths as the adjective \"myriametric\". The \"myriagramme\" (10\u00a0kg) was a French approximation of the avoirdupois \"quartier\" of and the \"myriaton\" appears in Isaac Asimov's \"Foundation\" novel trilogy.\nIn modern Greek, the word \"myriad\" is rarely used to denote 10,000, but a million is \"ekatommyrio\" (, \"lit.\" 'hundred myriad') and a thousand million is \"disekatommyrio\" (, \"lit.\" 'twice hundred myriad').\nIn East Asian languages.\nIn East Asia, the traditional numeral systems of China, Korea, and Japan are all decimal-based but grouped into ten thousands rather than thousands. The character for myriad is in traditional script and in simplified form in both mainland China and Japanese; its pronunciation varies between languages (Mandarin: \"w\u00e0n\", Hakka: \"wan\"5, Minnan: \"b\u0101n\", Cantonese: \"maan\"6, Japanese and Korean: \"man\", Vietnamese: \"v\u1ea1n\", Thai: \u0e2b\u0e21\u0e37\u0e48\u0e19 \"muen\" and Khmer: \u1798\u17c9\u17ba\u1793 \"meun\").\nBecause of this grouping into fours, higher orders of numbers are provided by the powers of 10,000 rather than 1,000: In China, 10,0002 was in ancient texts but is now called and sometimes written as 1,0000,0000; 10,0003 is 1,0000,0000,0000 or ; 10,0004 is 1,0000,0000,0000,0000 or ; and so on. Conversely, Chinese, Japanese, and Korean generally do not have native words for powers of one thousand: what is called \"one million\" in English is \"100\" (100 myriad) in the Sinosphere, and \"one billion\" in English is \" (ten myllion) or \" (ten myriad myriad) in the Sinosphere. Unusually, Vietnam employs its former translation of , \"m\u1ed9t tri\u1ec7u\", to mean 1,000,000 rather than the Chinese figure. Similarly, the Chinese government has adapted the word to mean the scientific prefix mega-, but transliterations are used instead for giga-, tera-, and other larger prefixes. This has caused confusion in areas closely related to China such as Hong Kong and Macau, where is still largely used to mean 10,0003.\n and are also frequently employed colloquially in expressions, clich\u00e9s, and \"chengyu\" (idioms) in the senses of \"vast\", \"numerous\", \"numberless\", and \"infinite\". A skeleton key is a (\"myriad-use key\"), the emperor was the \"lord of myriad chariots\" (), the Great Wall is called (\"Myriad-mile Long Wall\"), Zhu Xi's statement (\"the moon reflects in myriad rivers\") had the sense of supporting greater empiricism in Chinese philosophy, and Ha Qiongwen's popular 1959 propaganda poster , meaning \"Long live Chairman Mao\", literally reads as \"[May] Chairman Mao [live to be] 10,000 years old\". Its literary use may thus mean something huge and plentiful.60\nIn old Turkic.\nA similar term is the Old Turkic word \"t\u00fcm\u00e4n\", whose variant forms remain in use for \"ten thousand\" among modern Mongolian, Turkish. According to Sir Gerard Clauson (1891\u20131974), it was likely borrowed from Tokharian \"tm\u0101n\", which may have been borrowed in turn from Old Chinese \"tman\" \u842c &gt; \"wan\".\nIn Hebrew.\nIn Hebrew the word \u05e8\u05d1\u05d1\u05d4 (pronounced \"revava\") means 10,000, and is the highest number represented in Hebrew. Its sources go back to biblical times.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; The dictionary definition of \"myriad\" at Wiktionary\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20089", "revid": "3004667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20089", "title": "Mohamed Al-Fayed", "text": "Egyptian businessman (1929\u20132023)\nMohamed Abdel Moneim Al-Fayed (; 27 January 1929\u00a0\u2013 30 August 2023) was an Egyptian businessman. His residence and primary business interests were in the United Kingdom from the mid-1960s, and his business interests included ownership of the H\u00f4tel Ritz Paris, Harrods department store and Fulham Football Club. At the time of his death in 2023, \"Forbes\" estimated his wealth at US$2\u00a0billion. Since his death, Al-Fayed has been accused by multiple women of sexual harassment and assault.\nFayed was married to Samira Khashoggi from 1954 to 1956. They had a son, Dodi, who was in a romantic relationship with Diana, Princess of Wales, when they both died in a car crash in Paris in 1997. Fayed claimed that the crash was orchestrated by MI6 on the instructions of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. In 2011, Fayed financially supported an unreleased documentary film \"Unlawful Killing\", that presented his version of events.\nFrom 1995 onwards, Fayed was the subject of media scrutiny and investigations into allegations of sexist and discriminatory practices he mandated at Harrods, of sexual harassment and assault. Early media scrutiny of sexual misconduct allegations against Al-Fayed was curtailed by his frequent threats of litigation. He developed a reputation for spending large sums on litigation against news organizations reporting on sexual assault allegations against him. In 2024, the year following his death, he became the subject of multiple posthumous accusations of rape, with over 200 women making complaints of illegal activity.\nEarly life.\nFayed was born on 27 January 1929 in the Roshdy neighbourhood of Alexandria, in the Kingdom of Egypt, the eldest son of an Egyptian primary school teacher from Asyut. His year of birth has been disputed. The Department of Trade in 1988 found his date of birth was 27 January 1929. His brothers Ali and Salah were his business colleagues.\nAt the age of nineteen Al-Fayed was selling bottles of Coca-Cola on the streets of Alexandria, and sold Singer sewing machines at the age of twenty-one. In 1952 Al-Fayed was hired by a friend, Tousson El Barrawi, and the seventeen-year-old Adnan Khashoggi for their furniture import business. Al-Fayed excelled at the business and impressed Adnan's father, Mohamed Kashoggi, the personal physician of the King of Saudi Arabia. In the early 1950s Al-Fayed travelled to Europe for the first time, visiting France, Italy and Switzerland. Returning to Egypt, Al-Fayed confessed to his wife, Samira Kashoggi, Adnan Kashoggi's sister, that he had had an affair, and she demanded a divorce. Al-Fayed terminated his partnership with Adnan Kashoggi, and secretly withdrew \u00a3100,000 from Kashoggi's Al Nasr trading company. Kashoggi issued a writ against Al-Fayed for the return of the money, and later agreed with Al-Fayed to forgive the money and other loans and debts in return for Samira's freedom to remarry and return to Egypt. Following Egyptian President Nasser's threats to expropriate foreign businesses, Al-Fayed was able to take control of a small shipping company, owned by Leon Carasso, who wished to emigrate. Carasso later claimed that Al-Fayed had defaulted on the agreed payment for his business. Fayed also acquired interests in other transport companies at favourable prices. After Nasser ordered the confiscation of Egyptian property in 1961, Al-Fayed transferred ownership of his Middle Eastern Navigation Company to Genoa in Italy.\nOn 12 June 1964, Al-Fayed arrived in Haiti, then under the control of Fran\u00e7ois \"Papa Doc\" Duvalier. Al-Fayed entered the country on a Kuwaiti passport, and introduced himself as Sheikh Mohamed Fayed. Shortly after his arrival, Duvalier cancelled a ten-year contract with a U.S. company that gave them monopoly control over Haiti's oil industry and signed a similar contract with Al-Fayed for fifty years. Al-Fayed also worked with the geologist George de Mohrenschildt. He terminated his stay in Haiti six months later when a sample of \"crude oil\" provided by Haitian associates proved to be low-grade molasses. Al-Fayed promised to use his connections in Dubai to help bring investment to the Caribbean island, if they allowed him to build an oil refinery, and develop the wharf at Port-au-Prince. Al-Fayed had exclusive control over the collection of fees for docking, unloading, and loading at Haiti's main port, and this caused resentment in the Haitian shipping industry. Al-Fayed was 'tapped' for $30,000 by Duvalier, but rather than pay, and fearful of the growing anger of the shipping agents, he left Haiti in December 1964. Fayed later claimed that the Haitian government owed him $2 million. The 1988 Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) report on Al-Fayed's background stated \"we have no doubt at all that Mohamed Fayed perpetrated a substantial deceit on the government and people of Haiti in 1964 ... he deprived the harbor authority of over US $100,000 of money it could ill-afford to lose\" \nFayed then moved to England, where he lived in central London.\nCareer in Dubai.\nIngratiating himself in London's Arab expatriate community, Al-Fayed met an Iraqi businessman, Salim Abu Alwan, and through Alwan was introduced to Mahdi Al Tajir. Tajir was then an adviser to Sheikh Rashid bin Saeed Al Maktoum of the United Arab Emirates. Rashid was the Emir of Dubai, and oil was soon to be discovered in Dubai, which would transform the wealth of the emirate.\nTajir informed Al-Fayed that Dubai was penniless and needed to borrow \u00a31 million to build modern harbour facilities. Al-Fayed secured a loan of \u00a39 million from Imre Rochlitz, an American lawyer. Rochlitz's Jewish ancestry caused embarrassment to Tajir, and later caused Rochlitz to reject Al-Fayed's offer of a formal partnership. Al-Fayed earned \u00a31.5 million commission from the contract for British engineering company Costain to carry out the work to the port. Al-Fayed also assisted in securing finance for the Dubai World Trade Centre. The banker David Douglas-Home of Morgan Grenfell was responsible for managing the contract. By the mid-1970s Costain had gained over \u00a3280 million of contracts thanks to Al-Fayed and Tajir, and Al-Fayed bought 20.84% of Costain's shares. He was later appointed a company director.\nWith his earnings from commissions on various projects in Dubai, Al-Fayed bought a Rolls-Royce, a large chalet in Gstaad, and the remaining apartments of 60 Park Lane in Mayfair, where he had been living for the past few years.\nIn 1974 Al-Fayed met Roland 'Tiny' Rowland, a British businessman with extensive interests in Southern Africa, and the chairman of international conglomerate Lonrho. Fayed's complex professional relationship with Rowland dominated his life for the next twenty years, with legal repercussions continuing into the late 1990s.\nRowland persuaded Al-Fayed to exchange his shares in Costain for 5.5 million shares in Lonrho in March 1975, and Al-Fayed used the profit from the deal to buy another 3 million shares in Lonrho and become a director of the company. Al-Fayed soon became alarmed at Rowland's use of Lonrho's money to fund his lifestyle and to pay large bribes in Africa, as well as his syphoning off company profits into a secret bank account in Switzerland.\nThe British Department of Trade and Industry began to investigate Lonrho in early 1976, and an alarmed Al-Fayed quit the company in May 1976. He sold his Lonrho shares to Kuwaiti investors and bought back his Costain shares for \u00a311 million. Tajir's influence in Dubai was waning by 1977, and Al-Fayed was excluded from the commission process for a new aluminium smelter, and the development of Jebel Ali, putting Costain's future profits at risk.\nIn 1993 Al-Fayed was visited at Harrods by Mohammed Alabbar, the director of Dubai's Department of Economic Development. Alabbar had been appointed by Sheikh Maktoum to eradicate the system of large commission payments from previous decades. Tajir was challenged in the British courts to repay his alleged excessive profits earned from the construction of Dubai's aluminium smelter, and Al-Fayed was targeted over his management contract of the Dubai World Trade Centre. Al-Fayed's contract to manage the centre was later terminated by the Maktoums, and Al-Fayed sued them for compensation estimated between \u00a330 to 90 million. The case came to court in October 1994, and after trying to unsuccessfully settle the case with the Maktoums, Al-Fayed was due to testify on 17 October. Al-Fayed's lawyer informed the court that morning that he had been taken seriously ill with neck and back complications, and could not fly to Dubai as a result.\nAlabbar had secretly taped Al-Fayed on his way to Harrods that morning, and the tapes were shown to the court the next day. Al-Fayed's lack of ill health was evident, and Al-Fayed was informed by his lawyer of the disastrous effect that his deception had on the case that day.\nIn the mid-1960s, he met the ruler of Dubai, Sheikh Rashid Bin Saeed Al Maktoum, who entrusted him with helping transform Dubai, where he set up IMS (International Marine Services) in 1968. Fayed introduced British companies including the Costain Group (of which he became a director and 30% shareholder), Bernard Sunley &amp; Sons, and Taylor Woodrow to the emirate to carry out construction work.\nRelationship with the Sultan of Brunei.\nAl-Fayed became a financial adviser to the then Sultan of Brunei Omar Ali Saifuddien III in 1966. Al-Fayed told Maureen Orth that he had known Hassanal Bolkiah, who succeeded Saifuddien on his abdication, since the sultan's childhood and that they had met during the building of a trade centre in Brunei. Tiny Rowland told DTI inspectors that Al-Fayed had told him that he negotiated an introduction to the sultan for $500,000 plus a percentage of any resulting business with an Indian holy man and alleged fraudster, Shri Chandra Swamiji Maharaj. Rowland later admitted this account was untrue.\nIn mid-1984 Al-Fayed received several powers of attorney and written authorisations from the sultan to carry out tasks for him. These gave Al-Fayed access to large sums of the sultan's money. The sultan was then the richest man in the world. During this period, the bank of the three Fayed brothers, the Royal Bank of Scotland, received a transfer of hundreds of millions of dollars from Switzerland into their accounts. RBS assumed that the money belonged to the sultan, but Al-Fayed told the bank that his portfolio was separate from the sultan's. The DTI report noted that \"It may be no more than coincidence that this vast increase in disposable wealth followed quickly on the admission of Mohamed to the sultan's confidence ... It is, however, a very powerful coincidence.\"\nUsing a power of attorney, Al-Fayed bought the Dorchester Hotel for the sultan in 1985. Al-Fayed accompanied the sultan to 10 Downing Street to visit Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in January 1985, with sterling in decline and threatening the economy. The sultan, who had moved \u00a35 billion of assets out of pounds, moved the assets back into sterling. Al-Fayed took credit for this and for persuading the sultan to give half a billion pounds of contracts to British defence industries.\nRowland and later business career.\nFayed briefly joined the board of the mining conglomerate Lonrho in 1975 but left after a disagreement. In 1979 he bought the Ritz hotel in Paris, France, for US$30\u00a0million. In 1984 Fayed and his brothers purchased a 30% stake in House of Fraser, a group that included the London store of Harrods, from Tiny Rowland. In 1985, he and his brothers bought the remaining 70% of House of Fraser for \u00a3615 million. Rowland claimed that the Fayed brothers lied about their background and wealth, and he put pressure on the government to investigate them. A DTI inquiry into the Fayeds was launched. The DTI's subsequent report was critical, but no action was taken against the Fayeds, and while many believed the contents of the report, others felt it was politically motivated. Rowland described his relationship with the Fayed family in his book \"A Hero from Zero\". \nIn 1998 Rowland, who died that year, accused Fayed of stealing papers and jewels from his Harrods safe deposit box. Fayed was arrested, along with the director of Harrods security, John MacNamara, and four other employees, but the charges were dropped. Sensitive documents were stolen, along with jewellery, rare stamps and a gold cigarette case, among other items. Fayed settled the dispute with a payment to Rowland's widow; he also sued the Metropolitan Police for false arrest in 2002, but lost the case. In 1994 House of Fraser went public, but Fayed retained ownership of Harrods. He unsuccessfully applied for British citizenship twice, in 1994 and 1999. It has been suggested that his feud with Rowland contributed to the first refusal.\nIn 1996 Al-Fayed bought the rights to the historic British humorous magazine \"Punch\", and it was relaunched later that year, at a cost of \u00a33 million, under new editor Peter McKay. \"Punch\" had previously been published from 1841 to 1992. The relaunch was not successful, with \"Punch\" failing to match its satirical competitor, \"Private Eye\". \"Punch\" folded for a second time in 2002.\nIn January 1997 Al-Fayed established a new political organisation, The People's Trust, to promote a crusade against a \"culture of violence\". The establishment of The People's Trust followed Al-Fayed's support for anti-abortion candidates and the Christian Democrat, the newspaper of the Movement for Christian Democracy. The People's Trust planned to write to all candidates in the 1997 United Kingdom general election in order to identify a group of MPs who put \"their consciences, their constituents and their country at the heart of their politics, rather than their party\" The People's Trust was dissolved in September 1998 after failing to file its accounts.\nAfter \"Vanity Fair\" published Maureen Orth's article \"Holy War at Harrods\", Al-Fayed sued the American magazine for libel in September 1995 but withdrew his suit in 1997. Al-Fayed invited Tom Bower to write his biography in 1996. Bower's biography, \"\" was published in 1998. Al-Fayed announced his intention to sue, but withdrew his suit. Orth and Bower were both attempted victims of entrapment by Al-Fayed, with Al-Fayed's staff offering allegedly stolen documents to the writers.\nCash-for-questions.\nIn 1994, in what became known as the cash-for-questions affair, Fayed revealed the names of MPs he had paid to ask questions in Parliament on his behalf, but who had failed to declare their fees. It saw Conservative MPs Neil Hamilton and Tim Smith leave the government in disgrace, and a Committee on Standards in Public Life established to prevent such corruption occurring again. Fayed also revealed that cabinet minister Jonathan Aitken stayed for free at the Ritz Hotel in Paris at the same time as a group of Saudi arms dealers, leading to Aitken's unsuccessful libel case and later imprisonment for perjury. During this period, Al-Fayed's spokesman was Michael Cole, a former BBC journalist.\nHamilton lost a libel action against Al-Fayed in December 1999 and an appeal against the verdict in December 2000. The former MP has always denied that he was paid by Al-Fayed for asking questions in Parliament. Hamilton's libel action related to a Channel 4 \"Dispatches\" documentary broadcast on 16 January 1997 in which Al-Fayed stated that the MP had received up to \u00a3110,000 in cash and other gratuities for asking parliamentary questions. Hamilton's basis for his appeal was that the original verdict was invalid because Al-Fayed had paid \u00a310,000 for documents stolen from the dustbins of Hamilton's legal representatives by Benjamin Pell.\nIn 2003 Fayed moved from Surrey to Switzerland, alleging a breach in an agreement with the British tax authority. In 2005, he moved back to Britain, saying that he \"regards Britain as home\". He moored a yacht called the \"Sokar\" in Monaco prior to selling it in 2014.\nHouse of Fraser group and Harrods.\nIn 1984, Al-Fayed and his brother Ali, purchased a 30 per cent stake for \u00a3138 million in the House of Fraser, a group that included the Knightsbridge department store Harrods, from Tiny Rowland, the head of Lonrho. Lonrho had been pursuing control of the House of Fraser since 1977, and had been prevented from acquiring the company by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission in a 1981 ruling, although its purchase of \"The Observer\" was approved.\nAfter his purchase of the House of Fraser shares, Al-Fayed demanded that Rowland leave the board of House of Fraser, and courted the chairman of House of Fraser, Roland Smith, who received a retroactive bonus once Al-Fayed had acquired the company. The Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, John Biffen, ruled that Lonrho must give an undertaking not to buy any more shares in the House of Fraser, a ruling that left Roland \"incandescent\". Following the ruling Rowland began to sell shares to Al-Fayed, whom he had met while Al-Fayed was briefly a director of Lonrho. Rowland later said that \"I knew that Tootsie (as Rowland called Al-Fayed) could never afford to purchase the whole of House of Fraser.\"\nAl-Fayed bought the remaining 70 per cent of the House of Fraser in early 1985 for \u00a3615 million, sparking a bitter feud between him and Rowland. The former editor of \"The Observer\", Donald Trelford, believes that Rowland was \"...certainly motivated in his vendetta against Al-Fayed by outrage at having been conned. But he was also convinced that his shareholders had been cheated.\" Rowland felt his shareholders had been cheated as he believed Al-Fayed had used a power of attorney that he held for the Sultan of Brunei, then the richest man in the world, to fund the purchase. Rowland's bitterness also came from his belief that Al-Fayed had lied to the British government about the sources of his wealth, and that the government had failed to investigate Al-Fayed's credentials and had approved the sale without a reference to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (while Lonrho had faced three inquiries under the commission), and that the new trade secretary, Norman Tebbit, had prevented Lonrho from bidding while Al-Fayed's deal went through.\nOrigins of wealth.\nTo take control of the House of Fraser group, the Al-Fayed brothers had to convince the British government that they possessed sufficient assets to securely purchase the group. The Al-Fayeds invented a spurious family history of old money for themselves. Represented by the investment bankers Kleinwort Benson and the law firm Herbert Smith, the Al-Fayeds' bankers submitted to the government a one and a half page summary of their assets, which the government accepted. The Al-Fayed brothers claimed they were from a family of wealthy cotton traders. Their wealth was estimated by their bankers, Kleinwort Benson, to total \"several billion dollars\". A press release by Kleinwort Benson stated that the Al-Fayeds were an \"old established Egyptian family who for more than 100 years were ship owners, land owners and industrialists in Egypt.\" The report said that they were raised in Britain and fled Egypt following the rise to power of Gamal Abdel Nasser.\nThe DTI report came to very different conclusions about the scale of their wealth, stating that; If people had known, for instance, that they only owned one luxury hotel; that their interests in oil exploration consortia were of no current value; that their banking interests consisted of less than 5 percent of the issued share capital of a bank and were worth less than $10 million; that they had no current interests in construction projects: that far from being 'leading shipowners in the liner trade' they only owned two roll-on roll-off 1600 ton cargo ferries; if all these facts had been known people would have been less disposed to believe that the Al-Fayeds really owned the money they were using to buy HOF (House of Fraser)\n\"1988 DTI report into the background of the Fayed brothers\"\nIn March 1985 the Al-Fayeds announced a formal cash offer for House of Fraser of \u00a3615 million, which Kleinwort claimed was untethered by any borrowings. There has not yet been a comprehensive account of Al-Fayeds finances in 1985, but the DTI report claimed that by October 1984 the Al-Fayeds had at least $600 million in the Royal Bank of Scotland and in a Swiss bank at their disposal. \"We were not told the source of any of these funds or given a credible story as to how and where they were obtained\", said the DTI inspectors. The money the Al-Fayeds claimed as their own was apparently used as collateral in order to guarantee a loan of more than \u00a3400 million to buy House of Fraser.\nAl-Fayed told Maureen Orth in an interview that \"If you have a company with tremendous assets like Harrods...you have no problem. You don't need to use cash.\" The first loan, from a Swiss bank, was replaced with another loan secured by House of Fraser shares, the Al-Fayeds had acquired the House of Fraser with none of their own money used to purchase it. The Al-Fayeds ownership of Harrods was complete when the British government issued a press release announcing that it would not refer the Al-Fayeds' bid to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.\nDuring the final stages of the Al-Fayeds purchase of Harrods, Tiny Rowland wrote to the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, Norman Tebbit, repudiating the Al-Fayeds story of the origin of their families wealth. Rowland also enlisted the help of Ashraf Marwan, to aid him in his exposing of the Al-Fayeds. \"The Observer\" newspaper, owned by Rowland, was used to attack the Al-Fayeds. Al-Fayed issued a libel suit against \"The Observer\", and other newspapers critical of the Al-Fayeds were routinely threatened or issued with similar writs. All critical reporting of the Al-Fayeds outside of the \"Observer\" was virtually stopped.\n1988 DTI Report.\nFrom 1985 until 1987 Rowland led a worldwide investigation into Al-Fayed and his acquisition of Harrods. He employed accountants and solicitors, private detectives and freelance journalists in an operation, said to cost many millions of pounds, that was beyond the scope of any newspaper inquiry. Illicit bugging devices were used and some of the money went in bribes to officials to unearth incriminating documents in Egypt, Haiti, Dubai, Brunei, France and Switzerland, allegedly proving fraudulent dealings by Al-Fayed and showing his humble origins and limited net worth.\nThe results of Rowland's investigations into the Al-Fayeds were given to the Sunday newspaper \"The Observer\", owned by Lonrho. \"The Observer\" campaigned for an inquiry into the House of Fraser purchase, and an inquiry by inspectors from the Department of Trade and Industry was delivered in July 1988, but the DTI declined to publish it. Rowland obtained a copy in 1989, and the report was published in a special free sixteen page edition of \"The Observer\" on a Thursday morning. Publishing the report helped put the DTI inspectors' findings into the public arena, helping \"The Observer\"s libel defence, with the aim of pressuring the government into releasing the report. Lawyers from the DTI produced a court injunction and ordered all copies of \"The Observer\"s version of the report to be handed over or pulped. The report was officially published in 1990.\nThe DTI report said that the Al-Fayed brothers had 'dishonestly represented their origins, their wealth, their business interests and their resources to the Secretary of State, to the Office of Fair Trading, to the House of Fraser board and shareholders, and their own advisers' Rowland and the Lohnro group had previously been strongly criticised by a 1976 DTI report, and had been described by Prime Minister Edward Heath as \"an unpleasant and unacceptable face of capitalism\".\nIn 1993 the European Court of Human Rights dismissed a case brought by Al-Fayed and his brothers against the British Government, which had accused them of misrepresentation in the DTI report. They contended that the report had ruined their reputation and was not subject to appeal.\nOwnership of Harrods.\nHarrods had entered a steady decline under Hugh Fraser, yet still accounted for half of the House of Fraser group's profits. Determined to restore Harrods' fortunes, Al-Fayed hired Brian Walsh as manager of House of Fraser. Walsh created divisions in the company, and more than 200 buyers resigned in the next two years. Following arguments with Al-Fayed, Walsh was fired in October 1987. To calm staff, Al-Fayed distributed envelopes containing \u00a32,000 in cash. Following Walsh's departure, Al-Fayed moved his offices onto the fifth floor of Harrods, and took a more hands-on role as chairman of the store. Walsh was replaced by Michael Ellis-Jones, who was fired after eight weeks.\nChristoph Bettermann became the deputy chairman of Harrods in 1990, after having worked for Al-Fayed in Dubai since 1984. Bettermann was approached to work in the Emirate of Sharjah, in April 1991, and in June, Bettermann told Maureen Orth, Al-Fayed \"showed me a written transcript of a phone conversation between the headhunter and me. He accused me of breaking our trust by talking to these people. I told him, 'If you don't trust me, I resign. I cannot trust you if you bugged my phone.'\" Bettermann quit his job at Harrods and went to work for an oil company in Sharjah.\nAl-Fayed wrote to the ruler of Sharjah, and accused Bettermann of stealing large sums of money. Bettermann was cleared by three courts in which Fayed had pressed charges.\nAl-Fayed delighted in retail theatre, and during his 25 years at Harrods dressed as a Harrods doorman, a boy scout and Father Christmas over the years. Celebrities were also hired to open the annual Harrods sale, and Harrods sponsored the annual Royal Windsor Horse Show as it had done since 1982. In 1997 Harrods' sponsorship of the horse show was terminated after Prime Minister John Major had urged the chairman of the show to find a new sponsor to save Queen Elizabeth II from association with Al-Fayed.\nThe artist and designer, William Mitchell, was hired by Al-Fayed to create an 'entertaining retail environment'; this resulted in the creation of an Egyptian Hall on the ground floor of Harrods and, following its success, the Egyptian Escalators, which replaced the store's central lifts. Mitchell also designed memorials for Dodi Fayed and Diana, Princess of Wales at Harrods. Al-Fayed claimed to have invested more than \u00a3400 million restoring Harrods, with \u00a320 million or \u00a375 million being spent on the Egyptian escalator.\nIn 1991 the House of Commons Trade and Industry Committee told the Governor of the Bank of England, Robin Leigh-Pemberton to order the Fayeds to transfer control of the Harrods Bank to trustees, after they found that the Fayeds were not \"fit and proper\" to run the bank. Al-Fayed bought his brother, Saleh, out of his interest in Harrods for \u00a3100 million in 1994. In 1994, before House of Fraser plc was relisted on the London Stock Exchange, Harrods was moved out of the group so that it could remain under the private ownership of Al-Fayed and his family.\nEmployee relations.\nAl-Fayed was concerned by the loyalty of his staff, and employed two young Greek women as spies, to report on their fellow employees. The telephones of the shop workers' trade union, USDAW were bugged. Employees were signed to three-month contracts, and were often fired without agreed compensation, and forced to go to an industrial tribunal. Al-Fayed also listened in to his employees, and secretly recorded conversations about their sex lives.\nAl-Fayed would customarily fire employees who offended his idea of aesthetics, being most offended by overweight staff or black people. To avoid hiring black people, Harrods required applicants to submit photographs. The number of black people employed by Harrods was eventually half the number employed by other London stores.\nFrancesca Bettermann, Harrods former legal counsel, said of Al-Fayed \"He likes a pretty face. He wouldn't hire someone who was ugly. He liked them light-skinned, well educated, English, and young...I remember there was something on the application form that said, 'Your colour, race' I said, 'You're not allowed to put that on the form,' and he said, 'Well, make sure they put proper photos in, then.'\" In 1994 Harrods settled five racial-discrimination cases brought against the company, and, according to trade union officials, between June and September 1994, 23 of the 28 staff fired were black people, who had held mostly menial jobs.\nA florist was rejected for employment by Harrods because she was black. The chairman of the subsequent industrial tribunal condemned Harrods's defence as 'malicious and dishonest', stating 'there was an act of blatant racial discrimination...by a very senior personnel officer working in a very large organisation...there was lying and deceit on the part of Harrods personnel to conceal the act of discrimination. There was dishonest testimony by Harrods personnel'.\nRoyal warrants.\nIn August 2010, in a letter to the \"Daily Telegraph\", Al-Fayed revealed that he had burnt Harrods's royal warrants, after taking them down in 2000. Harrods had held the Royal warrants since 1910. Describing the warrants as a \"curse\", Al-Fayed claimed that business had tripled since their removal. The Duke of Edinburgh removed his warrant in January 2000, and the other warrants were removed from Harrods by Al-Fayed in December, pending their five-yearly review. The Duke of Edinburgh had been banned from Harrods by Al-Fayed. Film of the burning of the warrants in 2009 was shown in the final scene of \"Unlawful Killing\", a film funded by Al-Fayed and directed by Keith Allen.\nSale of Harrods.\nAfter denials that it was for sale, Harrods was sold to Qatar Holdings, the sovereign wealth fund of the emirate of Qatar in May 2010. A spokesman for Al-Fayed said \"in reaching the decision to retire, (Al-Fayed) wished to ensure that the legacy and traditions that he has built up in Harrods would be continued.\" Harrods was sold for \u00a31.5 billion.\nAl-Fayed later said that he decided to sell Harrods following the difficulty in getting his dividend approved by the trustee of the Harrods pension fund. Fayed said \"I'm here every day, I can't take my profit because I have to take a permission of those bloody idiots...I say is this right? Is this logic? Somebody like me? I run a business and I need to take bloody fucking trustee's permission to take my profit\". Al-Fayed was appointed honorary chairman of Harrods, for six months.\nScotland real estate.\nIn 1972 Fayed purchased the Balnagown estate in Easter Ross in northern Scotland. From an initial , Al-Fayed went on to build the estate up to . He invested more than \u00a320\u00a0million in the estate, restored the 14th-century pink Balnagown Castle, and created a tourist accommodation business. The Highlands of Scotland tourist board awarded Al-Fayed the Freedom of the Scottish Highlands in 2002, in recognition of his \"efforts to promote the area\".\nAs an Egyptian with links to Scotland, Al-Fayed funded a 2008 reprint of the 15th-century chronicle \"Scotichronicon\" by Walter Bower. The \"Scotichronicon\" describes how Scota, a daughter of an Egyptian Pharaoh, fled her family and landed in Scotland, bringing with her the Stone of Scone. According to the chronicle, Scotland was later named in her honour. The tale is disputed by modern historians. Al-Fayed later declared that \"The Scots are originally Egyptians and that's the truth.\"\nIn 2009 Al-Fayed revealed that he was a supporter of Scottish independence from the United Kingdom, announcing to the Scots that \"It's time for you to waken up and detach yourselves from the English and their terrible politicians...whatever help is needed for Scotland to regain its independence, I will provide it...when you Scots regain your freedom, I am ready to be your president.\"\nCharity.\nFayed set up the Al Fayed Charitable Foundation in 1987 aiming to help children with life-limiting conditions and children living in poverty. The charity works mainly with charities and hospices for disabled and neglected children in the UK, Thailand, and Mongolia. It works with charities including Francis House Hospice in Manchester, Great Ormond Street Hospital, and ChildLine. In September 1997, West Heath School in Sevenoaks, Kent, United Kingdom, was placed into receivership. West Heath was the former school of Diana, Princess of Wales. Al-Fayed bought the school for \u00a32.5 million in May 1998 and it became the new premises for the Beth Marie Centre for Traumatised Children, which had previously been based in Sevenoaks. The school reopened as The New School at West Heath in September 1998. In 2011 Mohamed Al-Fayed's daughter Camilla, who had worked as an ambassador for the charity for eight years, opened the newly refurbished Zoe's Place baby hospice in West Derby, Liverpool.\nFulham F.C..\nAl-Fayed bought west London professional football club Fulham F.C. for \u00a36.75\u00a0million in 1997. The purchase was made via Bill Muddyman's Muddyman Group. His long-term aim was that Fulham would become a Premier League side within five years. In the 2000\u201301 season, Fulham won the First Division under manager Jean Tigana, winning 101 points and scoring 90 goals, and were promoted to the Premier League. This meant that Al-Fayed had achieved his Premier League aim a year ahead of schedule. By 2002, Fulham were competing in European football, winning the Intertoto Cup and participating in the UEFA Cup. Fulham reached the 2010 UEFA Europa League final, which they lost to Atletico Madrid, and continued to play in the Premier League throughout Al-Fayed's tenure as owner, which ended in 2013.\nFulham temporarily left Craven Cottage while it was being upgraded to meet modern safety standards. There were fears that the club would not return to the Cottage after it was revealed that Al-Fayed had sold the first right to build on the ground to a property development firm.\nFulham lost a legal case against former manager Tigana in 2004 after Al-Fayed had wrongly alleged that Tigana had overpaid more than \u00a37m for new players and had negotiated transfers in secret. In 2009, Al-Fayed said that he was in favour of a wage cap for footballers, and criticised the management of The Football Association and Premier League as \"run by donkeys who don't understand business, who are dazzled by money.\"\nA statue of the American entertainer Michael Jackson was unveiled by Al-Fayed in April 2011 at Craven Cottage. In 1999 Jackson had attended a league game against Wigan Athletic at the stadium. Following criticism of the statue, Al-Fayed said \"If some stupid fans don't understand and appreciate such a gift this guy gave to the world they can go to hell. I don't want them to be fans.\" The statue was taken down by the club's new owners in 2013; Al-Fayed blamed the club's subsequent relegation from the Premier League on the 'bad luck' brought by its removal. Al-Fayed then donated the statue to the National Football Museum. In March 2019, the statue was removed from the museum, with a spokesperson saying it had been planned for \"several months\" to introduce exhibits that \"better represent\" football; the removal followed accusations of child sexual abuse by Jackson in the documentary \"Leaving Neverland\".\nUnder Al-Fayed Fulham F.C. was owned by Mafco Holdings, based in the tax haven of Bermuda and in turn owned by Al-Fayed and his family. By 2011, Al-Fayed had lent Fulham F.C. \u00a3187\u00a0million in interest free loans. In July 2013, it was announced that Al-Fayed had sold the club to Pakistani American businessman Shahid Khan, who owns the NFL's Jacksonville Jaguars.\nBusiness interests.\nAl-Fayed's business interests included:\nHis major business purchases included:\nMedia interests.\nIn 1996 Al-Fayed established Liberty Publishing, with the goal of the company stated as \"to launch and acquire or take strategic interests in significant media businesses\".\nThe chairman of Liberty Publishing was Stewart Steven, the former editor of the \"Evening Standard\", with John Dux the chief executive, a former managing director of News International. Al-Fayed had failed in bids to buy the newspaper \"Today\" from Lonrho in 1986 and from News International in 1995. Al-Fayed believed that the British government had put pressure on Rupert Murdoch, CEO of News International not to sell the newspaper to him. Andrew Neil was recruited by Liberty Publishing, and helped agree a \u00a34 million takeover of London News Radio. The takeover later collapsed.\nSteven dined with Hugo Young, chairman of the Scott Trust at the Garrick Club, and offered a cheque for \u00a317 million from Al-Fayed for \"The Observer\" newspaper. Young declined this offer, and another of \u00a325 million. A women-only radio station, Viva Radio, was bought for \u00a33 million in May 1996. Viva Radio was renamed Liberty Radio, and broadcast commentaries of Fulham F.C.'s home and away games. The station was sold to UCKG in 2000. Due to debts of \u00a36.5 million, Liberty Publishing was wound down by Al-Fayed's brother, Ali, in 1996. Steven, Dux and Mike Hollingsworth were fired, but Andrew Neil was retained as a consultant.\nProperty.\nAl-Fayed owned 55 and 60 Park Lane, and a building on South Street, Mayfair. All three buildings were secretly connected to the Dorchester Hotel, which Al-Fayed purchased for Hassanal Bolkiah, the Sultan of Brunei.\nIn 1995 Westminster City Council believed that Hyde Park Residences, the company letting 170 luxury flats at 55 and 60 Park Lane, had been wrongly reporting the flats as let on long leases to avoid paying higher business rates due on short tenancies. The council demanded an additional \u00a31.1 million, and Al-Fayed believed that the letting agent, Sandra Lewis-Glass had betrayed his confidence to the council. After bugging Lewis-Glass's telephone calls and placing her under surveillance, John McNamara, the head of Al-Fayed's security and a former Metropolitan Police officer, alleged to police that she had stolen two floppy disks worth 80 pence. Denying the accusation, Lewis-Glass was released without charge, and later sued for wrongful dismissal, winning \u00a313,500.\nIn the early 1970s Al-Fayed purchased the Castle St. Therese in the Parc de St Tropez on the French Riviera, a chalet in Gstaad, Switzerland, and Barrow Green Court and farm, near Oxted, Surrey.\nIn \"Bocardo SA v Star Energy UK\" the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom denied Al-Fayed compensation after an energy company, Star Energy, had drilled for oil under his Surrey estate. Al-Fayed originally won a share of the oil proceeds at the High Court, but was later told by appeal judges he could only claim damages. Bocardo SA was a company owned by Al-Fayed that owned his estates in Scotland and Surrey; it was based in Liechtenstein.\nPersonal life.\nFayed was married from 1954 to 1956 to Samira Khashoggi. He worked with his brother-in-law, Saudi Arabian arms dealer and businessman Adnan Khashoggi. In 1985, Fayed married the Finnish socialite and former model Heini Wath\u00e9n, with whom he had four children, including Omar.\nSometime in the early 1970s, he began using the prefix \"al-\" () in his name, rendering his name in English as \"al-Fayed\" rather than simply \"Fayed\". In Arabic names, the word \"al-\", in conjunction with the name of an ancestor, means \"family of\" or \"House of\". This aristocratic prefix led to \"Private Eye\" magazine nicknaming him the \"Phoney Pharaoh\". His brothers Ali and Salah followed suit at the time of their acquisition of the House of Fraser in the 1980s, though by the late 1980s, both had backtracked on the practice.\nMax Hastings, the former editor of the \"Daily Telegraph\", wrote that Al-Fayed had \"harried\" Conrad Black, the former owner of the \"Daily Telegraph\", \"in pursuit of his demand to be referred to in our newspaper as \"Al Fayed\". I sent the chairman a note, explaining that this was a long-running saga: \"The Fayeds have been seeking for years to call themselves Al Fayed, just as a socially ambitious Frenchman might seek to style himself de Fayed, or a German von Fayed ... At one level, it is harmless if the Fayeds wish to call themselves kings of Sheba, but I always feel determined to demonstrate that we will not be threatened.\"\nDeath of Dodi Fayed.\nBackground and relationship with Diana, Princess of Wales.\nLady Diana Spencer married Charles, Prince of Wales, then heir apparent to the British throne in 1981, becoming Princess of Wales. She was an international celebrity and a frequent visitor to Harrods in the 1980s. Al-Fayed and Dodi first met Diana and Charles in July 1986 when they were introduced at a polo tournament sponsored by Harrods.\nDiana and Charles divorced in 1996. She was hosted by Al-Fayed in the south of France in mid-1997, with her sons, Princes William and Harry. For the holiday, Fayed bought a 195\u00a0ft yacht, the \"Jonikal\" (later renamed the \"Sokar\"). Dodi and Diana later began a private cruise on the \"Jonikal\" and paparazzi photographs of the couple in an embrace were published. Diana's friend, the journalist Richard Kay, confirmed that Diana was involved in \"her first serious romance\" since her divorce.\nDodi and Diana went on a second private cruise on the \"Jonikal\" in the third week of August, and returned from Sardinia to Paris on 30 August. Later that day, the couple privately dined at the Ritz, after the behaviour of the press caused them to cancel a restaurant reservation. They planned to spend the night at Dodi's apartment near the Arc de Triomphe. In an attempt to deceive the paparazzi, a decoy car left the front of the hotel, while Diana and Dodi departed from the rear of the hotel in a Mercedes-Benz S280 driven by concierge Henri Paul. Five minutes later, the car crashed in the Pont de l'Alma tunnel. Dodi and Paul were found dead at this location; Diana died later in hospital. British bodyguard Trevor Rees-Jones, who sustained a serious head injury, was the sole survivor of the crash. Fayed arrived in Paris a day later and viewed Dodi's body, which was returned to the United Kingdom for an Islamic funeral.\nConspiracy theories.\nFrom February 1998, Al-Fayed maintained that the crash was a result of a conspiracy, and later contended that the crash was orchestrated by MI6 on the instructions of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. His claims were dismissed by a French judicial investigation, but Fayed appealed the verdict.\nThe British Operation Paget, a Metropolitan police inquiry that concluded in 2006, also found no evidence of a conspiracy. To Operation Paget, Al-Fayed made 175 \"conspiracy claims\".\nAn inquest headed by Lord Justice Scott Baker into the deaths of Diana and Dodi began at the Royal Courts of Justice, London, on 2 October 2007 and lasted for six months. It was a continuation of the original inquest that had begun in 2004.\nAt the Scott Baker inquest, Fayed accused the Duke of Edinburgh, the Prince of Wales, Lady Sarah McCorquodale, her sister, and numerous others, of plotting to kill the Princess of Wales. Their motive, he claimed, was that they could not tolerate the idea of the Princess marrying a Muslim.\nAl-Fayed first claimed that the Princess was pregnant to the \"Daily Express\" in May 2001, and that he was the only person who had been told. Witnesses at the inquest who said the Princess was not pregnant, and could not have been, were part of the conspiracy according to Al-Fayed. Fayed's testimony at the inquest was roundly condemned in the press as farcical. Members of the British Government's Intelligence and Security Committee accused Fayed of turning the inquest into a 'circus' and called for it to be ended prematurely. Lawyers representing Al-Fayed later accepted at the inquest that there was no direct evidence that either the Duke of Edinburgh or MI6 were involved in any murder conspiracy involving Diana or Dodi. A few days before Al-Fayed's appearance, John MacNamara, a former senior detective at Scotland Yard and Al-Fayed's investigator for five years from 1997, was forced to admit on 14 February 2008 that he had no evidence to suggest foul play, except for the assertions Al-Fayed had made to him. His admissions also related to the lack of evidence for Al-Fayed's claims of the Princess's pregnancy and the couple's engagement.\nThe jury verdict, given on 7 April 2008, was that Diana and Dodi were \"unlawfully killed\" through the grossly negligent driving of Henri Paul, who was drunk, and the pursuing vehicles.\nAl-Fayed's lawyers accepted that there was no evidence to support the assertion that Diana was illegally embalmed to conceal pregnancy, or that a pregnancy could be confirmed by any medical evidence. They also accepted that there was no evidence to support the assertion that the French emergency and medical services had played any role in a conspiracy to harm Diana. Following the Baker inquest, Al-Fayed said that he was abandoning his conspiracy campaign, and would accept the jury's verdict.\nJournalist Dominic Lawson wrote in \"The Independent\" in 2008 that Al-Fayed sought to concoct \"a conspiracy to cover up the true circumstances\" of fatalities caused by the crash \"involving an intoxicated and over-excited driver (an employee of Mohamed Fayed's Paris Ritz)\". He \"had remarkable success in persuading elements of the tabloid press, notably the \"Daily Express\", to give the conspiracy a fair wind.\"\nAl-Fayed financially supported \"Unlawful Killing\" (2011), a documentary film presenting his version of events. It was not formally released because of the potential for libel suits.\nNationality.\nAl-Fayed was born an Egyptian citizen, entered Haiti on a Kuwaiti passport, and left Haiti with a Haitian diplomatic passport with which he entered the United Kingdom in 1964. In 1970 Al-Fayed informed Mahdi Al Tajir that he and his brothers' Haitian diplomatic passports had expired, and their Egyptian passports made it difficult for them to obtain visas in many countries. Tajir secured Emirati passports for Al-Fayed, but not Emirati nationality. On the passport documents Al-Fayed had his date of birth changed from 1929 to 1933, making himself four years younger. His two brothers reduced their ages by ten years on their new passports.\nThe rulers of Dubai, the Al Maktoum family, had refused to renew the Fayeds' passports in 1993, and so they reverted to travelling on their original Egyptian passports. Mohamed and Ali Al-Fayed applied for British citizenship in early 1993. Ali's application was supported by Gordon Reece and Peter Hordern, and Mohamed's by Lord Bramall and Jeffrey Archer. The Al-Fayed brothers' application for British citizenship was rejected in December 1993, on the basis that the DTI report disqualified them from citizenship. Michael Howard, the Conservative home secretary, asked for the decision to be reviewed, fearing renewed embarrassment over his connections with alleged fraudster Harry Landy, which surfaced during the DTI investigation. The application was rejected again in February 1995, and in 1996 the High court declared that the home secretary could not deny, without explanation, the Al-Fayeds' citizenship requests. The Home Office later abandoned its appeal to the House of Lords against the High Court's decision.\nIn 1997, Jack Straw, the home secretary in the new Labour government, reconsidered the Al-Fayeds' citizenship request, but rejected Mohamed Al-Fayed's request in May 1999. Ali Al-Fayed had had his request for citizenship granted in March 1999.\nThe rejection was attributed to Al-Fayed's admitting that he bribed politicians and his breaking in to safety deposit boxes in Harrods. Al-Fayed described the decision as \"perverse\" and said he was a victim of the British establishment and \"zombie\" politicians.\nDeath.\nAl-Fayed died in London on 30 August 2023, aged 94. His cause of death was listed as old age and was announced on 1 September. He was buried that day at Barrow Green Court alongside Dodi, after a funeral service during Friday prayers at London Central Mosque.\nSexual misconduct allegations.\nAl-Fayed has been accused by multiple women of sexual harassment and assault. Young women applying for employment at Harrods were often subjected to HIV tests and gynaecological examinations. They were then selected to spend the weekend with Al-Fayed in Paris.\nEarly allegations.\nIn \"Holy War at Harrods\", a 1995 profile of Al-Fayed for \"Vanity Fair\", Maureen Orth described how, according to former employees, \"Fayed regularly walked the store on the lookout for young, attractive women to work in his office. Those who rebuffed him would often be subjected to crude, humiliating comments about their appearance or dress... A dozen ex-employees I spoke with said that Fayed would chase secretaries around the office and sometimes try to stuff money down women's blouses\". Al-Fayed sued \"Vanity Fair\", resulting in a settlement with no damages paid, but requiring \"Vanity Fair\" to place all evidence in locked storage. \"Vanity Fair\" chose to settle in part out of sympathy for Princess Diana's fatal crash.\nIn December 1997, the ITV current affairs programme \"The Big Story\" broadcast testimonies from former Harrods employees who spoke of how Al-Fayed routinely sexually harassed women in similar ways. Al-Fayed was interviewed under caution by the Metropolitan Police after an allegation of sexual assault against a 15-year-old schoolgirl in October 2008. The case was dropped by the Crown Prosecution Service when they found there was no realistic chance of conviction due to conflicting statements.\nA December 2017 episode of Channel 4's \"Dispatches\" programme alleged that Al-Fayed sexually harassed three female Harrods employees, and attempted to \"groom\" them. One of the employees was aged 17 at the time. Cheska Hill-Wood waived her right to anonymity to be interviewed for the programme. The programme alleged Al-Fayed targeted young employees over a 13-year period.\nEarly media scrutiny of sexual misconduct allegations against Al-Fayed was curtailed by his frequent threats of litigation. Al-Fayed developed a reputation for spending large sums on litigation against media outlets reporting on sexual assault allegations against him. The lack of scrutiny was also attributed to the actions of Al-Fayed's security chief, John MacNamara, who allegedly threatened and surveilled potential witnesses and victims.\nSexual misconduct scandal.\nIn September 2024, BBC News reported that more than 20 women who had worked at Harrods have alleged that Al-Fayed sexually assaulted them; five of these women accused him of raping them. Former manager of the women's club Fulham L.F.C., Gaute Haugenes said in September 2024 that to protect players from Al-Fayed they were not allowed to be left alone with him. He also said that members of staff were aware that he \"liked young, blonde girls\". A documentary, \"Al-Fayed: Predator at Harrods\" was broadcast on BBC Two which featured interviews with the women and explored evidence of the failure by Harrods to properly investigate the claims and the potential \"cover-up\" of abuse allegations. On 21 September 2024, Dean Armstrong KC, a barrister representing alleged victims, said his team had 37 clients, but that he had been contacted by 150 individuals with claims about Al-Fayed. \nOn 26 September 2024, the Metropolitan Police said they would be exploring to see if anyone else should be pursued for criminal offences following the allegations made against Al-Fayed. On the same day, Harrods's managing director, Michael Ward, said Al Fayed \"presided over a toxic culture of secrecy, intimidation, fear of repercussion and sexual misconduct\".\nBy 26 September it was thought that around 200 women, who previously worked for Al Fayed, had spoken to investigators with claims of rape and sexual assault.\nIn addition to reported sexual assault issues at Harrods, on 26 September sexual assault allegations were also made relating to Al-Fayed's ownership of Fulham FC between 1997 and 2013. On 27 September lawyers representing those making allegations against Al-Fayed said they were working with 60 women.\nOn 11 October the Metropolitan Police revealed that 40 new allegations, from 40 different people, including sexual assault and rape, had been made against Al-Fayed, covering a period between 1979 and 2013.\nOn 18 October, former Fulham Ladies F.C. captain Ronnie Gibbons said that she had been groped twice by Al Fayed and that he had forcefully tried to kiss her in his private office at the Harrods store in 2000, when she was 20 years old. By 21 October, Harrods announced that they were in the process of settling more than 250 claims for compensation brought by women who had alleged sexual misconduct by Al Fayed. By 31 October, 400 alleged victims or witnesses had presented themselves to lawyers concerning allegations of sexual misconduct. It was described, at the time, by a lawyer representing the Justice for Harrods Survivors group as \"the worst case of corporate abuse of women the world has ever seen\". Some women claimed that they had been sexually abused by both Al Fayed and his brother Salah, who died of pancreatic cancer in 2010.\nIn November 2024, it was found that the Metropolitan Police were told about allegations of sexual assault against Al Fayed ten years earlier than it had acknowledged. The Met had claimed that it first received such allegations in 2005. However, in 1995, the Met had received such allegations from Samantha Ramsay, who is now deceased. The BBC reported that \"Samantha's family say the Met dismissed her claims. They believe that multiple women could have been saved from sexual abuse if the force had acted.\" The Met claimed that there was no history of Samantha's allegations on their computer system, \"but that in 1995 some reports were paper-based and might not have been transferred.\" Ramsay's sister, Emma, recalled the police as having said at the time: \"We've added it to a pile of other female names that we've got that have made the same complaint against Mohamed Al Fayed.\" The Metropolitan Police has said it is investigating more than five people it believes may have assisted or enabled Al Fayed's sexual offences. By the end of November 2024, the inquiry was looking into alleged offences between 1977 and 2014 with the youngest victim aged 13.\nAl-Fayed's son, Omar, said that, in the light of the allegations, he was \"horrified\" and that they had \"thrown into question the loving memory I had of (my father)\". He also expressed his sorrow for the victims and stated that they \"and public deserve full transparency and accountability\".\nOn 13 August 2025, the BBC reported that 146 women and men came forward reporting about crimes regarding the Metropolitan Police's investigation. This is double the number reported back in October 2024. Harrods, that is now under new ownership, has offered victims, compensation of up to \u00a3385,000 and a formal apology for Mohammed Al Fayed's alleged crimes of the past.\nIn media.\nAl-Fayed appeared on an episode of \"Da Ali G Show\" in 2000, and the \"Howard Stern Show\" in 2007. Al-Fayed appeared on the 2011 edition of British \"Celebrity Big Brother\", and set the housemates a task based on dressing up as ancient Egyptian mummies.\nIn the 2007 BBC sitcom \"Gavin &amp; Stacey\", Nessa recounts having a sexual relationship with Al-Fayed.\nAl-Fayed was portrayed by Salim Daw in seasons 5 and 6 of \"The Crown\". He expressed \"deep sadness\" and a connection to Al-Fayed upon the businessman's 2023 death.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
