{"id": "15641", "revid": "40039457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15641", "title": "Joseph Stalin", "text": "Leader of the Soviet Union from 1924 to 1953\nJoseph Vissarionovich Stalin (n\u00e9\u00a0Dzhugashvili; 18 December\u00a0[O.S. 6 December]\u00a01878\u00a0\u2013 5 March 1953) was a Soviet politician, dictator and revolutionary who led the Soviet Union from 1924 until his death in 1953. He held office as General Secretary of the Communist Party from 1922 to 1952 and as premier from 1941 until his death. Despite initially governing the country as part of a collective leadership, he eventually consolidated power to become a dictator by the 1930s. Stalin codified the party's official interpretation of Marxism as Marxism\u2013Leninism, and his version of it is referred to as Stalinism.\nBorn into a poor Georgian family in Gori, Russian Empire, Stalin attended the Tiflis Theological Seminary before joining the Marxist Russian Social Democratic Labour Party. He raised funds for Vladimir Lenin's Bolshevik faction through bank robberies and other crimes, and edited the party's newspaper, \"Pravda\". He was repeatedly arrested and underwent several exiles to Siberia. After the Bolsheviks seized power in the October Revolution of 1917, Stalin served as a member of the Politburo, and from 1922 used his position as General Secretary to gain control over the party bureaucracy. After Lenin's death in 1924, Stalin won the leadership struggle over rivals including Leon Trotsky. Stalin's doctrine of socialism in one country became central to the party's ideology, and his five-year plans starting in 1928 led to forced agricultural collectivisation, rapid industrialisation, and a centralised command economy. His policies contributed to a famine in 1932\u20131933 which killed millions, including in the Holodomor in Ukraine. Between 1936 and 1938, Stalin executed hundreds of thousands of his real and perceived political opponents in the Great Purge. Under his regime, an estimated 18 million people passed through the Gulag system of forced labour camps, and more than six million people, including kulaks and entire ethnic groups, were deported to remote areas of the country.\nStalin promoted Marxism\u2013Leninism abroad through the Communist International and supported European anti-fascist movements. In 1939, his government signed the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact with Nazi Germany, enabling the Soviet invasion of Poland at the start of World War II. Germany broke the pact by invading the Soviet Union in 1941, leading Stalin to join the Allies. The Red Army, with Stalin as its commander-in-chief, repelled the German invasion and captured Berlin in 1945, ending the war in Europe. The Soviet Union established Soviet-aligned states in Eastern Europe, and with the United States emerged as a global superpower, with the two countries entering a period of rivalry known as the Cold War. Stalin presided over post-war reconstruction and the first Soviet atomic bomb test in 1949. During these years, the country experienced another famine and a state-sponsored antisemitic campaign culminating in the \"doctors' plot\". In 1953, Stalin died after a stroke. He was succeeded as leader by Georgy Malenkov and eventually Nikita Khrushchev, who in 1956 denounced Stalin's rule and began a campaign of \"de-Stalinisation\".\nOne of the 20th century's most significant figures, Stalin has a deeply contested legacy. During his rule, he was the subject of a pervasive personality cult within the international Marxist\u2013Leninist movement, which revered him as a champion of socialism and the working class. Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, Stalin has retained a degree of popularity in some of the post-Soviet states (particularly Russia and Georgia) as an economic moderniser and victorious wartime leader who transformed the Soviet Union into an industrialised superpower. Conversely, his regime has been widely condemned for overseeing mass repression and man-made famine which resulted in the suffering and deaths of millions of Soviet citizens.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life.\nStalin was born on 18 December\u00a0[O.S. 6 December]\u00a01878 in Gori, Georgia, then part of the Tiflis Governorate of the Russian Empire. An ethnic Georgian, his birth name was Ioseb Besarionis dze Jughashvili (Russified as Iosif Vissarionovich Dzhugashvili). His parents were Besarion Jughashvili and Ekaterine Geladze; Stalin was their third child and the only one to survive past infancy. After Besarion's shoemaking workshop went into decline, the family fell into poverty, and he became an alcoholic who beat his wife and son. Ekaterine and her son left the home by 1883, moving through nine different rented rooms. In 1888, Stalin enrolled at the Gori Church School where he excelled. He faced health problems: an 1884 smallpox infection left him with facial scars, and at age 12 he was seriously injured when he was struck by a phaeton, causing a lifelong disability in his left arm.\nIn 1894, Stalin enrolled as a trainee Russian Orthodox priest at the Tiflis Theological Seminary, enabled by a scholarship. He initially achieved high grades, but lost interest in his studies. Stalin became influenced by Nikolay Chernyshevsky's pro-revolutionary novel \"What Is to Be Done?\", and Alexander Kazbegi's \"The Patricide\", with Stalin adopting the nickname \"Koba\" from its bandit protagonist. After reading \"Das Kapital\", Stalin focused on Karl Marx's philosophy of Marxism, which was on the rise as a variety of socialism opposed to the Tsarist authorities. He began attending secret workers' meetings, and left the seminary in April 1899.\n1899\u20131905: Russian Social Democratic Labour Party.\nDuring October 1899, he worked as a meteorologist at the Tiflis observatory. He attracted a group of socialist supporters, and co-organised a secret workers' meeting where he convinced many to strike on May Day 1900. The empire's secret police, the Okhrana, became aware of Stalin's activities and attempted to arrest him in March 1901, but he went into hiding during which he lived off donations from friends. He helped plan a demonstration in Tiflis on May Day 1901, at which 3,000 marchers clashed with the authorities. Stalin was elected to the Tiflis Committee of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP), a Marxist party founded in 1898, in November 1901.\nThat month, he travelled to Batumi. His militant rhetoric proved divisive among the city's Marxists, some of whom suspected that he was an \"agent provocateur\". Stalin began working at the Rothschild refinery storehouse, where he co-organised two workers' strikes. After the strike leaders were arrested, he co-organised a mass demonstration which led to the storming of the prison. Stalin was arrested in April 1902 and sentenced to three years exile in Siberia, arriving in Novaya Uda in November 1903. After one failed attempt, Stalin escaped from his exile in January 1904 and travelled to Tiflis, where he co-edited the Marxist newspaper \"Proletariatis Brdzola\" (\"Proletarian Struggle\") with Filipp Makharadze. During his exile, the RSDLP had become divided between Vladimir Lenin's \"Bolshevik\" faction and Julius Martov's \"Mensheviks\". Stalin, who detested many Mensheviks in Georgia, aligned himself with the Bolsheviks.\n1905\u20131912: Revolution of 1905 and aftermath.\nIn January 1905, government troops massacred protesters in Saint Petersburg and unrest spread across the Empire in the Revolution of 1905. Stalin was in Baku in February when ethnic violence broke out between Armenians and Azeris, and he formed Bolshevik \"battle squads\" which he used to keep the city's warring ethnic factions apart. His armed squads attacked local police and troops, raided arsenals, and raised funds via protection rackets. In November 1905, the Georgian Bolsheviks elected Stalin as one of their delegates to a Bolshevik conference in Tampere, Finland, where he met Lenin. Although Stalin held Lenin in deep respect, he vocally disagreed with his view that the Bolsheviks should field candidates for the 1906 election to the State Duma; Stalin viewed parliamentary process as a waste of time. In April 1906, he attended the RSDLP's Fourth Congress in Stockholm, where the party\u2014then led by a Menshevik majority\u2014agreed that it would not raise funds using armed robbery. Lenin and Stalin disagreed with this, and privately discussed continuing the robberies for the Bolshevik cause.\nStalin married Kato Svanidze in July 1906, and in March 1907 she gave birth to their son Yakov. Stalin, who by now had established himself as \"Georgia's leading Bolshevik\", organised the June 1907 robbery of a bank stagecoach in Tiflis to fund the Bolsheviks. His operatives ambushed the convoy in Erivansky Square with guns and homemade bombs; around 40 people were killed. Stalin settled in Baku with his wife and son, where Mensheviks confronted him about the robbery and voted to expel him from the RSDLP, but he ignored them. Stalin secured Bolshevik domination of Baku's RSDLP branch and edited two Bolshevik newspapers. In November 1907, his wife died of typhus, and he left his son with her family in Tiflis. In Baku he reassembled his gang, which attacked Black Hundreds and raised money through racketeering, counterfeiting, robberies and kidnapping the children of wealthy figures for ransom.\nIn March 1908, Stalin was arrested and imprisoned in Baku. He led the imprisoned Bolsheviks, organised discussion groups, and ordered the killing of suspected informants. He was sentenced to two years of exile in Solvychegodsk in northern Russia, arriving there in February 1909. In June, Stalin escaped to Saint Petersburg, but was arrested again in March 1910 and sent back to Solvychegodsk. In June 1911, Stalin was given permission to move to Vologda, where he stayed for two months. He then escaped to Saint Petersburg, where he was arrested again in September 1911 and sentenced to a further three years of exile in Vologda.\n1912\u20131917: Rise to the Central Committee and \"Pravda\".\nIn January 1912, the first Bolshevik Central Committee was elected at the Prague Conference. Lenin and Grigory Zinoviev decided to co-opt Stalin to the committee, which Stalin (while still in exile in Vologda) agreed to. Lenin believed that Stalin, as a Georgian, would help secure support from the empire's minority ethnicities. \nIn February 1912, Stalin again escaped to Saint Petersburg, where he was tasked with converting the Bolshevik weekly newspaper, \"Zvezda\" (\"Star\") into a daily, \"Pravda\" (\"Truth\"). The new newspaper was launched in April 1912 and Stalin's role as editor was kept secret. In May 1912, he was again arrested and sentenced to three years of exile in Siberia. In July, he arrived in Narym, where he shared a room with fellow Bolshevik Yakov Sverdlov. After two months, they escaped to Saint Petersburg, where Stalin continued work on \"Pravda\".\nAfter the October 1912 Duma elections, Stalin wrote articles calling for reconciliation between the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks; Lenin criticised him and he relented. In January 1913, Stalin travelled to Vienna, where he researched the \"national question\" of how the Bolsheviks should deal with the Empire's national and ethnic minorities. His article \"Marxism and the National Question\" was first published in the March, April, and May 1913 issues of the Bolshevik journal \"Prosveshcheniye\" under the pseudonym \"K. Stalin\". The alias, which he had used since 1912, is derived from the Russian for steel (\"stal\"), and has been translated as \"Man of Steel\". In February 1913, Stalin was again arrested in Saint Petersburg and sentenced to four years of exile in Turukhansk in Siberia, where he arrived in August. Still concerned over a potential escape, the authorities moved him to Kureika in March 1914.\n1917: Russian Revolution.\nWhile Stalin was in exile, Russia entered the First World War, and in October 1916 he and other exiled Bolsheviks were conscripted into the Russian Army. They arrived in Krasnoyarsk in February 1917, where a medical examiner ruled Stalin unfit for service due to his crippled arm. Stalin was required to serve four more months of his exile and successfully requested to serve it in Achinsk. Stalin was in the city when the February Revolution took place; the Tsar abdicated and the Empire became a \"de facto\" republic. In a celebratory mood, Stalin travelled by train to Petrograd (as Saint Petersburg had been renamed) in March. He assumed control of \"Pravda\" alongside Lev Kamenev, and was appointed as a Bolshevik delegate to the executive committee of the Petrograd Soviet, an influential workers' council.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe existing government of landlords and capitalists must be replaced by a new government, a government of workers and peasants.The existing pseudo-government which was not elected by the people and which is not accountable to the people must be replaced by a government recognised by the people, elected by representatives of the workers, soldiers and peasants and held accountable to their representatives.\nStalin's editorial in \"Pravda\", October 1917\nStalin helped organise the July Days uprising, an armed display of strength by supporters of the Bolsheviks. After the demonstration was suppressed, the Provisional Government initiated a crackdown on the party, raiding \"Pravda\". Stalin smuggled Lenin out of the paper's office and took charge of his safety, moving him between Petrograd safe houses before smuggling him to nearby Razliv. In Lenin's absence, Stalin continued editing \"Pravda\" and served as acting leader of the Bolsheviks, overseeing the party's Sixth Congress. Lenin began calling for the Bolsheviks to seize power by toppling the Provisional Government, a plan which was supported by Stalin and fellow senior Bolshevik Leon Trotsky, but opposed by Kamenev, Zinoviev, and other members.\nOn 24 October, police raided the Bolshevik newspaper offices, smashing machinery and presses; Stalin salvaged some of the equipment. In the early hours of 25 October, Stalin joined Lenin in a Central Committee meeting in Petrograd's Smolny Institute, from where the Bolshevik coup\u2014the October Revolution\u2014was directed. Bolshevik militia seized Petrograd's power station, main post office, state bank, telephone exchange, and several bridges. A Bolshevik-controlled ship, the \"Aurora\", opened fire on the Winter Palace; the Provisional Government's assembled delegates surrendered and were arrested. Stalin, who had been tasked with briefing the Bolshevik delegates of the Second Congress of Soviets about the situation, had not played a publicly visible role. Trotsky and other later opponents used this as evidence his role had been insignificant, although historians reject this, citing his role as a member of the Central Committee and as an editor of \"Pravda\".\nIn Lenin's government.\n1917\u20131918: People's Commissar for Nationalities.\nOn 26 October 1917, Lenin declared himself chairman of the new government, the Council of People's Commissars (Sovnarkom). Stalin supported Lenin's decision not to form a coalition with the Socialist Revolutionary Party. He became part of an informal leadership group alongside Lenin, Trotsky, and Sverdlov, and his importance within the Bolshevik ranks grew. Stalin's office was near Lenin's in the Smolny Institute, and he and Trotsky had direct access to Lenin without an appointment. Stalin co-signed Lenin's decrees shutting down hostile newspapers, and co-chaired the committee drafting a constitution for the newly-formed Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic. He supported Lenin's formation of the Cheka security service and the Red Terror, arguing that state violence was an effective tool for capitalist powers. Unlike some Bolsheviks, Stalin never expressed concern about the Cheka's rapid expansion and the Red Terror.\nHaving left his role as \"Pravda\" editor, Stalin was appointed the People's Commissar for Nationalities. He appointed Nadezhda Alliluyeva as his secretary, and married her in early 1919. In November 1917, he signed the Decree on Nationality, granting ethnic minorities the right to secession and self-determination. He travelled to Helsinki to meet with the Finnish Social Democrats, and granted Finland's request for independence from Russia in December. Due to the threats posed by the First World War, in March 1918 the government relocated from Petrograd to the Moscow Kremlin. Stalin supported Lenin's desire to sign an armistice with the Central Powers; Stalin thought this necessary because he\u2014unlike Lenin\u2014was unconvinced that Europe was on the verge of proletarian revolution. The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was signed in March 1918, ceding vast territories and angering many; the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries withdrew from the coalition government. The Bolsheviks were renamed the Russian Communist Party.\n1918\u20131921: Military command.\nIn May 1918, during the intensifying Russian Civil War, Sovnarkom sent Stalin to Tsaritsyn to take charge of food procurement in Southern Russia. Eager to prove himself as a commander, he took control of regional military operations and befriended Kliment Voroshilov and Semyon Budyonny, who later formed the core of his military support base. Stalin sent large numbers of Red Army troops to battle the region's White armies, resulting in heavy losses and drawing Lenin's concern. In Tsaritsyn, Stalin commanded the local Cheka branch to execute suspected counter-revolutionaries, often without trial, and purged the military and food collection agencies of middle-class specialists, who were also executed. His use of state violence was at a greater scale than most Bolshevik leaders approved of, for instance, he ordered several villages torched to ensure compliance with his food procurement program.\nIn December 1918, Stalin was sent to Perm to lead an inquiry into how Alexander Kolchak's White forces had been able to decimate Red troops there. He returned to Moscow in January 1919, before being assigned to the Western Front at Petrograd. When the Red Third Regiment defected, he ordered the public execution of captured defectors. In September he returned to the Southern Front. During the war, Stalin proved his worth to the Central Committee by displaying decisiveness and determination. However, he also disregarded orders and repeatedly threatened to resign when affronted. In November 1919, the government awarded him the Order of the Red Banner for his service.\nThe Bolsheviks won the main phase of the civil war by the end of 1919. By that time, Sovnarkom had turned its attention to spreading proletarian revolution abroad, forming the Communist International in March 1919; Stalin attended its inaugural ceremony. Although Stalin did not share Lenin's belief that Europe's proletariat were on the verge of revolution, he acknowledged that Soviet Russia remained vulnerable. In February 1920, he was appointed to head the Workers' and Peasants' Inspectorate (Rabkrin); that same month he was also transferred to the Caucasian Front.\nThe Polish\u2013Soviet War broke out in early 1920, with the Poles invading Ukraine, and in May, Stalin was moved to the Southwest Front. Lenin believed that the Polish proletariat would rise up to support an invasion, but Stalin argued that nationalism would lead them to support their government's war effort. Stalin lost the argument and accepted Lenin's decision. On his front, Stalin became determined to conquer Lvov; in focusing on this goal, he disobeyed orders to transfer his troops to assist Mikhail Tukhachevsky's forces at the Battle of Warsaw in early August, which ended in a major defeat for the Red Army. Stalin then returned to Moscow, where Tukhachevsky blamed him for the loss. Humiliated, he demanded demission from the military, which was granted on 1 September. At the 9th Party Congress in late September, Trotsky accused Stalin of \"strategic mistakes\" and claimed that he had sabotaged the campaign; Lenin joined in the criticism. Stalin felt disgraced and his antipathy toward Trotsky increased.\n1921\u20131924: Lenin's final years.\nThe Soviet government sought to bring neighbouring states under its domination; in February 1921 it invaded the Menshevik-governed Georgia, and in April 1921, Stalin ordered the Red Army into Turkestan to reassert Soviet control. As People's Commissar for Nationalities, Stalin believed that each ethnic group had the right to an \"autonomous republic\" within the Russian state in which it could oversee various regional affairs. In taking this view, some Marxists accused him of bending too much to bourgeois nationalism, while others accused him of remaining too Russo-centric. In his diverse native Caucasus, however, Stalin opposed the idea of separate autonomous republics, arguing that these would oppress ethnic minorities within their territories; instead, he called for a Transcaucasian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic. The Georgian Communist Party opposed the idea, resulting in the Georgian affair. In mid-1921, Stalin returned to the South Caucasus, calling on Georgian communists to reject the chauvinistic nationalism which he argued had marginalised the Abkhazian, Ossetian, and Adjarian minorities. In March 1921, Nadezhda gave birth to another of Stalin's sons, Vasily.\nAfter the civil war, workers' strikes and peasant uprisings broke out across Russia in opposition to Sovnarkom's food requisitioning project; in response, Lenin introduced market-oriented reforms in the New Economic Policy (NEP). There was also turmoil within the Communist Party, as Trotsky led a faction calling for abolition of trade unions; Lenin opposed this, and Stalin helped rally opposition to Trotsky's position. At the 11th Party Congress in March and April 1922, Lenin nominated Stalin as the party's General Secretary, which was intended as a purely organisational role. Although concerns were expressed that adopting the new position would overstretch his workload and grant him too much power, Stalin was appointed to the post.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStalin is too crude, and this defect which is entirely acceptable in our milieu and in relationships among us as communists, becomes unacceptable in the position of General Secretary. I therefore propose to comrades that they should devise a means of removing him from this job and should appoint to this job someone else who is distinguished from comrade Stalin in all other respects only by the single superior aspect that he should be more tolerant, more polite and more attentive towards comrades, less capricious, etc.\n\u2014 Lenin's Testament, 4 January 1923\nIn May 1922, a massive stroke left Lenin partially paralysed. Residing at his Gorki dacha, his main connection to Sovnarkom was through Stalin. Despite their comradeship, Lenin disliked what he referred to as Stalin's \"Asiatic\" manner and told his sister Maria that Stalin was \"not intelligent\". The two men argued on the issue of foreign trade; Lenin believed that the Soviet state should have a monopoly on foreign trade, but Stalin supported Grigori Sokolnikov's view that doing so was impractical. Another disagreement came over the Georgian affair, with Lenin backing the Georgian Central Committee's desire for a Georgian Soviet Republic over Stalin's idea of a Transcaucasian one. They also disagreed on the nature of the Soviet state; Lenin called for establishment of a new federation named the \"Union of Soviet Republics of Europe and Asia\", while Stalin believed that this would encourage independence sentiment among non-Russians. Lenin accused Stalin of \"Great Russian chauvinism\", while Stalin accused Lenin of \"national liberalism\". A compromise was reached in which the federation would be named the \"Union of Soviet Socialist Republics\" (USSR), whose formation was ratified in December 1922.\nTheir differences also became personal; Lenin was angered when Stalin was rude to his wife Krupskaya during a telephone conversation. In the final years of his life, Krupskaya provided leading figures with Lenin's Testament, which criticised Stalin's rude manners and excessive power and suggested that he be removed as general secretary. Some historians have questioned whether Lenin wrote the document, suggesting that it was written by Krupskaya; Stalin never publicly voiced concerns about its authenticity. Most historians consider it an accurate reflection of Lenin's views.\nConsolidation of power.\n1924\u20131928: Succeeding Lenin.\nUpon Lenin's death in January 1924, Stalin took charge of the funeral and was a pallbearer. To bolster his image as a devoted Leninist amid his growing personality cult, Stalin gave nine lectures at Sverdlov University on the \"Foundations of Leninism\", later published in book form. At the 13th Party Congress in May 1924, Lenin's Testament was read only to the leaders of the provincial delegations. Embarrassed by its contents, Stalin offered his resignation as General Secretary; this act of humility saved him, and he was retained in the post.\nAs General Secretary, Stalin had a free hand in making appointments to his own staff, and implanted loyalists throughout the party. Favouring new members from proletarian backgrounds to \"Old Bolsheviks\", who tended to be middle-class university graduates, he ensured that he had loyalists dispersed across the regions. Stalin had much contact with young party functionaries, and the desire for promotion led many to seek his favour. Stalin also developed close relations with key figures in the secret police: Felix Dzerzhinsky, Genrikh Yagoda, and Vyacheslav Menzhinsky. His wife gave birth to a daughter, Svetlana, in February 1926.\nIn the wake of Lenin's death, a power struggle emerged to become his successor: alongside Stalin was Trotsky, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Nikolai Bukharin, Alexei Rykov, and Mikhail Tomsky. Stalin saw Trotsky\u2014whom he personally despised\u2014as the main obstacle to his dominance, and during Lenin's illness had formed an unofficial triumvirate (\"troika\") alongside Kamenev and Zinoviev. Although Zinoviev was concerned about Stalin's growing power, he rallied behind him at the 13th Congress as a counterweight to Trotsky, who now led a faction known as the Left Opposition. Trotsky's supporters believed that the NEP conceded too much to capitalism, and they called Stalin a \"rightist\" for his support of the policy. Stalin built up a retinue of his supporters within the Central Committee as the Left Opposition were marginalised.\nIn late 1924, Stalin moved against Kamenev and Zinoviev, removing their supporters from key positions. In 1925, the two moved into open opposition to Stalin and Bukharin and launched an unsuccessful attack on their faction at the 14th Party Congress in December. Stalin accused Kamenev and Zinoviev of reintroducing factionalism, and thus instability. In mid-1926, Kamenev and Zinoviev joined with Trotsky to form the United Opposition against Stalin; in October the two agreed to stop factional activity under threat of expulsion, and later publicly recanted their views. The factionalist arguments continued, with Stalin threatening to resign in October and December 1926, and again in December 1927. In October 1927, Trotsky was removed from the Central Committee; he was later exiled to Kazakhstan in 1928 and deported from the country in 1929.\nStalin was now the supreme leader of the party and state. He entrusted the position of head of government to Vyacheslav Molotov; other important supporters on the Politburo were Voroshilov, Lazar Kaganovich, and Sergo Ordzhonikidze, with Stalin ensuring his allies ran state institutions. His growing influence was reflected in naming of locations after him; in June 1924 the Ukrainian city of Yuzovka became Stalino, and in April 1925, Tsaritsyn was renamed Stalingrad. In 1926, Stalin published \"On Questions of Leninism,\" in which he argued for the concept of \"socialism in one country\", which was presented as an orthodox Leninist perspective despite clashing with established Bolshevik views that socialism could only be achieved globally through the process of world revolution. In 1927, there was some argument in the party over Soviet policy regarding China. Stalin had called for the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), led by Mao Zedong, to ally itself with Chiang Kai-shek's Kuomintang (KMT) nationalists, viewing a CCP-KMT alliance as the best bulwark against Japanese imperial expansionism. Instead, the KMT repressed the CCP and a civil war broke out between the two sides.\n1928\u20131932: First five-year plan.\nEconomic policy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe have fallen behind the advanced countries by fifty to a hundred years. We must close that gap in ten years. Either we do this or we'll be crushed.\nThis is what our obligations before the workers and peasants of the USSR dictate to us.\n\u2014 Stalin, February 1931\nThe Soviet Union lagged far behind the industrial and agricultural development of the Western powers. Stalin's government feared attack from capitalist countries, and many communists, including in Komsomol, OGPU, and the Red Army, were eager to be rid of the NEP and its market-oriented approach. They had concerns about those who profited from the policy: affluent peasants known as \"kulaks\" and small business owners, or \"NEPmen\". At this point, Stalin turned against the NEP, which put him on a course to the \"left\" even of Trotsky or Zinoviev.\nIn early 1928, Stalin travelled to Novosibirsk, where he alleged that kulaks were hoarding grain and ordered them be arrested and their grain confiscated, with Stalin bringing much of the grain back to Moscow with him in February. At his command, grain procurement squads surfaced across West Siberia and the Urals, with violence breaking out between the squads and the peasantry. Stalin announced that kulaks and the \"middle peasants\" must be coerced into releasing their harvest. Bukharin and other Central Committee members were angered that they had not been consulted about the measure. In January 1930, the Politburo approved the \"liquidation\" of the kulak class, which was exiled to other parts of the country or concentration camps. By July 1930, over 320,000 households had been affected. According to Dmitri Volkogonov, dekulakisation was \"the first mass terror applied by Stalin in his own country.\"\nIn 1929, the Politburo announced the mass collectivisation of agriculture, establishing both \"kolkhoz\" collective farms and \"sovkhoz\" state farms. Although officially voluntary, many peasants joined the collectives out of fear they would face the fate of the kulaks. By 1932, about 62% of households involved in agriculture were part of collectives, and by 1936 this had risen to 90%. Many collectivised peasants resented the loss of their private farmland, and productivity slumped. Famine broke out in many areas, with the Politburo frequently being forced to dispatch emergency food relief. Armed peasant uprisings broke out in Ukraine, the North Caucasus, Southern Russia, and Central Asia, reaching their apex in March 1930; these were suppressed by the army. Stalin responded with an article insisting that collectivisation was voluntary and blaming violence on local officials. Although he and Stalin had been close for many years, Bukharin expressed concerns and regarded them as a return to Lenin's old \"war communism\" policy. By mid-1928, he was unable to rally sufficient support in the party to oppose the reforms; in November 1929, Stalin removed him from the Politburo.\nOfficially, the Soviet Union had replaced the \"irrationality\" and \"wastefulness\" of a market economy with a planned economy organised along a long-term and scientific framework; in reality, Soviet economics were based on \"ad hoc\" commandments issued often to make short-term targets. In 1928, the first five-year plan was launched by Stalin with a main focus on boosting Soviet heavy industry; it was finished a year ahead of schedule, in 1932. The country underwent a massive economic transformation: new mines were opened, new cities like Magnitogorsk constructed, and work on the White Sea\u2013Baltic Canal began. Millions of peasants moved to the cities, and large debts were accrued purchasing foreign-made machinery.\nMany major construction projects, including the White Sea\u2013Baltic Canal and the Moscow Metro, were constructed largely through forced labour. The last elements of workers' control over industry were removed, with factory managers receiving privileges; Stalin defended wage disparity by pointing to Marx's argument that it was necessary during the lower stages of socialism. To promote intensification of labour, medals and awards as well as the Stakhanovite movement were introduced. Stalin argued that socialism was being established in the USSR while capitalism was crumbling during the Great Depression. His rhetoric reflected his utopian vision of the \"new Soviet person\" rising to unparallelled heights of human development.\nCultural and foreign policy.\nIn 1928, Stalin declared that class war between the proletariat and their enemies would intensify as socialism developed. He warned of a \"danger from the right\", including from within the Communist Party. The first major show trial in the USSR was the Shakhty Trial of 1928, in which middle-class \"industrial specialists\" were convicted of sabotage. From 1929 to 1930, show trials were held to intimidate opposition; these included the Industrial Party Trial, Menshevik Trial, and Metro-Vickers Trial. Aware that the ethnic Russian majority may have concerns about being ruled by a Georgian, he promoted ethnic Russians throughout the state bureaucracy and made Russian compulsory in schools, albeit in tandem with local languages. Nationalist sentiment was suppressed. Conservative social policies were promoted to boost population growth; this included a focus on strong family units, re-criminalisation of homosexuality, restrictions on abortion and divorce, and abolition of the \"Zhenotdel\" women's department.\nStalin desired a \"cultural revolution\", entailing both the creation of a culture for the \"masses\" and the wider dissemination of previously elite culture. He oversaw a proliferation of schools, newspapers, and libraries, as well as advancement of literacy and numeracy. Socialist realism was promoted throughout the arts, while Stalin wooed prominent writers, namely Maxim Gorky, Mikhail Sholokhov, and Aleksey Nikolayevich Tolstoy. He expressed patronage for scientists whose research fit within his preconceived interpretation of Marxism; for instance, he endorsed the research of agrobiologist Trofim Lysenko despite the fact that it was rejected by the majority of Lysenko's scientific peers as pseudo-scientific. The government's anti-religious campaign was re-intensified, with increased funding given to the League of Militant Atheists. Priests, imams, and Buddhist monks faced persecution. Religious buildings were demolished, most notably Moscow's Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, destroyed in 1931 to make way for the Palace of the Soviets. Religion retained an influence over the population; in the 1937 census, 57% of respondents were willing to admit to being religious.\nThroughout the 1920s, Stalin placed a priority on foreign policy. He personally met with a range of Western visitors, including George Bernard Shaw and H. G. Wells, both of whom were impressed with him. Through the Communist International, Stalin's government exerted a strong influence over Marxist parties elsewhere; he left the running of the organisation to Bukharin before his ousting. At its 6th Congress in July 1928, Stalin informed delegates that the main threat to socialism came from non-Marxist socialists and social democrats, whom he called \"social fascists\"; Stalin recognised that in many countries, these groups were Marxist\u2013Leninists' main rivals for working-class support. This focus on opposing rival leftists concerned Bukharin, who regarded the growth of fascism and the far right across Europe as a greater threat.\nIn 1929, Stalin's son Yakov unsuccessfully attempted suicide, shooting himself in the chest and narrowly missing his heart; his failure earned the contempt of Stalin, who is reported to have brushed off the attempt by saying \"He can't even shoot straight.\" His relationship with Nadezhda was strained amid their arguments and her mental health problems. In November 1932, after a group dinner in the Kremlin in which Stalin flirted with other women, Nadezhda shot herself in the heart. Publicly, the cause of death was given as appendicitis; Stalin also concealed the real cause of death from his children. Stalin's friends noted that he underwent a significant change following her suicide, becoming emotionally harder.\n1932\u20131939: Major crises.\nFamine of 1932\u20131933.\nWithin the Soviet Union, civic disgruntlement against Stalin's government was widespread. Social unrest in urban areas led Stalin to ease some economic policies in 1932. In May 1932, he introduced \"kolkhoz\" markets where peasants could trade surplus produce. However, penal sanctions became harsher; a decree in August 1932 made the theft of a handful of grain a capital offence. The second five-year plan reduced production quotas from the first, focusing more on improving living conditions through housing and consumer goods. Emphasis on armament production increased after Adolf Hitler became German chancellor in 1933.\nThe Soviet Union experienced a major famine which peaked in the winter of 1932\u20131933, with 5\u20137 million deaths. The worst affected areas were Ukraine (where the famine was called the Holodomor), Southern Russia, Kazakhstan and the North Caucasus. In the case of Ukraine, historians debate whether the famine was intentional, with the purpose of eliminating a potential independence movement; no documents show Stalin explicitly ordered starvation. Poor weather led to bad harvests in 1931 and 1932, compounded by years of declining productivity. Rapid industrialisation policies, neglect of crop rotation, and failure to build reserve grain stocks exacerbated the crisis. Stalin blamed hostile elements and saboteurs among the peasants. The government provided limited food aid to famine-stricken areas, prioritising urban workers; for Stalin, Soviet industrialisation was more valuable than peasant lives. Grain exports declined heavily. Stalin did not acknowledge his policies' role in the famine, which was concealed from foreign observers.\nIdeological and foreign affairs.\nIn 1936, Stalin oversaw the adoption of a new constitution with expansive democratic features; it was designed as propaganda, as all power rested in his hands. He declared that \"socialism, the first phase of communism, has been achieved\". In 1938, the \"History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks)\" was released; commonly known as the \"Short Course\", it became the central text of Stalinism. Authorised Stalin biographies were also published, though Stalin preferred to be viewed as the embodiment of the Communist Party, rather than have his life story explored.\nSeeking better international relations, in 1934 the Soviet Union joined the League of Nations, from which it had previously been excluded. Stalin initiated confidential communications with Hitler in October 1933, shortly after the latter came to power. Stalin admired Hitler, particularly his manoeuvres to remove rivals within the Nazi Party in the Night of the Long Knives. Stalin nevertheless recognised the threat posed by fascism and sought to establish better links with the liberal democracies of Western Europe; in May 1935, the Soviets signed treaties of mutual assistance with France and Czechoslovakia. At the Communist International's 7th Congress in July\u2013August 1935, the Soviet Union encouraged Marxist\u2013Leninists to unite with other leftists as part of a popular front against fascism. In response, Germany, Italy, and Japan signed the Anti-Comintern Pact.\nWhen the Spanish Civil War broke out in July 1936, the Soviets sent military aid to the Republican faction, including 648 aircraft and 407 tanks, along with 3,000 Soviet troops and 42,000 members of the International Brigades. Stalin took a personal involvement in the Spanish situation. Germany and Italy backed the Nationalist faction, which was ultimately victorious in March 1939. With the outbreak of the Second Sino-Japanese War in July 1937, the Soviet Union and China signed a non-aggression pact. Stalin aided the Chinese as the KMT and the Communists suspended their civil war and formed his desired United Front against Japan.\nGreat Purge.\nStalin's approach to state repression was often contradictory. In May 1933, he released many convicted of minor offences, ordering the security services not to enact further mass arrests and deportations, and in September 1934, he launched a commission to investigate false imprisonments. That same month, he called for the execution of workers at the Stalin Metallurgical Factory accused of spying for Japan. After Sergei Kirov was murdered in December 1934, Stalin became increasingly concerned about assassination threats, and state repression intensified. Stalin issued a decree establishing NKVD troikas which could issue rapid and severe sentences without involving the courts. In 1935, he ordered the NKVD to expel suspected counterrevolutionaries from urban areas; over 11,000 were expelled from Leningrad alone in early 1935.\nIn 1936, Nikolai Yezhov became head of the NKVD, after which Stalin moved to orchestrate the arrest and execution of his remaining opponents in the Communist Party in the Great Purge. The first Moscow Trial in August 1936 saw Kamenev and Zinoviev executed. The second trial took place in January 1937, and the third in March 1938, with Bukharin and Rykov executed. By late 1937, all remnants of collective leadership were gone from the Politburo, which was now effectively under Stalin's control. There were mass expulsions from the party, with Stalin also ordering foreign communist parties to purge anti-Stalinist elements. These purges replaced most of the party's old guard with younger officials loyal to Stalin. Party functionaries readily carried out their commands and sought to ingratiate themselves with Stalin, to avoid becoming victims. Such functionaries often carried out more arrests and executions than their quotas set by government.\nRepressions intensified further from December 1936 until November 1938. In May 1937, Stalin ordered the arrest of much of the army's high command, and mass arrests in the military followed. By late 1937, purges extended beyond the party to the wider population. In July 1937, the Politburo ordered a purge of \"anti-Soviet elements\", targeting anti-Stalin Bolsheviks, former Mensheviks, Socialist Revolutionaries, priests, ex\u2013White Army soldiers, and common criminals. Stalin initiated \"national operations\", the ethnic cleansing of non-Soviet ethnic groups \u2014 among them Poles, Germans, Latvians, Finns, Greeks, Koreans, and Chinese \u2014 through internal or external exile. More than 1.6 million people were arrested, 700,000 shot, and an unknown number died under torture. The NKVD also assassinated defectors and opponents abroad; in August 1940, Trotsky was assassinated in Mexico, eliminating Stalin's last major opponent.\nStalin initiated all key decisions during the purge, and personally directed many operations. Historians debate his motives, noting his personal writings from the period were \"unusually convoluted and incoherent\", filled with claims about enemies encircling him. He feared a domestic fifth column in the event of war with Japan and Germany, particularly after right-wing forces overthrew the leftist Spanish government. The Great Purge ended when Yezhov was replaced by Lavrentiy Beria, a fellow Georgian completely loyal to Stalin. Yezhov himself was arrested in April 1939 and executed in 1940. The purge damaged the Soviet Union's reputation abroad, particularly among leftist sympathisers. As it wound down, Stalin sought to deflect his responsibility, blaming its \"excesses\" and \"violations of law\" on Yezhov.\nWorld War II.\n1939\u20131941: Pact with Nazi Germany.\nAs a Marxist\u2013Leninist, Stalin considered conflict between competing capitalist powers inevitable; after Nazi Germany annexed Austria and then part of Czechoslovakia in 1938, he recognised a major war was looming. He sought to maintain Soviet neutrality, hoping that a German war against France and the United Kingdom would lead to Soviet dominance in Europe. The Soviets faced a threat from the east, with Soviet troops clashing with the expansionist Japanese in the latter part of the 1930s, culminating in the Battles of Khalkhin Gol in 1939. Stalin initiated a military build-up, with the Red Army more than doubling between January 1939 and June 1941, although in haste many of its officers were poorly trained. Between 1940 and 1941 Stalin purged the military, leaving it with a severe shortage of trained officers when war eventually broke out.\nAs Britain and France seemed unwilling to commit to an alliance with the Soviet Union, Stalin saw a better deal with the Germans. On 3 May 1939, he replaced his Western-oriented foreign minister Maxim Litvinov with Vyacheslav Molotov. Germany began negotiations with the Soviets, proposing that Eastern Europe be divided between the two powers. In August 1939, the Soviet Union signed the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact with Germany, a non-aggression pact negotiated by Molotov and German foreign minister Joachim von Ribbentrop with a secret protocol dividing Eastern Europe. On 1 September, Germany invaded Poland, leading the UK and France to declare war on Germany. On 17 September, the Red Army entered eastern Poland, officially to restore order. On 28 September, Germany and the Soviet Union exchanged some of their conquered territories, and a German\u2013Soviet Frontier Treaty was signed shortly after in Stalin's presence. The two states continued trading, undermining the British blockade of Germany.\nThe Soviets further demanded parts of eastern Finland, but the Finnish government refused. The Soviets invaded Finland in November 1939, starting the Winter War; despite numerical inferiority, the Finns kept the Red Army at bay. International opinion backed Finland, with the Soviet Union being expelled from the League of Nations. Embarrassed by their inability to defeat the Finns, the Soviets signed an interim peace treaty, in which they received territorial concessions. In June 1940, the Red Army occupied the Baltic states, which were forcibly merged into the Soviet Union in August; they also invaded and annexed Bessarabia and northern Bukovina, parts of Romania. The Soviets sought to forestall dissent in the new territories with mass repressions. A noted instance was the Katyn massacre of April and May 1940, in which around 22,000 members of the Polish armed forces, police, and intelligentsia were executed by the NKVD.\nThe speed of the German victory over and occupation of France in mid-1940 took Stalin by surprise. He seemingly focused on appeasement in order to delay conflict. After the Tripartite Pact was signed by the Axis powers of Germany, Japan, and Italy in October 1940, Stalin proposed that the USSR also join the Axis alliance. To demonstrate peaceful intentions, in April 1941 the Soviets signed a neutrality pact with Japan. Stalin, who had been the country's \"de facto\" head of government for almost 15 years, concluded that relations with Germany had deteriorated to such an extent that he needed to become \"de jure\" head of government as well, and on 6 May, replaced Molotov as Premier of the Soviet Union.\n1941\u20131942: German invasion.\nIn June 1941, Germany invaded the Soviet Union, initiating the war on the Eastern Front. Despite intelligence agencies repeatedly warning him of Germany's intentions, Stalin was taken by surprise. He formed a State Defence Committee, which he headed as Supreme Commander, as well as a military Supreme Command (Stavka), with Georgy Zhukov as its chief of staff. The German tactic of \"blitzkrieg\" was initially highly effective; the Soviet air force in the western borderlands was destroyed within two days. The German Wehrmacht pushed deep into Soviet territory; soon, Ukraine, Byelorussia, and the Baltic states were under German occupation, and Leningrad was under siege; and Soviet refugees were flooding into Moscow and surrounding cities. By July, Germany's Luftwaffe was bombing Moscow, and by October the Wehrmacht was amassing for a full assault on the capital. Plans were made for the Soviet government to evacuate to Kuibyshev, although Stalin decided to remain in Moscow, believing his flight would damage troop morale. The German advance on Moscow was halted after two months of battle in increasingly harsh weather conditions.\nGoing against the advice of Zhukov and other generals, Stalin emphasised attack over defence. In June 1941, he ordered a scorched earth policy of destroying infrastructure and food supplies before the Germans could seize them, also commanding the NKVD to kill around 100,000 political prisoners in areas the Wehrmacht approached. He purged the military command; several high-ranking figures were demoted or reassigned and others were arrested and executed. With Order No. 270, Stalin commanded soldiers risking capture to fight to the death, describing the captured as traitors; among those taken as a prisoner of war was Stalin's son Yakov, who died in German custody. Stalin issued Order No. 227 in July 1942, which directed that those retreating unauthorised would be placed in \"penal battalions\" and used as cannon fodder. Both the German and Soviet armies disregarded the laws of war in the Geneva Conventions; the Soviets heavily publicised Nazi massacres of communists, Jews, and Romani. In April 1942, Stalin sponsored the formation of the Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee (JAC) to garner global Jewish support for the war effort.\nThe Soviets allied with the UK and U.S.; although the U.S. joined the war against Germany in 1941, little direct American assistance reached the Soviets until late 1942. Responding to the invasion, the Soviets expanded their industry in central Russia, focusing almost entirely on military production. They achieved high levels of productivity, outstripping Germany. During the war, Stalin was more tolerant of the Russian Orthodox Church and allowed it to resume some of its activities. He also permitted a wider range of cultural expression, notably permitting formerly suppressed writers and artists like Anna Akhmatova and Dmitri Shostakovich to disperse their work more widely. \"The Internationale\" was dropped as the country's national anthem, to be replaced with a more patriotic song. The government increasingly promoted Pan-Slavist sentiment, while encouraging increased criticism of cosmopolitanism, particularly \"rootless cosmopolitanism\", an approach with particular repercussions for Soviet Jews. The Communist International was dissolved in 1943, and Stalin began encouraging foreign Marxist\u2013Leninist parties to emphasise nationalism over internationalism in order to broaden their domestic appeal.\nIn April 1942, Stalin overrode Stavka by ordering the Soviets' first serious counter-attack, an attempt to seize German-held Kharkov in eastern Ukraine. This attack proved unsuccessful. That year, Hitler shifted his primary goal from an overall victory on the Eastern Front to the goal of securing the oil fields in the southern Soviet Union crucial to a long-term German war effort. While Red Army generals saw evidence that Hitler would shift efforts south, Stalin considered this to be a flanking move in a renewed effort to take Moscow. In June 1942, the German Army began a major offensive in Southern Russia, threatening Stalingrad; Stalin ordered the Red Army to hold the city at all costs, resulting in the protracted Battle of Stalingrad, which became the bloodiest and fiercest battle of the entire war. In February 1943, the German forces attacking Stalingrad surrendered. The Soviet victory there marked a major turning point in the war; in commemoration, Stalin declared himself Marshal of the Soviet Union in March.\n1942\u20131945: Soviet counter-attack.\nBy November 1942, the Soviets had begun to repulse the German southern campaign and, although there were 2.5\u00a0million Soviet casualties in that effort, it permitted the Soviets to take the offensive for most of the rest of the war on the Eastern Front. In summer 1943, Germany attempted an encirclement attack at Kursk, which was successfully repulsed by the Soviets. By the end of the year, the Soviets occupied half of the territory taken by the Germans to that point. Soviet military industrial output also had increased substantially from late 1941 to early 1943 after Stalin had moved factories well to the east of the front, safe from invasion and aerial assault.\nIn Allied countries, Stalin was increasingly depicted in a positive light over the course of the war. In 1941, the London Philharmonic Orchestra performed a concert to celebrate his birthday, and in 1942, \"Time\" magazine named him \"Man of the Year\". When Stalin learnt that people in Western countries affectionately called him \"Uncle Joe\" he was initially offended, regarding it as undignified. There remained mutual suspicions between Stalin, British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, and U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt, together known as the \"Big Three\". Churchill flew to Moscow to visit Stalin in August 1942 and again in October 1944. Stalin scarcely left Moscow during the war, frustrating Roosevelt and Churchill with his reluctance to meet them.\nIn November 1943, Stalin met with Churchill and Roosevelt in Tehran, a location of Stalin's choosing. There, Stalin and Roosevelt got on well, with both desiring the post-war dismantling of the British Empire. At Tehran, the trio agreed that to prevent Germany rising to military prowess yet again, the German state should be broken up. Roosevelt and Churchill also agreed to Stalin's demand that the German city of K\u00f6nigsberg be declared Soviet territory. Stalin was impatient for the UK and U.S. to open up a Western Front to take the pressure off the East; they eventually did so in mid-1944. Stalin insisted that, after the war, the Soviet Union should incorporate the portions of Poland it had occupied in 1939, which Churchill opposed. Discussing the fate of the Balkans, later in 1944 Churchill agreed to Stalin's suggestion that after the war, Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary, and Yugoslavia would come under the Soviet sphere of influence while Greece would come under that of the Western powers.\nIn 1944, the Soviet Union made significant advances across Eastern Europe toward Germany, including Operation Bagration, a massive offensive in the Byelorussian SSR against the German Army Group Centre. In 1944, the German armies were pushed out of the Baltic states, which were then re-annexed into the Soviet Union. As the Red Army reconquered the Caucasus and Crimea, various ethnic groups living in the region\u2014the Kalmyks, Chechens, Ingushi, Karachai, Balkars, and Crimean Tatars\u2014were accused of having collaborated with the Germans. Using the idea of collective responsibility as a basis, Stalin's government abolished their autonomous republics and between late 1943 and 1944 deported the majority of their populations to Central Asia and Siberia. Over one million people were deported as a result of the policy, with high rates of mortality.\nIn February 1945, the three leaders met at the Yalta Conference. Roosevelt and Churchill conceded to Stalin's demand that Germany pay the Soviet Union 20\u00a0billion dollars in reparations, and that his country be permitted to annex Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands in exchange for entering the war against Japan. An agreement was also made that a post-war Polish government should be a coalition consisting of both communist and conservative elements. Privately, Stalin sought to ensure that Poland would come fully under Soviet influence. The Red Army withheld assistance to Polish resistance fighters battling the Germans in the Warsaw Uprising, with Stalin believing that any victorious Polish militants could interfere with his future aspirations to dominate Poland. Stalin placed great emphasis on capturing Berlin before the Western Allies, believing that this would enable him to bring more of Europe under long-term Soviet control. Churchill, concerned by this, unsuccessfully tried to convince the U.S. that they should pursue the same goal.\n1945: Victory.\nIn April 1945, the Red Army seized Berlin, Hitler killed himself, and Germany surrendered in May. Stalin had wanted Hitler captured alive; he had his remains brought to Moscow in order to prevent them becoming a relic for Nazi sympathisers. Many Soviet soldiers engaged in looting, pillaging, and rape, both in Germany and parts of Eastern Europe. Stalin refused to punish the offenders. With Germany defeated, Stalin switched focus to the war with Japan, transferring half a million troops to the Far East. Stalin was pressed by his allies to enter the war and wanted to cement the Soviet Union's strategic position in Asia. On 8 August, in between the U.S. atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the Soviet army invaded Japanese-occupied Manchuria and northern Korea, defeating the Kwantung Army. These events led to the Japanese surrender and the war's end. The U.S. rebuffed Stalin's desire for the Red Army to take a role in the Allied occupation of Japan.\nAt the Potsdam Conference in July\u2013August 1945, Stalin repeated previous promises that he would refrain from a \"Sovietisation\" of Eastern Europe. Stalin pushed for reparations from Germany without regard to the base minimum supply for German citizens' survival, which worried Harry Truman and Churchill, who thought that Germany would become a financial burden for the Western powers. Stalin also pushed for \"war booty\", which would permit the Soviet Union to directly seize property from conquered nations without quantitative or qualitative limitation, and a clause was added permitting this to occur with some limitations. Germany was divided into four zones: Soviet, U.S., British, and French, with Berlin\u2014located in the Soviet area\u2014also divided thusly.\nPost-war era.\n1945\u20131947: Post-war reconstruction.\nAfter the war, Stalin was at the apex of his career. Within the Soviet Union he was widely regarded as the embodiment of victory and patriotism, and his armies controlled Central and Eastern Europe up to the River Elbe. In June 1945, Stalin adopted the title of Generalissimo and stood atop Lenin's Mausoleum to watch a celebratory parade led by Zhukov through Red Square. At a banquet held for army commanders, he described the Russian people as \"the outstanding nation\" and \"leading force\" within the Soviet Union, the first time that he had unequivocally endorsed Russians over the other Soviet nationalities. In 1946, the state published Stalin's \"Collected Works\". In 1947, it brought out a second edition of his official biography, which glorified him to a greater extent than its predecessor. He was quoted in \"Pravda\" on a daily basis and pictures of him remained pervasive on the walls of workplaces and homes.\nDespite his strengthened international position, Stalin was cautious about internal dissent and desire for change among the population. He was also concerned about his returning armies, who had been exposed to a wide range of consumer goods in Germany, much of which they had looted and brought back with them. In this he recalled the 1825 Decembrist Revolt by Russian soldiers returning from having defeated France in the Napoleonic Wars. He ensured that returning Soviet prisoners of war went through \"filtration\" camps as they arrived in the Soviet Union, in which 2,775,700 were interrogated to determine if they were traitors. About half were then imprisoned in labour camps. In the Baltic states, where there was much opposition to Soviet rule, dekulakisation and de-clericalisation programmes were initiated, resulting in 142,000 deportations between 1945 and 1949. The Gulag system of forced labour camps was expanded further. By January 1953, three percent of the Soviet population was imprisoned or in internal exile, with 2.8\u00a0million in \"special settlements\" in isolated areas and another 2.5\u00a0million in camps, penal colonies, and prisons.\nThe NKVD were ordered to catalogue the scale of destruction during the war. It was established that 1,710 Soviet towns and 70,000 villages had been destroyed. The NKVD recorded that between 26 and 27 million Soviet citizens had been killed, with millions more being wounded, malnourished, or orphaned. In the war's aftermath, some of Stalin's associates suggested modifications to government policy. Post-war Soviet society was more tolerant than its pre-war phase in various respects. Stalin allowed the Russian Orthodox Church to retain the churches it had opened during the war, and academia and the arts were also allowed greater freedom. Recognising the need for drastic steps to be taken to combat inflation and promote economic recovery, in December 1947 Stalin's government devalued the rouble and abolished the food rationing system. Capital punishment was abolished in 1947 but re-instituted in 1950. Stalin's health deteriorated, and he grew increasingly concerned that senior figures might try to oust him. He demoted Molotov, and increasingly favoured Beria and Malenkov for key positions. In the Leningrad affair, the city's leadership was purged amid accusations of treachery; executions of many of the accused took place in 1950.\nIn the post-war period there were often food shortages in Soviet cities, and the USSR experienced a major famine from 1946 to 1947. Sparked by a drought and ensuing bad harvest in 1946, it was exacerbated by government policy towards food procurement, including the state's decision to build up stocks and export food rather than distributing it to famine-hit areas. Estimates indicate that between one million and 1.5\u00a0million people died from malnutrition or disease as a result. While agricultural production stagnated, Stalin focused on a series of major infrastructure projects, including the construction of hydroelectric plants, canals, and railway lines running to the polar north. Many of these were constructed through prison labour.\n1947\u20131950: Cold War policy.\nIn the aftermath of the war, the British Empire declined, leaving the U.S. and USSR as the dominant world powers. Tensions among these former Allies grew, resulting in the Cold War. Although Stalin publicly described the British and U.S. governments as aggressive, he thought it unlikely that a war with them would be imminent, believing that several decades of peace was likely. He nevertheless secretly intensified Soviet research into nuclear weaponry, intent on creating an atom bomb. Still, Stalin foresaw the undesirability of a nuclear conflict, stating that \"atomic weapons can hardly be used without spelling the end of the world.\" He personally took a keen interest in the development of the weapon. In August 1949, the bomb was successfully tested in the deserts outside Semipalatinsk in Kazakhstan. Stalin also initiated a new military build-up; the Soviet army was expanded from 2.9\u00a0million soldiers, as it stood in 1949, to 5.8\u00a0million by 1953.\nThe U.S. began pushing its interests on every continent, acquiring air force bases in Africa and Asia and ensuring pro-U.S. regimes took power across Latin America. It launched the Marshall Plan in June 1947, with which it sought to undermine Soviet hegemony throughout Eastern Europe. The U.S. offered financial assistance to countries on the condition that they opened their markets to trade, aware that the Soviets would never agree. The Allies demanded that Stalin withdraw the Red Army from northern Iran. He initially refused, leading to an international crisis in 1946, but relented one year later. Stalin also tried to maximise Soviet influence on the world stage, unsuccessfully pushing for Libya\u2014recently liberated from Italian occupation\u2014to become a Soviet protectorate. He sent Molotov as his representative to San Francisco to take part in negotiations to form the United Nations, insisting that the Soviets have a place on its Security Council. In April 1949, the Western powers established the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), an anti-Soviet military alliance led by the U.S. In the West, Stalin was increasingly portrayed as the \"most evil dictator alive\" and compared to Hitler.\nIn 1948, Stalin edited and rewrote sections of \"Falsifiers of History\", published as a series of \"Pravda\" articles in February 1948 and then in book form. Written in response to public revelations of the 1939 Soviet alliance with Germany, it focused on blaming the Western powers for the war. He also erroneously claimed that the initial German advance in the early part of the war, during Operation Barbarossa, was not a result of Soviet military weakness, but rather a deliberate Soviet strategic retreat. In 1949, celebrations took place to mark Stalin's 70th birthday (although he actually was turning 71 at the time) at which Stalin attended an event at the Bolshoi Theatre alongside Marxist\u2013Leninist leaders from across Europe and Asia.\nEastern Bloc.\nAfter the war, Stalin sought to retain Soviet dominance across Eastern Europe while expanding its influence in Asia. Cautiously regarding the responses from the Western Allies, Stalin avoided immediately installing Communist Party governments in Eastern Europe, instead initially ensuring that Marxist-Leninists were placed in coalition ministries. In contrast to his approach to the Baltic states, he rejected the proposal of merging the new communist states into the Soviet Union, rather recognising them as independent nation-states. He was faced with the problem that there were few Marxists left in Eastern Europe, with most having been killed by the Nazis. He demanded that war reparations be paid by Germany and its Axis allies Hungary, Romania, and the Slovak Republic. Aware that the countries of Eastern Europe had been pushed to socialism through invasion rather than revolution, Stalin called them \"people's democracies\" instead of \"dictatorships of the proletariat\".\nChurchill observed that an \"Iron Curtain\" had been drawn across Europe, separating the east from the west. In September 1947, a meeting of East European communist leaders established Cominform to coordinate the Communist Parties across Eastern Europe and also in France and Italy. Stalin did not personally attend the meeting, sending Andrei Zhdanov in his place. Various East European communists also visited Stalin in Moscow. There, he offered advice on their ideas; for instance, he cautioned against the Yugoslav idea for a Balkan Federation incorporating Bulgaria and Albania. Stalin had a particularly strained relationship with Yugoslavian leader Josip Broz Tito due to the latter's continued calls for a Balkan federation and for Soviet aid for the communist forces in the ongoing Greek Civil War. In March 1948, Stalin launched an anti-Tito campaign, accusing the Yugoslav communists of adventurism and deviating from Marxist\u2013Leninist doctrine. At the second Cominform conference, held in Bucharest in June 1948, East European communist leaders all denounced Tito's government, accusing them of being fascists and agents of Western capitalism. Stalin ordered several assassination attempts on Tito's life and even contemplated an invasion of Yugoslavia itself.\nStalin suggested that a unified, but demilitarised, German state be established, hoping that it would either come under Soviet influence or remain neutral. When the U.S. and UK opposed this, Stalin sought to force their hand by blockading Berlin in June 1948. He gambled that the Western powers would not risk war, but they airlifted supplies into West Berlin until May 1949, when Stalin relented and ended the blockade. In September 1949 the Western powers transformed their zones into an independent Federal Republic of Germany; in response the Soviets formed theirs into the German Democratic Republic in October. In accordance with earlier agreements, the Western powers expected Poland to become an independent state with free democratic elections. In Poland, the Soviets merged various socialist parties into the Polish United Workers' Party (PZPR), and vote rigging was used to ensure that the PZPR secured office. The 1947 Hungarian elections were also rigged by Stalin, with the Hungarian Working People's Party taking control. In Czechoslovakia, where the communists did have a level of popular support, they were elected the largest party in 1946. Monarchy was abolished in Bulgaria and Romania. Across Eastern Europe, the Soviet model was enforced, with a termination of political pluralism, agricultural collectivisation, and investment in heavy industry. It was aimed at establishing economic autarky within the Eastern Bloc.\nAsia.\nIn October 1949, Chinese Communist Party chairman Mao Zedong took power in China and proclaimed the People's Republic of China. Marxist governments now controlled a third of the world's land mass. Privately, Stalin revealed that he had underestimated the Chinese Communists and their ability to win the civil war, instead encouraging them to make another peace with the KMT. In December 1949, Mao visited Stalin. Initially Stalin refused to repeal the Sino-Soviet Treaty of 1945, which significantly benefited the Soviet Union over China, although in January 1950 he relented and agreed to sign a new treaty. Stalin was concerned that Mao might follow Tito's example by pursuing a course independent of Soviet influence, and made it known that if displeased he would withdraw assistance; the Chinese desperately needed said assistance after decades of civil war.\nAt the end of World War II, the Soviet Union and the United States divided up the Korean Peninsula, formerly a Japanese colonial possession, along the 38th parallel, setting up a communist government in the north and a pro-Western, anti-communist government in the south. North Korean leader Kim Il Sung visited Stalin in March 1949 and again in March 1950; he wanted to invade the south, and although Stalin was initially reluctant to provide support, he eventually agreed by May 1950. The North Korean Army launched the Korean War by invading South Korea in June 1950, making swift gains and capturing Seoul. Both Stalin and Mao believed that a swift victory would ensue. The U.S. went to the UN Security Council\u2014which the Soviets were boycotting over its refusal to recognise Mao's government\u2014and secured international military support for the South Koreans. U.S. led forces pushed the North Koreans back. Stalin wanted to avoid direct Soviet conflict with the U.S., and convinced the Chinese to enter the war to aid the North in October 1950.\nThe Soviet Union was one of the first nations to extend diplomatic recognition to the newly created state of Israel in 1948, in hopes of obtaining an ally in the Middle East. When the Israeli ambassador Golda Meir arrived in the USSR, Stalin was angered by the Jewish crowds who gathered to greet her. He was further angered by Israel's growing alliance with the U.S. After Stalin fell out with Israel, he launched an anti-Jewish campaign within the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc. In November 1948, he abolished the JAC, and show trials took place for some of its members. The Soviet press engaged in vituperative attacks on Zionism, Jewish culture, and \"rootless cosmopolitanism\", with growing levels of antisemitism being expressed across Soviet society. Stalin's increasing tolerance of antisemitism may have stemmed from his increasing Russian nationalism or from the recognition that antisemitism had proved a useful tool for Hitler; he may have increasingly viewed the Jewish people as a \"counter-revolutionary\" nation. There were rumours that Stalin was planning on deporting all Soviet Jews to the Jewish Autonomous Region in Birobidzhan in Siberia.\n1950\u20131953: Final years.\nIn his later years, Stalin was in poor health. He took increasingly long holidays; in 1950 and again in 1951 he spent almost five months on holiday at his Abkhazian dacha. Stalin nevertheless mistrusted his doctors; in January 1952 he had one imprisoned after they suggested that he should retire to improve his health. In September 1952, several Kremlin doctors were arrested for allegedly plotting to kill senior politicians in what came to be known as the doctors' plot; the majority of the accused were Jewish. Stalin ordered that the doctors be tortured to ensure confessions. In November, the Sl\u00e1nsk\u00fd trial took place in Czechoslovakia, in which 13 senior Communist Party figures, 11 of them Jewish, were accused and convicted of being part of a vast Zionist-American conspiracy to subvert the Eastern Bloc. The same month, a much publicised trial of accused Jewish industrial wreckers took place in Ukraine. In 1951, Stalin initiated the Mingrelian affair, a purge of the Georgian Communist Party which resulted in over 11,000 deportations.\nFrom 1946 until his death, Stalin only gave three public speeches, two of which lasted only a few minutes. The amount of written material that he produced also declined. In 1950, Stalin issued the article \"Marxism and Problems of Linguistics\", which reflected his interest in questions of Russian nationhood. In 1952, Stalin's last book, \"Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR\", was published. It sought to provide a guide to leading the country after his death. In October 1952, he gave an hour and a half speech at the Central Committee plenum. There, he emphasised what he regarded as necessary leadership qualities, and highlighted the weaknesses of potential successors, notably Molotov and Mikoyan. In 1952, he eliminated the Politburo and replaced it with a larger version he named the Presidium.\nDeath, funeral and aftermath.\nOn 1 March 1953, Stalin's staff found him semi-conscious on the bedroom floor of his Kuntsevo Dacha. He was moved onto a couch and remained there for three days, during which he was hand-fed using a spoon and given various medicines and injections. Stalin's condition continued to deteriorate, and he died on 5 March. An autopsy revealed that he had died of a cerebral haemorrhage, and that his cerebral arteries had been severely damaged by atherosclerosis. Stalin's death was announced on 6 March; his body was embalmed, and then displayed in Moscow's House of Unions for three days. The crowds coming to view the body were so large and disorganised that many people were killed in a crowd crush. At the funeral on 9 March, attended by hundreds of thousands, Stalin was laid to rest in Lenin's Mausoleum in Red Square.\nStalin left neither a designated successor nor a framework within which a peaceful transfer of power could take place. The Central Committee met on the day of his death, after which Malenkov, Beria, and Khrushchev emerged as the party's dominant figures. The system of collective leadership was restored, and measures introduced to prevent any one member from attaining autocratic domination. The collective leadership included Georgy Malenkov, Lavrentiy Beria, Vyacheslav Molotov, Kliment Voroshilov, Nikita Khrushchev, Nikolai Bulganin, Lazar Kaganovich and Anastas Mikoyan. Reforms to the Soviet system were immediately implemented. Economic reform scaled back mass construction projects, placed a new emphasis on house building, and eased the levels of taxation on the peasantry to stimulate production. The new leaders sought rapprochement with Yugoslavia and a less hostile relationship with the U.S., and they pursued a negotiated end to the Korean War in July 1953. The imprisoned doctors were released and the antisemitic purges ceased. A mass amnesty for certain convicts was issued, halving the country's inmate population, and the state security and Gulag systems were reformed.\nPolitical ideology.\nStalin claimed to have embraced Marxism at the age of 15, and it served as the guiding philosophy throughout his adult life; according to Kotkin, Stalin held \"zealous Marxist convictions\", while Montefiore suggested that Marxism held a \"quasi-religious\" value for Stalin. Although he never became a Georgian nationalist, during his early life elements from Georgian nationalist thought blended with Marxism in his outlook. Stalin believed in the need to adapt Marxism to changing circumstances; in 1917, he declared that \"there is dogmatic Marxism and there is creative Marxism. I stand on the ground of the latter\". According to scholar Robert Service, Stalin's \"few innovations in ideology were crude, dubious developments of Marxism\".\nStalin believed in an inevitable \"class war\" between the world's proletariat and bourgeoisie in which the working classes would prove victorious and establish a dictatorship of the proletariat, regarding the Soviet Union as an example of such a state. He also believed that this proletarian state would need to introduce repressive measures against foreign and domestic \"enemies\" to ensure the full crushing of the propertied classes, and thus the class war would intensify with the advance of socialism. As a propaganda tool, the shaming of \"enemies\" explained all inadequate economic and political outcomes, the hardships endured by the populace, and military failures.\nStalin adhered to the Leninist variant of Marxism. In his book, \"Foundations of Leninism\", he stated that \"Leninism is the Marxism of the epoch of imperialism and of the proletarian revolution\". He claimed to be a loyal Leninist, although was\u2014according to Service\u2014\"not a blindly obedient Leninist\". Stalin respected Lenin, but not uncritically, and spoke out when he believed that Lenin was wrong. During the period of his revolutionary activity, Stalin regarded some of Lenin's views and actions as being the self-indulgent activities of a spoilt \u00e9migr\u00e9, deeming them counterproductive for those Bolshevik activists based within the Russian Empire itself. After the October Revolution, they continued to have differences, although Kotkin suggested that Stalin's friendship with Lenin was \"the single most important relationship in Stalin's life\".\nStalin viewed nations as contingent entities which were formed by capitalism and could merge into others. Ultimately, he believed that all nations would merge into a single, global community, and regarded all nations as inherently equal. In his work, he stated that \"the right of secession\" should be offered to the ethnic minorities of the Russian Empire, but that they should not be encouraged to take that option. He was of the view that if they became fully autonomous, then they would end up being controlled by the most reactionary elements of their community. Stalin's push for Soviet westward expansion into Eastern Europe resulted in accusations of Russian imperialism.\nPersonal life and characteristics.\nEthnically Georgian, Stalin grew up speaking the Georgian language, and did not begin learning Russian until age eight or nine. It has been argued that his ancestry was genetically Ossetian, but he never acknowledged an Ossetian identity. He remained proud of his Georgian identity, and throughout his life retained a heavy Georgian accent when speaking Russian. Some colleagues described him as \"Asiatic\", and he supposedly said that \"I am not a European man, but an Asian, a Russified Georgian\".\nDescribed as soft-spoken and a poor orator, Stalin's style was \"simple and clear, without flights of fancy, catchy phrases or platform histrionics\". He rarely spoke before large audiences and preferred to express himself in writing. In adulthood, Stalin measured in height. His moustached face was pock-marked from smallpox during childhood; this was airbrushed from published photographs. His left arm had been injured in childhood leaving it shorter than his right and lacking in flexibility. Stalin was a lifelong smoker, who smoked both a pipe and cigarettes. Publicly, he lived relatively plainly, with simple and inexpensive clothing and furniture. As leader, Stalin rarely left Moscow unless for holiday; he disliked travel, and refused to travel by plane. In 1934, his Kuntsevo Dacha was built from the Kremlin and became his primary residence. He holidayed in the south USSR every year from 1925 to 1936 and 1945 to 1951, often in Abkhazia, being a friend of its leader, Nestor Lakoba.\nPersonality.\nTrotsky and several other Soviet figures promoted the idea that Stalin was a mediocrity, a characterisation which gained widespread acceptance outside of the Soviet Union during his lifetime. However, historians have described him as having a complex mind, remarkable self-control, and strong memory. Stalin was a diligent worker and an effective and strategic organiser, with a keen interest in learning. As a leader, he meticulously scrutinised details, from film scripts to military plans, and judged others by their inner strength and cleverness. He was skilled at playing different roles depending on the audience, as well as in deception. Although he could be rude, Stalin rarely raised his voice; however, as his health deteriorated, he became unpredictable and bad-tempered. He could be charming and enjoyed cracking jokes when relaxed. At social events, Stalin encouraged singing and drinking, hoping others would drunkenly reveal secrets to him.\nStalin lacked compassion, possibly exacerbated by his repeated imprisonments and exiles, though he occasionally showed kindness to strangers, even during the Great Purge. He could be self-righteous, resentful, and vindictive, often holding grudges for years. By the 1920s, he had become suspicious and conspiratorial, prone to believing in plots against him and international conspiracies. While he never attended torture sessions or executions, Stalin took pleasure in degrading and humiliating people and kept even close associates in a state of \"unrelieved fear\". Service suggested he had tendencies toward a paranoid and sociopathic personality disorder. Historian E.A. Rees believed it was psychopathy that bred Stalin's tyranny, citing a 1927 diagnosis by neuropathologist Vladimir Bekhterev that described him as a \"typical case of severe paranoia\". Others have linked Stalin's brutality to his commitment to the survival of the Soviet Union and Marxist\u2013Leninist ideology.\nStalin had a keen interest in the arts. He protected certain Soviet writers, such as Mikhail Bulgakov, even when their work was criticised as harmful to his regime. Stalin enjoyed classical music, owned around 2,700 records, and often attended the Bolshoi Theatre in the 1930s and 40s. His taste was conservative, favouring classical drama, opera, and ballet over what he dismissed as experimental \"formalism\", and disliked avant-garde in the visual arts. An autodidact, Stalin was a voracious reader who kept over 20,000 books, with little fiction. His favourite subject was history, and he was especially interested in the reigns of Russian leaders Ivan the Terrible, Peter the Great, and Catherine the Great. Lenin was his favourite author, but he read and appreciated works by Trotsky and other adversaries.\nRelationships and family.\nStalin married his first wife, Ekaterina Svanidze, in 1906. Volkogonov suggested that she was \"probably the one human being he had really loved\". When she died, Stalin allegedly said: \"This creature softened my heart of stone. She died and with her died my last warm feelings for humanity.\" They had a son, Yakov, who frequently frustrated and annoyed Stalin. After Yakov was captured by the German Army during World War II, Stalin refused to agree to a prisoner exchange between him and German field marshal Friedrich Paulus, and Yakov died at a Nazi concentration camp in 1943.\nIn exile in Solvychegodsk in 1910, Stalin had an affair with his landlady, Maria Kuzakova, who in 1911 gave birth to his alleged second son, Konstantin Kuzakov, who later taught philosophy at the Leningrad Military Mechanical Institute, but never met Stalin. In 1914 in Kureika, Stalin, aged 35, had a relationship with Lidia Pereprygina, aged 14 (considered a minor at the time), who allegedly became pregnant with Stalin's child. In December 1914, Pereprygina gave birth to the child, although the infant died soon after. In 1916, Pereprygina was pregnant again. She gave birth to their alleged son, Alexander Davydov, in around April 1917. He was raised as the son of a peasant fisherman; Stalin later came to know of the child's existence but showed no interest in him.\nStalin's second wife was Nadezhda Alliluyeva, whom he married in 1919; theirs was not an easy relationship, they often fought. They had two biological children\u2014a son, Vasily, and daughter, Svetlana\u2014and adopted another son, Artyom Sergeev, in 1921. It is unclear if Stalin had a mistress during or after this marriage. She suspected he was unfaithful, and committed suicide in 1932. Stalin regarded Vasily as spoiled and often chastised his behaviour; as Stalin's son, he was swiftly promoted through the Red Army and allowed a lavish lifestyle. Conversely, Stalin had an affectionate relationship with Svetlana during her childhood, and was very fond of Artyom. He disapproved of Svetlana's suitors and husbands, which put strain on their relationship. After World War II, he made little time for his children, and his family played a diminishing role in his life. After Stalin's death, Svetlana changed her surname to Alliluyeva, and defected to the U.S.\nLegacy.\nThe historian Robert Conquest stated that Stalin perhaps \"determined the course of the twentieth century\" more than any other individual. Leninists remain divided in their views on Stalin; some view him as Lenin's authentic successor, while others believe he betrayed Lenin's ideas by deviating from them. For most Westerners and anti-communist Russians, he is viewed overwhelmingly negatively as a mass murderer; for significant numbers of Russians and Georgians, he is regarded as a great statesman and state-builder. The historian Dmitri Volkogonov characterised him as \"one of the most powerful figures in human history.\"\nAccording to Service, Stalin strengthened and stabilised the Soviet Union. In under three decades, Stalin transformed the country into a major industrial world power, one which could \"claim impressive achievements\" in terms of urbanisation, military strength, education and Soviet pride. Under his rule, the average Soviet life expectancy grew due to improved living conditions, nutrition and medical care as mortality rates declined. Although millions of Soviet citizens despised him, support for Stalin was nevertheless widespread throughout Soviet society. Conversely, the historian Vadim Rogovin argued that Stalin's purges \"caused losses to the communist movement both in the USSR and throughout the world from which the movement has not recovered to this very day\". Similarly, Nikita Khrushchev believed his purges of the Old Bolsheviks and leading figures in the military and academia had \"undoubtedly\" weakened the nation.\nStalin's necessity for the Soviet Union's economic development has been questioned, and it has been argued that his policies from 1928 onwards may have been a limiting factor. Stalin's Soviet Union has been characterised as a totalitarian state, with Stalin its authoritarian leader. Various biographers have described him as a dictator, an autocrat, or accused him of practising Caesarism. Montefiore argued that while Stalin initially ruled as part of a Communist Party oligarchy, the government transformed into a personal dictatorship in 1934, with Stalin only becoming \"absolute dictator\" after March\u2013June 1937, when senior military and NKVD figures were eliminated. In both the Soviet Union and elsewhere he came to be portrayed as an \"Oriental despot\". McDermott nevertheless cautioned against \"over-simplistic stereotypes\"\u2014promoted in the fiction of writers like Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn\u2014which portrayed Stalin as an omnipotent and omnipresent tyrant who controlled every aspect of Soviet life.\nA vast literature devoted to Stalin has been produced. During Stalin's lifetime, his approved biographies were largely hagiographic in content. Stalin ensured that these works gave very little attention to his early life, particularly because he did not wish to emphasise his Georgian origins in a state numerically dominated by Russians. Since his death many more biographies have been written, although until the 1980s these relied largely on the same sources of information. Under Mikhail Gorbachev's Soviet administration various previously classified files on Stalin's life were made available to historians, at which point he became \"one of the most urgent and vital issues on the public agenda\" in the Soviet Union. After the dissolution of the Union in 1991, the rest of the archives were opened to historians, resulting in much new information about Stalin coming to light, and producing a flood of new research.\nDeath toll.\nBefore the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the archival revelations, some Western historians estimated that the numbers killed by Stalin's regime were 20 million or higher. The scholarly consensus affirms that Soviet archival materials declassified in 1991 contain irrefutable data much lower than Western sources used prior to 1991, such as statements from emigres and other informants. Based on these records, scholars have estimated that 1.8 million people were deported to remote regions of the country during Stalin's dekulakisation campaign, in addition to 1 million peasants and ethnic minorities deported in the 1930s, and 3.5 million people (mainly ethnic minorities) deported in the 1940s and 1950s, for a total of 6.3 million. The Soviet archives also contain official records of 799,455 executions from 1921 to 1953, around 1.5 to 1.7\u00a0million deaths in Gulag camps (out of an estimated 18 million people who passed through), some 390,000 deaths during the dekulakisation forced resettlement, and up to 400,000 deaths of persons deported during the 1940s, with a total of about 3.3 million officially recorded victims in these categories. According to historian Stephen Wheatcroft, approximately 1 million of these deaths were \"purposive\" while the rest happened through neglect and irresponsibility.\nThe deaths of at least 3.5 to 6.5 million persons in the Soviet famine of 1932\u20131933 are sometimes, though not always, included with the victims of the Stalin era. Stalin has also been accused of genocide in the cases of forced population transfer of ethnic minorities across the Soviet Union and the Holodomor famine. However, British historian Michael Ellman argues that mass deaths from famines should be placed in a different category than the repression victims, mentioning that throughout Russian history famines and droughts have been a common occurrence. Famines were widespread throughout the world in the 19th and 20th centuries in countries such as China, India, Ireland, and Russia. Ellman compared the behaviour of the Stalinist regime to that of the British government (towards Ireland and India) and the G8 in contemporary times, and Stalin's \"behaviour was no worse than that of many rulers in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries\".\nIn the Soviet Union and post-Soviet states.\nShortly after his death, the Soviet Union went through a period of de-Stalinisation. Malenkov denounced the Stalin personality cult, and the cult was subsequently criticised in \"Pravda\". In 1956, Khrushchev gave his \"Secret Speech\", titled \"On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences\", to a closed session of the Party's 20th Congress. There, Khrushchev denounced Stalin for both his mass repression and his personality cult. He repeated these denunciations at the 22nd Party Congress in October 1962. In October 1961, Stalin's body was removed from the mausoleum and buried in the Kremlin Wall Necropolis, the location marked by a bust. Stalingrad was renamed Volgograd that year.\nKhrushchev's de-Stalinisation process ended when he was replaced as leader by Leonid Brezhnev in 1964; the latter introduced a level of re-Stalinisation within the Soviet Union. In 1969 and again in 1979, plans were proposed for a full rehabilitation of Stalin's legacy but on both occasions were halted due to fears of damaging the USSR's public image. Mikhail Gorbachev saw the total denunciation of Stalin as necessary for the regeneration of Soviet society.\nAfter the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, Boris Yeltsin continued Gorbachev's denunciation of Stalin but added to it a denunciation of Lenin. His successor Vladimir Putin did not seek to rehabilitate Stalin but emphasised the celebration of Soviet achievements under Stalin's leadership rather than the Stalinist repressions. In October 2017, Putin opened the Wall of Grief, a memorial to the victims of Stalin's repressions, in Moscow. In recent years, especially following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the government and general public of Russia has been accused of rehabilitating Stalin. In May 2025, Russian authorities re-added a statue of Stalin at the Taganskaya metro station after the original was removed in 1966 as part of the 90th anniversary of the opening of the metro. In July, the Communist Party of the Russian Federation described Khrushchev's 1956 speech denouncing Stalin's cult of personality as a \"mistake\" and \"politically biased\", further urging Putin to restore \"Stalingrad\" as the official name of the Russian city of Volgograd.\nAdmiration for Stalin has remained consistently widespread in Georgia, although Georgian attitudes have been very divided. A number of Georgians resent criticism of Stalin, the most famous figure from their nation's modern history.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nAcademic books and journals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMagazines, newspapers and websites.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15642", "revid": "40126538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15642", "title": "January", "text": "1st month in the Julian and Gregorian calendars\nJanuary is the first month of the year in the Julian and Gregorian calendars. Its length is 31 days. The first day of the month is known as New Year's Day. It is, on average, the coldest month of the year within most of the Northern Hemisphere (where it is the second month of winter) and the warmest month of the year within most of the Southern Hemisphere (where it is the second month of summer). In the Southern hemisphere, January is the seasonal equivalent of July in the Northern hemisphere and vice versa.\nAncient Roman observances during this month include Cervula and Juvenalia, celebrated January 1, as well as one of three Agonalia, celebrated January 9, and Carmentalia, celebrated January 11. These dates do not correspond to the modern Gregorian calendar.\nHistory.\nJanuary (in Latin, \"Ianuarius\") is named after Janus, the god of beginnings and transitions in ancient Roman religion and mythology.\nTraditionally, the original Roman calendar consisted of 10 months totaling 304 days, winter being considered a month-less period. Around 713 BC, the semi-mythical successor of Romulus, King Numa Pompilius, is supposed to have added the months of January and February, so that the calendar covered a standard lunar year (354 days). Although March was originally the first month in the old Roman calendar, January became the first month of the calendar year either under Numa or under the Decemvirs about 450\u00a0BC (Roman writers differ). In contrast, each specific calendar year was identified by the names of the two consuls, who entered office on March 15th until 153\u00a0BC, at which point they started entering office on January 1st.\nVarious Christian feast dates were used for the New Year in Europe during the Middle Ages, including March 25 (Feast of the Annunciation) and December 25. However, medieval calendars were still displayed in the Roman fashion with twelve columns from January to December. Beginning in the 16th century, European countries began officially making January 1 the start of the New Year once again\u2014sometimes called \"Circumcision Style\" because this was the date of the Feast of the Circumcision, being the seventh day after December 25.\nHistorical names for January include its original Roman designation, Ianuarius, the Saxon term \"Wulf-monath\" (meaning \"wolf month\") and Charlemagne's designation Wintarmanoth (\"winter / cold month\"). In Slovene, it is traditionally called \"prosinec\"; the name, associated with millet bread and the act of asking for something, was first written in 1466 in the \u0160kofja Loka manuscript.\nAccording to Theodor Mommsen, 1 January became the first day of the year in 600 AUC of the Roman calendar (153\u00a0BC), due to disasters in the Lusitanian War. A Lusitanian chief called Punicus invaded the Roman territory, defeated two Roman governors, and killed their troops. The Romans resolved to send a consul to Hispania, and in order to accelerate the dispatch of aid, \"they even made the new consuls enter into office two months and a half before the legal time\" (March 15).\nSymbols.\nJanuary's birthstone is the garnet, which represents constancy. Its birth flower is the cottage pink \"Dianthus caryophyllus\", galanthus or traditional carnation. The zodiac signs are Capricorn (until January 19) and Aquarius (January 20 onwards).\nObservances.\n\"This list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance.\"\nFood months in the United States.\n\"This list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance.\"\nNon-Gregorian.\n\"All Baha'i, Islamic, and Jewish observances begin at sundown prior to the date listed, and end at sundown on the date in question.\"\nMoveable.\n\"This list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance.\"\nJanuary 2 unless that day is a Sunday, in which case January 3\nFirst Friday\nSecond Saturday\nSecond Monday\nFriday before third Monday\nThird Friday\nSunday closest to January 22\nThird full week of January\nLast full week of January\nThird Monday\nWednesday of the third full week of January\nFriday between January 19\u201325\nLast Saturday\nLast Sunday\nJanuary 30 or the nearest Sunday\nLast Monday in January\nFourth Monday\nMonday Closest to January 29\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15643", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15643", "title": "JohnnyUnitas", "text": ""}
{"id": "15644", "revid": "49059523", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15644", "title": "Johnny Unitas", "text": "American football player (1933\u20132002)\nJohn Constantine Unitas (; May 7, 1933 \u2013 September 11, 2002) was an American professional football quarterback who played in the National Football League (NFL) for 18 seasons, primarily with the Baltimore Colts. Nicknamed \"Johnny U.\" and \"the Golden Arm\", Unitas was considered the prototype of the modern era marquee quarterback and is regarded as one of the greatest NFL players of all time.\nDuring his professional career from 1956 to 1973, Unitas set many NFL records and was named Most Valuable Player three times in 1959, 1964, and 1967, in addition to receiving 10 Pro Bowl and five first-team All-Pro honors. He helped lead the Colts to four championship titles; three in the pre-merger era in 1958, 1959, and 1968, and one in the Super Bowl era in Super Bowl V. His first championship victory is regarded as one of the league's greatest games and is credited with helping popularize the NFL. Between 1956 and 1960, he set the record for most consecutive games with a touchdown pass at 47, which held for 52 years.\nUnitas is one of only six players to be named to the NFL's 50th, 75th and 100th Anniversary All-Time Teams. He led the league in fourth quarter comebacks in six seasons, more than any other quarterback, and is praised for his development of the hurry-up offense. Unitas was inducted to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1979.\nEarly life.\nJohn Constantine Unitas was born during the Great Depression on May 7, 1933, in Pittsburgh to Francis J. Unitas and Helen Superfisky, the third of four children. Both parents were of Lithuanian descent; his surname was a result of a phonetic transliteration of a common Lithuanian last name \"Jonaitis\". The elder Unitas ran a modest coal delivery business. Unitas grew up in the Mount Washington neighborhood with a Catholic upbringing.\nWhen Unitas was five years old, his father died of cardiovascular renal disease complicated by pneumonia, leaving the young boy and his siblings to be raised by their mother. When some relatives wanted to split up her children to different homes she refused, determined to keep the family together. She continued the coal delivery business, and worked as an office cleaner four nights a week, from 10 pm to 6 am.\nAt St. Justin's High School in Pittsburgh, Unitas played halfback and quarterback, becoming the best quarterback in the Catholic \"B\" League, under coach Max Carey. Hundreds of fans would come to his games to watch Unitas throw his \"jump pass\", which could be as far as 60 yards in the air. In his senior year, Unitas was named quarterback on Pittsburgh's All-Catholic High School Team.\nCollege career.\nIn his younger years, Unitas dreamed about being part of the Notre Dame Fighting Irish football team, but when he tried out for the team, coach Frank Leahy said that he was just too skinny and he would \"get murdered\" if he was put on the field. Other sources say Leahy was not present at Unitas's workout for Notre Dame, and assistant coach Bernie Crimmins passed on Unitas, because he thought the team's fans could not accept a 135-pound quarterback. A later scholarship offer at the University of Pittsburgh was withdrawn. In 1952, Crimmins became Indiana University's head coach and attempted to recruit Unitas away from a collapsing Louisville program, but Unitas was loyal and stayed at Louisville.\nInstead, Unitas attended the University of Louisville, under coach Frank Camp, after being recruited by young assistant coach Frank Gitschier. Gitschier would later teach Unitas the basics of quarterback play, give the introduction speech at Unitas's Hall of Fame induction in 1979, and in 2002 give a eulogy at Unitas's funeral. In his four-year career as a Louisville Cardinal, Unitas completed 245 passes for 3,139 yards and 27 touchdowns. Reportedly, the Unitas weighed on his first day of practice. His first start was in the fifth game of the 1951 season against St. Bonaventure (quarterbacked by future NFL player and coach Ted Marchibroda), where Unitas completed 11 consecutive passes and three touchdowns to give the Cardinals a 21\u201319 lead. Louisville ended up losing the game 22\u201321 on a disputed field goal, but found a new starting quarterback. Unitas also played safety on defense. Unitas completed 12 of 19 passes for 240 yards and four touchdowns in a 35\u201328 victory over Houston (a 19-point favorite), including a 92-yard touchdown pass. The team finished the season 5\u20134 overall and 4\u20131 with Unitas starting. He completed 46 of 99 passes for 602 yards and nine touchdowns (44).\nIn 1952, the team's motto was, \"Unitas We Stand, Divided We Fall\". However, the university had decided to de-emphasize sports. The new president at Louisville, Dr. Philip Grant Davidson, reduced the amount of athletic aid and tightened academic standards for athletes. As a result, 15 players scholarships were terminated. Unitas maintained his by taking on a new elective: square dancing. In 1952, coach Frank Camp switched the team to two-way football. Unitas not only played safety or linebacker on defense and quarterback on offense, but also returned kicks and punts on special teams. The Cardinals won their first game against Wayne State, and then Florida State in the second game. Unitas completed 16 of 21 passes for 198 yards and three touchdowns. In the next game against Florida State, Louisville won 41\u201314. While under the Seminole rush, Unitas, a right-hander, threw a left-handed pass between his legs for 15 yards, as reported by future Florida State quarterback Lee Corso who had seen film of the play and marveled at Unitas' quickness. The rest of the season was a struggle for the Cardinals, who finished 3\u20135. Unitas completed 106 of 198 passes for 1,540 yards and 12 touchdowns.\nThe team won their first game in 1953, against Murray State, and lost the rest for a record of 1\u20137. One of the most memorable games of the season came in a 59\u20136 loss against Tennessee, which was played in Knoxville, Tennessee. Unitas completed 9 out of 19 passes for 73 yards, rushed 9 times for 52 yards, returned six kickoffs for 85 yards, fielded one punt for three yards, and had 86 percent of the team's tackles. The only touchdown the team scored was in the fourth quarter when Unitas made a fake pitch to the running back and ran the ball 23 yards for a touchdown. His also kicked off and punted that day. When one of his teammates was injured in the third quarter, Unitas lifted him up and carried the injured man off the field.\nUnitas himself was hurt later in the fourth quarter while trying to run the ball, and was helped off the field. As described by Bob Wilson of the \"Knoxville News-Sentinel\", \"'Battered and bruised, Unitas was helped off the field later in the final period as the [Tennessee] spectators saluted his gifted and courageous play with an ovation that resounded across Loudon Lake.\" When he got to the locker room he was so tired that his jersey and shoulder pads had to be cut off because he could not lift his arms. Louisville ended the season with a 20\u201313 loss to Eastern Kentucky. Unitas completed 49 of 95 passes for 470 yards and three touchdowns.\nUnitas was elected captain for the 1954 season, but due to an early injury did not see much playing time. His first start was the third game of the season, against Florida State. Of the 34-man team, 21 were freshmen. The 1954 Cardinals went 3\u20136, with their last win at home against Morehead State. Unitas was slowed by so many injuries his senior year his 527 passing yards ended second to Jim Houser's 560.\nDuring his time at Louisville, Unitas was 247 for 502 passing, for 2,912 yards and 27 touchdowns.\nProfessional career.\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nAfter his collegiate career, the Pittsburgh Steelers of the NFL drafted Unitas in the ninth round. However, he was released before the season began as the odd man out among four quarterbacks trying to fill three spots. Steelers' head coach Walt Kiesling had made up his mind about Unitas; he thought he was not smart enough to quarterback an NFL team, and he was not given any snaps in practice with the Steelers. Among those edging out Unitas was Ted Marchibroda, whom Unitas lost to in his first college game years earlier, future longtime NFL head coach. Out of pro football, Unitas\u2014by this time married\u2014worked in construction in Pittsburgh to support his family. On the weekends, he played quarterback, safety and punter on a local semi-professional team called the Bloomfield Rams for $6 a game.\nBaltimore Colts.\nIn 1956, Unitas joined the Baltimore Colts of the NFL under legendary coach Weeb Ewbank, after being asked at the last minute to join Bloomfield Rams lineman Jim Deglau, a Croatian steelworker with a life much like Unitas, at the latter's scheduled Colts tryout. The pair borrowed money from friends to pay for the gas to make the trip. Deglau later told a reporter after Unitas's death, \"[His] uncle told him not to come. [He] was worried that if he came down and the Colts passed on him, it would look bad (to other NFL teams).\" The Colts signed Unitas, much to the chagrin of the Cleveland Browns, who had hoped to claim the former Steeler quarterback.\nUnitas made his NFL debut with an inauspicious \"mop-up\" appearance against Detroit, going 0\u20132 with one interception. Two weeks later, starting quarterback George Shaw suffered a broken leg against the Chicago Bears. In his first serious action, Unitas's initial pass was intercepted and returned for a touchdown. Then he botched a hand-off on his next play, resulting in a fumble recovered by the Bears. Unitas rebounded quickly from that 58\u201327 loss, leading the Colts to an upset of Green Bay and their first win over Cleveland. He threw nine touchdown passes that year, including one in the season finale that started his record 47-game streak. His 55.6-percent completion mark was a rookie record.\nIn 1957, his first season as the Colts full-time starter at quarterback, Unitas finished first in the NFL in passing yards (2,550) and touchdown passes (24) as he helped lead the Colts to a 7\u20135 record, the first winning record in franchise history. At season's end, Unitas received the Jim Thorpe Trophy as the NFL's Most Valuable Player by the Newspaper Enterprise Association (NEA).\n1958: \"The Greatest Game Ever Played\".\nUnitas continued his prowess in 1958 passing for 2,007 yards and 19 touchdowns as the Colts won the Western Conference title. The Colts won the NFL championship under his leadership on December 28, 1958, by defeating the New York Giants 23\u201317 in sudden death overtime on a touchdown by fullback Alan Ameche. It was the first overtime game in NFL history, and is often referred to as the \"greatest game ever played\". The game, nationally televised by NBC, has been credited for sparking the rise in popularity of professional football during the 1960s.\n1959 MVP season.\nIn 1959, Unitas was named the NFL's MVP by the Associated Press (AP) for the first time, as well as United Press International's player of the year, after leading the NFL in passing yards (2,899), touchdown passes (32), and completions (193). He then led the Colts to a repeat championship, sparking a fourth quarter comeback to beat the Giants again 31\u201316 in the title game.\nWith the Colts fresh off back-to-back championships, Unitas was lauded by rookie head coach of the Green Bay Packers, Vince Lombardi, who said of the 26-year-old signal caller: \"Without him, they're just ordinary. With him, they're great. He's the best quarterback I've ever seen.\"\nBeginning of the 1960s.\nAs the 1960s began, the Colts' fortunes (and win totals) declined. Injuries to key players such as Alan Ameche, Raymond Berry, and Lenny Moore were a contributing factor. Unitas's streak of 47 straight games with at least one touchdown pass ended against the Los Angeles Rams in week 11 of the 1960 season. In spite of this, he topped the 3,000-yard passing mark for the first time and led the league in touchdown passes for the fourth consecutive season.\nAfter three middle-of-the-pack seasons, Colts owner Carroll Rosenbloom fired Weeb Ewbank and replaced him with Don Shula, who at the time was the youngest head coach in NFL history (33 years of age when he was hired). The Colts finished 8\u20136 in Shula's first season at the helm, good enough for only third place in the NFL's Western Conference, but they did end the season on a strong note by winning their final three games. The season was very successful for Unitas personally, as he led the NFL in passing yards with a career-best total of 3,481 and also led in completions with 237.\n1964 MVP season.\nIn the 1964 season the Colts returned to the top of the Western Conference. After dropping their season opener to the Minnesota Vikings, the Colts ran off 10 straight victories to finish with a 12\u20132 record. The season was one of Unitas's best as he finished with 2,824 yards passing, a league-best 9.26 yards per pass attempt, 19 touchdown passes and only 6 interceptions. He was named the NFL's Most Valuable Player by the AP and UPI for a second time. However, the season ended on a disappointing note for the Colts, as they were upset by the Cleveland Browns in the 1964 NFL Championship Game, losing 27\u20130.\nUnitas resumed his torrid passing in 1965, throwing for 2,530 yards, 23 touchdowns and finishing with a league-high and career-best 97.1 passer rating. But he was lost for the balance of the season due to a knee injury in a week 12 loss to the Bears. Backup quarterback Gary Cuozzo also suffered a season-ending injury the following week, and running back Tom Matte filled in as the emergency quarterback for the regular season finale and in a playoff loss to the Packers. The Colts and Packers finished in a tie for first place in the Western Conference, and a one-game playoff was played in Green Bay to decide who would be the conference representative in the 1965 NFL Championship Game. The Colts lost in overtime 13\u201310 due in large part to a game-tying field goal by Don Chandler that many, including Colts hall of fame coach Don Shula and Chandler himself years later, say was incorrectly ruled good.\nUnitas, healthy once more, threw for 2,748 yards and 22 touchdowns in 1966 in a return to Pro Bowl form. However, he posted a league-high 24 interceptions.\n1967 MVP season.\nAfter once again finishing second in the Western Conference in 1966, the Colts rebounded to finish 11\u20131\u20132 in 1967 tying the Los Angeles Rams for the NFL's best record. In winning his third MVP award from the AP and UPI in 1967 (and his second from the NEA), Unitas had a league-high 58.5 completion percentage and passed for 3,428 yards and 20 touchdowns. He openly complained about having tennis elbow and he threw eight interceptions and only three touchdown passes in the final five games. Once again, the season ended in loss for the Colts, as they were shut out of the newly instituted four-team NFL playoff after losing the divisional tiebreaker to the Rams, a 34\u201310 rout in the regular season finale.\nSuper Bowls and final Colt years.\nIn the final game of the 1968 preseason, the muscles in Unitas's arm were torn when he was hit by a member of the Dallas Cowboys defense. Unitas wrote in his autobiography that he felt his arm was initially injured by the use of the \"night ball\" that the NFL was testing for better TV visibility during night games. In a post-game interview the previous year, he noted having constant pain in his elbow for several years prior. He would spend most of the season sitting on the bench. The Colts still marched to a league-best 13\u20131 record behind backup quarterback and ultimate 1968 NFL MVP Earl Morrall. Although he was injured through most of the season, Unitas came off the bench to play in Super Bowl III, the famous game where Joe Namath guaranteed a New York Jets win despite conventional wisdom. Unitas's insertion was a desperation move in an attempt to retrieve dominance of the NFL over the upstart AFL. Although the Colts won an NFL Championship in 1968, they lost the Super Bowl to the AFL Champion New York Jets, thus becoming the first-ever NFL champions that were not also deemed world champions. Unitas helped put together the Colts' only score, a touchdown late in the game. Unitas also drove the Colts into scoring position following the touchdown and successful onside kick, but head coach Don Shula eschewed a field goal attempt, which (if successful) would have cut the Jets' lead to 16\u201310. Despite not playing until late in the third quarter, he still finished the game with more passing yards than the team's starter, Earl Morrall.\nAfter an off-season of rehabilitation on his elbow, Unitas rebounded in 1969, passing for 2,342 yards and 12 touchdowns with 20 interceptions. But the Colts finished with a disappointing 8\u20135\u20131 record and missed the playoffs.\nIn 1970, the NFL and AFL had merged into one league, and the Colts moved to the new American Football Conference, along with the Cleveland Browns and the Pittsburgh Steelers. He threw for 2,213 yards and 14 touchdowns while leading the Colts to an 11\u20132\u20131 season. In their first rematch with the Jets, Unitas and Namath threw a combined nine interceptions in a 29\u201322 Colts win. Namath threw 62 passes and broke his hand on the final play of the game, ending his season.\nUnitas threw for 390 yards, three touchdowns, and no interceptions in AFC playoff victories over the Cincinnati Bengals and the Oakland Raiders. In Super Bowl V against the Dallas Cowboys, he was knocked out of the game with a rib injury in the second quarter, soon after throwing a 75-yard touchdown pass (setting a then-Super Bowl record) to John Mackey. However, he had also thrown two interceptions before his departure from the game. Earl Morrall came in to lead the team to a last-second, 16\u201313 victory.\nIn 1971, Unitas split playing time with Morrall, throwing only three touchdown passes. He started both playoff games, a win over the Cleveland Browns that sent the Colts to the AFC Championship Game against Don Shula and the Miami Dolphins, which they lost by a score of 21\u20130. Unitas threw three interceptions in the game, one of which was returned for a touchdown by safety Dick Anderson.\nThe 1972 season saw the Colts declining. After losing the season opener, Unitas was involved in the second and final regular season head-to-head meeting with \"Broadway\" Joe Namath. The first was in 1970 (won by the Colts, 29\u201322). The last meeting took place on September 24, 1972, at Memorial Stadium. He threw for 376 yards and three touchdowns, but Namath upstaged him again, bombing the Colts for 496 yards and six touchdowns in a 44\u201334 Jets victory \u2013 their first over Baltimore since the 1970 merger. After losing four of their first five games, the Colts fired head coach Don McCafferty, and benched Unitas.\nOne of the more memorable moments in football history came on Unitas's last game in a Colts uniform at Memorial Stadium, in a game against the Buffalo Bills. He was not the starter for this game, but the Colts were blowing the Bills out by a score of 28\u20130 behind Marty Domres; Unitas entered the game due to the fans chanting, \"We want Unitas!!!\", and a plan devised by head coach John Sandusky to convince Unitas that the starting quarterback was injured. Unitas came onto the field and threw two passes, one of which was a long touchdown to wide receiver Eddie Hinton which would be his last pass as a Colt. The Colts won the game by a score of 35\u20137. A small plane flew over the stadium trailing a banner that read, \u201cUnitas We Stand\u201d.\nSan Diego.\nUnitas was traded from the Colts to the San Diego Chargers on January 20, 1973, in a transaction that originally had future considerations returning to Baltimore. The deal's only obstacle was the personal services contract he had signed with the Colts in 1970 which would have kept him employed within the organization on an annual salary of $30,000 over ten years once his career as an active player ended. The pact had been signed when the ballclub was owned by Carroll Rosenbloom who subsequently acquired the Los Angeles Rams on July 13, 1972, in a franchise swap with Robert Irsay. The deal was completed when the Chargers purchased that contract. Eager to sever all ties with the Colts, Unitas signed a new two-year contract with the Chargers on June 8, 1973. He succeeded John Hadl who had requested and was granted a trade to the Rams.\nUnitas started the season with a 38\u20130 loss to the Washington Redskins. He threw for just 55 yards and three interceptions and was sacked five times. His final victory as a starter came against the Buffalo Bills in week 2. Unitas was 10\u201318 for 175 yards, two touchdown passes, and no interceptions in a 34\u20137 Chargers rout.\nUnitas threw two first-half interceptions, passed for only 19 yards, and went 2-for-9 against the Pittsburgh Steelers. He was then replaced by rookie quarterback and future Hall of Famer Dan Fouts. He made only one other game appearance, in the eighth game of the season against the Chiefs, throwing a single pass for an eight-yard gain. After posting a 1\u20133 record as a starter, Unitas retired in the preseason of 1974, on July 25, 1974.\nRecords and accomplishments.\nUnitas won three NFL championships (1958, 1959, 1970), and three MVP awards (1959, 1964, 1967). He was first-team All Pro five times (1958, 1959, 1964, 1965, 1967), and second team All-Pro three times (1957, 1960, 1963). He was also chosen for ten Pro Bowls (1957\u20131964, 1966, 1967). He was the league's passing yards leader four times (1957, 1959, 1960, 1963), led the NFL in touchdown passes four times (1957\u20131960) and led the NFL in passer rating twice (1958, 1965).\nUnitas led the NFL in fourth quarter comebacks six times (1958, 1961, 1962, 1965, 1967, and 1970), more than any other quarterback. He is credited with laying the foundation for the two-minute drill.\nHis 32 touchdown passes in 1959 were a record at the time, making Unitas the first quarterback to hit the 30 touchdown mark in a season. Early in his career he broke the single season records for completion percentage by a rookie (1956), total passing yards (1960), total completions (1963), and yards per passing attempt (1964). His 47-game consecutive touchdown streak between 1956 and 1960 was a record considered by many to be unbreakable. He led the league in touchdown passes from 1957 to 1960. The streak stood for 52 years before being broken by New Orleans Saints quarterback Drew Brees in a game against the San Diego Chargers on October 7, 2012.\nUnitas finished his 18 NFL seasons with 2,830 completions in 5,186 attempts for 40,239 yards and 290 touchdowns, with 253 interceptions. He also rushed for 1,777 yards and 13 touchdowns. Plagued by arm trouble in his later seasons, he threw more interceptions (64) than touchdowns (38) in 1968\u20131973. After averaging 215.8 yards per game in his first 12 seasons, his production fell to 124.4 in his final six. His passer rating plummeted from 82.9 to 60.4 for the same periods. Even so, Unitas set many passing records during his career. He was the first quarterback to throw for more than 40,000 yards, despite playing during an era when NFL teams played shorter seasons of 12 or 14 games (as opposed to today's 17-game seasons) and prior to modern passing-friendly rules implemented in 1978.\nUnitas was selected to the NFL's All-Decade Team of the 1960s, the NFL's 50th Anniversary Team, the NFL's 75th Anniversary Team and the NFL 100th Anniversary All-Time Team. He was selected Player of the Decade for the 1960s, and named \"Greatest Player in the First 50 Years of Pro Football\".\nDifferent era.\nRule changes and statistical differences.\nUnitas played his entire career in what is sometimes called the \"dead ball\" era, before the 1978 NFL rule changes made to favor passing offense. The two key rules being the \"Mel Blount Rule\" limiting the amount of physical play a defender can use against a receiver, and the rule allowing offensive lineman to extend and grab while blocking instead of keeping their fists closed. The top four Hall of Fame quarterback ratings from the dead ball era are Sonny Jurgenson (82.62), Len Dawson (82.56), Bart Starr (80.47), and Unitas (78.2). There are 34 modern quarterbacks with ratings higher than Jurgenson, with thirteen above a 90 rating. Thus, it has been said that the records from the two eras cannot be fairly compared. It has also been argued that the 1978 rule changes, and ensuing rule changes since to favor the offense, have had as much or more impact on raising quarterback statistics to higher and higher numbers, as increasing the number of games played in a season from 12 to 17 since the 1950s have had.\nRule changes and quarterback protection.\nMore rules aimed at protecting quarterbacks from physical harm also have been implemented since Unitas retired. In describing Unitas in 2002 after his death, \"Sports Illustrated\" writer Paul Zimmerman observed of this earlier era, \"The NFL hadn't liberalized the passing rules. His receivers could get mugged downfield. Defensive linemen could head-slap their way into the backfield, and when they homed in on a quarterback they could hit him any way they wanted. None of today's cellophane-wrapper protection from the officials. ... And Unitas got hit plenty.\" Upton Bell, former Colts and Patriots executive and son of NFL Commissioner Bert Bell, in comparing Unitas to modern quarterbacks stated, \"They damaged quarterbacks in previous eras. Today they try to preserve them.\" Bell observed the effects on a quarterback's passing if he knew he would be hit after throwing (old rules) or not (modern rules), and how the best quarterbacks of the modern era would not have been healthy enough to play at a high level into their later thirties if they had been subjected to the unchecked violent play of earlier eras.\nThe Colts played the most brutal game in their history on November 13, 1960, in Chicago against the Chicago Bears. Unitas once said that Bears coach George Halas offered $500 to any player knocking Unitas out of the game. In the same game, Gino Marchetti said he was hit high and at the knees by two Bears simultaneously, the hardest he was ever hit in a football game, one of the Bears later apologizing that Halas had told them to do it. With 17 seconds left in the game (Bears up 20\u201317), Unitas said that Hall of Fame Bears middle linebacker Bill George had Unitas by the legs after a blitz, the ball having been thrown, holding Unitas upright at the behest of Hall of Fame defensive end Doug Adkins whose ensuing tackle hit Unitas in the head.\nUnitas' nose was busted and blood was pouring out; he would have a scar on the bridge of his nose for the rest of his life. The trainers could not stanch the bleeding, and Unitas refused to leave the game. He scooped up mud from the field and gave it to offensive lineman Alex Sandusky (or Dick Szymanski in other tellings) who shoved it into Unitas' nostrils. Unitas continued the game, throwing a 37-yard touchdown pass to Lenny Moore for a Colts victory. However, the battered Colts did not win another game the rest of the season, and lost their opportunity for a third consecutive world championship.\nThe and Adkins stated it was not his intention to hurt Unitas, as his shoulder pad inadvertently got under Unitas' helmet. He said Unitas was the greatest of all the great players of that time, and the best player Adkins played against because Unitas was so tough. In describing Unitas' last second pass to Moore that day, Adkins said, \"You had to beat [Unitas] the whole 60 minutes.\" Hall of Fame defensive tackle, and NFL 100th Anniversary All Time teammate of both Adkins and Unitas, Merlin Olsen said of Unitas, \"'The thing that makes Johnny Unitas the greatest of all time isn't his arm or even his football sense. ... It's his courage.'\"\nPost-playing years.\nAfter his playing days were finished, Unitas settled in Baltimore where he raised his family while also pursuing a career in broadcasting, doing color commentary for NFL games on CBS in the 1970s. He was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1979. He was said to be in tune with the psyche of Baltimore, and former Maryland Governor and Baltimore Mayor William Donald Schaefer said, \"He never passed anybody by. ... He gave the city hope.'\" In 1999, NFL Films and HBO produced a documentary about Unitas. Pro Football Hall of Fame writer Ray Didinger, one of the program's writers and producers, emphasized that they wanted to show the relationship between the Colts and Baltimore as a powerful part of Unitas's story.\nAfter Robert Irsay moved the Colts franchise to Indianapolis in 1984, a move known to this day in Baltimore as \"Bob Irsay's Midnight Ride,\" he was so outraged that he cut all ties to the relocated team (though his No. 19 jersey is still retired by the Colts), declaring himself strictly a \"Baltimore\" Colt for the remainder of his life. Some other prominent old-time Colts followed his lead, although many attended the 1975 team's reunion at Lucas Oil Stadium in Indianapolis in 2009. A total of 39 Colts players from that 1975 team attended said reunion in Indianapolis, including Bert Jones and Lydell Mitchell. Unitas asked the Pro Football Hall of Fame on numerous occasions (including on Roy Firestone's film \"Up Close\") to remove his display unless it was listed as belonging to the Baltimore Colts. The Hall of Fame has never complied with the request. Unitas donated his Colts memorabilia to the Babe Ruth Museum in Baltimore. They were on display at the Sports Legends Museum at Camden Yards until its closure in 2015.\nUnitas was inducted into the American Football Association's Semi Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1987.\nUnitas actively lobbied for another NFL team to come to Baltimore. After the football organization that made up the original Cleveland Browns moved to Baltimore in 1996 and established the Baltimore Ravens, he and some of the other old-time Colts attended the Ravens' first game ever against the Raiders on Opening Day at Memorial Stadium. He was frequently seen on the Ravens' sidelines at home games (most prominently in 1998 when the now-Indianapolis Colts played the Ravens in Baltimore) and received a thunderous ovation every time he was pictured on each of the huge widescreens at M&amp;T Bank Stadium. He was often seen on the 30-yard line on the Ravens side.\nWhen the NFL celebrated its first 50 years, Unitas was voted the league's best player. Green Bay Packers Hall of Fame middle linebacker Ray Nitschke said of Unitas, \"'What a tough guy and what a leader. ... He was the best I ever faced'\". Retired Bears quarterback Sid Luckman said of Unitas, \"He was better than me, better than Sammy Baugh, better than anyone.\" Hall of Fame player, and NFL coach, Raymond Berry said that what made Unitas unique \"was his uncanny instinct for calling the right play at the right time, his icy composure under fire, his fierce competitiveness and his utter disregard for his own safety\".\nPersonal life.\nOn November 20, 1954, Unitas, at age 21, married his high school sweetheart Dorothy Hoelle. They lived in Towson, Maryland and had five children before divorcing. Unitas's second wife was Sandra Lemon, whom he married on June 26, 1972. They had three children, lived in Baldwin, and remained married until his death.\nTowson University, where Unitas was a major fund-raiser and which his children attended, named its football and lacrosse complex Johnny Unitas Stadium in recognition of both his football career and service to the university.\nToward the end of his life, Unitas brought media attention to the many permanent physical disabilities that he and his fellow players suffered during their careers before heavy padding and other safety features became popular. Unitas had both knees replaced because of an injury in a 1963 Bears game. As the result of an injury to his right arm and elbow first suffered against the Dallas Cowboys in 1968, he eventually could not pick up a fork to feed himself with his right hand in later years. Also, his fingers had been repeatedly broken over the years, and he had no use of the middle three fingers on his right hand. He would slowly sign autographs with his thumb and little finger, and play golf by strapping his hand to the club with a Velcro strip. He could not perform any physical activity more strenuous than golf due to his artificial knees.\nIn 1997, a five-hour surgery on the arm was not successful. He sought league financed disability payments, but was refused because he was receiving a pension and had not sought disability by age 55, even though the severe hand problem did not arise until he was 60. Although his hand was virtually useless, the league also said he was not totally and permanently disabled. Shortly after his death, an opinion column noted that it was \"a sad commentary on a league that Unitas helped bring into the television age. It was his mastery of the game that attracted countless numbers of fans to the sport and television.\"\nIn 1991, Unitas and his wife filed for bankruptcy protection under Chapter 11. Their court filings showed that the couple owed creditors as much as $3.2 million but had assets of about $1.4 million. His financial problems arose in part from a business venture in which he and two partners took out loans to buy National Circuits Inc., a maker of printed circuit boards, and the firm subsequently failed.\nOn September 11, 2002, Unitas died from a heart attack while exercising at the Kernan Physical Therapy Center (now The University of Maryland Rehabilitation &amp; Orthopaedic Institute) in Baltimore. His funeral was held at Cathedral of Mary Our Queen in Baltimore. Unitas was buried at Dulaney Valley Memorial Gardens in Timonium, Maryland.\nBetween his death and October 4, 2002, 56,934 people signed an online petition urging the Baltimore Ravens to rename the Ravens' home stadium (owned by the State of Maryland) after Unitas. These requests were unsuccessful since the lucrative naming rights had already been leased by the Ravens to Buffalo-based M&amp;T Bank. However, on October 20, 2002, the Ravens dedicated the front area of the stadium's main entrance as Unitas Plaza and unveiled a statue of Unitas as the centerpiece of the plaza; as well as adding Unitas and the other Baltimore Colt hall of famers (Lenny Moore, Art Donovan, Jim Parker, Raymond Berry, and John Mackey) to the Ravens Ring of Honor.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15645", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15645", "title": "John Jacob Astor", "text": "German-born American businessman (1763\u20131848)\nJohn Jacob Astor (born Johann Jakob Astor; July 17, 1763 \u2013 March 29, 1848) was a German-born American businessman, merchant, real estate mogul, and investor. Astor made his fortune mainly in a fur trade monopoly, by exporting opium into the Chinese Empire, and by investing in real estate in or around New York City during the late 18th and early 19th centuries. He was the first prominent member of the Astor family and the first multi-millionaire in the United States.\nBorn in Germany, Astor immigrated to England as a teenager and worked as a musical instrument manufacturer. He moved to the United States after the American Revolutionary War (1775\u20131783). Seeing the expansion of population to the west, Astor entered the fur trade and built a monopoly, managing a business empire that extended to the Great Lakes region and north into British North America (future Dominion of Canada), and later expanded into the Western United States and the American frontier West and extended to the far West Coast and Pacific Ocean. Following a decline in demand due to changing European styles and tastes in beaver fur mens' hats and clothing tastes, he got out of the fur trade in 1830, diversifying by investing in New York City real estate. Astor became one of the wealthiest men in the United States and became a prominent patron of the arts.\nAt the time of his death, Astor's estate was estimated to be $20 to $30 million, roughly equivalent to $\u00a0million to $\u00a0billion in 2024. In proportion to the GDP, he was one of the richest people in modern history, with 0.9% to 1.35% of the US GDP at his time of death. This was previously popularised by Nathaniel P. Tallmadge remarking \"one in every 100 dollars in this country ends up in J Astor's hands\" during Tallmadge's 1839-1840 campaign for the U.S. Senate.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nJohann Jakob Astor was born in 1763 in Walldorf, a town near Heidelberg in the Electoral Palatinate, which is in the present-day German state of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg. He was the youngest son of Johann Jacob Astor and Maria Magdalena vom Berg. His three older brothers were George, Henry, and Melchior. In his childhood, Johann worked in his father's butcher shop and as a dairy salesman. The Astor family ancestors were Waldensians who had presumably fled France due to religious persecution. In 1779, at the age of 16, he moved to London to join his brother George in working for an uncle's piano and flute manufacturer, Astor &amp; Broadwood. While there, he learned English and anglicized his name to John Jacob Astor.\nMigration to the United States.\nIn November 1783, just after the end of the American Revolutionary War, Astor boarded a ship for the United States, arriving in Baltimore around March of the following year. There, he rented a room from Sarah Cox Todd, a widow, and began a flirtation with his landlady's daughter, also named Sarah Cox Todd. The young couple married in 1785. His intent had been to join his brother Henry, who had established a butcher shop in New York City. A chance meeting with a fur trader on his voyage had inspired him to join the North American fur trade as well. After working at his brother's shop for a time, Astor began to purchase raw hides from Native Americans, prepare them himself, and resell them in London and elsewhere at great profit. He opened his own fur goods shop in New York in the late 1780s and also served as the New York agent of his uncle's musical instrument business.\nIn 1789, along with Dubois &amp; Stodart, he co-founded the Francis Bacon Piano Company.\nFortune from fur trade.\nAstor took advantage of the 1794 Jay Treaty between Great Britain and the United States, which opened new markets in Canada and the Great Lakes region. In London, Astor at once made a contract with the North West Company, which from Montreal rivaled the trade interests of the Hudson's Bay Company, then based in London.\nAstor imported furs from Montreal to New York and shipped them to Europe. By 1800, he had amassed over a quarter of a million dollars (equivalent to about $\u00a0million in 2024) and had become one of the leading figures in the fur trade. His agents worked throughout the western areas and were ruthless in competition. In 1800, following the example of the \"Empress of China\", the first American trading vessel to China, Astor traded mostly opium, but also, furs, teas, and sandalwood at the port of Canton in China, and greatly benefited from it.\nThe U.S. Embargo Act of 1807 disrupted Astor's import/export business because it closed off trade with Canada. With the permission of President Thomas Jefferson, Astor established the American Fur Company on April 6, 1808. He later formed subsidiaries: the Pacific Fur Company, and the Southwest Fur Company (in which Canadians had a part), in order to control fur trading in the Great Lakes areas and Columbia River region. His Columbia River trading post at Fort Astoria (established in April 1811) was the first United States community on the Pacific coast. He financed the overland Astor Expedition in 1810\u20131812 to reach the outpost. Members of the expedition were to discover South Pass, through which hundreds of thousands of settlers on the Oregon, Mormon, and California Trails used to later pass through the Rocky Mountains.\nAstor's fur trading ventures were disrupted during the War of 1812, when the British captured his trading posts. In 1816, he joined the opium smuggling trade. His American Fur Company purchased ten tons of Ottoman-produced opium, and shipped the contraband to Canton onboard the packet ship \"Macedonian\". Astor later left the Chinese opium trade and sold opium solely in Britain.\nAstor's business rebounded in 1817 after the U.S. Congress passed a protectionist law that barred foreign fur traders from U.S. territories. The American Fur Company came to dominate trading in the area around the Great Lakes, absorbing competitors in a monopoly. Astor had a townhouse at 233 Broadway in New York and a country estate, Hellgate, in the northern part of the city.\nIn 1822, Astor established the Robert Stuart House on Mackinac Island in Michigan as headquarters for the reorganized American Fur Company, making the island a metropolis of the fur trade. Washington Irving described this at length, based on contemporary documents, diaries, etc., in his travelogue \"Astoria\". Astor's commercial connections extended over the entire globe, and his ships were found in every sea. He and Sarah moved to a townhouse on Prince Street in New York.\nReal estate and retirement.\nAstor began buying land in New York City in 1799 and acquired sizable holdings along the waterfront. After the start of the 19th century, flush with China trade profits, he became more systematic, ambitious, and calculating by investing in New York real estate. In 1803, he bought a 70-acre farm on which he built the Astor Mansion at Hellgate. The property ran west of Broadway to the Hudson River between 42nd and 46th streets. That same year, and the following year, he bought considerable holdings from the disgraced Aaron Burr.\nIn the 1830s, Astor foresaw that the next big boom would be the build-up of New York, which would soon emerge as one of the world's greatest cities. Astor sold his interests in the American Fur Company, as well as all his other ventures, and used the money to buy and develop large tracts of Manhattan Island real estate. Astor correctly predicted the city's rapid growth northward on the island, and he purchased more and more land beyond the then-existing city limits. Astor rarely built on his land, but leased it to others for rent and their use. After retiring from his business, Astor spent the rest of his life as a patron of culture. He supported the ornithologist John James Audubon in his studies, artwork, and travels, and the presidential campaign of Henry Clay.\nMarriage and family.\nOn September 19, 1785, Astor married Sarah Cox Todd (April 9, 1762 \u2013 August 3, 1842). Her parents were Scottish immigrants Adam Todd and Sarah Cox. Although she brought him a dowry of only $300, she possessed a frugal mind and a business judgment that he declared better than that of most merchants. She assisted him in the practical details of his business, and managed Astor's affairs when he was away from New York.\nThey had eight children:\nFraternal organizations.\nAstor belonged to the Freemasons, a fraternal order, and served as Master of Holland Lodge #8, New York City in 1788. Later he served as Grand Treasurer for the Grand Lodge of New York. He was president of the German Society of the City of New York from 1837 to 1841.\nLegacy.\nAt the time of his death in 1848, Astor was the wealthiest person in the United States, leaving an estate estimated to be worth between $20 and $30 million, (equivalent to about $\u00a0billion to $\u00a0billion in 2020) or 0.9% to 1.35% of estimated US GDP at the time. By comparison, the fortune of Jeff Bezos was worth approximately $200 billion in 2020, similar to Astor at approximately 0.9% of US GDP.\nIn his will, Astor bequeathed $400,000 to build the Astor Library for the New York public, which was later consolidated with other libraries to form the New York Public Library. He also left $50,000 for a poorhouse and orphanage in his German hometown of Walldorf. The \"Astorhaus\" is now operated as a museum honoring Astor. It is a renowned and popular fest hall for marriages. Astor donated gifts totaling $20,000 to the German Society of the City of New York, during his term as president, from 1837 until 1841.\nAstor left the bulk of his fortune to his second son William, because his eldest son, John Jr., was sickly and mentally unstable. Astor left enough money to care for John Jr. for the rest of his life. William continued building the family fortune, and was an ancestor of John Jacob Astor III, John Jacob Astor IV, and John Jacob Astor VI.\nAstor is buried in Trinity Church Cemetery in Manhattan. Many members of his family had joined its congregation, but Astor remained a member of the local German Reformed congregation to his death. In the short story \"Bartleby, the Scrivener,\" Herman Melville used Astor as a symbol of men who made the earliest fortunes in New York.\nThe pair of marble lions that sit by the entrance of the New York Public Library Main Branch at Fifth Avenue and 42nd Street were originally named Leo Astor and Leo Lenox, after Astor and James Lenox, who founded the library from his own collection. Next, they were called Lord Astor and Lady Lenox (both lions are males). Mayor Fiorello La Guardia renamed them \"Patience\" and \"Fortitude\" during the Great Depression.\nThe neighborhood of Astoria in Queens, New York City, is named after Astor.\nAstor Place in Manhattan, New York City, was named after Astor, soon after his death.\nThe coastal town of Astoria, Oregon, is named after Astor, as well as an elementary school named in his honor. The background to the founding of this town is described in Washington Irving's \"Astoria,\" a book whose writing was financed by Astor.\nThe historic neighborhood of Astor Park in Green Bay, Wisconsin, is named after Astor. In 1835, John Jacob Astor founded the Town of Astor in Wisconsin. After the Town of Astor was united with the Town of Navarino to form the Borough of Green Bay, one neighborhood was named after him.\nA popular intersection in the inner city of Budapest is named after him, as well as the corresponding metro station, indirectly, through the Grand Budapest Astoria Hotel, which is located there.\nIn 1908, when the association football club FC Astoria Walldorf was formed in Astor's birthplace in Germany, the group added \"Astoria\" to its name in his, and the family's, honor.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15651", "revid": "8412748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15651", "title": "Julian calendar", "text": "Calendar introduced by Julius Caesar\nThe Julian calendar is a solar calendar of 365 days in every year with an additional leap day every fourth year (without exception). The Julian calendar is still used as a religious calendar in parts of the Eastern Orthodox Church and in parts of Oriental Orthodoxy as well as by the Amazigh people (also known as the Berbers). For a quick calculation, between 1901 and 2099 the much more common Gregorian date equals the Julian date plus 13 days.\nThe Julian calendar was proposed in 46\u00a0BC by (and takes its name from) Julius Caesar, as a reform of the earlier Roman calendar, which was largely a lunisolar one. It took effect on 1 January 45 BC, by his edict. Caesar's calendar became the predominant calendar in the Roman Empire and subsequently most of the Western world for more than 1,600 years, until 1582 when Pope Gregory XIII promulgated a revised calendar. Ancient Romans typically designated years by the names of ruling consuls; the \"Anno Domini\" system of numbering years was not devised until 525, and became widespread in Europe in the eighth century.\nThe Julian calendar has two types of years: a normal year of 365 days and a leap year of 366 days. They follow a simple cycle of three normal years and one leap year, giving an average year that is 365.25 days long. That is more than the actual solar year value of approximately 365.2419 days (the current value, which varies), which means the Julian calendar gains one\u00a0day every 129\u00a0years. In other words, the Julian calendar gains 3.1 days every 400 years. \nGregory's calendar reform modified the Julian rule by eliminating occasional leap days, to reduce the average length of the calendar year from 365.25 days to 365.2425 days and thus dramatically reducing the Julian calendar's drift against the solar year: the Gregorian calendar gains just 0.1 day over 400 years. For any given event during the years from 1901 through 2099, its date according to the Julian calendar is 13 days behind its corresponding Gregorian date (for instance Julian 1 January falls on Gregorian 14 January). Most Catholic countries adopted the new calendar immediately; Protestant countries did so slowly in the course of the following two centuries or so; most Orthodox countries retain the Julian calendar for religious purposes but adopted the Gregorian as their civil calendar in the early part of the twentieth century.\nHistory.\nMotivation.\nThe ordinary year in the previous Roman calendar consisted of 12 months, for a total of 355 days. In addition, a 27- or 28-day intercalary month, the Mensis Intercalaris, was sometimes inserted between February and March. This intercalary month was formed by inserting 22 or 23 days after the first 23 days of February; the last five days of February, which counted down toward the start of March, became the last five days of Intercalaris. The net effect was to add 22 or 23 days to the year, forming an intercalary year of 377 or 378 days. Some say the \"mensis intercalaris\" always had 27 days and began on either the first or the second day after the Terminalia (23 February).\nIf managed correctly, this system could have allowed the Roman year to stay roughly aligned to a tropical year. However, since the pontifices were often politicians, and because a Roman magistrate's term of office corresponded with a calendar year, this power was prone to abuse: a pontifex could lengthen a year in which he or one of his political allies was in office, or refuse to lengthen one in which his opponents were in power.\nCaesar's reform was intended to solve this problem permanently, by creating a calendar that remained aligned to the sun without any human intervention. This proved useful very soon after the new calendar came into effect. Varro used it in 37\u00a0BC to fix calendar dates for the start of the four seasons, which would have been impossible only 8 years earlier. A century later, when Pliny dated the winter solstice to 25 December because the sun entered the 8th degree of Capricorn on that date, this stability had become an ordinary fact of life.\nContext of the reform.\nAlthough the approximation of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;365+1\u20444 days for the tropical year had been known for a long time, ancient solar calendars had used less precise periods, resulting in gradual misalignment of the calendar with the seasons.\nThe octaeteris, a cycle of eight lunar years popularised by Cleostratus (and also commonly attributed to Eudoxus) which was used in some early Greek calendars, notably in Athens, is 1.53 days longer than eight mean Julian years. The length of nineteen years in the cycle of Meton was 6,940 days, six hours longer than the mean Julian year. The mean Julian year was the basis of the 76-year cycle devised by Callippus (a student under Eudoxus) to improve the Metonic cycle.\nIn Persia (Iran) after the reform in the Persian calendar by introduction of the Persian Zoroastrian (i. e. Young Avestan) calendar in 503\u00a0BC and afterwards, the first day of the year (1 Farvardin=Nowruz) slipped against the vernal equinox at the rate of approximately one day every four years.\nLikewise in the Egyptian calendar, a fixed year of 365 days was in use, drifting by one day against the sun in four years. An unsuccessful attempt to add an extra day every fourth year was made in 238\u00a0BC (Decree of Canopus). Caesar probably experienced this \"wandering\" or \"vague\" calendar in that country. He landed in the Nile delta in October 48\u00a0BC and soon became embroiled in the Ptolemaic dynastic war, especially after Cleopatra managed to be \"introduced\" to him in Alexandria.\nCaesar imposed a peace, and a banquet was held to celebrate the event. Lucan depicted Caesar talking to a wise man called Acoreus during the feast, stating his intention to create a calendar more perfect than that of Eudoxus (Eudoxus was popularly credited with having determined the length of the year to be &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;365+1\u20444 days). But the war soon resumed and Caesar was attacked by the Egyptian army for several months until he achieved victory. He then enjoyed a long cruise on the Nile with Cleopatra before leaving the country in June 47\u00a0BC.\nCaesar returned to Rome in 46\u00a0BC and, according to Plutarch, called in the best philosophers and mathematicians of his time to solve the problem of the calendar. Pliny says that Caesar was aided in his reform by the astronomer Sosigenes of Alexandria who is generally considered the principal designer of the reform. Sosigenes may also have been the author of the astronomical almanac published by Caesar to facilitate the reform. Eventually, it was decided to establish a calendar that would be a combination between the old Roman months, the fixed length of the Egyptian calendar, and the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;365+1\u20444 days of Greek astronomy. According to Macrobius, Caesar was assisted in this by a certain Marcus Flavius.\nAdoption of the Julian calendar.\nCaesar's reform only applied to the Roman calendar. However, in the following decades many of the local civic and provincial calendars of the empire and neighbouring client kingdoms were aligned to the Julian calendar by transforming them into calendars with years of 365 days with an extra day intercalated every four years. The reformed calendars typically retained many features of the unreformed calendars. In many cases, the New Year was not on 1 January, the leap day was not on the traditional bissextile day, the old month names were retained, the lengths of the reformed months did not match the lengths of Julian months, and, even if they did, their first days did not match the first day of the corresponding Julian month. Nevertheless, since the reformed calendars had fixed relationships to each other and to the Julian calendar, the process of converting dates between them became quite straightforward, through the use of conversion tables known as \"hemerologia\".\nThe three most important of these calendars are the Alexandrian calendar and the Ancient Macedonian calendar\u2500which had two forms: the Syro-Macedonian and the 'Asian' calendars. Other reformed calendars are known from Cappadocia, Cyprus and the cities of (Roman) Syria and Palestine. Unreformed calendars continued to be used in Gaul (the Coligny calendar), Greece, Macedon, the Balkans and parts of Palestine, most notably in Judea.\nThe Asian calendar was an adaptation of the Ancient Macedonian calendar used in the Roman province of Asia and, with minor variations, in nearby cities and provinces. It is known in detail through the survival of decrees promulgating it issued in 8BC by the proconsul Paullus Fabius Maximus. It renamed the first month Dios as , and arranged the months such that each month started on the ninth day before the kalends of the corresponding Roman month; thus the year began on 23 September, Augustus's birthday.\nJulian reform.\nRealignment of the year.\nThe first step of the reform was to realign the start of the calendar year (1 January) to the tropical year by making 46\u00a0BC 445 days long, compensating for the intercalations which had been missed during Caesar's pontificate. This year had already been extended from 355 to 378 days by the insertion of a regular intercalary month in February. When Caesar decreed the reform, probably shortly after his return from the African campaign in late Quintilis (July), he added 67 more days by inserting two extraordinary intercalary months between November and December.\nThese months are called \"Intercalaris Prior\" and \"Intercalaris Posterior\" in letters of Cicero written at the time; there is no basis for the statement sometimes seen that they were called \"Undecimber\" and \"Duodecimber\", terms that arose in the 18th century over a millennium after the Roman Empire's collapse. Their individual lengths are unknown, as is the position of the Nones and Ides within them.\nBecause 46\u00a0BC was the last of a series of irregular years, this extra-long year was, and is, referred to as the \"last year of confusion\". The new calendar began operation after the realignment had been completed, in 45\u00a0BC.\nMonths.\nThe Julian months were formed by adding ten days to a regular pre-Julian Roman year of 355 days, creating a regular Julian year of 365 days. Two extra days were added to January, Sextilis (August) and December, and one extra day was added to April, June, September, and November. February was not changed in ordinary years, and so continued to be the traditional 28 days. Thus, the ordinary (i.e., non-leap year) lengths of all of the months were set by the Julian calendar to the same values they still hold today.\nThe Julian reform did not change the method used to account days of the month in the pre-Julian calendar, based on the Kalends, Nones and Ides, nor did it change the positions of these three dates within the months. Macrobius states that the extra days were added immediately before the last day of each month to avoid disturbing the position of the established religious ceremonies relative to the Nones and Ides of the month.\nThe inserted days were all initially characterised as \"dies fasti\" (F \u2013 see Roman calendar). The character of a few festival days was changed. In the early Julio-Claudian period a large number of festivals were decreed to celebrate events of dynastic importance, which caused the character of the associated dates to be changed to NP. However, this practice was discontinued around the reign of Claudius, and the practice of characterising days fell into disuse around the end of the first century AD: the Antonine jurist Gaius speaks of \"dies nefasti\" as a thing of the past.\nIntercalation.\nThe old intercalary month was abolished. The new leap day was dated as \"ante diem bis sextum Kalendas Martias\" ('the sixth doubled day before the Kalends of March'), usually abbreviated as \"a.d. bis VI Kal. Mart.\"; hence it is called in English the bissextile day. The year in which it occurred was termed \"annus bissextus\", in English the bissextile year.\nThere is debate about the exact position of the bissextile day in the early Julian calendar. The earliest direct evidence is a statement of the 2nd century jurist Celsus, who states that there were two-halves of a 48-hour day, and that the intercalated day was the \"posterior\" half. An inscription from AD\u00a0168 states that \"a.d. V Kal. Mart.\" was the day after the bissextile day. The 19th century chronologist Ideler argued that Celsus used the term \"posterior\" in a technical fashion to refer to the earlier of the two days, which requires the inscription to refer to the whole 48-hour day as the bissextile. Some later historians share this view. Others, following Mommsen, take the view that Celsus was using the ordinary Latin (and English) meaning of \"posterior\". A third view is that neither half of the 48-hour \"bis sextum\" was originally formally designated as intercalated, but that the need to do so arose as the concept of a 48-hour day became obsolete.\nThere is no doubt that the bissextile day eventually became the earlier of the two days for most purposes. In 238 Censorinus stated that it was inserted after the Terminalia (23 February) and was followed by the last five days of February, i.e., a.d. VI, V, IV, III and prid. Kal. Mart. (which would be 24 to 28 February in a common year and the 25th to 29th in a leap year). Hence he regarded the bissextum as the first half of the doubled day. All later writers, including Macrobius about 430, Bede in 725, and other medieval computists (calculators of Easter) followed this rule, as does the liturgical calendar of the Roman Catholic Church. However, Celsus' definition continued to be used for legal purposes. It was incorporated into Justinian's Digest, and in the English \"Statute De Anno et Die Bissextili\" of 1236, which was not formally repealed until 1879.\nThe effect of the bissextile day on the nundinal cycle is not discussed in the sources. According to Dio Cassius, a leap day was inserted in 41\u00a0BC to ensure that the first market day of 40\u00a0BC did not fall on 1 January, which implies that the old 8-day cycle was not immediately affected by the Julian reform. However, he also reports that in AD\u00a044, and on some previous occasions, the market day was changed to avoid a conflict with a religious festival. This may indicate that a single nundinal letter was assigned to both halves of the 48-hour bissextile day by this time, so that the Regifugium and the market day might fall on the same date but on different days. In any case, the 8-day nundinal cycle began to be displaced by the 7-day week in the first century AD, and dominical letters began to appear alongside nundinal letters in the fasti.\nYear length; leap years.\nThe Julian calendar has two types of year: \"normal\" years of 365 days and \"leap\" years of 366 days. There is a simple cycle of three \"normal\" years followed by a leap year and this pattern repeats forever without exception. The Julian year is, therefore, on average 365.25 days long. Consequently, the Julian year drifts over time with respect to the tropical (solar) year (365.24217 days).\nAlthough Greek astronomers had known, at least since Hipparchus, a century before the Julian reform, that the tropical year was slightly shorter than 365.25 days, the calendar did not compensate for this difference. As a result, the calendar year gains about three days every four centuries compared to observed equinox times and the seasons. This discrepancy was largely corrected by the Gregorian reform of 1582. The Gregorian calendar has the same months and month lengths as the Julian calendar, but, in the Gregorian calendar, year numbers evenly divisible by 100 are not leap years, except that those evenly divisible by 400 remain leap years (even then, the Gregorian calendar diverges from astronomical observations by one day in 3,030 years).\nLeap year error.\nAlthough the new calendar was much simpler than the pre-Julian calendar, the pontifices initially added a leap day every three years, instead of every four. There are accounts of this in Solinus, Pliny, Ammianus, Suetonius, and Censorinus.\nMacrobius gives the following account of the introduction of the Julian calendar:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Caesar's regulation of the civil year to accord with his revised measurement was proclaimed publicly by edict, and the arrangement might have continued to stand had not the correction itself of the calendar led the priests to introduce a new error of their own; for they proceeded to insert the intercalary day, which represented the four quarter-days, at the beginning of each fourth year instead of at its end, although the intercalation ought to have been made at the end of each fourth year and before the beginning of the fifth.\nThis error continued for thirty-six years by which time twelve intercalary days had been inserted instead of the number actually due, namely nine. But when this error was at length recognised, it too was corrected, by an order of Augustus, that twelve years should be allowed to pass without an intercalary day, since the sequence of twelve such years would account for the three days which, in the course of thirty-six years, had been introduced by the premature actions of the priests.\nSo, according to Macrobius,\nSome people have had different ideas as to how the leap years went. The above scheme is that of Scaliger (1583) in the table below. He established that the Augustan reform was instituted in 8\u00a0BC. The table below shows for each reconstruction the implied proleptic Julian date for the first day of Caesar's reformed calendar and the first Julian date on which the Roman calendar date matches the Julian calendar after the completion of Augustus' reform.\nBy the systems of Scaliger, Ideler and B\u00fcnting, the leap years prior to the suspension happen to be BC years that are divisible by 3, just as, after leap year resumption, they are the AD years divisible by 4.\nPierre Brind'Amour argued that \"only one day was intercalated between 1/1/45 and 1/1/40 (disregarding a momentary 'fiddling' in December of 41) to avoid the nundinum falling on Kal. Ian.\"\nAlexander Jones says that the correct Julian calendar was in use in Egypt in 24\u00a0BC, implying that the first day of the reform in both Egypt and Rome, 1 January 45 BC, was the Julian date 1\u00a0January if 45\u00a0BC was a leap year and 2\u00a0January if it was not. This necessitates fourteen leap days up to and including AD\u00a08 if 45\u00a0BC was a leap year and thirteen if it was not.\nIn 1999, a papyrus was discovered which gives the dates of astronomical phenomena in 24\u00a0BC in both the Egyptian and Roman calendars. From 30 August 26 BC (Julian), Egypt had two calendars: the old Egyptian in which every year had 365 days and the new Alexandrian in which every fourth year had 366 days. Up to 28 August 22 BC (Julian) the date in both calendars was the same. The dates in the Alexandrian and Julian calendars are in one-to-one correspondence except for the period from 29 August in the year preceding a Julian leap year to the following 24 February. From a comparison of the astronomical data with the Egyptian and Roman dates, Alexander Jones concluded that the Egyptian astronomers (as opposed to travellers from Rome) used the correct Julian calendar.\nBecause of the confusion about this period, we cannot be sure exactly what day (e.g. Julian day number) any particular Roman date refers to before March of 8\u00a0BC, except for those used in Egypt in 24BC which are secured by astronomy.\nAn inscription has been discovered which orders a new calendar to be used in the Province of Asia to replace the previous Greek lunar calendar. According to one translation\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Intercalation shall commence on the day after 14 Peritius [a.d. IX Kal. Feb, which would have been 15 Peritius] as it is currently constituted in the third year following promulgation of the decree. Xanthicus shall have 32 days in this intercalary year.\nThis is historically correct. It was decreed by the proconsul that the first day of the year in the new calendar shall be Augustus' birthday, a.d. IX Kal. Oct. Every month begins on the ninth day before the kalends. The date of introduction, the day after 14 Peritius, was 1 Dystrus, the next month. The month after that was Xanthicus. Thus Xanthicus began on a.d. IX Kal. Mart., and normally contained 31 days. In leap year, however, it contained an extra \"Sebaste day\", the Roman leap day, and thus had 32 days. From the lunar nature of the old calendar we can fix the starting date of the new one as 24\u00a0January, a.d. IX Kal. Feb 5 BC in the Julian calendar, which was a leap year. Thus from inception the dates of the reformed Asian calendar are in one-to-one correspondence with the Julian.\nAnother translation of this inscription is\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Intercalation shall commence on the day after the fourteenth day in the current month of Peritius [a.d. IX Kal. Feb], occurring every third year. Xanthicus shall have 32 days in this intercalary year.\nThis would move the starting date back three years to 8\u00a0BC, and from the lunar synchronism back to 26 January (Julian). But since the corresponding Roman date in the inscription is 24 January, this must be according to the incorrect calendar which in 8\u00a0BC Augustus had ordered to be corrected by the omission of leap days. As the authors of the previous paper point out, with the correct four-year cycle being used in Egypt and the three-year cycle abolished in Rome, it is unlikely that Augustus would have ordered the three-year cycle to be introduced in Asia.\nMonth names.\nThe Julian reform did not immediately cause the names of any months to be changed. The old intercalary month was abolished and replaced with a single intercalary day at the same point (i.e., five days before the end of February).\nRoman.\nThe Romans later renamed months after Julius Caesar and Augustus, renaming Quintilis as \"Iulius\" (July) in 44\u00a0BC and Sextilis as \"Augustus\" (August) in 8\u00a0BC. Quintilis was renamed to honour Caesar because it was the month of his birth. According to a quoted by Macrobius, Sextilis was renamed to honour Augustus because several of the most significant events in his rise to power, culminating in the fall of Alexandria, occurred in that month.\nOther months were renamed by other emperors, but apparently none of the later changes survived their deaths. In AD\u00a037, Caligula renamed September as \"Germanicus\" after his father; in AD\u00a065, Nero renamed April as \"Neroneus\", May as \"Claudius\" and June as \"Germanicus\"; and in AD\u00a084 Domitian renamed September as \"Germanicus\" and October as \"Domitianus\". Commodus was unique in renaming all twelve months after his own adopted names (January to December): \"Amazonius\", \"Invictus\", \"Felix\", \"Pius\", \"Lucius\", \"Aelius\", \"Aurelius\", \"Commodus\", \"Augustus\", \"Herculeus\", \"Romanus\", and \"Exsuperatorius\". The emperor Tacitus is said to have ordered that September, the month of his birth and accession, be renamed after him, but the story is doubtful since he did not become emperor before November 275. Similar honorific month names were implemented in many of the provincial calendars that were aligned to the Julian calendar.\nOther name changes were proposed but were never implemented. Tiberius rejected a senatorial proposal to rename September as \"Tiberius\" and October as \"Livius\", after his mother Livia. Antoninus Pius rejected a senatorial decree renaming September as \"Antoninus\" and November as \"Faustina\", after his empress.\nCharlemagne.\nMuch more lasting than the ephemeral month names of the post-Augustan Roman emperors were the Old High German names introduced by Charlemagne. According to his biographer, Einhard, Charlemagne renamed all of the months agriculturally in German. These names were used until the 15th century, over 700 years after his rule, and continued, with some modifications, to be used as \"traditional\" month names until the late 18th century. The names (January to December) were: \"Wintarmanoth\" (\"winter month\"), \"Hornung\", \"Lentzinmanoth\" (\"spring month\", \"Lent month\"), \"Ostarmanoth\" (\"Easter month\"), \"Wonnemanoth\" (\"joy-month\", a corruption of \"Winnimanoth\" \"pasture-month\"), \"Brachmanoth\" (\"fallow-month\"), \"Heuuimanoth\" (\"hay month\"), \"Aranmanoth\" (\"reaping month\"), \"Witumanoth\" (\"wood month\"), \"Windumemanoth\" (\"vintage month\"), \"Herbistmanoth\" (\"harvest month\"), and \"Heilagmanoth\" (\"holy month\").\nEastern Europe.\nThe calendar month names used in western and northern Europe, in Byzantium, and by the Amazigh (Berbers), were derived from the Latin names. However, in eastern Europe older seasonal month names continued to be used into the 19th century, and in some cases are still in use, in many languages, including: Belarusian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, Finnish, Georgian, Lithuanian, Macedonian, Polish, Romanian, Slovene, Ukrainian. When the Ottoman Empire adopted the Julian calendar, in the form of the Rumi calendar, the month names reflected Ottoman tradition.\nYear numbering.\nThe principal method used by the Romans to identify a year for dating purposes was to name it after the two consuls who took office in it, the eponymous period in question being the consular year. Beginning in 153\u00a0BC, consuls began to take office on 1\u00a0January, thus synchronizing the commencement of the consular and calendar years. The calendar year has begun in January and ended in December since about 450\u00a0BC according to Ovid or since about 713\u00a0BC according to Macrobius and Plutarch (see Roman calendar). Julius Caesar did not change the beginning of either the consular year or the calendar year. In addition to consular years, the Romans sometimes used the regnal year of the emperor, and by the late 4th\u00a0century documents were also being dated according to the 15-year cycle of the indiction. In 537, Justinian required that henceforth the date must include the name of the emperor and his regnal year, in addition to the indiction and the consul, while also allowing the use of local eras.\nIn 309 and 310, and from time to time thereafter, no consuls were appointed. When this happened, the consular date was given a count of years since the last consul (called \"post-consular\" dating). After 541, only the reigning emperor held the consulate, typically for only one year in his reign, and so post-consular dating became the norm. Similar post-consular dates were also known in the west in the early 6th\u00a0century. The system of consular dating, long obsolete, was formally abolished in the law code of Leo\u00a0VI, issued in 888.\nOnly rarely did the Romans number the year from the founding of the city (of Rome), (AUC). This method was used by Roman historians to determine the number of years from one event to another, not to date a year. Different historians had several different dates for the founding. The , an inscription containing an official list of the consuls which was published by Augustus, used an epoch of 752\u00a0BC. The epoch used by Varro, 753\u00a0BC, has been adopted by modern historians. Indeed, Renaissance editors often added it to the manuscripts that they published, giving the false impression that the Romans numbered their years. Most modern historians tacitly assume that it began on the day the consuls took office, and ancient documents such as the which use other AUC systems do so in the same way. However, Censorinus, writing in the 3rd\u00a0century\u00a0AD, states that, in his time, the AUC year began with the Parilia, celebrated on 21\u00a0April, which was regarded as the actual anniversary of the foundation of Rome.\nMany local eras, such as the Era of Actium and the Spanish Era, were adopted for the Julian calendar or its local equivalent in the provinces and cities of the Roman Empire. Some of these were used for a considerable time. Perhaps the best known is the Era of Martyrs, sometimes also called (after Diocletian), which was associated with the Alexandrian calendar and often used by the Alexandrian Christians to number their Easters during the 4th and 5th centuries, and continues to be used by the Coptic and Ethiopian churches.\nIn the eastern Mediterranean, the efforts of Christian chronographers such as Annianus of Alexandria to date the Biblical creation of the world led to the introduction of Anno Mundi eras based on this event. The most important of these was the Etos Kosmou, used throughout the Byzantine world from the 10th century and in Russia until 1700. In the west, the kingdoms succeeding the empire initially used indictions and regnal years, alone or in combination. The chronicler Prosper of Aquitaine, in the fifth century, used an era dated from the Passion of Christ, but this era was not widely adopted. Dionysius Exiguus proposed the system of Anno Domini in 525. This era gradually spread through the western Christian world, once the system was adopted by Bede in the eighth century.\nThe Julian calendar was also used in some Muslim countries. The Rumi calendar, the Julian calendar used in the later years of the Ottoman Empire, adopted an era derived from the lunar AH year equivalent to AD\u00a01840, i.e., the effective Rumi epoch was AD\u00a0585. In recent years, some users of the Berber calendar have adopted an era starting in 950\u00a0BC, the approximate date that the Libyan pharaoh Sheshonq I came to power in Egypt.\nNew Year's Day.\nThe Roman calendar began the year on 1 January, and this remained the start of the year after the Julian reform. However, even after local calendars were aligned to the Julian calendar, they started the new year on different dates. The Alexandrian calendar in Egypt started on 29 August (30 August after an Alexandrian leap year). Several local provincial calendars were aligned to start on the birthday of Augustus, 23 September. The indiction caused the Byzantine year, which used the Julian calendar, to begin on 1 September; this date is still used in the Eastern Orthodox Church for the beginning of the liturgical year. When the Julian calendar was adopted in AD\u00a0988 by Vladimir I of Kiev, the year was numbered Anno Mundi 6496, beginning on 1 March, six months after the start of the Byzantine Anno Mundi year with the same number. In 1492 (AM 7000), Ivan III, according to church tradition, realigned the start of the year to 1 September, so that AM 7000 only lasted for six months in Russia, from 1 March to 31 August 1492.\nIn Anglo-Saxon England, the year most commonly began on 25 December, which, as (approximately) the winter solstice, had marked the start of the year in pagan times, though 25 March (the equinox) is occasionally documented in the 11th century. Sometimes the start of the year was reckoned as 24 September, the start of the so-called \"western indiction\" introduced by Bede. These practices changed after the Norman conquest. From 1087 to 1155 the English year began on 1 January, and from 1155 to 1751 it began on 25 March. In 1752 it was moved back to 1 January. (See Calendar [New Style] Act 1750).\nEven before 1752, 1 January was sometimes treated as the start of the new year\u00a0\u2013 for example by Pepys \u2013 while the \"year starting 25th March was called the Civil or Legal Year\". To reduce misunderstandings on the date, it was not uncommon for a date between 1 January and 24 March to be written as \"1661/62\". This was to explain to the reader that the year was 1661 counting from March and 1662 counting from January as the start of the year. (For more detail, see Dual dating).\nReplacement by the Gregorian calendar.\nThe Gregorian calendar has replaced the Julian as the civil calendar in all countries which had been using it\u00a0\u2013 Greece being the last to do so, in 1923. The liturgical calendar used by Christian denominations in the west are almost all based on the Gregorian calendar, but most Eastern Orthodox churches continue to base theirs on the Julian.\nA calendar similar to the Julian one, the Alexandrian calendar, is the basis for the Ethiopian calendar, which is still the civil calendar of Ethiopia. Egypt converted from the Alexandrian calendar to Gregorian on 1 Thaut 1592/11 September 1875.\nDuring the changeover between calendars and for some time afterwards, dual dating was used in documents and gave the date according to both systems. In contemporary as well as modern texts that describe events during the period of change, it is customary to clarify to which calendar a given date refers by using an O.S. or N.S. suffix (denoting Old Style, Julian or New Style, Gregorian).\nTransition history.\nIn 1582, Pope Gregory XIII promulgated the Gregorian calendar. Reform was required as the Julian calendar year, with an average length of 365.25 days, was longer than the natural tropical year. On average, the astronomical solstices and the equinoxes advance by 10.8 minutes per year against the Julian calendar year. As a result, 21 March (which is the base date for calculating the date of Easter) gradually moved out of alignment with the March equinox.\nWhile Hipparchus and presumably Sosigenes were aware of the discrepancy, although not of its correct value, it was evidently felt to be of little importance at the time of the Julian reform (46\u00a0BC). However, it accumulated significantly over time: the Julian calendar gained a day every 128 years. By 1582, 21 March was ten days out of alignment with the March equinox, the date where it was reckoned to have been in 325, the year of the Council of Nicaea.\nSince the Julian and Gregorian calendars were long used simultaneously, although in different places, calendar dates in the transition period are often ambiguous, unless it is specified which calendar was being used. In some circumstances, double dates might be used, one in each calendar. The notation \"Old Style\" (O.S.) is sometimes used to indicate a date in the Julian calendar, as opposed to \"New Style\" (N.S.), which either represents the Gregorian date or the Julian date with the start of the year as 1 January. This notation is used to clarify dates from countries that continued to use the Julian calendar after the Gregorian reform, such as Great Britain, which did not adopt the reformed calendar until 1752, or Russia, which did not do so until 1918 (see Soviet calendar). This is why the Russian Revolution of 7 November 1917 N.S. is known as the October Revolution, because it began on 25 October O.S.\nModern usage.\nEastern Orthodox.\nAlthough most Eastern Orthodox countries (most of them in eastern or southeastern Europe) had adopted the Gregorian calendar by 1924, their national churches had not. The \"Revised Julian calendar\" was endorsed by a synod in Constantinople in May 1923, consisting of a solar part which was and will be identical to the Gregorian calendar until the year 2800, and a lunar part which calculated Easter astronomically at Jerusalem. All Eastern Orthodox churches refused to accept the lunar part, so all Orthodox churches continue to celebrate Easter according to the Julian calendar, with the exception of the Finnish Orthodox Church (and the Estonian Orthodox Church. from 1923 to 1945).\nThe Orthodox Churches of Jerusalem, Russia, Serbia, Montenegro, Poland (from 15 June 2014), North Macedonia, Georgia, and the Greek Old Calendarists and other groups continue to use the Julian calendar, thus they celebrate the Nativity on 25 December \"Julian\" (which is 7 January \"Gregorian\" until 2100). \nThe Orthodox Church of Ukraine announced in late May 2023 that they would use the Gregorian calendar to celebrate Christmas on December 25, 2023, partly in reflection to Russia's invasion of the country in early 2022; the church continues to celebrate Easter on the date according to the Julian tradition.\nDate of Easter.\nMost branches of the Eastern Orthodox Church use the Julian calendar for calculating the date of Easter, upon which the timing of all the other moveable feasts depends. Some such churches have adopted the Revised Julian calendar for the observance of fixed feasts, while such Orthodox churches retain the Julian calendar for all purposes.\nSyriac Christianity.\nThe Ancient Assyrian Church of the East, an East Syriac rite that is commonly miscategorised under \"eastern Orthodox\", uses the Julian calendar, where its participants celebrate Christmas on 7 January \"Gregorian\" (which is 25 December \"Julian\"). The Assyrian Church of the East, the church it split from in 1968 (the replacement of traditional Julian calendar with Gregorian calendar being among the reasons), uses the Gregorian calendar ever since the year of the schism.\nOriental Orthodox.\nThe Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem of Armenian Apostolic Orthodox Church uses Julian calendar, while the rest of Armenian Church uses Gregorian calendar. Both celebrate the Nativity as part of the Feast of Theophany according to their respective calendar.\nBerbers.\nThe Julian calendar is still used by the Berbers of the Maghreb in the form of the Berber calendar.\nFoula.\nFoula in Shetland, Scotland, a small settlement on a remote island of the archipelago, still celebrates festivities according to the Julian calendar.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15654", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15654", "title": "John Quincy Adams", "text": "President of the United States from 1825 to 1829\nJohn Quincy Adams (; July 11, 1767 \u2013 February 23, 1848) was the sixth president of the United States, serving from 1825 to 1829. He previously served as the eighth United States secretary of state from 1817 to 1825. During his long diplomatic and political career, Adams served as an ambassador and also as a member of the United States Congress representing Massachusetts in both chambers. He was the eldest son of John Adams, the second president, and First Lady Abigail Adams. Initially a Federalist like his father, he won election to the presidency as a member of the Democratic-Republican Party, and later, in the mid-1830s, became affiliated with the Whig Party.\nBorn in Braintree, Massachusetts, Adams spent much of his youth in Europe, where his father served as a diplomat. After returning to the United States, Adams established a successful legal practice in Boston. In 1794, President George Washington appointed Adams as the U.S. ambassador to the Netherlands, and Adams would serve in high-ranking diplomatic posts until 1801, when Thomas Jefferson took office as president. Federalist leaders in Massachusetts arranged for Adams's election to the United States Senate in 1802, but Adams broke with the Federalist Party over foreign policy and was denied re-election. In 1809, President James Madison, a member of the Democratic-Republican Party, appointed Adams as the U.S. ambassador to Russia. Multilingual, Adams held diplomatic posts for the duration of Madison's presidency, and he served as part of the American delegation that negotiated an end to the War of 1812. In 1817, President James Monroe selected Adams as his secretary of state. In that role, Adams negotiated the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty in 1819, which transferred Florida to the United States, delineated the Sabine\u2013Red\u2013Arkansas\u201342nd parallel boundary, and formalized the U.S. renunciation of claims to Texas. He also helped formulate the Monroe Doctrine, which became a key tenet of U.S. foreign policy. In 1818, Adams was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia.\nAdams, Andrew Jackson, William H. Crawford, and Henry Clay\u2014all members of the Democratic-Republican Party\u2014competed in the 1824 presidential election. Because no candidate won a majority of electoral votes, the House of Representatives held a contingent election, which Adams won with the support of Speaker of the House Henry Clay, whom Adams would controversially appoint as his secretary of state. As president, Adams called for an ambitious agenda that included federally funded infrastructure projects, the establishment of a national university, and engagement with the countries of Latin America, but Congress refused to pass many of his initiatives. During Adams's presidency, the Democratic-Republican Party split into two major camps: the National Republican Party, which supported Adams, and Andrew Jackson's Democratic Party. The Democrats proved to be more effective political organizers than Adams and his National Republican supporters, and Jackson soundly defeated him in the 1828 presidential election. This made Adams the second president to fail to win re-election (his father being the first).\nRather than retiring from public service, Adams won election to the House of Representatives, where he would serve from 1831 until his death in 1848. He remains the only former president to be elected to the chamber. After narrowly losing his bids for Governor of Massachusetts and Senate re-election, Adams joined the Anti-Masonic Party in the early 1830s before joining the Whig Party, which united those opposed to President Jackson. During his time in Congress, Adams became increasingly critical of slavery and of the Southern leaders whom he believed controlled the Democratic Party. He was particularly opposed to the annexation of Texas and the Mexican\u2013American War, which he saw as a war to extend slavery and its political grip on Congress. He also led the repeal of the \"gag rule\", which had prevented the House of Representatives from debating petitions to abolish slavery. While historians typically rank Adams as an average president who had an ambitious agenda but could not get it passed by Congress, they concur that Adams was one of the greatest diplomats and secretaries of state in American history. Historians also credit him with a vehement stance against slavery, and his fight for the rights of women and Native Americans during his post-presidency.\nEarly life, education, and early career.\nJohn Quincy Adams was born on July 11, 1767, to John and Abigail Adams (n\u00e9e Smith) in a part of Braintree, Massachusetts, that is now Quincy. He was named after his mother's maternal grandfather, Colonel John Quincy, after whom Quincy, Massachusetts, is also named. Colonel Quincy died two days after his great-grandson's birth. Young Adams was educated by tutors \u2013 his cousin James Thaxter and his father's law clerk, Nathan Rice. He soon exhibited literary skills, and in 1779 he started a diary that he kept until just before he died in 1848. Until the age of ten, Adams grew up on the family farm in Braintree, largely in the care of his mother. Though frequently absent because of his participation in the American Revolution, John Adams maintained a correspondence with his son, encouraging him to read works by authors such as Thucydides and Hugo Grotius. With his father's encouragement, Adams would also translate classical authors such as Virgil, Horace, Plutarch, and Aristotle.\nIn 1778, Adams and his father departed for Europe, where John Adams would serve as part of American diplomatic missions in France and the Netherlands. During this period, Adams studied law, French, Greek, and Latin, and attended several schools, including Leiden University. In 1781, Adams traveled to Saint Petersburg, Russia, where he served as the secretary to the American diplomat, Francis Dana. He returned to the Netherlands in 1783 and accompanied his father to Great Britain in 1784. Though Adams enjoyed Europe, he and his family decided he needed to return to the United States to complete his education and eventually launch a political career.\nAdams returned to the United States in 1785 and earned admission as a member of the junior class of Harvard College the following year. He joined Phi Beta Kappa and excelled academically, graduating second in his class in 1787. After graduating from Harvard, he studied law with Theophilus Parsons in Newburyport, Massachusetts, from 1787 to 1789. Adams initially opposed the ratification of the United States Constitution, but he ultimately came to accept the document, and in 1789 his father was elected as the first vice president of the United States. In 1790, Adams opened his own legal practice in Boston. Despite some early struggles, he was successful as an attorney and established financial independence from his parents.\nEarly political career (1793\u20131817).\nEarly diplomatic career and marriage.\nAdams initially avoided becoming involved in politics, instead focusing on building his legal career. In 1791, he wrote a series of pseudonymously published essays arguing that Britain provided a better governmental model than France. Two years later, he published another series of essays attacking Edmond-Charles Gen\u00eat, a French diplomat who sought to undermine President George Washington's policy of neutrality in the French Revolutionary Wars. In 1794, Washington appointed Adams as the U.S. ambassador to the Netherlands. Adams considered declining the role, but ultimately took the position on the advice of his father. While abroad, Adams continued to urge neutrality, arguing that the United States would benefit economically by staying out of the ongoing French Revolutionary Wars. His chief duty as the ambassador to the Netherlands was to secure and maintain loans essential to U.S. finances. On his way to the Netherlands, he met with John Jay, who was then negotiating the Jay Treaty with Great Britain. Adams supported the Jay Treaty, but it proved unpopular with many in the United States, contributing to a growing partisan split between the Federalist Party of Alexander Hamilton and the Democratic-Republican Party of Thomas Jefferson. In 1794 he supported John Skey Eustace who wanted to return to the United States via the Netherlands.\nAdams spent the winter of 1795\u20131796 in London, where he met Louisa Catherine Johnson, the second daughter of American merchant Joshua Johnson. In April 1796, Louisa accepted Adams's proposal of marriage. Adams's parents disapproved of his decision to marry a woman who had grown up in England, but he informed his parents that he would not reconsider his decision. Adams initially wanted to delay his wedding to Louisa until he returned to the United States, but they married in All Hallows-by-the-Tower on July 26, 1797. Shortly after the wedding, Joshua Johnson fled England to escape his creditors, and Adams did not receive the dowry that Johnson had promised him, much to the embarrassment of Louisa. Adams noted in his own diary that he had no regrets about his decision to marry Louisa.\nIn 1796, Washington appointed Adams as the U.S. ambassador to Portugal. Later that year, John Adams defeated Jefferson in the 1796 presidential election. When the elder Adams became president, he appointed his son as the U.S. ambassador to Prussia. Though concerned that his appointment would be criticized as nepotistic, Adams accepted the position and traveled to the Prussian capital of Berlin with his wife and his younger brother, Thomas Boylston Adams. The State Department tasked Adams with developing commercial relations with Prussia and Sweden, but President Adams also asked his son to write to him frequently about affairs in Europe. His advice that he regularly gave to his father based on his experiences on the ground in Europe proved particularly valuable during the Quasi-War with France, although President Adams also relied heavily on his official staff for such advice and not primarily on his son. In 1799, Adams negotiated a new trade agreement between the United States and Prussia, though he could never complete an agreement with Sweden. He frequently wrote to family members in the United States, and in 1801 his letters about the Prussian region of Silesia were published in a book titled \"Letters on Silesia\". During his time in Prussia, Adams befriended the German diplomat and writer Friedrich von Gentz, whose work, \"The Origins and Principles of the American Revolution, Compared with the Origins and Principles of the French Revolution,\" Adams would translate into English in 1800. In the 1800 presidential election, Jefferson defeated John Adams, and both Adams and his son left office in early 1801.\nU.S. senator from Massachusetts.\nOn his return to the United States, Adams re-established a legal practice in Boston, and in April 1802 he was elected to the Massachusetts Senate. In November of that year, he ran unsuccessfully for the United States House of Representatives. In February 1803, the Massachusetts legislature elected Adams to the United States Senate. Though somewhat reluctant to affiliate with any political party, Adams joined the Federalist minority in Congress. Like his Federalist colleagues, he opposed the impeachment of Associate Justice Samuel Chase, an outspoken supporter of the Federalist Party.\nAdams had strongly opposed Jefferson's 1800 presidential candidacy, but he gradually became alienated from the Federalist Party. His disaffection was driven by the party's declining popularity, disagreements over foreign policy, and Adams's hostility to Timothy Pickering, a Federalist Party leader whom Adams viewed as overly favorable to Britain. Unlike other New England Federalists, Adams supported the Jefferson administration's Louisiana Purchase and expansionist policies. Adams was the lone Federalist in Congress to vote for the Non-importation Act of 1806, which attempted to coerce Britain into ceasing its interference with American shipping as part of the ongoing Napoleonic Wars. Adams became increasingly frustrated with the unwillingness of other Federalists to criticize British actions, including impressment, and he moved closer to the Jefferson administration. After Adams supported the Embargo Act of 1807, the Federalist-controlled Massachusetts legislature elected Adams's successor several months before the end of his term, and Adams resigned from the Senate shortly thereafter.\nWhile a member of the Senate, Adams served as a professor of logic at Brown University and as the Boylston Professor of Rhetoric and Oratory at Harvard University. Adams's devotion to classical rhetoric shaped his response to public issues, and he would remain inspired by those rhetorical ideals long after the neo-classicalism and deferential politics of the founding generation were eclipsed by the commercial ethos and mass democracy of the Jacksonian Era. Many of Adams's idiosyncratic positions were rooted in his abiding devotion to the Ciceronian ideal of the citizen-orator \"speaking well\" to promote the welfare of the polis. He was also influenced by the classical republican ideal of civic eloquence espoused by Scottish philosopher David Hume. Adams adapted these classical republican ideals of public oratory to the American debate, viewing its multilevel political structure as ripe for \"the renaissance of Demosthenic eloquence\". His \"Lectures on Rhetoric and Oratory\" (1810) looks at the fate of ancient oratory, the necessity of liberty for it to flourish, and its importance as a unifying element for a new nation of diverse cultures and beliefs. Just as civic eloquence failed to gain popularity in Britain, in the United States interest faded in the second decade of the 19th century, as the \"public spheres of heated oratory\" disappeared in favor of the private sphere.\nMinister to Russia.\nAfter resigning from the Senate, Adams was ostracized by Massachusetts Federalist leaders, but he declined Democratic-Republican entreaties to seek office. In 1809, he argued before the Supreme Court of the United States in \"Fletcher v. Peck\", and the Supreme Court ultimately agreed with Adams's argument that the Constitution's Contract Clause prevented the state of Georgia from invalidating a land sale to out-of-state companies. Later that year, President James Madison appointed Adams as the first United States Minister to Russia in 1809. Though Adams had only recently broken with the Federalist Party, his support of Jefferson's foreign policy had earned him goodwill with the Madison Administration. Adams was well-qualified for the role after his experiences in Europe generally and Russia specifically.\nAfter a difficult passage through the Baltic Sea, Adams arrived in the Russian capital of St. Petersburg in October 1809. He quickly established a productive working relationship with Russian official Nikolay Rumyantsev and eventually befriended Tsar Alexander I of Russia. Adams continued to favor American neutrality between France and Britain during the Napoleonic Wars. Louisa was initially distraught at the prospect of living in Russia, but she became a popular figure at the Russian court. From his diplomatic post, Adams observed the French Emperor Napoleon's invasion of Russia, which ended in defeat for the French. In February 1811, President Madison nominated Adams as an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court. The nomination was unanimously confirmed by the Senate, but Adams declined the seat, preferring a career in politics and diplomacy, so Joseph Story took the seat instead.\nTreaty of Ghent and ambassador to Britain.\nAdams had long feared that the United States would enter a war it could not win against Britain, and by early 1812, he saw such a war as inevitable due to the continued British interference with American shipping, which included impressing alleged Royal Navy deserters from US merchantmen. In mid-1812, the United States declared war against Britain, beginning the War of 1812. Tsar Alexander attempted to mediate the conflict between Britain and the United States, and President Madison appointed Adams, Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin, and Federalist Senator James A. Bayard to a delegation charged with negotiating an end to the war. Gallatin and Bayard arrived in St. Petersburg in July 1813, but the British declined Tsar Alexander's offer of mediation. Hoping to start negotiations at another venue, Adams left Russia in April 1814. Negotiations finally began in mid-1814 in Ghent, where Adams, Gallatin, and Bayard were joined by two additional American delegates, Jonathan Russell and former Speaker of the House Henry Clay. Adams, the nominal head of the delegation, got along well with Gallatin, Bayard, and Russell, but he occasionally clashed with Clay.\nDuring the initial stages of negotiation, the British delegation pushed for the creation of an Indian barrier state near the Great Lakes. As this was designed to prevent the westward expansion of US colonizers, the American delegation unanimously rejected this offer, and their negotiating position was bolstered by the US victory at the Battle of Plattsburgh. By November 1814, the Liverpool ministry decided to seek an end to hostilities with the U.S. on the basis of \"status quo ante bellum\". Even though this meant the issue of impressment would not be resolved, Adams and his fellow commissioners had hoped for similar terms. The treaty was signed on December 24, 1814. The United States did not gain any concessions from the treaty but could boast that it had survived a war against the strongest power in the world. Following the signing of the treaty, Adams traveled to Paris, where he witnessed first-hand the Hundred Days of Napoleon's restoration.\nIn May 1815, Adams learned that President Madison had appointed him as the U.S. ambassador to Britain. With the aid of Clay and Gallatin, Adams negotiated a limited trade agreement with Britain. Following the conclusion of the trade agreement, much of Adams's time as ambassador was spent helping stranded American sailors and prisoners of war. In pursuit of national unity, newly elected president James Monroe decided a Northerner would be optimal for the position of Secretary of State, and he chose the respected and experienced Adams for the role. Having spent several years in Europe, Adams returned to the United States in August 1817.\nSecretary of State (1817\u20131825).\nAdams served as Secretary of State during Monroe's eight-year presidency, from 1817 to 1825. Many of his successes as secretary, such as the convention of 1818 with the United Kingdom, the Transcontinental Treaty with Spain, and the Monroe Doctrine, were not preplanned strategies but responses to unexpected events. Adams wanted to delay American recognition of the newly independent republics of Latin America to avoid the risk of war with Spain and its European allies. However, Andrew Jackson's military campaign in Florida and Henry Clay's threats in Congress forced Spain to cut a deal, which Adams negotiated successfully. Biographer James Lewis says, \"He managed to play the cards that he had been dealt \u2013 cards that he very clearly had not wanted \u2013 in ways that forced the Spanish cabinet to recognize the weakness of its own hand\". Apart from the Monroe doctrine, his last four years as Secretary of State were less successful because he was preoccupied with his presidential campaign and refused to make compromises with other countries that might have weakened his candidacy; the result was a small-scale trade war but a successful election to the White House.\nTaking office in the aftermath of the War of 1812, Adams thought that the country had been fortunate in avoiding territorial losses, and he prioritized avoiding another war with a European power, particularly Britain. He also sought to avoid exacerbating sectional tensions, which had been a major issue for the country during the War of 1812. One of the major challenges confronting Adams was how to respond to the power vacuum in Latin America that arose from Spain's weakness following the Peninsular War. In addition to his foreign policy role, Adams held several domestic duties, including overseeing the 1820 United States census and writing an extensive report on weights and measures. The weights and measures report, a particular passion of Adams', provided an extensive historical perspective on the topic and advocated for adoption of the metric system.\nMonroe and Adams agreed on most major foreign policy issues: both favored neutrality in Latin American independence wars, peace with the United Kingdom, rejection of a trade agreement with the French, and peaceful expansion into the Spanish Empire's North American territories. The president and his secretary of state developed a strong working relationship, and while Adams often influenced Monroe's policies, he respected that Monroe made the final decisions on major issues. Monroe met regularly with his five-person cabinet, which initially consisted of Adams, Secretary of the Treasury William H. Crawford, Secretary of War John C. Calhoun, Secretary of the Navy Benjamin Crowninshield, and Attorney General William Wirt. Adams developed a strong respect for Calhoun but believed that Crawford was unduly focused on succeeding Monroe in 1824.\nDuring his time as ambassador to Britain, Adams had begun negotiations over several contentious issues that had not been solved by the War of 1812 or the Treaty of Ghent. In 1817, the two countries agreed to the Rush\u2013Bagot Treaty, which limited naval armaments on the Great Lakes. Negotiations between the two powers continued, resulting in the Treaty of 1818, which defined the Canada\u2013United States border west of the Great Lakes. The boundary was set at the 49th parallel to the Rocky Mountains, while the territory to the west of the mountains, known as Oregon Country, would be jointly occupied. The agreement marked a watershed moment in United Kingdom\u2013United States relations, as the United States focused on its southern and western borders and British concerns about American expansionism subsided.\nAdams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty.\nWhen Adams took office, Spanish possessions bordered the United States to the south and west. To the south, Spain retained control of Florida, which the U.S. had long sought to purchase. Spain struggled to control the Indian tribes active in Florida, and some of those tribes raided United States territory. To the west, New Spain bordered the territory acquired by the United States in the Louisiana Purchase, but no clear boundary had been established between United States and Spanish territory. After taking office, Adams began negotiations with Luis de On\u00eds, the Spanish minister to the United States, for the purchase of Florida and the settlement of a border between the United States and New Spain. The negotiations were interrupted by an escalation of the Seminole War, and in December 1818, Monroe ordered General Andrew Jackson to enter Florida and retaliate against Seminoles that had raided Georgia. Exceeding his orders, Jackson captured the Spanish outposts of St. Marks and Pensacola and executed two British subjects. While Jackson's actions outraged the rest of the cabinet, Adams defended them as necessary to the country's self-defense, and he eventually convinced Monroe and most of the cabinet to support Jackson. Adams informed Spain that its failure to police its own territory had compelled Jackson to act, and he advised Spain to either secure the region or sell it to the United States. The British, meanwhile, declined to risk their recent rapprochement with the United States, and did not make a major diplomatic issue out of Jackson's execution of the two men.\nNegotiations between Spain and the United States continued, and Spain agreed to cede Florida. The determination of the western boundary of the United States proved more difficult. American expansionists favored setting the border at the Rio Grande, but Spain, intent on protecting its colony of Mexico from American encroachment, insisted on setting the boundary at the Sabine River. At Monroe's direction, Adams agreed to the Sabine River boundary, but he insisted that Spain cede its claims on Oregon Country. Adams was deeply interested in establishing American control over the Oregon Country, partly because he believed that control of that region would spur trade with Asia. The acquisition of Spanish claims to the Pacific Northwest also allowed the Monroe administration to pair the acquisition of Florida, which was chiefly sought by Southerners, with territorial gains favored primarily by those in the North. After extended negotiations, Spain and the United States agreed to the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty, which was ratified in February 1821. Adams was deeply proud of the treaty, though he privately was concerned by the potential expansion of slavery into the newly acquired territories. In 1824, the Monroe administration would strengthen US claims to Oregon by ratifying the Russo-American Treaty of 1824, which established Russian Alaska's southern border at 54\u00b040\u2032 north.\nMonroe Doctrine.\nAs the Spanish Empire continued to fracture during Monroe's second term, Adams, Monroe and Clay became increasingly concerned that the \"Holy Alliance\" of Prussia, Austria, and Russia would seek to bring Spain's erstwhile colonies under their control, to the point of even contemplating a Holy Alliance of their own to defend democracy. In his 1821 Fourth of July address, Adams addressed this issue, noting a shared \"chain of sympathy\" between the U.S. and Latin America, but arguing for neutrality rather than a Holy Alliance. In 1822, following the conclusion of the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty, the Monroe administration recognized the independence of several Latin American countries, including Argentina and Mexico. In 1823, British Foreign Secretary George Canning suggested that the United States and Britain should work together to preserve the independence of these fledgling republics. The cabinet debated whether to accept the offer, but Adams opposed it. Instead, Adams urged Monroe to publicly declare the United States' opposition to any European attempt to colonize or re-take control of territory in the Americas, while also committing the United States to neutrality in European affairs. In his December 1823 annual message to Congress, Monroe laid out the Monroe Doctrine, which was largely built upon Adams's ideas. In issuing the Monroe Doctrine, the United States displayed a new level of assertiveness in international relations, as the doctrine represented the country's first claim to a sphere of influence. It also marked the country's shift in psychological orientation away from Europe and towards the Americas. Debates over foreign policy would no longer center on relations with Britain and France, but instead focus on western expansion and relations with Native Americans. The doctrine became one of the foundational principles of U.S. foreign policy.\n1824 presidential election.\nImmediately upon becoming Secretary of State, Adams emerged as one of Monroe's most likely successors, as the last three presidents had all served in the role before taking office. As the 1824 election approached, Henry Clay, John C. Calhoun (who later dropped out of the race), and William H. Crawford appeared to be Adams's primary competition to succeed Monroe. Crawford favored state sovereignty and a strict constructionist view of the Constitution, while Clay, Calhoun, and Adams embraced federally funded internal improvements, high tariffs, and the Second Bank of the United States, which was also known as the national bank. Because the Federalist Party had all but collapsed after the War of 1812, all the major presidential candidates were members of the Democratic-Republican Party. Adams felt that his own election as president would vindicate his father, while also allowing him to pursue an ambitious domestic policy. Though he lacked the charisma of his competitors, Adams was widely respected and benefited from the lack of other prominent Northern political leaders.\nAdams's top choice for the role of vice president was General Andrew Jackson; Adams noted that \"the Vice-Presidency was a station in which [Jackson] could hang no one, and in which he would need to quarrel with no one\". However, as the 1824 election approached, Jackson jumped into the race for president, and Calhoun ended up receiving the Vice-presidential support of Adams supporters. While the other candidates based their candidacies on their long tenure as congressmen, ambassadors, or members of the cabinet, Jackson's appeal rested on his military service, especially in the Battle of New Orleans. The congressional nominating caucus had decided upon previous Democratic-Republican presidential nominees, but it had become largely discredited by 1824. Candidates were instead nominated by state legislatures or nominating conventions, and Adams received the endorsement of the New England legislatures. The regional strength of each candidate played an important role in the election; Adams was popular in New England, Clay and Jackson were strong in the West, and Jackson and Crawford competed for the South.\nIn the 1824 presidential election, Jackson won a plurality in the Electoral College, taking 99 of the 261 electoral votes, while Adams won 84, Crawford won 41, and Clay took 37. Calhoun, meanwhile, won a majority of the electoral votes for vice president. Adams nearly swept the electoral votes of New England and won a majority of the electoral votes in New York, but he won just six electoral votes from the slave states. Most of Jackson's support came from slave-holding states, but he also won New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and some electoral votes from the Northwest. As no candidate won a majority of the electoral votes, the House was required to hold a contingent election under the terms of the Twelfth Amendment. The House would decide among the top three electoral vote winners, with each state's delegation having one vote; thus, unlike his three rivals, Clay was not eligible to be elected by the House.\nAdams knew that his own victory in the contingent election would require the support of Clay, who wielded immense influence in the House of Representatives. Though they were quite different in temperament and had clashed in the past, Adams and Clay shared similar views on national issues. By contrast, Clay viewed Jackson as a dangerous demagogue, and he was unwilling to support Crawford due to the latter's health issues. Adams and Clay met before the contingent election, and Clay agreed to support Adams in the election. Adams also met with Federalists such as Daniel Webster, promising that he would not deny governmental positions to members of their party. On February 9, 1825, Adams won the contingent election on the first ballot, taking 13 of the 24 state delegations. Adams won the House delegations of all the states in which he or Clay had won a majority of the electoral votes, as well as the delegations of Illinois, Louisiana, and Maryland. Adams's victory made him the first child of a president to serve as president himself. After the election, many of Jackson's supporters claimed that Adams and Clay had reached a \"Corrupt bargain\" whereby Adams promised Clay the position of Secretary of State in return for Clay's support.\nPresidency (1825\u20131829).\nInauguration.\nAdams was inaugurated on March 4, 1825, becoming the first son of a former United States president to himself become president, a feat only repeated 176 years later by George W. Bush, son of George H. W. Bush. As Adams took the oath of office, he departed from tradition by placing his hand on a book of constitutional law instead of on a Bible. In his inaugural address, he adopted a post-partisan tone, promising to avoid party-building and politically motivated appointments. He also proposed an elaborate program of \"internal improvements\": roads, ports, and canals. Though some were worried about the constitutionality of such federal projects, Adams argued that the General Welfare Clause provided for broad constitutional authority. He promised that he would ask Congress to authorize many such projects.\nAdministration.\nAdams presided over a harmonious and productive cabinet that he met with on a weekly basis. Like Monroe, Adams sought a geographically balanced cabinet that would represent the various party factions, and he asked the members of the Monroe cabinet to remain in place for his own administration. Samuel L. Southard of New Jersey stayed on as Secretary of the Navy, William Wirt kept his post of Attorney General, and John McLean of Ohio continued to serve as the Postmaster General, an important position that was not part of the cabinet at that time. Adams's first choices for Secretary of War and Secretary of the Treasury were Andrew Jackson and William Crawford, but each declined to serve in the administration. Adams instead selected James Barbour of Virginia, a prominent supporter of Crawford, to lead the War Department. Leadership of the Treasury Department went to Richard Rush of Pennsylvania, who would become a prominent advocate of internal improvements and protective tariffs within the administration. Adams chose Henry Clay as Secretary of State, angering those who believed Clay had offered Adams his support in the 1824 election in exchange for the most prestigious position in the cabinet. Clay would later regret accepting the job since it reinforced the \"Corrupt Bargain\" accusation. However, Clay's strength in the West and interest in foreign policy made him a natural choice for the position.\nDomestic affairs.\nAmbitious agenda.\nIn his 1825 annual message to Congress, Adams presented a comprehensive and ambitious agenda. He called for major investments in internal improvements as well as the creation of a national university, a naval academy, and a national astronomical observatory. Noting the healthy status of the treasury and the possibility for more revenue via land sales, Adams argued for the completion of several projects that were in various stages of construction or planning, including a road from Washington, D.C. to New Orleans. He also proposed the establishment of a Department of the Interior as a new cabinet-level department that would preside over these internal improvements. Adams hoped to fund these measures primarily through Western land sales, rather than increased taxes or public debt. The domestic agenda of Adams and Clay, which would come to be known as the American System, was designed to unite disparate regional interests in the promotion of a thriving national economy.\nAdams's programs faced opposition from various quarters. Many disagreed with his broad interpretation of the constitution and preferred that power be concentrated in state governments rather than the federal government. Others disliked interference from any level of government and were opposed to central planning. Some in the South feared that Adams was secretly an abolitionist and that he sought to subordinate the states to the federal government. Most of the president's proposals were defeated in Congress. Adams's ideas for a national university, a national observatory, and the establishment of a uniform system of weights and measures never received congressional votes. His proposal for the creation of a naval academy won the approval of the Senate but was defeated in the House; opponents objected to the naval academy's cost and worried that the establishment of such an institution would \"produce degeneracy and corruption of the public morality\". Adams's proposal to establish a national bankruptcy law was also defeated.\nUnlike other aspects of his domestic agenda, Adams won congressional approval for several ambitious infrastructure projects. Between 1824 and 1828, the United States Army Corps of Engineers conducted surveys for a bevy of potential roads, canals, railroads, and improvements in river navigation. Adams presided over major repairs and further construction on the National Road, and shortly after he left office the National Road extended from Cumberland, Maryland, to Zanesville, Ohio. The Adams administration also saw the beginning of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal; the construction of the Chesapeake &amp; Delaware Canal and the Louisville and Portland Canal around the Falls of the Ohio; the connection of the Great Lakes to the Ohio River system in Ohio and Indiana; and the enlargement and rebuilding of the Dismal Swamp Canal in North Carolina. Additionally, the first passenger railroad in the United States, the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, was constructed during Adams's presidency. Though many of these projects were undertaken by private actors, the government often provided money or land to aid the completion of such projects.\nFormation of political parties.\nIn the immediate aftermath of the 1825 contingent election, Jackson was gracious to Adams. Nevertheless, Adams's appointment of Clay rankled Jackson, who received a flood of letters encouraging him to run. In 1825, Jackson accepted the presidential nomination of the Tennessee legislature for the 1828 election. Though he had been close to Adams during Monroe's presidency, Vice President Calhoun was also politically alienated from the president by the appointment of Clay, since that appointment established Clay as the natural heir to Adams. Adams's ambitious December 1825 annual message to Congress further galvanized the opposition, with important figures such as Francis Preston Blair of Kentucky and Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri breaking with the Adams administration. By the end of the first session of the 19th United States Congress, an anti-Adams congressional coalition consisting of Jacksonians (led by Benton and Hugh Lawson White), Crawfordites (led by Martin Van Buren and Nathaniel Macon), and Calhounites (led by Robert Y. Hayne and George McDuffie) had emerged. Aside from Clay, Adams lacked strong supporters outside of the North, and Edward Everett, John Taylor, and Daniel Webster served as his strongest advocates in Congress. Supporters of Adams began calling themselves National Republicans, while supporters of Jackson began calling themselves Democrats. In the press, they were often described as \"Adams Men\" and \"Jackson Men\".\nIn the 1826 elections, Adams's opponents picked up seats throughout the country, as allies of Adams failed to coordinate among themselves. Andrew Stevenson, a Jackson supporter, replaced John Taylor, an Adams supporter, as Speaker of the House. As Adams himself noted, the United States had never seen a Congress that was firmly under the control of political opponents of the president. After the elections, Van Buren and Calhoun agreed to throw their support behind Jackson in 1828, with Van Buren bringing along many of Crawford's supporters. Though Jackson did not articulate a detailed political platform in the same way that Adams did, his coalition united in opposition to Adams's reliance on government planning. Adams, meanwhile, clung to the hope of a non-partisan nation, and he refused to make full use of the power of patronage to build up his own party structure.\nTariff of 1828.\nDuring the first half of his administration, Adams avoided taking a strong stand on tariffs, partly because he wanted to avoid alienating his allies in the South and New England. After Jacksonians took power in 1827, they devised a tariff bill designed to appeal to Western states while instituting high rates on imported materials important to the economy of New England. It is unclear whether Van Buren, who shepherded the bill through Congress, meant for the bill to pass, or if he had deliberately designed it to force Adams and his allies to oppose it. Regardless, Adams signed the Tariff of 1828, which became known as the \"Tariff of Abominations\" by opponents. Adams was denounced in the South, and he received little credit for the tariff in the North.\nIndian policy.\nAdams sought the gradual assimilation of Native Americans via consensual agreements, a priority shared by few whites in the 1820s. Yet Adams was also deeply committed to the westward expansion of the United States. Settlers on the frontier, constantly seeking to move westward, cried for a more expansionist policy that disregarded the concerns of Native Americans. Early in his term, Adams suspended the Treaty of Indian Springs after learning that the Governor of Georgia, George Troup, had forced the treaty on the Muscogee. Adams signed a new treaty with the Muscogee in January 1826 that allowed the Muscogee to stay but ceded most of their land to Georgia. Troup refused to accept its terms and authorized all Georgian citizens to evict the Muscogee. A showdown between Georgia and the federal government was only averted after the Muscogee agreed to a third treaty. Though many saw Troup as unreasonable in his dealings with the federal government and the Native Americans, the administration's handling of the incident alienated those in the Deep South who favored immediate Indian removal.\nForeign affairs.\nAdams famously said, \"America goes not abroad, in search of monsters to destroy\".\nTrade and claims.\nOne of the major foreign policy goals of the Adams administration was the expansion of American trade. His administration reached reciprocity treaties with a number of nations, including Denmark, Prussia, and the Federal Republic of Central America. The administration also reached commercial agreements with the Kingdom of Hawaii and the Kingdom of Tahiti. Agreements with Denmark and Sweden opened their colonies to American trade, but Adams was especially focused on opening trade with the British West Indies. The United States had reached a commercial agreement with Britain in 1815, but that agreement excluded British possessions in the Western Hemisphere. In response to United States pressure, the British had begun to allow a limited amount of American imports to the West Indies in 1823, but United States leaders continued to seek an end to Britain's protective Imperial Preference system. In 1825, Britain banned United States trade with the British West Indies, dealing a blow to Adams's prestige. The Adams administration negotiated extensively with the British to lift this ban, but the two sides could not reach an agreement. Despite the loss of trade with the British West Indies, the other commercial agreements secured by Adams helped expand the overall volume of United States exports.\nLatin America.\nAside from an unsuccessful attempt to purchase Texas from Mexico, President Adams did not seek to expand into Latin America or North America. Adams and Clay instead sought engagement with Latin America to prevent it from falling under the British Empire's economic influence. As part of this goal, the administration favored sending a United States delegation to the Congress of Panama, an 1826 conference of New World republics organized by Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar. Clay and Adams hoped that the conference would inaugurate a \"Good Neighborhood Policy\" among the independent states of the Americas. However, the funding for a delegation and the confirmation of delegation nominees became entangled in a political battle over Adams's domestic policies, with opponents such as Van Buren impeding the confirmation of a delegation. While Van Buren saw the Panama Congress as an unwelcome deviation from the more isolationist foreign policy established by President Washington, many Southerners opposed involvement with any conference attended by delegates from Haiti, a republic that had been established through a slave revolt. Though the United States delegation finally won confirmation from the Senate, it never reached the Congress of Panama due to the Senate's delay.\n1828 presidential election.\nThe Jacksonians formed an effective party apparatus that adopted many modern campaign techniques. Rather than focusing on issues, they emphasized Jackson's popularity and the supposed corruption of Adams and the federal government. Jackson himself described the campaign as a \"struggle between the virtue of the people and executive patronage\". Adams, meanwhile, refused to adapt to the new reality of political campaigns, and he avoided public functions and refused to invest in pro-administration tools such as newspapers. In early 1827, Jackson was publicly accused of having encouraged his wife, Rachel, to desert her first husband. In response, followers of Jackson attacked Adams's personal life, and the campaign turned increasingly nasty. The Jacksonian press portrayed Adams as an out-of-touch elitist, while pro-Adams newspapers attacked Jackson's past involvement in various duels and scuffles, portraying him as too emotional and impetuous for the presidency. Though Adams and Clay had hoped that the campaign would focus on the American System, it was instead dominated by the personalities of Jackson and Adams.\nVice President Calhoun joined Jackson's ticket, while Adams turned to Secretary of the Treasury Richard Rush as his running mate. The 1828 election thus marked the first time in United States history that a presidential ticket composed of two Northerners faced off against a presidential ticket composed of two Southerners. In the election, Jackson won 178 of the 261 electoral votes and just under 56% of the popular vote. Jackson won 50.3% of the popular vote in the free states, but 72.6% of the vote in the slave states. No future presidential candidate would match Jackson's proportion of the popular vote until Theodore Roosevelt's 1904 campaign, while Adams's loss made him the second one-term president, after his own father. By 1828, only two states did not hold a popular vote for president, and the number of votes in the 1828 election was triple that in the 1824 election. This increase in votes was due not only to the recent wave of democratization, but also because of increased interest in elections and the growing ability of the parties to mobilize voters. Adams did not attend Jackson's inauguration, making him one of only four presidents who finished their terms but skipped the event.\nLater congressional career (1830\u20131848).\nJackson administration, 1830\u20131836.\nAdams considered permanently retiring from public life after his 1828 defeat, and he was deeply hurt by the suicide of his son, George Washington Adams, in 1829. He was appalled by many of the Jackson administration's actions, including its embrace of the spoils system and the prosecution of his close friend, Treasury Auditor Tobias Watkins, for embezzlement. Though they had once maintained a cordial relationship, Adams and Jackson each came to loathe the other in the decades after the 1828 election. Adams grew bored with his retirement and still felt that his career was unfinished, so he ran for and won a seat in the United States House of Representatives in the 1830 elections. His election went against the generally held opinion, shared by his own wife and youngest son, that former presidents should not run for public office. Nonetheless, he would win election to nine terms, serving from 1831 until his death in 1848. Adams and Andrew Johnson are the only former presidents to serve in Congress. After winning election, Adams became affiliated with the Anti-Masonic Party, partly because the National Republican Party's leadership in Massachusetts included many of the former Federalists that Adams had clashed with earlier in his career. The Anti-Masonic Party originated as a movement against Freemasonry, but it developed into the country's first third party and embraced a general program of anti-elitism.\nAdams expected a light workload when he returned to Washington at 64 years old, but Speaker Andrew Stevenson selected Adams chair of the Committee on Commerce and Manufactures. Though he identified as a member of the Anti-Masonic Party, Congress was broadly polarized into allies of Jackson and opponents of Jackson, and Adams generally aligned with the latter camp. Stevenson, an ally of Jackson, expected that the committee chairmanship would keep Adams busy defending the tariff even while the Jacksonian majority on the committee would prevent Adams from accruing any real power. As chair of the committee charged with writing tariff laws, Adams became an important player in the nullification crisis, which stemmed largely from Southern objections to the high rates imposed by the Tariff of 1828. South Carolina leaders argued that states could nullify federal laws, and they announced that they would bar the federal government from enforcing the tariff in their state. Adams helped pass the Tariff of 1832, which lowered rates, but not enough to mollify the South Carolina nullifiers. The crisis ended when Clay and Calhoun agreed to another tariff bill, the Tariff of 1833, that furthered lower tariff rates. Adams was appalled by the Nullification Crisis's outcome, as he felt that the Southern states had unfairly benefited from challenging federal law. After the crisis, Adams was convinced that Southerners exercised undue influence over the federal government through their control of Jackson's Democratic Party.\nIn the 1833 Massachusetts gubernatorial election, the Anti-Masonic Party nominated Adams in a four-way race between Adams, the National Republican candidate, the Democratic candidate, and a candidate of the Working Men's Party. The National Republican candidate, John Davis, won 40% of the vote, while Adams finished in second place with 29%. Because no candidate won a majority of the vote, the state legislature decided the election. Rather than seek election by the legislature, Adams withdrew his name from contention, and the legislature selected Davis. Adams was nearly elected to the Senate in 1835 by a coalition of Anti-Masons and National Republicans, but his support for Jackson in a minor foreign policy matter annoyed National Republican leaders enough that they dropped their support for his candidacy. After 1835, Adams never again sought higher office, focusing instead on his service in the House of Representatives.\nVan Buren, Harrison and Tyler administrations, 1837\u20131843.\nIn the mid-1830s, the Anti-Masonic Party, the National Republicans, and other groups opposed to Jackson coalesced into the Whig Party. In the 1836 presidential election Democrats put forward Martin Van Buren, while the Whigs fielded multiple presidential candidates. Because he disdained all the major party contenders for president, Adams did not take part in the campaign; Van Buren won the election. Nonetheless, Adams became aligned with the Whig Party in Congress. Adams generally opposed the initiatives of President Van Buren, long a political adversary, though they maintained a cordial public relationship.\nThe Republic of Texas won its independence from Mexico in the Texas Revolution of 1835\u20131836. Texas had largely been settled by Americans from the Southern United States, and many of those settlers owned slaves despite an 1829 Mexican law that abolished slavery. Many in the United States and Texas thus favored the admission of Texas into the union as a slave state. Adams considered the issue of Texas to be \"a question of far deeper root and more overshadowing branches than any or all others that agitate the country\", and he emerged as one of the leading congressional opponents of annexation. When he served as secretary of state, Adams had sought to acquire Texas, but he argued that, because Mexico had abolished slavery, the acquisition of Texas would transform the region from a free territory into a slave state. He also feared that the annexation of Texas would encourage Southern expansionists to pursue other potential slave states, including Cuba. Adams's firm stance may have played a role in discouraging Van Buren from pushing for the annexation of Texas during his presidency.\nWhig nominee William Henry Harrison defeated Van Buren in the 1840 presidential election, and the Whigs gained control of both houses of Congress for the first time. Despite his low regard for Harrison as a person, Adams was enthusiastic about the new Whig administration and the end of the long-standing Democratic dominance of the federal government. However, Harrison died in April 1841 and was succeeded by Vice President John Tyler, a Southerner who, unlike Adams, Henry Clay, and many other prominent Whigs, did not embrace the American System. Adams saw Tyler as an agent of \"the slave-driving, Virginia, Jeffersonian school, principled against all improvement\". After Tyler vetoed a bill to restore the national bank, Whig congressmen expelled Tyler from the party. Adams was appointed chairman of a special committee that explored impeaching Tyler, and Adams presented a scathing report of Tyler that argued that his actions warranted impeachment. The impeachment process did not move forward, though, because the Whigs did not believe that the Senate would vote to remove Tyler from office.\nOpposition to the Mexican-American War, 1844\u20131848.\nTyler made the annexation of Texas the main foreign policy priority of the later stages of his administration. He attempted to win ratification of an annexation treaty in 1844, but, to Adams's surprise and relief, the Senate rejected the treaty. The annexation of Texas became the central issue of the 1844 presidential election, and Southerners blocked the nomination of Van Buren at the 1844 Democratic National Convention due to the latter's opposition to annexation; the party instead nominated James K. Polk, an acolyte of Andrew Jackson. Though he once again did not take part in the campaigning, Adams was deeply disappointed that Polk defeated his old ally, Henry Clay, in the 1844 election. He attributed the outcome of the election partly to the Liberty Party, a small, abolitionist third party that may have siphoned votes from Clay in the crucial state of New York. After the election, Tyler, whose term would end in March 1845, once again submitted an annexation treaty to Congress. Adams strongly attacked the treaty, arguing that the annexation of Texas would involve the United States in \"a war for slavery\". Despite Adams's opposition, both houses of Congress approved the treaty, with most Democrats voting for annexation and most Whigs voting against it. Texas thus joined the United States as a slave state in 1845.\nAdams had served with James K. Polk in the House of Representatives, and Adams loathed the new president, seeing him as another expansionist, pro-slavery Southern Democrat. Adams favored the annexation of the entirety of Oregon Country, a disputed region occupied by both the United States and Britain, and was disappointed when President Polk signed the Oregon Treaty, which divided the land between the two claimants at the 49th parallel. Polk's expansionist aims centered instead on the Mexican province of Alta California, and he attempted to buy the province from Mexico. The Mexican government refused to sell California or recognize the independence and subsequent American annexation of Texas. Polk deployed a military detachment led by General Zachary Taylor to back up his assertion that the Rio Grande constituted the Southern border of both Texas and the United States. After Taylor's forces clashed with Mexican soldiers north of the Rio Grande, Polk asked for a declaration of war in early 1846, asserting that Mexico had invaded American territory. Though some Whigs questioned whether Mexico had started an aggressive war, both houses of Congress declared war, with the House voting 174-to-14 to approve the declaration. One of the 14 dissenting votes was Adams, who believed that Polk was seeking to wage an offensive to expand slavery. After the start of the war, he supported the Wilmot Proviso, an unsuccessful legislative proposal that would have banned slavery in any territory ceded by Mexico. After 1846, ill health increasingly affected Adams, but he continued to oppose the Mexican\u2013American War until his death in 1848.\nAnti-slavery movement.\nIn the 1830s, slavery emerged as an increasingly polarizing issue in the United States. A longtime opponent of slavery, Adams used his new role in Congress to fight it, and he became the most prominent national leader opposing slavery. After one of his reelection victories, he said that he must \"bring about a day prophesied when slavery and war shall be banished from the face of the Earth\". He wrote in his private journal in 1820:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The discussion of this Missouri question has betrayed the secret of their souls. In the abstract they admit that slavery is an evil, they disclaim it, and cast it all upon the shoulder of Great Britain. But when probed to the quick upon it, they show at the bottom of their souls pride and vainglory in their condition of masterdom. They look down upon the simplicity of a Yankee's manners, because he has no habits of overbearing like theirs and cannot treat negroes like dogs. It is among the evils of slavery that it taints the very sources of moral principle. It establishes false estimates of virtue and vice: for what can be more false and heartless than this doctrine which makes the first and holiest rights of humanity to depend upon the color of the skin?\nIn 1836, partially in response to Adams's consistent presentation of citizen petitions requesting the abolition of slavery in the District of Columbia, the U.S. House of Representatives imposed a gag rule that immediately tabled any petitions about slavery. Democrats and Southern Whigs favored the rule, but Northern Whigs, like Adams, opposed it. In late 1836, Adams began a campaign to ridicule slave owners and the gag rule. He frequently attempted to present anti-slavery petitions, often in ways that provoked strong reactions from Southern representatives. Though the gag rule remained in place, the discussion ignited by his actions and the attempts of others to quiet him raised questions of the right to petition, the right to legislative debate, and the morality of slavery. Adams fought actively against the gag rule for another seven years, eventually moving the resolution that led to its repeal in 1844.\nIn 1841, at the request of Lewis Tappan and Ellis Gray Loring, Adams joined the case of \"United States v. The Amistad\". Adams went before the Supreme Court on behalf of African slaves who had revolted and seized the Spanish ship \"Amistad\". Adams appeared on February 24, 1841, and spoke for four hours. His argument succeeded: the Court ruled that the Africans were free and they returned to their homes.\nSmithsonian Institution.\nAdams also became a leading force for the promotion of science. In 1829, British scientist James Smithson died, and he left his fortune for the \"increase and diffusion of knowledge\". In Smithson's will, he stated that should his nephew, Henry James Hungerford, die without heirs, the Smithson estate would go to the government of the United States to create an \"Establishment for the increase and diffusion of Knowledge among men\". After the nephew died without heirs in 1835, President Andrew Jackson informed Congress of the bequest, which amounted to about US$500,000 (equivalent to US$ in 2024). Adams realized that this might allow the United States to realize his dream of building a national institution of science and learning. Adams thus became Congress's primary supporter of the future Smithsonian Institution.\nThe money was invested in shaky state bonds, which quickly defaulted. After heated debate in Congress, Adams successfully argued to restore the lost funds with interest. Though Congress wanted to use the money for other purposes, Adams successfully persuaded Congress to preserve the money for an institution of science and learning. Congress also debated whether the federal government had the authority to accept the gift, though with Adams leading the initiative, Congress accepted the legacy bequeathed to the nation and pledged the faith of the United States to the charitable trust on July 1, 1836. Partly due to Adams's efforts, Congress voted to establish the Smithsonian Institution in 1846. A nonpolitical board of regents was established to lead the institution, which included a museum, art gallery, library, and laboratory.\nDeath.\nIn 1846, the 78-year-old former president suffered a stroke that left him partially paralyzed. After a few months of rest, he made a full recovery and resumed his duties in Congress. When Adams entered the House chamber on February 13, 1847, everyone \"stood up and applauded\".\nOn February 21, 1848, the House of Representatives was discussing the matter of honoring United States Army officers who served in the Mexican\u2013American War. Adams had been a vehement critic of the war, and as Congressmen rose up to say, \"Aye!\" in favor of the measure, he instead yelled, \"No!\" He rose to answer a question put forth by Speaker of the House Robert Charles Winthrop. Immediately thereafter, Adams collapsed, having suffered a massive cerebral hemorrhage. Two days later, on February 23, he died at 7:20\u00a0p.m. with his wife at his side in the Speaker's Room inside the Capitol Building in Washington, D.C.; his only living child, Charles Francis, did not arrive in time to see his father alive. His last words were \"This is the last of Earth. I am content\". Among those present for his death was future president Abraham Lincoln, then a freshman representative from Illinois.\nHis original interment was temporary, in the public vault at the Congressional Cemetery in Washington, D.C. Later, he was interred in the family burial ground in Quincy, Massachusetts, across from the (Unitarian) United First Parish Church, called Hancock Cemetery. After Louisa's death in 1852, his son had his parents re-interred in the expanded family crypt in the United First Parish Church across the street, next to John and Abigail. Both tombs are viewable by the public. Adams's original tomb at Hancock Cemetery is still there and marked simply \"J.Q. Adams\".\nPersonal life.\nAdams and Louisa had three sons and a daughter. Their daughter, Louisa, was born in 1811, but died in 1812, from unknown reasons. They named their first son George Washington Adams (1801\u20131829) after the first president. This decision upset Adams's mother, and, by her account, his father as well. Both George and their second son, John (1803\u20131834), led troubled lives and died in early adulthood. George, who had long suffered from alcoholism, died in 1829 after going overboard on a steamboat; it is not clear whether he fell or purposely jumped from the boat. John, who ran an unprofitable flour and grist mill owned by his father, died of an unknown illness in 1834. Adams's youngest son, Charles Francis Adams Sr., was an important leader of the \"Conscience Whigs\", a Northern, anti-slavery faction of the Whig Party. Charles served as the Free Soil Party's vice presidential candidate in the 1848 presidential election and later became a prominent member of the Republican Party, serving as United States Minister to England during the American Civil War.\nPersonality.\nAdams's personality and political beliefs were much like his father's. He always preferred solitary reading to social engagements, and he was repeatedly persuaded to stay in public service by others. Historian Paul Nagel states that, like Abraham Lincoln after him, Adams often suffered from depression, for which he sought treatment in early years. Adams thought his depression was due to the high expectations demanded of him by his father and mother. Throughout his life, he felt inadequate and socially awkward because of his depression, and was constantly bothered by his physical appearance. He was closer to his father, with whom he spent much of his early life while abroad, than he was to his mother. In his youth, while the American Revolution raged on, Adams heard from his mother about his father's work and the substantial risks he took to support it. As a result, he developed a deep respect for his father. In contrast, Adams had a rocky relationship with his mother, due to her high expectations of him, and her fear that her children would follow in the footsteps of her brother, who died of alcoholism. His biographer, Nagel, concludes that his mother's disapproval of Louisa Johnson motivated him to marry Johnson in 1797, despite Adams's reservations that Johnson, like his mother, had a forceful personality.\nThough Adams wore a powdered wig tied in a queue in his youth, he abandoned this fashion while serving as the U.S. Minister to Russia (1809\u20131814) and became the first president to adopt a short haircut instead of long hair tied in a queue and to regularly wear long trousers instead of knee breeches according to the fashion of the 19th century. It has been suggested that John Quincy Adams had the highest I.Q. of any U.S. president. Dean Simonton, a professor of psychology at UC Davis, estimated his I.Q. score at 165. He reportedly spoke eight foreign languages (Dutch, French, German, Greek, Italian, Latin, Russian, and Spanish), more than any other U.S. president. He remains the only U.S. president who could converse in Russian.\nLegacy.\nHistorical reputation.\nAdams is widely regarded as one of the most effective diplomats and secretaries of state in American history, but scholars generally rank him as an average president. Adams is remembered as a man eminently qualified for the presidency, yet hopelessly weakened in his presidential leadership potential because of the 1824 election. Most importantly, Adams is remembered as a poor politician in an era when politics had begun to matter more. He spoke of trying to serve as a man above the \"baneful weed of party strife\" at the precise moment in history when the Second Party System was emerging with nearly revolutionary force. Biographer and historian William J. Cooper Jr. comments that Adams \"does not loom large in the American imagination\", but that he has received more public attention since the late 20th century due to his anti-slavery stances. Cooper writes that Adams was the first \"major public figure\" to publicly question whether the United States could remain united so long as the institution of slavery persisted. Historian Daniel Walker Howe writes that Adams's \"intellectual ability and courage were above reproach, and his wisdom in perceiving the national interest has stood the test of time\". He has also been praised as a strong prose stylist, with James Parker describing him as one of the \"three authentically muddy-eyed and pained-by-subjectivity \"writers\"\" that the White House has harbored, along with Abraham Lincoln and Barack Obama.\nMemorials.\nThe John Quincy Adams Birthplace is now part of Adams National Historical Park and open to the public. Adams House, one of twelve undergraduate residential Houses at Harvard University, is named for John Adams, John Quincy Adams, and other members of the Adams family associated with Harvard. John Quincy Adams tower, located in the Southwest residential area of the University of Massachusetts Amherst, is named for the president. In 1870, Charles Francis built the first presidential library in the United States, to honor his father. The Stone Library includes over 14,000 books written in twelve languages. The library is located at Peacefield (the \"Old House\") at Adams National Historical Park in Quincy, Massachusetts.\nAn Adams Memorial has been proposed in Washington, D.C., honoring Adams and his wife, son, father, mother, and other members of their family. The John Quincy Adams School in Washington, D.C., was named after him. It merged with the James F. Oyster School and now is called the Oyster-Adams Bilingual School.\nAdams's middle name of Quincy has been used by several locations in the United States, including the town of Quincy, Illinois. Adams County, Illinois and Adams County, Indiana are also named after Adams. Adams County, Iowa, and Adams County, Wisconsin, were each named for either John Adams or John Quincy Adams.\nSome sources contend that in 1843 Adams sat for the earliest confirmed photograph of a United States president, although others maintain that William Henry Harrison had posed even earlier for his portrait, in 1841. The original daguerreotype is in the collection of the National Portrait Gallery of the Smithsonian Institution.\nFilm and television.\nAdams occasionally is featured in the mass media. In the PBS miniseries \"The Adams Chronicles\" (1976), he was portrayed by David Birney, William Daniels, Marcel Trenchard, Steven Grover and Mark Winkworth. He was also portrayed by Anthony Hopkins in the 1997 film \"Amistad\", and again by Ebon Moss-Bachrach and Steven Hinkle in the 2008 HBO television miniseries \"John Adams\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\"\nstyle=\"width:100%\""}
{"id": "15655", "revid": "47587808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15655", "title": "Jurassic", "text": "Second period of the Mesozoic Era\nThe Jurassic ( ) is a geologic period and stratigraphic system that spanned from the end of the Triassic Period Ma (million years ago) to the beginning of the Cretaceous Period, 143.1 Ma. The Jurassic constitutes the second and middle period of the Mesozoic Era as well as the eighth period of the Phanerozoic Eon and is named after the Jura Mountains, where limestone strata from the period were first identified.\nThe start of the Jurassic was marked by the major Triassic\u2013Jurassic extinction event, associated with the eruption of the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province (CAMP). The beginning of the Toarcian Age started around 183 Ma and is marked by the Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event, a global episode of oceanic anoxia, ocean acidification, and elevated global temperatures associated with extinctions, likely caused by the eruption of the Karoo-Ferrar large igneous provinces. The end of the Jurassic, however, has no clear, definitive boundary with the Cretaceous and is the only boundary between geological periods to remain formally undefined.\nBy the beginning of the Jurassic, the supercontinent Pangaea had begun rifting into two landmasses: Laurasia to the north and Gondwana to the south. The climate of the Jurassic was warmer than the present, and there were no ice caps. Forests grew close to the poles, with large arid expanses in the lower latitudes.\nOn land, the fauna transitioned from the Triassic fauna, dominated jointly by dinosauromorph and pseudosuchian archosaurs, to one dominated by dinosaurs alone. The first stem-group birds appeared during the Jurassic, evolving from a branch of theropod dinosaurs. Other major events include the appearance of the earliest crabs and modern frogs, salamanders and lizards. Mammaliaformes, one of the few cynodont lineages to survive the end of the Triassic, continued to diversify throughout the period, with the Jurassic seeing the emergence of the first crown group mammals. Crocodylomorphs made the transition from a terrestrial to an aquatic life. The oceans were inhabited by marine reptiles such as ichthyosaurs and plesiosaurs, while pterosaurs were the dominant flying vertebrates. Modern sharks and rays first appeared and diversified during the period, while the first known crown-group teleost fish (the dominant group of modern fish) appeared near the end of the period. The flora was dominated by ferns and gymnosperms, including conifers, of which many modern groups made their first appearance during the period, as well as other groups like the extinct Bennettitales.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology and history.\nThe chronostratigraphic term \"Jurassic\" is linked to the Jura Mountains, a forested mountain range that mainly follows the France\u2013Switzerland border. The name \"Jura\" is derived from the Celtic root via Gaulish \"*iuris\" \"wooded mountain\", which was borrowed into Latin as a name of a place and evolved into \"Juria\" and finally \"Jura\".\nDuring a tour of the region in 1795, German naturalist Alexander von Humboldt recognized carbonate deposits within the Jura Mountains as geologically distinct from the Triassic aged Muschelkalk of southern Germany, but he erroneously concluded that they were older. He then named them ('Jura limestone') in 1799.\nIn 1829, the French naturalist Alexandre Brongniart published a book entitled \"Description of the Terrains that Constitute the Crust of the Earth or Essay on the Structure of the Known Lands of the Earth.\" In this book, Brongniart used the phrase \"terrains jurassiques\" when correlating the \"Jura-Kalkstein\" of Humboldt with similarly aged oolitic limestones in Britain, thus coining and publishing the term \"Jurassic\".\nThe German geologist Leopold von Buch in 1839 established the three-fold division of the Jurassic, originally named from oldest to the youngest: the Black Jurassic, Brown Jurassic, and White Jurassic. The term \"Lias\" had previously been used for strata of equivalent age to the Black Jurassic in England by William Conybeare and William Phillips in 1822. William Phillips, the geologist, worked with William Conybeare to find out more about the Black Jurassic in England.\nThe French palaeontologist Alcide d'Orbigny in papers between 1842 and 1852 divided the Jurassic into ten stages based on ammonite and other fossil assemblages in England and France, of which seven are still used, but none has retained its original definition. The German geologist and palaeontologist Friedrich August von Quenstedt in 1858 divided the three series of von Buch in the Swabian Jura into six subdivisions defined by ammonites and other fossils.\nThe German palaeontologist Albert Oppel in his studies between 1856 and 1858 altered d'Orbigny's original scheme and further subdivided the stages into biostratigraphic zones, based primarily on ammonites. Most of the modern stages of the Jurassic were formalized at the Colloque du Jurassique \u00e0 Luxembourg in 1962.\nGeology.\nThe Jurassic Period is divided into three epochs: Early, Middle, and Late. Similarly, in stratigraphy, the Jurassic is divided into the Lower Jurassic, Middle Jurassic, and Upper Jurassic series. Geologists divide the rocks of the Jurassic into a stratigraphic set of units called stages, each formed during corresponding time intervals called ages.\nStages can be defined globally or regionally. For global stratigraphic correlation, the International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS) ratify global stages based on a Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) from a single formation (a stratotype) identifying the lower boundary of the stage. The ages of the Jurassic from youngest to oldest are as follows:\nStratigraphy.\nJurassic stratigraphy is primarily based on the use of ammonites as index fossils. The first appearance datum of specific ammonite taxa is used to mark the beginnings of stages, as well as smaller timespans within stages, referred to as \"ammonite zones\"; these, in turn, are also sometimes subdivided further into subzones. Global stratigraphy is based on standard European ammonite zones, with other regions being calibrated to the European successions. \nEarly Jurassic.\nThe oldest part of the Jurassic Period has historically been referred to as the Lias or Liassic, roughly equivalent in extent to the Early Jurassic, but also including part of the preceding Rhaetian. The Hettangian Stage was named by Swiss palaeontologist Eug\u00e8ne Renevier in 1864 after Hettange-Grande in north-eastern France. The GSSP for the base of the Hettangian is located at the Kuhjoch Pass, Karwendel Mountains, Northern Calcareous Alps, Austria; it was ratified in 2010. The beginning of the Hettangian, and thus the Jurassic as a whole, is marked by the first appearance of the ammonite \"Psiloceras spelae tirolicum\" in the Kendlbach Formation exposed at Kuhjoch. The base of the Jurassic was previously defined as the first appearance of \"Psiloceras planorbis\" by Albert Oppel in 1856\u201358, but this was changed as the appearance was seen as too localised an event for an international boundary.\nThe Sinemurian Stage was first defined and introduced into scientific literature by Alcide d'Orbigny in 1842. It takes its name from the French town of Semur-en-Auxois, near Dijon. The original definition of Sinemurian included what is now the Hettangian. The GSSP of the Sinemurian is located at a cliff face north of the hamlet of East Quantoxhead, 6 kilometres east of Watchet, Somerset, England, within the Blue Lias, and was ratified in 2000. The beginning of the Sinemurian is defined by the first appearance of the ammonite \"Vermiceras quantoxense.\"\nAlbert Oppel in 1858 named the Pliensbachian Stage after the hamlet of Pliensbach in the community of Zell unter Aichelberg in the Swabian Alb, near Stuttgart, Germany. The GSSP for the base of the Pliensbachian is found at the Wine Haven locality in Robin Hood's Bay, Yorkshire, England, in the Redcar Mudstone Formation, and was ratified in 2005. The beginning of the Pliensbachian is defined by the first appearance of the ammonite \"Bifericeras donovani\".\nThe village Thouars (Latin: \"Toarcium\"), just south of Saumur in the Loire Valley of France, lends its name to the Toarcian Stage. The Toarcian was named by Alcide d'Orbigny in 1842, with the original locality being Vrines quarry around 2\u00a0km northwest of Thouars. The GSSP for the base of the Toarcian is located at Peniche, Portugal, and was ratified in 2014. The boundary is defined by the first appearance of ammonites belonging to the subgenus \"Dactylioceras\" (\"Eodactylites\")\".\"\nMiddle Jurassic.\nThe Aalenian is named after the city of Aalen in Germany. The Aalenian was defined by Swiss geologist Karl Mayer-Eymar in 1864. The lower boundary was originally between the dark clays of the Black Jurassic and the overlying clayey sandstone and ferruginous oolite of the Brown Jurassic sequences of southwestern Germany. The GSSP for the base of the Aalenian is located at Fuentelsaz in the Iberian range near Guadalajara, Spain, and was ratified in 2000. The base of the Aalenian is defined by the first appearance of the ammonite \"Leioceras opalinum\".\nAlcide d'Orbigny in 1842 named the Bajocian Stage after the town of Bayeux (Latin: \"Bajoce\") in Normandy, France. The GSSP for the base of the Bajocian is located in the Murtinheira section at Cabo Mondego, Portugal; it was ratified in 1997. The base of the Bajocian is defined by the first appearance of the ammonite \"Hyperlioceras mundum.\"\nThe Bathonian is named after the city of Bath, England, introduced by Belgian geologist d'Omalius d'Halloy in 1843, after an incomplete section of oolitic limestones in several quarries in the region. The GSSP for the base of the Bathonian is Ravin du B\u00e8s, Bas-Auran area, Alpes de Haute Provence, France; it was ratified in 2009. The base of the Bathonian is defined by the first appearance of the ammonite \"Gonolkites convergens\", at the base of the \"Zigzagiceras zigzag\" ammonite zone\".\"\nThe Callovian is derived from the Latinized name of the village of Kellaways in Wiltshire, England, and was named by Alcide d'Orbigny in 1852, originally the base at the contact between the Forest Marble Formation and the Cornbrash Formation. However, this boundary was later found to be within the upper part of the Bathonian. The base of the Callovian does not yet have a certified GSSP. The working definition for the base of the Callovian is the first appearance of ammonites belonging to the genus \"Kepplerites.\"\nLate Jurassic.\nThe Oxfordian is named after the city of Oxford in England and was named by Alcide d'Orbigny in 1844 in reference to the Oxford Clay. The base of the Oxfordian lacks a defined GSSP. W. J. Arkell in studies in 1939 and 1946 placed the lower boundary of the Oxfordian as the first appearance of the ammonite \"Quenstedtoceras mariae\" (then placed in the genus \"Vertumniceras\"). Subsequent proposals have suggested the first appearance of \"Cardioceras redcliffense\" as the lower boundary.\nThe village of Kimmeridge on the coast of Dorset, England, is the origin of the name of the Kimmeridgian. The stage was named by Alcide d'Orbigny in 1842 in reference to the Kimmeridge Clay. The GSSP for the base of the Kimmeridgian is the Flodigarry section at Staffin Bay on the Isle of Skye, Scotland, which was ratified in 2021. The boundary is defined by the first appearance of ammonites marking the boreal Bauhini Zone and the subboreal Baylei Zone.\nThe Tithonian was introduced in scientific literature by Albert Oppel in 1865. The name Tithonian is unusual in geological stage names because it is derived from Greek mythology rather than a place name. Tithonus was the son of Laomedon of Troy and fell in love with Eos, the Greek goddess of dawn. His name was chosen by Albert Oppel for this stratigraphical stage because the Tithonian finds itself hand in hand with the dawn of the Cretaceous. The base of the Tithonian currently lacks a GSSP. The working definition for the base of the Tithonian is the first appearance of the ammonite genus \"Gravesia\".\nThe upper boundary of the Jurassic is currently undefined, and the Jurassic\u2013Cretaceous boundary is currently the only system boundary to lack a defined GSSP. Placing a GSSP for this boundary has been difficult because of the strong regionality of most biostratigraphic markers, and lack of any chemostratigraphic events, such as isotope excursions (large sudden changes in ratios of isotopes), that could be used to define or correlate a boundary. Calpionellids, an enigmatic group of planktonic protists with urn-shaped calcitic tests briefly abundant during the latest Jurassic to earliest Cretaceous, have been suggested to represent the most promising candidates for fixing the Jurassic\u2013Cretaceous boundary In particular, the first appearance \"Calpionella alpina,\" co-inciding with the base of the eponymous Alpina subzone, has been proposed as the definition of the base of the Cretaceous. The working definition for the boundary has often been placed as the first appearance of the ammonite \"Strambergella jacobi,\" formerly placed in the genus \"Berriasella\", but its use as a stratigraphic indicator has been questioned, as its first appearance does not correlate with that of \"C. alpina\".\nMineral and hydrocarbon deposits.\nThe Kimmeridge Clay and equivalents are the major source rock for the North Sea oil. The Arabian Intrashelf Basin, deposited during the Middle and Late Jurassic, is the setting of the world's largest oil reserves, including the Ghawar Field, the world's largest oil field. The Jurassic-aged Sargelu and Naokelekan formations are major source rocks for oil in Iraq. Over 1500 gigatons of Jurassic coal reserves are found in north-west China, primarily in the Turpan-Hami Basin and the Ordos Basin.\nImpact structures.\nMajor impact structures include the Morokweng impact structure, a 70\u00a0km diameter impact structure buried beneath the Kalahari desert in northern South Africa. The impact is dated to the Tithonian, approximately 146.06 \u00b1 0.16 Ma. Another major structure is the Puchezh-Katunki crater, 40 kilometres in diameter, buried beneath Nizhny Novgorod Oblast in western Russia. The impact has been dated to the Sinemurian, 195.9\u202f\u00b1\u202f1.0\u202fMa.\nPaleogeography and tectonics.\nAt the beginning of the Jurassic, all of the world's major landmasses were coalesced into the supercontinent Pangaea, which during the Early Jurassic began to break up into northern supercontinent Laurasia and the southern supercontinent Gondwana. The rifting between North America and Africa was the first to initiate, beginning in the early Jurassic, associated with the emplacement of the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province.\nDuring the Jurassic, the North Atlantic Ocean remained relatively narrow, while the South Atlantic did not open until the Cretaceous. The continents were surrounded by Panthalassa, with the Tethys Ocean between Gondwana and Asia. At the end of the Triassic, there was a marine transgression in Europe, flooding most parts of central and western Europe transforming it into an archipelago of islands surrounded by shallow seas. During the Jurassic, both the North and South Pole were covered by oceans. Beginning in the Early Jurassic, the Boreal Ocean was connected to the proto-Atlantic by the \"Viking corridor\" or Transcontinental Laurasian Seaway, a passage between the Baltic Shield and Greenland several hundred kilometers wide. During the Callovian, the Turgai Epicontinental Sea formed, creating a marine barrier between Europe and Asia.\nMadagascar and Antarctica began to rift away from Africa during the late Early Jurassic in association with the eruption of the Karoo-Ferrar large igneous provinces, opening the western Indian Ocean and beginning the fragmentation of Gondwana. At the beginning of the Jurassic, North and South America remained connected, but by the beginning of the Late Jurassic they had rifted apart to form the Caribbean Seaway, also known as the Hispanic Corridor, which connected the North Atlantic Ocean with eastern Panthalassa. Palaeontological data suggest that the seaway had been open since the Early Jurassic.\nAs part of the Nevadan orogeny, which began during the Triassic, the Cache Creek Ocean closed, and various terranes including the large Wrangellia Terrane accreted onto the western margin of North America. By the Middle Jurassic the Siberian plate and the North China-Amuria block had collided, resulting in the closure of the Mongol-Okhotsk Ocean.\nDuring the Early Jurassic, around 190 million years ago, the Pacific Plate originated at the triple junction of the Farallon, Phoenix, and Izanagi tectonic plates, the three main oceanic plates of Panthalassa. The previously stable triple junction had converted to an unstable arrangement surrounded on all sides by transform faults because of a kink in one of the plate boundaries, resulting in the formation of the Pacific Plate at the centre of the junction. During the Middle to early Late Jurassic, the Sundance Seaway, a shallow epicontinental sea, covered much of northwest North America.The eustatic sea level is estimated to have been close to present levels during the Hettangian and Sinemurian, rising several tens of metres during the late Sinemurian\u2013Pliensbachian before regressing to near present levels by the late Pliensbachian. There seems to have been a gradual rise to a peak of ~75 m above present sea level during the Toarcian. During the latest part of the Toarcian, the sea level again dropped by several tens of metres. It progressively rose from the Aalenian onwards, aside from dips of a few tens of metres in the Bajocian and around the Callovian\u2013Oxfordian boundary, peaking possibly as high as 140 metres above present sea level at the Kimmeridgian\u2013Tithonian boundary. The sea levels falls in the late Tithonian, perhaps to around 100 metres, before rebounding to around 110 metres at the Tithonian\u2013Berriasian boundary.\nThe sea level within the long-term trends across the Jurassic was cyclical, with 64 fluctuations, 15 of which were over 75 metres. The most noted cyclicity in Jurassic rocks is fourth order, with a periodicity of approximately 410,000 years.\nDuring the Early Jurassic the world's oceans transitioned from an aragonite sea to a calcite sea chemistry, favouring the dissolution of aragonite and precipitation of calcite. The rise of calcareous plankton during the Middle Jurassic profoundly altered ocean chemistry, with the deposition of biomineralized plankton on the ocean floor acting as a buffer against large CO2 emissions.\nClimate.\nThe climate of the Jurassic was generally warmer than that of present, by around , with atmospheric carbon dioxide likely about four times higher. Intermittent \"cold snap\" intervals are known to have occurred during this time period, however, interrupting the otherwise warm greenhouse climate. Forests likely grew near the poles, where they experienced warm summers and cold, sometimes snowy winters; there were unlikely to have been ice sheets given the high summer temperatures that prevented the accumulation of snow, though there may have been mountain glaciers. Dropstones and glendonites in northeastern Siberia during the Early to Middle Jurassic indicate cold winters. The ocean depths were likely warmer than present, and coral reefs grew 10\u00b0 of latitude further north and south. The Intertropical Convergence Zone likely existed over the oceans, resulting in large areas of desert and scrubland in the lower latitudes between 40\u00b0 N and S of the equator. Tropical rainforest and tundra biomes are likely to have been rare or absent. The Jurassic also witnessed the decline of the Pangaean megamonsoon that had characterised the preceding Permian and Triassic periods. Variation in the frequency of wildfire activity in the Jurassic was governed by the 405 kyr eccentricity cycle. Thanks to the breakup of Pangaea, the hydrological cycle during the Jurassic was significantly enhanced.\nThe beginning of the Jurassic was likely marked by a thermal spike corresponding to the Triassic\u2013Jurassic extinction and eruption of the Central Atlantic magmatic province. The first part of the Jurassic was marked by the Early Jurassic Cool Interval between 199 and 183 million years ago. It has been proposed that glaciation was present in the Northern Hemisphere during both the early Pliensbachian and the latest Pliensbachian. There was a spike in global temperatures of around during the early part of the Toarcian corresponding to the Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event and the eruption of the Karoo-Ferrar large igneous provinces in southern Gondwana, with the warm interval extending to the end of the Toarcian around 174 million years ago. During the Toarcian Warm Interval, ocean surface temperatures likely exceeded , and equatorial and subtropical (30\u00b0N\u201330\u00b0S) regions are likely to have been extremely arid, with temperatures in the interior of Pangea likely in excess of .The Toarcian Warm Interval is followed by the Middle Jurassic Cool Interval (MJCI) between 174 and 164 Ma, which may have been punctuated by brief, ephemeral icehouse intervals. During the Aalenian, precessionally forced climatic changes dictated peatland wildfire magnitude and frequency. The European climate appears to have become noticeably more humid at the Aalenian-Bajocian boundary but then became more arid during the middle Bajocian. A transient ice age possibly occurred in the late Bajocian. The Callovian-Oxfordian boundary at the end of the MJCI witnessed particularly notable global cooling, potentially even an ice age. This is followed by the Kimmeridgian Warm Interval (KWI) between 164 and 150 Ma. Based on fossil wood distribution, this was one of the wettest intervals of the Jurassic. The Pangaean interior had less severe seasonal swings than in previous warm periods as the expansion of the Central Atlantic and Western Indian Ocean provided new sources of moisture. A prominent drop in temperatures occurred during the Tithonian, known as the Early Tithonian Cooling Event (ETCE). The end of the Jurassic was marked by the Tithonian\u2013early Barremian Cool Interval (TBCI), beginning 150 Ma and continuing into the Early Cretaceous.\nClimatic events.\nToarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event.\nThe Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event (TOAE), also known as the Jenkyns Event, was an episode of widespread oceanic anoxia during the early part of the Toarcian Age, c. 183 Ma. It is marked by a globally documented high amplitude negative carbon isotope excursion, as well as the deposition of black shales and the extinction and collapse of carbonate-producing marine organisms, associated with a major rise in global temperatures.\nThe TOAE is often attributed to the eruption of the Karoo-Ferrar large igneous provinces and the associated increase of carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere, as well as the possible associated release of methane clathrates. This likely accelerated the hydrological cycle and increased silicate weathering, as evidenced by an increased amount of organic matter of terrestrial origin found in marine deposits during the TOAE. Groups affected include ammonites, ostracods, foraminifera, bivalves, cnidarians, and especially brachiopods, for which the TOAE represented one of the most severe extinctions in their evolutionary history. While the event had significant impact on marine invertebrates, it had little effect on marine reptiles. During the TOAE, the Sichuan Basin was transformed into a giant lake, probably three times the size of modern-day Lake Superior, represented by the Da'anzhai Member of the Ziliujing Formation. The lake likely sequestered ~460 gigatons (Gt) of organic carbon and ~1,200 Gt of inorganic carbon during the event. Seawater pH, which had already substantially decreased prior to the event, increased slightly during the early stages of the TOAE, before dropping to its lowest point around the middle of the event. This ocean acidification is the probable cause of the collapse of carbonate production. Additionally, anoxic conditions were exacerbated by enhanced recycling of phosphorus back into ocean water as a result of high ocean acidity and temperature inhibiting its mineralisation into apatite; the abundance of phosphorus in marine environments caused further eutrophication and consequent anoxia in a positive feedback loop.\nEnd-Jurassic transition.\nThe end-Jurassic transition was originally considered one of eight mass extinctions, but is now considered to be a complex interval of faunal turnover, with the increase in diversity of some groups and decline in others, though the evidence for this is primarily European, probably controlled by changes in eustatic sea level.\nFlora.\nEnd-Triassic extinction.\nThere is no evidence of a mass extinction of plants at the Triassic\u2013Jurassic boundary. At the Triassic\u2013Jurassic boundary in Greenland, the sporomorph (pollen and spores) record suggests a complete floral turnover. An analysis of macrofossil floral communities in Europe suggests that changes were mainly due to local ecological succession. At the end of the Triassic, the Peltaspermaceae became extinct in most parts of the world, with \"Lepidopteris\" persisting into the Early Jurassic in Patagonia. \"Dicroidium\", a corystosperm seed fern that was a dominant part of Gondwanan floral communities during the Triassic, also declined at the Triassic\u2013Jurassic boundary, surviving as a relict in Antarctica into the Early Jurassic.\nFloral composition.\nConifers.\nConifers formed a dominant component of Jurassic floras. The Late Triassic and Jurassic was a major time of diversification of conifers, with most modern conifer groups appearing in the fossil record by the end of the Jurassic, having evolved from voltzialean ancestors.\nAraucarian conifers have their first unambiguous records during the Early Jurassic, and members of the modern genus \"Araucaria\" were widespread across both hemispheres by the Middle Jurassic.\nAlso abundant during the Jurassic is the extinct family Cheirolepidiaceae, often recognised through their highly distinctive \"Classopolis\" pollen. Jurassic representatives include the pollen cone \"Classostrobus\" and the seed cone \"Pararaucaria\". Araucarian and Cheirolepidiaceae conifers often occur in association.\nThe oldest definitive record of the cypress family (Cupressaceae) is \"Austrohamia minuta\" from the Early Jurassic (Pliensbachian) of Patagonia, known from many parts of the plant. The reproductive structures of \"Austrohamia\" have strong similarities to those of the primitive living cypress genera \"Taiwania\" and \"Cunninghamia.\" By the Middle to Late Jurassic Cupressaceae were abundant in warm temperate\u2013tropical regions of the Northern Hemisphere, most abundantly represented by the genus \"Elatides\". The Jurassic also saw the first appearances of some modern genera of cypresses, such as \"Sequoia\".\nMembers of the extinct genus \"Schizolepidopsis\" which likely represent a stem-group to the pine family (Pinaceae), were widely distributed across Eurasia during the Jurassic. The oldest unambiguous record of Pinaceae is the pine cone \"Eathiestrobus\", known from the Late Jurassic (Kimmeridgian) of Scotland, which remains the only known unequivocal fossil of the group before the Cretaceous. Despite being the earliest known member of the Pinaceae, \"Eathiestrobus\" appears to be a member of the pinoid clade of the family, suggesting that the initial diversification of Pinaceae occurred earlier than has been found in the fossil record.\nThe earliest record of the yew family (Taxaceae) is \"Palaeotaxus rediviva\", from the Hettangian of Sweden, suggested to be closely related to the living \"Austrotaxus\", while \"Marskea jurassica\" from the Middle Jurassic of Yorkshire, England and material from the Callovian\u2013Oxfordian Daohugou Bed in China are thought to be closely related to \"Amentotaxus,\" with the latter material assigned to the modern genus, indicating that Taxaceae had substantially diversified by the end of the Jurassic.\nThe oldest unambiguous members of Podocarpaceae are known from the Jurassic, found across both hemispheres, including \"Scarburgia\" and \"Harrisiocarpus\" from the Middle Jurassic of England, as well as unnamed species from the Middle-Late Jurassic of Patagonia.\nDuring the Early Jurassic, the flora of the mid-latitudes of Eastern Asia were dominated by the extinct deciduous broad leafed conifer \"Podozamites,\" which appears to not be closely related to any living family of conifer. Its range extended northwards into polar latitudes of Siberia and then contracted northward in the Middle to Late Jurassic, corresponding to the increasing aridity of the region.\nGinkgoales.\nGinkgoales, of which the sole living species is \"Ginkgo biloba\", were more diverse during the Jurassic: they were among the most important components of Eurasian Jurassic floras and were adapted to a wide variety of climatic conditions. The earliest representatives of the genus \"Ginkgo,\" represented by ovulate and pollen organs similar to those of the modern species, are known from the Middle Jurassic in the Northern Hemisphere. Several other lineages of ginkgoaleans are known from Jurassic rocks, including \"Yimaia\", \"Grenana\", \"Nagrenia\" and \"Karkenia\". These lineages are associated with \"Ginkgo-\"like leaves, but are distinguished from living and fossil representatives of \"Ginkgo\" by having differently arranged reproductive structures. \"Umaltolepis\" from the Jurassic of Asia has strap-shaped ginkgo-like leaves with highly distinct reproductive structures with similarities to those of peltasperm and corystosperm seed ferns, has been suggested to be a member of Ginkgoales \"sensu lato.\"\nBennettitales.\nBennettitales, having first become widespread during the preceding Triassic, were diverse and abundant members of Jurassic floras across both hemispheres. The foliage of Bennettitales bears strong similarities to those of cycads, to such a degree that they cannot be reliably distinguished on the basis of morphology alone. Leaves of Bennettitales can be distinguished from those of cycads their different arrangement of stomata, and the two groups are not thought to be closely related. Jurassic Bennettitales predominantly belong to the group Williamsoniaceae, which grew as shrubs and small trees. The Williamsoniaceae are thought to have had a divaricate branching habit, similar to that of living \"Banksia\", and adapted to growing in open habitats with poor soil nutrient conditions. Bennettitales exhibit complex, flower-like reproductive structures some of which are thought to have been pollinated by insects. Several groups of insects that bear long proboscis, including extinct families such as kalligrammatid lacewings and extant ones such as acrocerid flies, are suggested to have been pollinators of bennettitales, feeding on nectar produced by bennettitalean cones.\nCycads.\nCycads reached their apex of diversity during the Jurassic and Cretaceous Periods. Despite the Mesozoic sometimes being called the \"Age of Cycads\", cycads are thought to have been a relatively minor component of mid-Mesozoic floras, with the Bennettitales and Nilssoniales, which have cycad-like foliage, being dominant. The Nilssoniales have often been considered cycads or cycad relatives, but have been found to be distinct on chemical grounds, and perhaps more closely allied with Bennettitales.\"\" The relationships of most Mesozoic cycads to living groups are ambiguous, with no Jurassic cycads belonging to either of the two modern groups of cycads, though some Jurassic cycads possibly represent stem-group relatives of modern Cycadaceae, like the leaf genus \"Paracycas\" known Europe, and Zamiaceae, like some European species of the leaf genus \"Pseudoctenis\". Also widespread during the Jurassic was the extinct \"Ctenis\" lineage, which appears to be distantly related to modern cycads. Modern cycads are pollinated by beetles, and such an association is thought to have formed by the Early Jurassic.\nOther seed plants.\nAlthough there have been several claimed records, there are no widely accepted Jurassic fossil records of flowering plants, which make up 90% of living plant species, and fossil evidence suggests that the group diversified during the following Cretaceous.\nThe earliest known gnetophytes, one of the four main living groups of gymnosperms, appeared by the end of the Jurassic, with the oldest unequivocal gnetophyte being the seed \"Dayvaultia\" from the Late Jurassic of North America.\n\"Seed ferns\" (Pteridospermatophyta) is a collective term to refer to disparate lineages of fern like plants that produce seeds but have uncertain affinities to living seed plant groups. A prominent group of Jurassic seed ferns is the Caytoniales, which reached their zenith during the Jurassic, with widespread records in the Northern Hemisphere, though records in the Southern Hemisphere remain rare. Due to their berry-like seed-bearing capsules, they have often been suggested to have been closely related or perhaps ancestral to flowering plants, but the evidence for this is inconclusive. Corystosperm-aligned seed ferns, such as \"Pachypteris\" and \"Komlopteris\" were widespread across both hemispheres during the Jurassic.\nCzekanowskiales, also known as Leptostrobales, are a group of seed plants uncertain affinities with persistent heavily dissected leaves borne on deciduous short shoots, subtended by scale-like leaves, known from the Late Triassic (possibly Late Permian) to Cretaceous. They are thought to have had a tree- or shrub-like habit and formed a conspicuous component of Northern Hemisphere Mesozoic temperate and warm-temperate floras. The genus \"Phoenicopsis\" was widespread in Early-Middle Jurassic floras of Eastern Asia and Siberia.\nThe Pentoxylales, a small but clearly distinct group of liana-like seed plants of obscure affinities, first appeared during the Jurassic. Their distribution appears to have been confined to Eastern Gondwana.\nFerns and allies.\nLiving families of ferns widespread during the Jurassic include Dipteridaceae, Matoniaceae, Gleicheniaceae, Osmundaceae and Marattiaceae. Polypodiales, which make up 80% of living fern diversity, have no record from the Jurassic and are thought to have diversified in the Cretaceous, though the widespread Jurassic herbaceous fern genus \"Coniopteris,\" historically interpreted as a close relative of tree ferns of the family Dicksoniaceae, has recently been reinterpreted as an early relative of the group.\nThe Cyatheales, the group containing most modern tree ferns, appeared during the Late Jurassic, represented by members of the genus \"Cyathocaulis\", which are suggested to be early members of Cyatheaceae on the basis of cladistic analysis. Only a handful of possible records exist of the Hymenophyllaceae from the Jurassic, including \"Hymenophyllites macrosporangiatus\" from the Russian Jurassic.\nThe oldest remains of modern horsetails of the genus \"Equisetum\" first appear in the Early Jurassic, represented by \"Equisetum dimorphum\" from the Early Jurassic of Patagonia and \"Equisetum laterale\" from the Early to Middle Jurassic of Australia. Silicified remains of \"Equisetum thermale\" from the Late Jurassic of Argentina exhibit all the morphological characters of modern members of the genus. The estimated split between \"Equisetum bogotense\" and all other living \"Equisetum\" is estimated to have occurred no later than the Early Jurassic.\nLower plants.\nQuillworts virtually identical to modern species are known from the Jurassic onwards. \"Isoetites rolandii\" from the Middle Jurassic of Oregon is the earliest known species to represent all major morphological features of modern \"Isoetes\". More primitive forms such as \"Nathorstiana,\" which retain an elongated stem, persisted into the Early Cretaceous.\nThe moss \"Kulindobryum\" from the Middle Jurassic of Russia, which was found associated with dinosaur bones, is thought to be related to the Splachnaceae, which grow on animal caracasses. \"Bryokhutuliinia\" from the same region is thought to be related to Dicranales. \"Heinrichsiella\" from the Jurassic of Patagonia is thought to belong to either Polytrichaceae or Timmiellaceae.\nThe liverwort \"Pellites hamiensis\" from the Middle Jurassic Xishanyao Formation of China is the oldest record of the family Pelliaceae. \"Pallaviciniites sandaolingensis\" from the same deposit is thought to belong to the subclass Pallaviciniineae within the Pallaviciniales. \"Ricciopsis sandaolingensis\", also from the same deposit, is the only Jurassic record of Ricciaceae.\nFauna.\nDinosaurs.\nDinosaurs, which had morphologically diversified in the Late Triassic, experienced a major increase in diversity and abundance during the Early Jurassic in the aftermath of the end-Triassic extinction and the extinction of other reptile groups, becoming the dominant vertebrates in terrestrial ecosystems. \"Chilesaurus\", a morphologically aberrant herbivorous dinosaur from the Late Jurassic of South America, has uncertain relationships to the three main groups of dinosaurs, having been recovered as a member of all three in different analyses.\nTheropods.\nAdvanced theropods belonging to Neotheropoda first appeared in the Late Triassic. Basal neotheropods, such as coelophysoids and dilophosaurs, persisted into the Early Jurassic, but became extinct by the Middle Jurassic. The earliest averostrans appear during the Early Jurassic, with the earliest known member of Ceratosauria being \"Saltriovenator\" from the early Sinemurian (199.3\u2013197.5 Ma) of Italy. The unusual ceratosaur \"Limusaurus\" from the Late Jurassic of China had a herbivorous diet, with adults having edentulous beaked jaws, making it the earliest known theropod to have converted from an ancestrally carnivorous diet. The earliest members of the Tetanurae appeared during the late Early Jurassic or early Middle Jurassic. The Megalosauridae represent the oldest radiation of the Tetanurae, first appearing in Europe during the Bajocian. The oldest member of Allosauroidea has been suggested to be \"Asfaltovenator\" from the Middle Jurassic of South America. Coelurosaurs first appeared during the Middle Jurassic, including early tyrannosaurs such as \"Proceratosaurus\" from the Bathonian of Britain. Some coelurosaurs from the Late Jurassic of China including \"Shishugounykus\" and \"Haplocheirus\" are suggested to represent early alvarezsaurs, however, this has been questioned. Scansoriopterygids, a group of small feathered coelurosaurs with membraneous, bat-like wings for gliding, are known from the Middle to Late Jurassic of China. The oldest record of troodontids is suggested to be \"Hesperornithoides\" from the Late Jurassic of North America. Tooth remains suggested to represent those of dromaeosaurs are known from the Jurassic, but no body remains are known until the Cretaceous.\nBirds.\nThe earliest avialans, which include birds and their ancestors, appear during the Middle to Late Jurassic, definitively represented by \"Archaeopteryx\" from the Late Jurassic of Germany. Avialans belong to the clade Paraves within Coelurosauria, which also includes dromaeosaurs and troodontids. The Anchiornithidae from the Middle-Late Jurassic of Eurasia have frequently suggested to be avialans, but have also alternatively found as a separate lineage of paravians.\nOrnithischians.\nThe earliest definitive ornithischians appear during the Early Jurassic, represented by basal ornithischians like \"Lesothosaurus\", heterodontosaurids, and early members of Thyreophora. The earliest members of Ankylosauria and Stegosauria appear during the Middle Jurassic. The basal neornithischian \"Kulindadromeus\" from the Middle Jurassic of Russia indicates that at least some ornithischians were covered in protofeathers. The earliest members of Ankylopollexia, which become prominent in the Cretaceous, appeared during the Late Jurassic, represented by bipedal forms such as \"Camptosaurus\". Ceratopsians first appeared in the Late Jurassic of China, represented by members of Chaoyangsauridae.\nSauropodomorphs.\nSauropods became the dominant large herbivores in terrestrial ecosystems during the Jurassic. Some Jurassic sauropods reached gigantic sizes, becoming the largest organisms to have ever lived on land.\nBasal bipedal sauropodomorphs, such as massospondylids, continued to exist into the Early Jurassic, but became extinct by the beginning of the Middle Jurassic. Quadrupedal sauropomorphs appeared during the Late Triassic. The quadrupedal \"Ledumahadi\" from the earliest Jurassic of South Africa reached an estimated weight of 12 tons, far in excess of other known basal sauropodomorphs. Gravisaurian sauropods first appeared during the Early Jurassic, with the oldest definitive record being \"Vulcanodon\" from Zimbabwe, likely of Sinemurian age. Eusauropods first appeared during the late Early Jurassic (Toarcian) and diversified during the Middle Jurassic; these included cetiosaurids, turiasaurs, and mamenchisaurs. Neosauropods such as macronarians and diplodocoids first appeared during the Middle Jurassic, before becoming abundant and globally distributed during the Late Jurassic.\nOther reptiles.\nCrocodylomorphs.\nThe Triassic\u2013Jurassic extinction decimated pseudosuchian diversity, with crocodylomorphs, which originated during the early Late Triassic, being the only group of pseudosuchians to survive. All other pseudosuchians, including the herbivorous aetosaurs and carnivorous \"rauisuchians\", became extinct. The morphological diversity of crocodylomorphs during the Early Jurassic was around the same as that of Late Triassic pseudosuchians, but they occupied different areas of morphospace, suggesting that they occupied different ecological niches to their Triassic counterparts and that there was an extensive and rapid radiation of crocodylomorphs during this interval. While living crocodilians are mostly confined to an aquatic ambush predator lifestyle, Jurassic crocodylomorphs exhibited a wide variety of life habits. An unnamed protosuchid known from teeth from the Early Jurassic of Arizona represents the earliest known herbivorous crocodylomorph, an adaptation that appeared several times during the Mesozoic.\nThe Thalattosuchia, a clade of predominantly marine crocodylomorphs, first appeared during the Early Jurassic and became a prominent part of marine ecosystems. Within Thalattosuchia, the Metriorhynchidae became highly adapted for life in the open ocean, including the transformation of limbs into flippers, the development of a tail fluke, and smooth, scaleless skin. The morphological diversity of crocodylomorphs during the Early and Middle Jurassic was relatively low compared to that in later time periods and was dominated by terrestrial small-bodied, long-legged sphenosuchians, early crocodyliforms and thalattosuchians. The Neosuchia, a major group of crocodylomorphs, first appeared during the Early to Middle Jurassic. The Neosuchia represents the transition from an ancestrally terrestrial lifestyle to a freshwater aquatic ecology similar to that occupied by modern crocodilians. The timing of the origin of Neosuchia is disputed. The oldest record of Neosuchians has been suggested to be \"Calsoyasuchus,\" from the Early Jurassic of Arizona, which in many analyses has been recovered as the earliest branching member of the neosuchian family Goniopholididae, which radically alters times of diversification for crocodylomorphs. However, this placement has been disputed, with some analyses finding it outside Neosuchia, which would place the oldest records of Neosuchia in the Middle Jurassic. \"Razanandrongobe\" from the Middle Jurassic of Madagascar has been suggested to represent the oldest record of Notosuchia, a primarily Gondwanan clade of mostly terrestrial crocodylomorphs, otherwise known from the Cretaceous and Cenozoic.\nTurtles.\nStem-group turtles (Testudinata) diversified during the Jurassic. Jurassic stem-turtles belong to two progressively more advanced clades, the Mesochelydia and Perichelydia. It is thought that the ancestral condition for mesochelydians is aquatic, as opposed to terrestrial for testudinates. The two modern groups of turtles (Testudines), Pleurodira and Cryptodira, diverged by the beginning of the Late Jurassic. The oldest known pleurodires, the Platychelyidae, are known from the Late Jurassic of Europe and the Americas, while the oldest unambiguous cryptodire, \"Sinaspideretes,\" an early relative of softshell turtles, is known from the Late Jurassic of China. The Thalassochelydia, a diverse lineage of marine turtles unrelated to modern sea turtles, are known from the Late Jurassic of Europe and South America.\nLepidosaurs.\nRhynchocephalians (the sole living representative being the tuatara) had achieved a global distribution by the beginning of the Jurassic, and represented the dominant group of small reptiles during the Jurassic globally. Rhynchocephalians reached their highest morphological diversity in their evolutionary history during the Jurassic, occupying a wide range of lifestyles, including the aquatic pleurosaurs with long snake-like bodies and reduced limbs, the specialized herbivorous eilenodontines, as well as the sapheosaurs which had broad tooth plates indicative of durophagy. Rhynchocephalians disappeared from Asia after the Early Jurassic. The last common ancestor of living squamates (which includes lizards and snakes) is estimated to have lived around 190 million years ago during the Early Jurassic, with the major divergences between modern squamate lineages estimated to have occurred during the Early to Middle Jurassic. Squamates first appear in the fossil record during the Middle Jurassic including members of modern clades such as Scincomorpha, though many Jurassic squamates have unclear relationships to living groups. \"Eichstaettisaurus\" from the Late Jurassic of Germany has been suggested to be an early relative of geckos and displays adaptations for climbing. \"Dorsetisaurus\" from the Late Jurassic of North America and Europe represents the oldest widely accepted record of Anguimorpha. \"Marmoretta\" from the Middle Jurassic of Britain has been suggested to represent a late surviving lepidosauromorph outside both Rhynchocephalia and Squamata, though some studies have recovered it as a stem-squamate.\nChoristoderes.\nThe earliest known remains of Choristodera, a group of freshwater aquatic reptiles with uncertain affinities to other reptile groups, are found in the Middle Jurassic. Only two genera of choristodere are known from the Jurassic. One is the small lizard-like \"Cteniogenys\", thought to be the most basal known choristodere; it is known from the Middle to Late Jurassic of Europe and Late Jurassic of North America, with similar remains also known from the upper Middle Jurassic of Kyrgyzstan and western Siberia. The other is \"Coeruleodraco\" from the Late Jurassic of China, which is a more advanced choristodere, though still small and lizard-like in morphology.\nIchthyosaurs.\nIchthyosaurs suffered an evolutionary bottleneck during the end-Triassic extinction, with all non-neoichthyosaurians becoming extinct. Ichthyosaurs reached their apex of species diversity during the Early Jurassic, with an array of morphologies including the huge apex predator \"Temnodontosaurus\" and swordfish-like \"Eurhinosaurus,\" though Early Jurassic ichthyosaurs were significantly less morphologically diverse than their Triassic counterparts. At the Early\u2013Middle Jurassic boundary, between the end of the Toarcian and the beginning of the Bajocian, most lineages of ichythosaur appear to have become extinct, with the first appearance of the Ophthalmosauridae, the clade that would encompass almost all ichthyosaurs from then on, during the early Bajocian. Ophthalmosaurids were diverse by the Late Jurassic, but failed to fill many of the niches that had been occupied by ichthyosaurs during the Early Jurassic.\nPlesiosaurs.\nPlesiosaurs originated at the end of the Triassic (Rhaetian). By the end of the Triassic, all other sauropterygians, including placodonts and nothosaurs, had become extinct. At least six lineages of plesiosaur crossed the Triassic\u2013Jurassic boundary. Plesiosaurs were already diverse in the earliest Jurassic, with the majority of plesiosaurs in the Hettangian-aged Blue Lias belonging to the Rhomaleosauridae. Early plesiosaurs were generally small-bodied, with body size increasing into the Toarcian. There appears to have been a strong turnover around the Early\u2013Middle Jurassic boundary, with microcleidids and rhomaleosaurids becoming extinct and nearly extinct respectively after the end of the Toarcian with the first appearance of the dominant clade of plesiosaurs of the latter half of the Jurassic, the Cryptoclididae during the Bajocian. The Middle Jurassic saw the evolution of short-necked and large-headed thalassophonean pliosaurs from ancestrally small-headed, long-necked forms\".\" Some thalassophonean pliosaurs, such as some species of \"Pliosaurus\", had skulls up to two metres in length with body lengths estimated around , making them the apex predators of Late Jurassic oceans. Plesiosaurs invaded freshwater environments during the Jurassic, with indeterminate remains of small-bodied pleisosaurs known from freshwater sediments from the Jurassic of China and Australia.\nPterosaurs.\nPterosaurs first appeared in the Late Triassic. A major radiation of Jurassic pterosaurs is the Rhamphorhynchidae, which first appeared in the late Early Jurassic (Toarcian); they are thought to been piscivorous. Anurognathids, which first appeared in the Middle Jurassic, possessed short heads and densely furred bodies, and are thought to have been insectivores. Derived monofenestratan pterosaurs such as wukongopterids appeared in the late Middle Jurassic. Advanced short-tailed pterodactyloids first appeared at the Middle\u2013Late Jurassic boundary. Jurassic pterodactyloids include the ctenochasmatids, like \"Ctenochasma\", which have closely spaced needle-like teeth that were presumably used for filter feeding. The bizarre Late Jurassic ctenochasmatoid \"Cycnorhamphus\" had a jaw with teeth only at the tips, with bent jaws like those of living openbill storks that may have been used to hold and crush hard invertebrates.\nAmphibians.\nThe diversity of temnospondyls had progressively declined through the Late Triassic, with only brachyopoids surviving into the Jurassic and beyond. Members of the family Brachyopidae are known from Jurassic deposits in Asia, while the chigutisaurid \"Siderops\" is known from the Early Jurassic of Australia. Modern lissamphibians began to diversify during the Jurassic. The Early Jurassic \"Prosalirus\" thought to represent the first frog relative with a morphology capable of hopping like living frogs. Morphologically recognisable stem-frogs like the South American \"Notobatrachus\" are known from the Middle Jurassic, with modern crown-group frogs like \"Enneabatrachus\" and \"Rhadinosteus\" appearing by the Late Jurassic. While the earliest salamander-line amphibians are known from the Triassic, crown group salamanders first appear during the Middle to Late Jurassic in Eurasia, alongside stem-group relatives. Many Jurassic stem-group salamanders, such as \"Marmorerpeton\" and \"Kokartus\", are thought to have been neotenic. Early representatives of crown group salamanders include \"Chunerpeton, Pangerpeton\" and \"Linglongtriton\" from the Middle to Late Jurassic Yanliao Biota of China. Some of these are suggested to belong to Cryptobranchoidea, which contains living Asiatic and giant salamanders. \"Beiyanerpeton\", and \"Qinglongtriton\" from the same biota are thought to be early members of Salamandroidea, the group which contains all other living salamanders. Salamanders dispersed into North America by the end of the Jurassic, as evidenced by \"Iridotriton\", found in the Late Jurassic Morrison Formation. The stem-caecilian \"Eocaecilia\" is known from the Early Jurassic of Arizona. The fourth group of lissamphibians, the extinct salamander-like albanerpetontids, first appeared in the Middle Jurassic, represented by \"Anoualerpeton priscus\" from the Bathonian of Britain, as well as indeterminate remains from equivalently aged sediments in France and the Anoual Formation of Morocco.\nMammaliaformes.\nMammaliaformes, including mammals, having originated from cynodonts at the end of the Triassic, diversified extensively during the Jurassic. While most Jurassic mammalaliaforms are solely known from isolated teeth and jaw fragments, exceptionally preserved remains have revealed a variety of lifestyles. The docodontan \"Castorocauda\" was adapted to aquatic life, similarly to the platypus and otters. Some members of Haramiyida and the eutriconodontan tribe Volaticotherini had a patagium akin to those of flying squirrels, allowing them to glide through the air. The aardvark-like mammal \"Fruitafossor\", of uncertain taxonomy, was likely a specialist on colonial insects, similarly to living anteaters. Australosphenida, a group of mammals possibly related to living monotremes, first appeared in the Middle Jurassic of Gondwana. The earliest records of multituberculates, one of the longest lasting and most successful orders of mammals, are known from the Middle Jurassic. Therian mammals, represented today by living placentals and marsupials, diversified meteorically during the Middle Jurassic. They have their earliest records during the early Late Jurassic, represented by \"Juramaia,\" a eutherian mammal closer to the ancestry of placentals than marsupials. \"Juramaia\" is much more advanced than expected for its age, as other therian mammals are not known until the Early Cretaceous, and it has been suggested that \"Juramaia\" may also originate from the Early Cretaceous instead. Two groups of non-mammaliaform cynodonts persisted beyond the end of the Triassic. The insectiviorous Tritheledontidae has a few records from the Early Jurassic. The Tritylodontidae, a herbiviorous group of cynodonts that first appeared during the Rhaetian, has abundant records from the Jurassic, overwhelmingly from the Northern Hemisphere.\nFish.\nJawless fish.\nThe last known species of conodont, a class of jawless fish whose hard, tooth-like elements are key index fossils, finally became extinct during the earliest Jurassic after over 300 million years of evolutionary history, with an asynchronous extinction occurring first in the Tethys and eastern Panthalassa and survivors persisting into the earliest Hettangian of Hungary and central Panthalassa. End-Triassic conodonts were represented by only a handful of species and had been progressively declining through the Middle and Late Triassic. \"Yanliaomyzon\" from the Middle Jurassic of China represents the oldest post Paleozoic lamprey, and the oldest lamprey to have the toothed feeding apparatus and likely the three stage life cycle typical of modern members of the group.\nSarcopterygii.\nLungfish (Dipnoi) were present in freshwater environments of both hemispheres during the Jurassic. Some studies have proposed that the last common ancestor of all living lungfish lived during the Jurassic. Mawsoniids, a marine and freshwater/brackish group of coelacanths, which first appeared in North America during the Triassic, expanded into Europe and South America by the end of the Jurassic. The marine Latimeriidae, which contains the living coelacanths of the genus \"Latimeria\", were also present in the Jurassic, having originated in the Triassic, with a number of records from the Jurassic of Europe including \"Swenzia\", thought to be the closest known relative of living coelacanths.\nActinopterygii.\nRay-finned fish (Actinopterygii) were major components of Jurassic freshwater and marine ecosystems. Archaic \"palaeoniscoid\" fish, which were common in both marine and freshwater habitats during the preceding Triassic declined during the Jurassic, being largely replaced by more derived actinopterygian lineages. The oldest known Acipenseriformes, the group that contains living sturgeon and paddlefish, are from the Early Jurassic. Amiiform fish (which today only includes the bowfin) first appeared during the Early Jurassic, represented by \"Caturus\" from the Pliensbachian of Britain; after their appearance in the western Tethys, they expanded to Africa, North America and Southeast and East Asia by the end of the Jurassic, with the modern family Amiidae appearing during the Late Jurassic. Pycnodontiformes, which first appeared in the western Tethys during the Late Triassic, expanded to South America and Southeast Asia by the end of the Jurassic, having a high diversity in Europe during the Late Jurassic. During the Jurassic, the Ginglymodi, the only living representatives being gars (Lepisosteidae) were diverse in both freshwater and marine environments. The oldest known representatives of anatomically modern gars appeared during the Late Jurassic. Stem-group teleosts, which make up over 99% of living Actinopterygii, had first appeared during the Triassic in the western Tethys; they underwent a major diversification beginning in the Late Jurassic, with early representatives of modern teleost clades such as Elopomorpha and Osteoglossoidei appearing during this time. The Pachycormiformes, a group of marine stem-teleosts, first appeared in the Early Jurassic and included both tuna-like predatory and filter-feeding forms, the latter included the largest bony fish known to have existed: \"Leedsichthys\", with an estimated maximum length of over 15 metres, known from the late Middle to Late Jurassic.\nChondrichthyes.\nDuring the Early Jurassic, the shark-like hybodonts, which represented the dominant group of chondrichthyans during the preceding Triassic, were common in both marine and freshwater settings; however, by the Late Jurassic, hybodonts had become minor components of most marine communities, having been largely replaced by modern neoselachians, but remained common in freshwater and restricted marine environments. The Neoselachii, which contains all living sharks and rays, radiated beginning in the Early Jurassic. The oldest known ray (Batoidea) is \"Antiquaobatis\" from the Pliensbachian of Germany. Jurassic batoids known from complete remains retain a conservative, guitarfish-like morphology. The oldest known Hexanchiformes and carpet sharks (Orectolobiformes) are from the Early Jurassic (Pliensbachian and Toarcian, respectively) of Europe. The oldest known members of the Heterodontiformes, the only living members of which are the bullhead shark (\"Heterodontus\"), first appeared in the Early Jurassic, with representatives of the living genus appearing during the Late Jurassic. The oldest record of angelsharks (Squatiniformes) is \"Pseudorhina\" from the Late Jurassic (Oxfordian\u2013Tithonian) of Europe, which already has a bodyform similar to members of the only living genus of the order, \"Squatina\". The oldest known remains of Carcharhiniformes, the largest order of living sharks, first appear in the late Middle Jurassic (Bathonian) of the western Tethys (England and Morocco). Known dental and exceptionally preserved body remains of Jurassic Carchariniformes are similar to those of living catsharks. Synechodontiformes, an extinct group of sharks closely related to Neoselachii, were also widespread during the Jurassic. The oldest remains of modern chimaeras are from the Early Jurassic of Europe, with members of the living family Callorhinchidae appearing during the Middle Jurassic. Unlike most living chimaeras, Jurassic chimeras are often found in shallow water environments. The closely related myriacanthids and the flattened \"Squaloraja\" are also known from the Jurassic of Europe.\nInsects and arachnids.\nThere appears to have been no major extinction of insects at the Triassic\u2013Jurassic boundary. Many important insect fossil localities are known from the Jurassic of Eurasia, the most important being the Karabastau Formation of Kazakhstan and the various Yanliao Biota deposits in Inner Mongolia, China, such as the Daohugou Bed, dating to the Callovian\u2013Oxfordian. The diversity of insects stagnated throughout the Early and Middle Jurassic, but during the latter third of the Jurassic origination rates increased substantially while extinction rates remained flat. The increasing diversity of insects in the Middle\u2013Late Jurassic corresponds with a substantial increase in the diversity of insect mouthparts. The Middle to Late Jurassic was a time of major diversification for beetles, particularly for the suborder Polyphaga, which represents 90% of living beetle species but which was rare during the preceding Triassic. Weevils first appear in the fossil record during the Middle to Late Jurassic, but are suspected to have originated during the Late Triassic to Early Jurassic. Orthopteran diversity had declined during the Late Triassic, but recovered during the Early Jurassic, with the Hagloidea, a superfamily of ensiferan orthopterans today confined to a few living species, being particularly diverse during the Jurassic. The oldest known lepidopterans (the group containing butterflies and moths) are known from the Triassic\u2013Jurassic boundary, with wing scales belonging to the suborder Glossata and Micropterigidae-grade moths from the deposits of this age in Germany. Modern representatives of both dragonflies and damselflies also first appeared during the Jurassic. Although modern representatives are not known until the Cenozoic, ectoparasitic insects thought to represent primitive fleas, belonging to the family Pseudopulicidae, are known from the Middle Jurassic of Asia. These insects are substantially different from modern fleas, lacking the specialised morphology of the latter and being larger. Parasitoid wasps (Apocrita) first appeared during the Early Jurassic and subsequently became widespread, reshaping terrestrial food webs. The Jurassic saw also saw the first appearances of several other groups of insects, including Phasmatodea (stick insects), Mantophasmatidae (gladiators), Embioptera (webspinners), and Raphidioptera (snakeflies). The earliest scale insect (Coccomorpha) is known from amber dating to the Late Jurassic, though the group probably originated earlier during the Triassic. \nOnly a handful of records of mites are known from the Jurassic, including \"Jureremus\", an oribatid mite belonging to the family Cymbaeremaeidae known from the Late Jurassic of Britain and Russia, and a member of the still living orbatid genus \"Hydrozetes\" from the Early Jurassic of Sweden. Spiders diversified through the Jurassic. The Early Jurassic \"Seppo koponeni\" may represent a stem group to Palpimanoidea. \"Eoplectreurys\" from the Middle Jurassic of China is considered a stem lineage of Synspermiata. The oldest member of the family Archaeidae, \"Patarchaea\", is known from the Middle Jurassic of China. \"Mongolarachne\" from the Middle Jurassic of China is among the largest known fossil spiders, with legs over 5 centimetres long. The only scorpion known from the Jurassic is \"Liassoscorpionides\" from the Early Jurassic of Germany, of uncertain placement. Eupnoi harvestmen (Opiliones) are known from the Middle Jurassic of China, including members of the family Sclerosomatidae.\nMarine invertebrates.\nEnd-Triassic extinction.\nDuring the end-Triassic extinction, 46%\u201372% of all marine genera became extinct. The effects of the end Triassic extinction were greatest at tropical latitudes and were more severe in Panthalassa than the Tethys or Boreal oceans. Tropical reef ecosystems collapsed during the event, and would not fully recover until much later in the Jurassic. Sessile filter feeders and photosymbiotic organisms were among those most severely affected.\nMarine ecosystems.\nHaving declined at the Triassic\u2013Jurassic boundary, reefs substantially expanded during the Late Jurassic, including both sponge reefs and scleractinian coral reefs. Late Jurassic reefs were similar in form to modern reefs but had more microbial carbonates and hypercalcified sponges, and had weak biogenic binding. Reefs sharply declined at the close of the Jurassic, which caused an associated drop in diversity in decapod crustaceans. The earliest planktonic foraminifera, which constitute the suborder Globigerinina, are known from the late Early Jurassic (mid-Toarcian) of the western Tethys, expanding across the whole Tethys by the Middle Jurassic and becoming globally distributed in tropical latitudes by the Late Jurassic. Coccolithophores and dinoflagellates, which had first appeared during the Triassic, radiated during the Early to Middle Jurassic, becoming prominent members of the phytoplankton. Microconchid tube worms, the last remaining order of Tentaculita, a group of animals of uncertain affinities that were convergent on \"Spirorbis\" tube worms, were rare after the Triassic and had become reduced to the single genus \"Punctaconchus,\" which became extinct in the late Bathonian. The oldest known diatom is from Late Jurassic\u2013aged amber from Thailand, assigned to the living genus \"Hemiaulus.\"\nEchinoderms.\nCrinoids diversified throughout the Jurassic, reaching their peak Mesozoic diversity during the Late Jurassic, primarily due to the radiation of sessile forms belonging to the orders Cyrtocrinida and Millericrinida. Echinoids (sea urchins) underwent substantial diversification beginning in the Early Jurassic, primarily driven by the radiation of irregular (asymmetrical) forms, which were adapting to deposit feeding. Rates of diversification sharply dropped during the Late Jurassic.\nCrustaceans.\nThe Jurassic was a significant time for the evolution of decapods. The first true crabs (Brachyura) are known from the Early Jurassic, with the earliest being \"Eocarcinus praecursor\" from the early Pliensbachian of England, which lacked the crab-like morphology (carcinisation) of modern crabs, and \"Eoprosopon klugi\" from the late Pliensbachian of Germany, which may belong to the living family Homolodromiidae. Most Jurassic crabs are known only from carapace pieces, which makes it difficult to determine their relationships. While rare in the Early and Middle Jurassic, crabs became abundant during the Late Jurassic as they expanded from their ancestral silty sea floor habitat into hard substrate habitats like reefs, with crevices in reefs providing refuge from predators. Hermit crabs also first appeared during the Jurassic, with the earliest known being \"Schobertella hoelderi\" from the late Hettangian of Germany. Early hermit crabs are associated with ammonite shells rather than those of gastropods. Glypheids, which today are only known from two species, reached their peak diversity during the Jurassic, with around 150 species out of a total fossil record of 250 known from the period. Jurassic barnacles were of low diversity compared to present, but several important evolutionary innovations are known, including the first appearances of calcite shelled forms and species with an epiplanktonic mode of life.\nBrachiopods.\nBrachiopod diversity declined during the Triassic\u2013Jurassic extinction. Spire-bearing brachiopods (Spiriferinida and Athyridida) did not recover their biodiversity, becoming extinct in the TOAE. Rhynchonellida and Terebratulida also declined during the Triassic\u2013Jurassic extinction but rebounded during the Early Jurassic; neither clade underwent much morphological variation. Brachiopods substantially declined in the Late Jurassic; the causes are poorly understood. Proposed reasons include increased predation, competition with bivalves, enhanced bioturbation or increased grazing pressure.\nBryozoans.\nLike the preceding Triassic, bryozoan diversity was relatively low compared to the Paleozoic. The vast majority of Jurassic bryozoans are members of Cyclostomatida, which experienced a radiation during the Middle Jurassic, with all Jurassic representatives belonging to the suborders Tubuliporina and Cerioporina. Cheilostomata, the dominant group of modern bryozoans, first appeared during the Late Jurassic.\nMolluscs.\nGastropods.\nMarine gastropods were significantly affected by the T-J extinction, with around 56% of genera going extinct, with Neritimorpha being particularly strongly effected, while Heterobranchia suffered much lower losses than other groups. While present, the diversity of freshwater and land snails was much lower during the Jurassic than in contemporary ecosystems, with the diversity of these groups not reaching levels comparable to modern times until the following Cretaceous.\nBivalves.\nThe end-Triassic extinction had a severe impact on bivalve diversity, though it had little impact on bivalve ecological diversity. The extinction was selective, having less of an impact on deep burrowers, but there is no evidence of a differential impact between surface-living (epifaunal) and burrowing (infaunal) bivalves. Bivalve family level diversity after the Early Jurassic was static, though genus diversity experienced a gradual increase throughout the period. Rudists, the dominant reef-building organisms of the Cretaceous, first appeared in the Late Jurassic (mid-Oxfordian) in the northern margin of the western Tethys, expanding to the eastern Tethys by the end of the Jurassic.\nCephalopods.\nAmmonites were devastated by the end-Triassic extinction, with only a handful of genera belonging to the family Psiloceratidae of the suborder Phylloceratina surviving and becoming ancestral to all later Jurassic and Cretaceous ammonites. Ammonites explosively diversified during the Early Jurassic, with the orders Psiloceratina, Ammonitina, Lytoceratina, Haploceratina, Perisphinctina and Ancyloceratina all appearing during the Jurassic. Ammonite faunas during the Jurassic were regional, being divided into around 20 distinguishable provinces and subprovinces in two realms, the northern high latitude Pan-Boreal realm, consisting of the Arctic, northern Panthalassa and northern Atlantic regions, and the equatorial\u2013southern Pan-Tethyan realm, which included the Tethys and most of Panthalassa. Ammonite diversifications occurred coevally with marine transgressions, while their diversity nadirs occurred during marine regressions.\nThe oldest definitive records of the squid-like belemnites are from the earliest Jurassic (Hettangian\u2013Sinemurian) of Europe and Japan; they expanded worldwide during the Jurassic. Belemnites were shallow-water dwellers, inhabiting the upper 200 metres of the water column on the continental shelves and in the littoral zone. They were key components of Jurassic ecosystems, both as predators and prey, as evidenced by the abundance of belemnite guards in Jurassic rocks.\nThe earliest vampyromorphs, of which the only living member is the vampire squid, first appeared during the Early Jurassic. The earliest octopuses appeared during the Middle Jurassic, having split from their closest living relatives, the vampyromorphs, during the Triassic to Early Jurassic. All Jurassic octopuses are solely known from the hard gladius. Octopuses likely originated from bottom-dwelling (benthic) ancestors which lived in shallow environments. \"Proteroctopus\" from the late Middle Jurassic La Voulte-sur-Rh\u00f4ne lagerst\u00e4tte, previously interpreted as an early octopus, is now thought to be a basal taxon outside the clade containing vampyromorphs and octopuses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15656", "revid": "50655340", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15656", "title": "John Wyndham", "text": "English science fiction writer (1903\u20131969)\nJohn Wyndham Parkes Lucas Beynon Harris (; 10 July 1903\u00a0\u2013 11 March 1969) was an English science fiction writer best known for his works published under the pen name John Wyndham, although he also used other combinations of his names, such as John Beynon and Lucas Parkes. Some of his works were set in post-apocalyptic landscapes. His best known works include \"The Day of the Triffids\" (1951), filmed in 1962, and \"The Midwich Cuckoos\" (1957), which was filmed in 1960 as \"Village of the Damned\", in 1995 under the same title, and again in 2022 in Sky Max under its original title.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nWyndham was born in the village of Dorridge near Knowle, Warwickshire, England, the son of Gertrude Parkes, the daughter of the Birmingham ironmaster John Israel Parkes, and her second husband (after widowhood), George Beynon Harris, a barrister.\nFrom 1909 to 1911 the Harris family lived at 239 Hagley Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, but when he was 8\u00a0years\u00a0old his parents separated. His father then attempted to sue the Parkes family for \"the custody, control and society\" of his wife and two sons (including Wyndham's younger brother, the writer Vivian Beynon Harris), in an unusual and high-profile 1913 court case, which he lost. The case, which re-exposed previous allegations of sexual impropriety, pre-dating his marriage, left Wyndham's father a broken man. Gertrude moved with the children to a smaller house in Edgbaston and the brothers became estranged from their father. Wyndham subsequently attended a private school in Edgbaston run by a Miss Mabel Woodward, and from 1914 to 1915 was at Edgbaston High School for Boys (he later said that while there he was bullied), and Blundell's School in Tiverton, Devon, during the First World War. His longest and final stay was at Bedales School, near Petersfield in Hampshire (1918\u20131921), which he left at the age of 18.\nHis mother left Birmingham to live in a series of boarding houses and spa hotels. In Wyndham's self-penned biographical notes for his early Penguin Books publications, he said he lived in Birmingham only from 1904 to 1911.\nEarly career.\nAfter leaving school, Wyndham tried several careers, including farming, law, commercial art and advertising; however, he mostly relied on an allowance from his family to survive. He eventually turned to writing for money in 1925 and by 1931 he was selling short stories and serial fiction to American science fiction magazines. His debut short story, \"Worlds to Barter\", appeared under the pen name John B. Harris in 1931. Subsequent stories were credited to 'John Beynon Harris' until mid-1935, when he began to use the pen name John Beynon. Three novels as by Beynon were published in 1935/36, two of them works of science fiction, the other a detective story. He also used the pen name Wyndham Parkes for one short story in the British \"Fantasy Magazine\" in 1939, as John Beynon had already been credited for another story in the same issue.\nDuring these years he lived at the Penn Club, London, which had been opened in 1920 by the remaining members of the Friends Ambulance Unit, and which had been partly funded by the Quakers. The intellectual and political mixture of pacifists, socialists and communists continued to inform his views on social engineering and feminism. At the Penn Club he met his future wife, Grace Wilson, a teacher. They embarked on a long-lasting love affair, and obtained adjacent rooms in the club, but for many years did not marry, partly because of the marriage bar under which Wilson would have lost her position.\nSecond World War.\nDuring the Second World War, Wyndham first served as a censor in the Ministry of Information. He drew on his experiences as a firewatcher during the London Blitz and as a member of the Home Guard in \"The Day of the Triffids\".\nHe then joined the British Army, serving as a corporal cipher operator in the Royal Corps of Signals. He participated in the Normandy landings, landing a few days after D-Day. He was attached to XXX Corps, which took part in some of the heaviest fighting, including surrounding the trapped German army in the Falaise Pocket.\nHis wartime letters to his long-time partner, Grace Wilson, are now held in the Archives of the University of Liverpool. He wrote at length of his struggles with his conscience, his doubts about humanity and his fears of the inevitability of further war. He also wrote passionately about his love for her and his fears that he would be so tainted she would not be able to love him when he returned.\nPostwar.\nAfter the war Wyndham returned to writing, still using the pen name John Beynon. Inspired by the success of his younger brother Vivian Beynon Harris, who had four novels published starting in 1948, he altered his writing style and by 1951, using the John Wyndham pen name for the first time, he wrote the novel \"The Day of the Triffids\". His pre-war writing career was not mentioned in the book's publicity and people were allowed to assume that this was a first novel from an unknown writer. The book had an enormous success and established Wyndham as an important exponent of science fiction.\nHe wrote and published six more novels under the name John Wyndham, the name he used professionally from 1951. His novel \"The Outward Urge\" (1959) was credited to John Wyndham and Lucas Parkes but Lucas Parkes was another pseudonym for Wyndham. Two story collections, \"Jizzle\" and \"The Seeds of Time\", were published in the 1950s under Wyndham's name but included several stories originally published as by John Beynon before 1951. \nMarriage.\nIn 1963, he married Grace Isobel Wilson, whom he had known for more than thirty years, in a civil ceremony. They lived near Petersfield, Hampshire, just outside the grounds of Bedales School, until his death there in 1969, aged 65. The couple were childless, as was his brother, who also outlived him.\nCritical reception.\nWyndham's reputation rests mainly on the first four of the novels published in his life under that name. \"The Day of the Triffids\" remains his best-known work, but some readers consider that \"The Chrysalids\" was really his best. This is set in the far future of a post-nuclear dystopia where genetic stability is compromised and women are severely oppressed if they give birth to \"mutants\". David Mitchell, author of \"Cloud Atlas\", wrote of it: \"One of the most thoughtful post-apocalypse novels ever written. Wyndham was a true English visionary, a William Blake with a science doctorate.\" \"The Guardian\" states his \"innocuously English backdrops are central to the power of his novels, implying that apocalypse could occur at any time \u2014 or, indeed, be happening in the next village at this moment\", while \"The Times\"'s reviewer of \"The Day of the Triffids\" described it as possessing \"all the reality of a vividly realised nightmare.\" \nThe ideas in \"The Chrysalids\" are echoed in \"The Handmaid's Tale\", whose author, Margaret Atwood, has acknowledged Wyndham's work as an influence. She wrote an introduction to a new edition of \"Chocky\" in which she states that the intelligent alien babies in \"The Midwich Cuckoos\" entered her dreams.\nWyndham also wrote several short stories, ranging from hard science fiction to whimsical fantasy. Several have been filmed: \"Consider Her Ways\", \"Random Quest\", \"Dumb Martian\", \"A Long Spoon\", \"Jizzle\" (filmed as \"Maria\") and \"Time to Rest\" (filmed as \"No Place Like Earth\"). There is also a radio version of \"Survival\".\nBrian Aldiss, another British science fiction writer, disparaged some of Wyndham's novels as \"cosy catastrophes\", especially \"The Day of the Triffids\". This became a cliche about his work, but it has been rebutted by many more recent critics. L.J. Hurst commented that in \"Triffids\" the main character witnesses several murders, suicides and misadventures, and is frequently in mortal danger. Atwood wrote: \"...one might as well call World War II\u2014of which Wyndham was a veteran\u2014a 'cozy' war because not everyone died in it.\"\nMany other writers have acknowledged Wyndham's work as an influence, including Alex Garland, whose screenplay for \"28 Days Later\" draws heavily on \"The Day of the Triffids\".\nLegacy.\nFollowing his death, some of Wyndham's unsold work was published and his earlier work was republished. His archive was acquired by the University of Liverpool.\nOn 24 May 2015, an alley in Hampstead that appears in \"The Day of the Triffids\" was formally named Triffid Alley as a memorial to him.\nWorks.\nShort stories.\nAll short stories.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15657", "revid": "50721303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15657", "title": "Jerzy Kosi\u0144ski", "text": "Polish-American writer (1933\u20131991)\nJerzy Kosi\u0144ski (; born J\u00f3zef Nikodem Lewinkopf; June 14, 1933\u00a0\u2013 May 3, 1991) was a Polish-born American writer and two-time president of the American chapter of P.E.N., who wrote primarily in English. \nBorn in Poland to Jewish parents, he and his family survived World War II with the help of their Polish villager neighbors. After mandatory military service and education under Poland's communist government, he emigrated to the United States and became a U.S. citizen.\nHe was known for novels including \"Being There\" (1971) and the controversial \"The Painted Bird\" (1965), which were adapted as films, respectively, in 1979 and 2019.\nLife.\nKosi\u0144ski was born in 1933 as J\u00f3zef Nikodem Lewinkopf in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, as the only child of Polish Jews Mieczys\u0142aw (Moj\u017cesz) Lewinkopf and El\u017cbieta Liniecka. As a child during World War II, he lived in occupied central Poland under a false identity, Jerzy Kosi\u0144ski, which his father gave him. Eugeniusz Oko\u0144, a Catholic priest, issued him a forged baptismal certificate, and the Lewinkopf family survived the Holocaust thanks to local villagers who offered assistance to Polish Jews, at grave personal risk. Kosi\u0144ski's father was assisted not only by town leaders and clergymen, but by individuals such as Marianna Pasiowa, a member of an underground network that helped Jews evade capture. \nThe family lived openly in D\u0105browa Rzeczycka, near Stalowa Wola, and attended church in nearby Wola Rzeczycka, with the support of villagers in K\u0119pa Rzeczycka. For a time, they were sheltered by a Catholic family in Rzeczyca Okr\u0105g\u0142a. Jerzy even served as an altar boy in the local church.\nAfter the war, Kosi\u0144ski's father aligned himself with Poland's communist regime, and the family was relatively well off. Kosi\u0144ski and his parents moved to Jelenia G\u00f3ra. By age 22 he had earned degrees in history and sociology at the University of \u0141\u00f3d\u017a. He then became a teaching assistant at the Polish Academy of Sciences. Kosi\u0144ski also studied in the Soviet Union, and served as a sharpshooter in the Polish Army. A biographer writes that Kosinski disliked conformity and therefore the communism that his father had sworn allegiance to, and developed anti-communist views.\nIn order to emigrate to the United States in 1957, he created a fake foundation which ostensibly sponsored him. He later said he had forged letters from prominent communist authorities guaranteeing his return to Poland, which were then required for anyone leaving the country.\nKosi\u0144ski first worked at odd jobs to get by, including driving a truck, and he managed to graduate from Columbia University. In 1965 he became an American citizen. In 1967 he received a Guggenheim Foundation fellowship, and in 1968 a grant from the Ford Foundation. In 1970 he won an American Academy of Arts and Letters award for literature. The grants allowed him to write a political nonfiction book that opened new doors of opportunity. He became a lecturer at Yale, Princeton, Davenport, and Wesleyan Universities.\nKosi\u0144ski practiced photographic art, with a 1957 one-man exhibition at Warsaw's Crooked Circle [\"Krzywe Ko\u0142o\"] Gallery and a 1988 exhibition at New York's Andre Zarre Gallery.\nIn 1962 Kosi\u0144ski married an American steel heiress, Mary Hayward Weir, eighteen years his senior; four years later they divorced. Weir died in 1968 from brain cancer, leaving Kosi\u0144ski out of her will. He fictionalized the marriage in his novel \"Blind Date\", describing Weir under the name Mary-Jane Kirkland. In 1968 he married Katherina \"Kiki\" von Fraunhofer (1933\u20132007), a marketing consultant and descendant of Bavarian nobility.\nDeath.\nToward the end of his life Kosi\u0144ski suffered from multiple illnesses, and questions arose regarding plagiarism in his work. By his late 50s he was suffering from an irregular heartbeat.\nHe died by suicide on May 3, 1991 by ingesting a lethal amount of alcohol and drugs and wrapping a plastic bag around his head, suffocating himself. His suicide note read: \"I am going to put myself to sleep now for a bit longer than usual. Call it Eternity.\" Per his wishes, Kosi\u0144ski was cremated and Oscar de la Renta spread his ashes near his home in the Dominican Republic, off a small cove in Casa de Campo.\nNotable novels.\nKosi\u0144ski's novels have appeared on \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list, and have been translated into over 30 languages, with total sales estimated at 70 million in 1991.\n\"The Painted Bird\".\n\"The Painted Bird\", Kosi\u0144ski's controversial 1965 novel, is a fictional account that depicts the personal experiences of a boy of unknown religious and ethnic background who wanders around unidentified areas of Eastern Europe during World War II and takes refuge among a series of people, many of whom are brutally cruel and abusive, either to him or to others.\nSoon after the book was published in the US, Kosi\u0144ski was accused by the then-Communist Polish government of being anti-Polish, especially following the regime's 1968 anti-Zionist campaign. The book was banned in Poland from its initial publication until the fall of the Communist government in 1989. When it was finally printed, thousands of Poles in Warsaw lined up for as long as eight hours to purchase copies of the work autographed by Kosi\u0144ski. Polish literary critic and University of Warsaw professor Pawe\u0142 Dudziak remarked that \"in spite of the unclear role of its author, \"The Painted Bird\" is an achievement in English literature.\" He stressed that, because the book is a work of fiction and does not document real-world events, accusations of anti-Polish sentiment may result only from taking it too literally.\nThe book received recommendations from Elie Wiesel who wrote in \"The New York Times Book Review\" that it was \"one of the best\u00a0... Written with deep sincerity and sensitivity.\" Richard Kluger, reviewing it for \"Harper's Magazine\" wrote: \"Extraordinary\u00a0... literally staggering\u00a0... one of the most powerful books I have ever read.\" Jonathan Yardley, reviewing it for \"The Miami Herald\", wrote: \"Of all the remarkable fiction that emerged from World War II, nothing stands higher than Jerzy Kosi\u0144ski's \"The Painted Bird\". A magnificent work of art, and a celebration of the individual will. No one who reads it will forget it; no one who reads it will be unmoved by it.\"\n\"Steps\".\n\"Steps\" (1968), a novel comprising scores of loosely connected vignettes, won the U.S. National Book Award for Fiction.\nAmerican novelist David Foster Wallace described \"Steps\" as a \"collection of unbelievably creepy little allegorical tableaux done in a terse elegant voice that's like nothing else anywhere ever\". Wallace continued in praise: \"Only Kafka's fragments get anywhere close to where Kosi\u0144ski goes in this book, which is better than everything else he ever did combined.\" Samuel Coale, in a 1974 discussion of Kosi\u0144ski's fiction, wrote that \"the narrator of \"Steps\" for instance, seems to be nothing more than a disembodied voice howling in some surrealistic wilderness.\"\n\"Being There\".\nOne of Kosi\u0144ski's more significant works is \"Being There\" (1971), a satirical view of the absurd reality of America's media culture. It is the story of Chance the gardener, a man with few distinctive qualities who emerges from nowhere and suddenly becomes the heir to the throne of a Wall Street tycoon and a presidential policy adviser. His simple and straightforward responses to popular concerns are praised as visionary despite the fact that no one actually understands what he is really saying. Many questions surround his mysterious origins, and filling in the blanks in his background proves impossible.\nThe novel was made into a 1979 movie directed by Hal Ashby, and starring Peter Sellers, who was nominated for an Academy Award for the role, and Melvyn Douglas, who won the award for Best Supporting Actor. The screenplay was co-written by award-winning screenwriter Robert C. Jones and Kosi\u0144ski. The film won the 1981 British Academy of Film and Television Arts (Film) Best Screenplay Award, as well as the 1980 Writers Guild of America Award (Screen) for Best Comedy Adapted from Another Medium. It was nominated for the 1980 Golden Globe Best Screenplay Award (Motion Picture).\nCriticism.\nAccording to Eliot Weinberger, an American writer, essayist, editor and translator, Kosi\u0144ski was not the author of \"The Painted Bird\". Weinberger alleged in his 2000 book \"Karmic Traces\" that Kosi\u0144ski was not fluent in English at the time of its writing.\nIn a review of \"\" by James Park Sloan, D.G. Myers, associate professor of English at Texas A&amp;M University wrote \"For years Kosinski passed off \"The Painted Bird\" as the true story of his own experience during the Holocaust. Long before writing it he regaled friends and dinner parties with macabre tales of a childhood spent in hiding among the Polish peasantry. Among those who were fascinated was Dorothy de Santillana, a senior editor at Houghton Mifflin, to whom Kosi\u0144ski confided that he had a manuscript based on his experiences. Upon accepting the book for publication, Santillana said 'It is my understanding that, fictional as the material may sound, it is straight autobiography'. Although he backed away from this statement, Kosi\u0144ski never wholly disavowed it.\"\nM.A. Orthofer addressed Weinberger's assertion: \"Kosinski was, in many respects, a fake \u2013 possibly near as genuine a one as Weinberger could want. (One aspect of the best fakes is the lingering doubt that, possibly, there is some authenticity behind them \u2013 as is the case with Kosinski.) Kosinski famously liked to pretend he was someone he wasn't (as do many of the characters in his books), he occasionally published under a pseudonym, and, apparently, he plagiarized and forged left and right.\"\nKosi\u0144ski addressed these claims in the introduction to the 1976 reissue of \"The Painted Bird\", saying that \"Well-intentioned writers, critics, and readers sought facts to back up their claims that the novel was autobiographical. They wanted to cast me in the role of spokesman for my generation, especially for those who had survived the war; but for me, survival was an individual action that earned the survivor the right to speak only for himself. Facts about my life and my origins, I felt, should not be used to test the book's authenticity, any more than they should be used to encourage readers to read \"The Painted Bird\". Furthermore, I felt then, as I do now, that fiction and autobiography are very different modes.\"\nPlagiarism allegations.\nIn June 1982, a \"Village Voice\" report by Geoffrey Stokes and Eliot Fremont-Smith alleged Kosi\u0144ski wrote \"The Painted Bird\" in Polish, and had it secretly translated into English. The report said that Kosi\u0144ski's books had been ghost-written by \"assistant editors\", finding stylistic differences among Kosi\u0144ski's novels. Kosi\u0144ski, according to them, had depended upon his freelance editors for \"the sort of composition that we usually call writing.\" American biographer James Sloan notes that New York poet, publisher and translator George Reavey said he had written \"The Painted Bird\" for Kosi\u0144ski.\nThe article found a more realistic picture of Kosi\u0144ski's life during the Holocaust \u2013 a view which was supported by biographers Joanna Siedlecka and Sloan. The article asserted that \"The Painted Bird,\" assumed to be semi-autobiographical, was largely a work of fiction. The information showed that rather than wandering the Polish countryside, as his fictional character did, Kosi\u0144ski spent the war years in hiding with Polish Catholics.\nTerence Blacker, an English publisher (who helped publish Kosi\u0144ski's books) and author of children's books and mysteries for adults, wrote an article published in \"The Independent\" in 2002:\nThe significant point about Jerzy Kosi\u0144ski was that...his books...had a vision and a voice consistent with one another and with the man himself. The problem was perhaps that he was a successful, worldly author who played polo, moved in fashionable circles and even appeared as an actor in Warren Beatty's \"Reds\". He seemed to have had an adventurous and rather kinky sexuality which, to many, made him all the more suspect. All in all, he was a perfect candidate for the snarling pack of literary hangers-on to turn on. There is something about a storyteller becoming rich and having a reasonably full private life that has a powerful potential to irritate so that, when things go wrong, it causes a very special kind of joy.\nJournalist John Corry wrote a 6,000-word feature article in \"The New York Times\" in November 1982, responding and defending Kosi\u0144ski, which appeared on the front page of the Arts and Leisure section. Among other things, Corry alleged that reports that \"Kosinski was a plagiarist in the pay of the C.I.A. were the product of a Polish Communist disinformation campaign.\"\nIn an essay published in \"New York\" in 1999, Kosi\u0144ski's sometime lover, Laurie Stieber, wrote that he incorporated passages from her letters into the revised and expanded 1981 edition of his 1973 novel \"The Devil Tree\", without asking her. \"The allegations in the \"Voice\",\" wrote Stieber, \"combined with what I knew to be true about the revised edition of \"The Devil Tree\", left me with a gnawing mistrust in all aspects of our relationship. I hadn\u2019t wavered, however, from my opinion that he was an extraordinary intellectual and philosopher, a brilliant storyteller and, yes, writer. But ego, and the fear of having his credibility strip-searched by erudite Polish or Russian editors, were behind his insistence on writing in English rather than using translators. By borrowing too greedily, Jerzy inadvertently wrote the \"Village Voice\" article himself.\"\nIn 1988, Kosi\u0144ski wrote \"The Hermit of 69th Street\", in which he sought to demonstrate the absurdity of investigating prior work by inserting footnotes for practically every term in the book. \"Ironically,\" wrote theatre critic Lucy Komisar, \"possibly his only true book\u00a0... about a successful author who is shown to be a fraud.\"\nDespite repudiation of the \"Village Voice\" allegations of plagiarism in detailed articles in \"The New York Times\", \"The Los Angeles Times\", and other publications, Kosi\u0144ski remained tainted. \"I think it contributed to his death,\" said Zbigniew Brzezinski, a friend and fellow Polish emigrant.\nTelevision, radio, film, and newspaper appearances.\nKosi\u0144ski appeared 12 times on \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\" during 1971\u20131973, and \"The Dick Cavett Show\" in 1974, was a guest on the talk radio show of Long John Nebel, posed half-naked for a cover photograph by Annie Leibovitz for \"The New York Times Magazine\" in 1982, and presented the Oscar for screenwriting in 1982.\nHe also played the role of Bolshevik revolutionary and Politburo member Grigory Zinoviev in Warren Beatty's film \"Reds\". The \"Time\" magazine critic wrote: \"As Reed's Soviet nemesis, novelist Jerzy Kosinski acquits himself nicely\u2013a tundra of ice against Reed's all-American fire.\" \"Newsweek\" complimented Kosi\u0144ski's \"delightfully abrasive\" performance.\nFriendships.\nKosi\u0144ski was friends with Roman Polanski, with whom he attended the National Film School in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, and said he narrowly missed being at Polanski and Sharon Tate's house on the night Tate was murdered by Charles Manson's followers in 1969, due to lost luggage. His novel \"Blind Date\" portrayed the Manson murders. In 1984, Polanski denied Kosi\u0144ski's story in his autobiography. Journalist John Taylor of \"New York Magazine\" believes Polanski was mistaken. \"Although it was a single sentence in a 461-page book, reviewers focused on it. But the accusation was untrue: Jerzy and Kiki had been invited to stay with Tate the night of the Manson murders, and they missed being killed as well only because they stopped in New York en route from Paris because their luggage had been misdirected.\" The reason why Taylor believes this is that \"a friend of Kosi\u0144ski wrote a letter to the \"Times\", which was published in the \"Book Review\", describing the detailed plans he and Jerzy had made to meet that weekend at Polanski's house on Cielo Drive.\" The letter referenced was written by Clement Biddle Wood.\nSvetlana Alliluyeva, who had a friendship with Kosi\u0144ski, is introduced as a character in his novel \"Blind Date\".\nKosi\u0144ski wrote his novel \"Pinball\" (1982) for his friend George Harrison, having conceived of the idea for the book at least 10 years before writing it.\nFurther reading.\nBiographical accounts.\nHe is the subject of the off-Broadway play \"More Lies About Jerzy\" (2001), written by Davey Holmes and originally starring Jared Harris as Kosinski-inspired character \"Jerzy Lesnewski\". The most recent production being produced at the New End Theatre in London starring George Layton.\nHe also appears as one of the 'literary golems' (ghosts) in Thane Rosenbaum's novel \"The Golems of Gotham\".\nOne of the songs of the Polish band NeLL, entitled \"Frisco Lights\", was inspired by Kosinski.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15658", "revid": "1319213144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15658", "title": "Jeep", "text": "American automobile brand\nJeep is an American automobile brand, now owned by multi-national corporation Stellantis. Jeep has been part of Chrysler since 1987, when Chrysler acquired the Jeep brand, along with other assets, from its previous owner, American Motors Corporation (AMC).\nJeep's current product range consists solely of sport utility vehicles\u2014both crossovers and fully off-road worthy SUVs and models, including one pickup truck. Previously, Jeep's range included other pick-ups, as well as small vans, and a few roadsters. Some of Jeep's vehicles\u2014such as the Grand Cherokee\u2014reach into the luxury SUV segment, a market segment the 1963 Wagoneer is considered to have started. Jeep sold 1.4 million SUVs globally in 2016, up from 500,000 in 2008, two-thirds of which in North America, and was Fiat-Chrysler's best selling brand in the U.S. during the first half of 2017. In the U.S. alone, over 2400 dealerships hold franchise rights to sell Jeep-branded vehicles, and if Jeep were spun off into a separate company, it is estimated to be worth between $22 and $33.5 billion\u2014slightly \"more\" than all of FCA (US). Bob Broderdorf is the current CEO of the Jeep brand worldwide.\nPrior to 1940 the term \"jeep\" had been used as U.S. Army slang for new recruits or vehicles, but the World War II \"jeep\" that went into production in 1941 specifically tied the name to this light military 4\u00d74, arguably making them the oldest four-wheel drive mass-production vehicles now known as SUVs. The Jeep became the primary light four-wheel-drive vehicle of the United States Armed Forces and the Allies during World War II, as well as the postwar period. The term became common worldwide in the wake of the war. Doug Stewart noted: \"The spartan, cramped, and unstintingly functional jeep became the ubiquitous World War II four-wheeled personification of Yankee ingenuity and cocky, can-do determination.\" It is the precursor of subsequent generations of military light utility vehicles such as the Humvee, and inspired the creation of civilian analogs such as the original Series I Land Rover. Many Jeep variants serving similar military and civilian roles have since been designed in other nations.\nThe Jeep marque has been headquartered in Toledo, Ohio, ever since Willys\u2013Overland launched production of the first CJ or Civilian Jeep branded models there in 1945. Its replacement, the conceptually consistent Jeep Wrangler series, has remained in production since 1986. With its solid axles and open top, the Wrangler has been called the Jeep model that is as central to the brand's identity as the 911 is to Porsche.\nAt least two Jeep models (the CJ-5 and the SJ Wagoneer) enjoyed extraordinary three-decade production runs of a single body generation.\nIn lowercase, the term \"jeep\" continues to be used as a generic term for vehicles inspired by the Jeep that are suitable for use on rough terrain.\nIn Iceland, the word Jeppi (derived from Jeep) has been used since World War II and is still used for any type of SUV.\nWorld War II.\nDevelopment \u2013 1. Bantam Reconnaissance Car.\nWhen it became clear that the United States would be involved in the European theater of World War II, the Army contacted 135 companies to create working prototypes of a four-wheel drive reconnaissance car. Only two companies responded: the American Bantam Car Company and Willys-Overland. The Army set a seemingly impossible deadline of 49 days to supply a working prototype. Willys asked for more time, but was refused. American Bantam had only a small staff with nobody to draft the vehicle plans, so chief engineer Harold Crist hired Karl Probst, a talented freelance designer from Detroit. After turning down Bantam's initial request, Probst responded to an Army request and began work on July 17, 1940, initially without salary.\nProbst drafted the full plans in just two days for the Bantam prototype known as the BRC or Bantam Reconnaissance Car, working up a cost estimate the next day. Bantam's bid was submitted on July 22, complete with blueprints. Much of the vehicle could be assembled from off-the-shelf automotive parts, and custom four-wheel drivetrain components were to be supplied by Spicer. The hand-built prototype was completed in Butler, Pennsylvania and driven to Camp Holabird, Maryland on September 23 for Army testing. The vehicle met all the Army's criteria except engine torque.\nDevelopment \u2013 2. Willys and Ford.\nThe Army thought that the Bantam company lacked the production capacity to manufacture and deliver the required number of vehicles, so it supplied the Bantam design to Willys and Ford, and encouraged them to enhance the design. The resulting Ford \"Pygmy\" and Willys \"Quad\" prototypes looked very similar to the Bantam BRC prototype, and Spicer supplied very similar four-wheel drivetrain components to all three manufacturers.\n1,500 of each model (Bantam BRC-40, Ford GP, and Willys MA) were built and extensively field-tested. After the weight specification was revised from to a maximum of including oil and water, Willys-Overland's chief engineer Delmar \"Barney\" Roos modified the design to use Willys's heavy but powerful \"Go Devil\" engine, and won the initial production contract. The Willys version became the standard jeep design, designated the model MB, and was built at their plant in Toledo, Ohio. The familiar pressed-metal Jeep grille was a Ford design feature and incorporated in the final design by the Army.\nBecause the US War Department required a large number of vehicles in a short time, Willys-Overland granted the US Government a non-exclusive license to allow another company to manufacture vehicles using Willys' specifications. The Army chose Ford as a second supplier, building Jeeps to Willys' design. Willys supplied Ford with a complete set of plans and specifications. American Bantam, the creators of the first Jeep, built approximately 2,700 of them to the BRC-40 design, but spent the rest of the war building heavy-duty trailers for the Army.\nFull production \u2013 Willys MB and Ford GPW.\nFinal production version jeeps built by Willys-Overland were the Model MB, while those built by Ford were the Model GPW (\"G\" = government vehicle, \"P\" = 80\" wheelbase, \"W\" = Willys engine design). There were subtle differences between the two. The versions produced by Ford had every component (including bolt heads) marked with an \"F\", and early on Ford also stamped their name in large letters in their trademark script, embossed in the rear panel of their jeeps. Willys followed the Ford pattern by stamping 'Willys' into several body parts, but the U.S. government objected to this practice, and both parties stopped this in 1942. In spite of persistent advertising by both car and component manufacturers of contributions to the production of successful jeeps during the war, no \"Jeep\"-branded vehicles were built until the 1945 Willys CJ-2A.\nThe cost per vehicle trended upwards as the war continued from the price under the first contract from Willys at US$648.74 (Ford's was $782.59 per unit; these figures are equivalent to $ and $ in 2024, respectively). Willys-Overland and Ford, under the direction of Charles E. Sorensen (vice-president of Ford during World War II), produced about 640,000 Jeeps towards the war effort, which accounted for approximately 18% of all the wheeled military vehicles built in the U.S. during the war.\nJeeps were used by every service of the U.S. military. An average of 145 were supplied to every Army infantry regiment. Jeeps were used for many purposes, including cable laying, sawmilling, as firefighting pumpers, field ambulances, tractors, and, with suitable wheels, would run on railway tracks. An amphibious jeep, the model GPA, or \"seep\" (Sea Jeep) was built for Ford in modest numbers, but it could not be considered a success as it was neither a good off-road vehicle nor a good boat. As part of the war effort, nearly 30% of all Jeep production was supplied to Great Britain and to the Soviet Red Army.\nPost-war military.\nThe Jeep has been widely imitated around the world, including in France by Delahaye and by Hotchkiss et Cie (after 1954, Hotchkiss manufactured Jeeps under license from Willys), and in Japan by Mitsubishi Motors and Toyota. The Land Rover was inspired by the Jeep. The utilitarian good looks of the original Jeep have been hailed by industrial designers and museum curators alike. The Museum of Modern Art described the Jeep as a masterpiece of functionalist design and has periodically exhibited the Jeep as part of its collection. Pulitzer Prize-winning war correspondent Ernie Pyle called the jeep, along with the Coleman G.I. Pocket Stove, \"the two most important pieces of noncombat equipment ever developed\". Jeeps became even more famous following the war, as they became available on the surplus market. Some ads claimed to offer \"Jeeps still in the factory crate.\" This legend persisted for decades, despite the fact that Jeeps were never shipped from the factory in crates (although Ford did \"knock down\" Jeeps for easier shipping, which may have perpetuated the myth).\nThe \"Jeepney\" is a unique type of taxi or bus created in the Philippines. The first Jeepneys were military-surplus MBs and GPWs, left behind in the war-ravaged country following World War II and Filipino independence. Jeepneys were built from Jeeps by lengthening and widening the rear \"tub\" of the vehicle, allowing them to carry more passengers. Over the years, Jeepneys have become the most ubiquitous symbol of the modern Philippines, even as they have been decorated in more elaborate and flamboyant styles by their owners. Most Jeepneys today are scratch-built by local manufacturers, using different powertrains.\nAside from Jeepneys, backyard assemblers in the Philippines construct replica Jeeps with stainless steel bodies and surplus parts, and are called \"owner-type jeeps\" (as jeepneys are also called \"passenger-type jeeps\").\nIn the United States military, the Jeep has been supplanted by a number of vehicles (e.g. Ford's M151) of which the latest is the Humvee.\nCJ-V35/U.\nAfter World War II, Jeep began to experiment with new designs, including a model that could drive underwater. On February 1, 1950, contract N8ss-2660 was approved for 1,000 units \"especially adapted for general reconnaissance or command communications\" and \"constructed for short period underwater operation such as encountered in landing and fording operations\". The engine was modified with a snorkel system so that the engine could properly breathe underwater.\nM715.\nIn 1965, Jeep developed the M715 army truck, a militarized version of the civilian J-series Jeep truck, which served extensively in the Vietnam War. It had heavier full-floating axles and a foldable, vertical, flat windshield. Today, it serves other countries and is still being produced by Kia under license.\nEtymology.\nMany explanations of the origin of the word \"jeep\" have proven difficult to verify. The most widely held theory is that the military designation \"GP\" (for \"Government Purposes\" or \"General Purpose\") was slurred into the word \"Jeep\" in the same way that the contemporary \"HMMWV\" (for \"High-Mobility Multi-purpose Wheeled Vehicle\") has become known as the Humvee. Joe Frazer, Willys-Overland President from 1939 to 1944, claimed to have coined the word \"jeep\" by slurring the initials G.P. There are no contemporaneous uses of \"GP\" before later attempts to create a backronym.\nA more detailed view, popularized by R. Lee Ermey on his television series \"Mail Call\", disputes this \"slurred GP\" origin, saying that the vehicle was designed for specific duties, and was never referred to as \"General Purpose\" and it is highly unlikely that the average jeep-driving GI would have been familiar with this designation. The Ford GPW abbreviation actually meant G for government use, P to designate its wheelbase and W to indicate its Willys-Overland designed engine. Ermey suggests that soldiers at the time were so impressed with the new vehicles that they informally named it after Eugene the Jeep, a character in the \"Thimble Theatre\" comic strip and cartoons created by E. C. Segar, as early as mid-March 1936. Eugene the Jeep was Popeye's \"jungle pet\" and was \"small, able to move between dimensions and could solve seemingly impossible problems\".\nThe word \"jeep\", however, was used as early as World War I, as U.S. Army slang for new uninitiated recruits, or by mechanics to refer to new, unproven vehicles. In 1937, tractors which were supplied by Minneapolis Moline to the US Army were called jeeps. A precursor of the Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress was also referred to as the jeep.\n\"Words of the Fighting Forces\" by Clinton A. Sanders, a dictionary of military slang, published in 1942, in the library at The Pentagon gives this definition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Jeep: A four-wheel drive vehicle of one-half- to one-and-one-half-ton [] capacity for reconnaissance or other army duty. A term applied to the bantam-cars, and occasionally to other motor vehicles (U.S.A.) in the Air Corps, the Link Trainer; in the armored forces, the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442-ton [] command vehicle. Also referred to as \"any small plane, helicopter, or gadget.\"\nThis definition is supported by the use of the term \"jeep carrier\" to refer to the Navy's small escort carriers.\nEarly in 1941, Willys-Overland demonstrated the vehicle's off-road capability by having it drive up the steps of the United States Capitol, driven by Willys test driver Irving \"Red\" Hausmann, who had recently heard soldiers at Fort Holabird calling it a \"jeep\". When asked by syndicated columnist Katharine Hillyer for the \"Washington Daily News\" (or by a bystander, according to another account) what it was called, Hausmann answered, \"It's a jeep.\"\nKatharine Hillyer's article was published nationally on February 19, 1941, and included a picture of the vehicle with the caption:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;LAWMAKERS TAKE A RIDE \u2013 With Senator Meade, of New York, at the wheel, and Representative Thomas, of New Jersey, sitting beside him, one of the Army's new scout cars, known as \"jeeps\" or \"quads\", climbs up the Capitol steps in a demonstration yesterday. Soldiers in the rear seat for gunners were unperturbed.\nAlthough the term was also military slang for vehicles that were untried or untested, this exposure caused all other jeep references to fade, leaving the 4\u00d74 with the name.\nBrand, trademarks and image.\nThe \"Jeep\" brand has gone through many owners, starting with Willys-Overland, which filed the original trademark application for the \"Jeep\" brand-name in February 1943. To help establish the term as a Willys brand, the firm campaigned with advertisements emphasizing Willys' prominent contribution to the Jeep that helped win the war. Willys' application initially met with years of opposition, primarily from Bantam, but also from Minneapolis-Moline. The Federal Trade Commission initially ruled in favor of Bantam in May 1943, largely ignoring Minneapolis-Moline's claim, and continued to scold Willys-Overland after the war for its advertising. The FTC even slapped the company with a formal complaint, to cease and desist any claims that it \"created or designed\" the Jeep \u2013 Willys was only allowed to advertise its contribution to the Jeep's development. Willys however proceeded to produce the first Civilian Jeep (CJ) branded vehicles in 1945. Being the only company that continually produced \"Jeep\" vehicles after the war, Willys-Overland was eventually granted the name \"Jeep\" as a registered trademark in June 1950. Aside from Willys, King Features Syndicate has held a trademark on the name \"Jeep\" for their comics since August 1936.\nWillys had also seriously considered the brand name \"AJ\", and was granted the trademark for it in December 1944, but instead the civilian production models as of 1945 were marketed as the \"Universal Jeep\", which reflected a wider range of uses outside of farming.\nFCA US LLC, the most recent successor company to the Jeep brand, now holds trademark status on the name \"Jeep\" and the distinctive 7-slot front grille design. The original 9-slot grille associated with all World War II jeeps was designed by Ford for their GPW, and because it weighed less than the original \"Slat Grille\" of Willys (an arrangement of flat bars), was incorporated into the \"standardized jeep\" design.\nThe history of the HMMWV (Humvee) has ties with Jeep. In 1971, Jeep's Defense and Government Products Division was turned into AM General, a wholly owned subsidiary of American Motors Corporation, which also owned Jeep. In 1979, while still owned by American Motors, AM General began the first steps toward designing the Humvee. AM General also continued manufacturing the two-wheel-drive DJ, which Jeep created in 1953. The General Motors Hummer and Chrysler Jeep have been waging battle in U.S. courts over the right to use seven slots in their respective radiator grilles. Chrysler Jeep claims it has the exclusive rights to use the seven vertical slits since it is the sole remaining assignee of the various companies since Willys gave their postwar jeeps seven slots instead of Ford's nine-slot design for the Jeep.\nOff-road abilities.\nJeep advertising has always emphasized the brand's vehicles' off-road capabilities. Today, the Wrangler is one of the few remaining four-wheel-drive vehicles with solid front and rear axles. These axles are known for their durability, strength, and articulation. New Wranglers come with a Dana 44 rear differential and a Dana 30 front differential. The upgraded Rubicon model of the JK Wrangler is equipped with electronically activated locking differentials, Dana 44 axles front and rear with 4.10 gears, a 4:1 transfer case, electronic sway bar disconnect, and heavy-duty suspension.\nAnother benefit of solid axle vehicles is they tend to be easier and cheaper to \"lift\" with aftermarket suspension systems. This increases the distance between the axle and chassis of the vehicle. By increasing this distance, larger tires can be installed, which will increase the ground clearance, allowing it to traverse even larger and more difficult obstacles. In addition to higher ground clearance, many owners aim to increase suspension articulation or \"flex\" to give their Jeeps greatly improved off-road capabilities. Good suspension articulation keeps all four wheels in contact with the ground and maintains traction.\nUseful features of the smaller Jeeps are their short wheelbases, narrow frames, ample approach, breakover, and departure angles, thus enabling them to traverse through places where full-size four-wheel drives have difficulty.\nThe Jeep's design does have some drawbacks however. The short wheelbase and lighter weight make climbing steeper inclines more difficult, as the weight cannot be as evenly distributed on an angle compared to longer wheelbase off-roaders. The usage of solid axles affects ground clearance, as their design makes them the lowest point to the ground regardless of the height of the body. Earlier Jeeps lacked basic safety equipment such as doors, seatbelts or roll cages, making them extremely dangerous if rolled over.\nCompany history and ownership.\nAfter the war, Willys did not resume production of its passenger-car models, choosing instead to concentrate on Jeeps and Jeep-branded vehicles, launching the Jeep Station Wagon in 1946, the Jeep Truck in 1947, and the Jeepster in 1948. An attempt to re-enter the passenger-car market in 1952 with the Willys Aero sedan proved unsuccessful, and ended with the company's acquisition by Kaiser Motors in 1953, for $60 million. Kaiser initially called the merged company \"Willys Motors\", but renamed itself Kaiser-Jeep in 1963. By the end of 1955, Kaiser-Frazer had dropped the Willys Aero, as well as its own passenger cars to sell Jeeps exclusively.\nAmerican Motors Corporation (AMC) in turn purchased Kaiser's money-losing Jeep operations in 1970. This time $70 million changed hands. The utility vehicles complemented AMC's passenger car business by sharing components, achieving volume efficiencies, as well as capitalizing on Jeep's international and government markets. In 1971, AMC spun off Jeep's commercial, postal, and military vehicle lines into a separate subsidiary, AM General \u2013 the company that later developed the M998 Humvee. In 1976 Jeep introduced the CJ-7, replacing the CJ-6 in North America, as well as crossing 100,000 civilian units in annual global sales for the first time.\nThe French automaker Renault began investing in AMC in 1979. Renault began selling Jeeps through their European dealerships soon thereafter, beginning in Belgium and France, gradually supplanting a number of independent importers. During this period Jeep introduced the XJ Cherokee, its first unibody SUV; and global sales topped 200,000 for the first time in 1985. However, the replacement of the CJ Jeeps by the new Wrangler line in 1986 marked the start of a different era. By 1987, the automobile markets had changed and Renault itself was experiencing financial troubles, stemming from their heavy investment into AMC while simultaneously laying workers off in France; this led to the assassination of then-Renault CEO Georges Besse in 1986 by the French extremist group Action Directe. Renault's upper management quickly moved to sell off AMC.\nChrysler Corporation bought out AMC in 1987, shortly after the Jeep CJ-7 had been replaced with the AMC-designed Wrangler YJ; the acquisition was primarily for Jeep. After more than 40 years, the four-wheel drive utility vehicles brand that had been a profitable niche for smaller automakers fell into the hands of one of the Big Three; Jeep was the only AMC brand continued by Chrysler after the acquisition, partnered with the new Eagle marque (created for legal reasons involving Renault's sale of the AMC assets to Chrysler) as the Jeep-Eagle division. Chrysler subsequently merged with Daimler-Benz in 1998 (by which point Eagle was discontinued) and folded into DaimlerChrysler. During this time, the Chrysler and Jeep sales channels were combined, primarily to complement Chrysler's luxury automobiles with Jeep's popular SUVs. DaimlerChrysler eventually sold most of its interest in Chrysler to a private equity company in 2007. Chrysler and the Jeep division operated under Chrysler Group LLC, until December 15, 2014, when Chrysler folded into Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, with the stateside subsidiary operating under 'FCA US LLC'.\nJeeps have been built under licence by various manufacturers around the world, including Mahindra in India, EBRO in Spain, and several in South America. Mitsubishi built more than 30 models in Japan between 1953 and 1998; Most were based on the CJ-3B model of the original Willys-Kaiser design.\nToledo, Ohio has been the headquarters of the Jeep brand since its inception, and the city has always been proud of this heritage. Although no longer produced in the same Toledo Complex as the World War II originals, two streets in the vicinity of the old plant are named Willys Parkway and Jeep Parkway. The Jeep Wrangler is built in the city currently, not far from the site of the original Willys-Overland plant.\nAmerican Motors set up the first automobile-manufacturing joint venture in the People's Republic of China on January 15, 1984. The result was Beijing Jeep Corporation, Ltd., in partnership with Beijing Automobile Industry Corporation, to produce the Jeep Cherokee (XJ) in Beijing. Manufacture continued after Chrysler's buyout of AMC. This joint venture is now part of DaimlerChrysler and DaimlerChrysler China Invest Corporation. The original 1984 XJ model was updated and called the \"Jeep 2500\" toward the end of its production that ended after 2005.\nIn October 2022, the joint venture between Stellantis and Chinese company Guangzhou Automobile Group filed for bankruptcy, although Stellantis said it intends to continue servicing Jeep brand customers in China.\nWhile Jeeps have been built in India under license by Mahindra &amp; Mahindra since the 1960s, Jeep has entered the Indian market directly in 2016, starting with the release of the Wrangler and Grand Cherokee in the country.\nList of CEOs.\n\"Current\": Bob Broderdorf (since February 2025)\nCivilian model list.\nJeep CJ.\nThe CJ (for \"Civilian Jeep\") series were literally the first \"Jeep\" branded vehicles sold commercially to the civilian public, beginning in 1945 with the CJ-2A, followed by the CJ-3A in 1949 and the CJ-3B in 1953. These early Jeeps are frequently referred to as \"flat-fenders\" because their front fenders were completely flat and straight, just as on the original WW II model (the Willys MB and identical Ford GPW).\nThe CJ-4 exists only as a single 1951 prototype and constitutes the \"missing link\" between the flat-fendered CJ-2A and CJ-3A/B, and the subsequent Jeeps with new bodies, featuring rounded fenders and hoods, beginning with the 1955 CJ-5, first introduced as the military Willys MD (or M38A1). The restyled body was mostly prompted to clear the taller new overhead-valve Hurricane engine.\nWillys Jeep Station Wagon and Truck.\nWith over 300,000 wagons and variants built in the U.S., it was one of Willys' most successful post-World War II models. Its production coincided with consumers moving to the suburbs.\nWillys / Jeep Jeepster &amp; (Jeepster) Commando.\nThe Jeepster introduced in 1948 was directly based on the rear-wheel-drive Jeep Station Wagon chassis, and shared many of the same parts.\n(Jeepster) Commando\nJeep DJ and Fleetvan.\nFrom 1955 onwards Willys offered two-wheel drive versions of their CJ Jeeps for commercial use, called DJ models (for 'Dispatcher Jeep'), in both open and closed body styles. A well-known version was the right-hand drive model with sliding side-doors, used by the US Postal service.\nIn 1961 the range was expanded with the 'Fleetvan' delivery van, based on DJ Jeeps.\nFleetvan Jeep\nSJ Wagoneer, Cherokee and pickups.\nSUV models (1962\u20131991)\nPickup models (1962\u20131988)\nJeeps built outside the U.S..\nJeeps have been built and/or assembled around the world by various companies.\nApparel and sponsorships.\nJeep is also a brand of apparel of outdoor lifestyle sold under license. It is reported that there are between 600 and 1,500 such outlets in China, vastly outnumbering the number of Jeep auto dealers in the country.\nIn April 2012 Jeep signed a shirt sponsorship deal worth \u20ac35\u00a0m (US$45.8\u00a0m) with Italian football club Juventus.\nIn August 2014, Jeep signed a sponsorship deal with the Greek football club AEK Athens F.C.\nJeep has been the title sponsor of France's top men's professional basketball league, LNB Pro A, since 2018. Under the deal, the league markets itself as Jeep \u00c9lite.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nInline references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15660", "revid": "49645270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15660", "title": "Jamaica", "text": "Country in the Caribbean\nJamaica is an island country in the Caribbean, covering . It is the third-largest island in the Greater Antilles and the Caribbean, after Cuba and the island of Hispaniola. Jamaica lies about south of Cuba, west of Hispaniola (the island containing Haiti and the Dominican Republic), and southeast of the Cayman Islands (a British Overseas Territory). With million people, Jamaica is the third most populous Anglophone country in the Americas and the fourth most populous country in the Caribbean. Kingston is the country's capital and largest city.\nThe indigenous Ta\u00edno peoples of the island gradually came under Spanish rule after the arrival of Christopher Columbus in 1494. Many of the indigenous people either were killed or died of diseases, after which the Spanish brought large numbers of Africans to Jamaica as slaves. The island remained a possession of Spain, under the name Santiago, until 1655, when England (part of what would become the Kingdom of Great Britain) conquered it and named it \"Jamaica\". It became an important part of the colonial British West Indies. Under Britain's colonial rule, Jamaica became a leading sugar exporter, with a plantation economy dependent on continued importation of African slaves and their descendants. The British fully emancipated all slaves in 1838, and many freedmen chose to have subsistence farms rather than to work on plantations. Beginning in the 1840s, the British began using Chinese and Indian indentured labourers for plantation work. Jamaicans achieved independence from the United Kingdom on 6 August 1962.\nJamaica is a parliamentary constitutional monarchy, with power vested in the bicameral Parliament of Jamaica, consisting of an appointed Senate and a directly elected House of Representatives. Andrew Holness has served as Prime Minister of Jamaica since March 2016. Jamaica is a Commonwealth realm, with Charles III as its king; the appointed representative of the Crown is the Governor-General of Jamaica, the office having been held by Patrick Allen since 2009. Because of a high rate of emigration for work since the 1960s, there is a large Jamaican diaspora, particularly in Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Most Jamaicans are of Sub-Saharan African ancestry, with significant European, East Asian (primarily Chinese), Indian, Lebanese, and mixed-race minorities.\nJamaica is an upper-middle-income country with an economy heavily dependent on tourism; it has an average of 4.3 million tourists a year. The country has a global influence that belies its small size; it was the birthplace of the Rastafari religion and reggae music (and such associated genres as dub, ska, and dancehall); and it is internationally prominent in sports, including cricket, sprinting, and athletics. Jamaica has sometimes been considered the world's least populous cultural superpower.\nEtymology.\nThe indigenous people, the Ta\u00edno, called the island \"Xaymaca\" in their language, meaning the \"Land of Wood and Water\" or the \"Land of Springs\". \"Yamaye\" has been suggested as an early Ta\u00edno name for the island as recorded by Christopher Columbus.\nJamaicans often refer to their home island as \"yaad\" \u2013 the Jamaican Patois word for yard, meaning home. Other colloquial names such as \"Jamrock\", \"Jamdown\" (\"Jamdung\" in Jamaican Patois), or briefly \"Ja\" are also widely used.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThere is no archaeological evidence of any human presence on Jamaica until about 500. A group known as the \"Redware people\" after their pottery arrived circa 600, followed by the Ta\u00edno circa 800, who most likely came from South America. They practised an agrarian and fishing economy, and at their height are thought to have numbered some 60,000 people, grouped into around 200 villages headed by \"caciques\" (chiefs). The south coast of Jamaica was the most populated, especially around the area now known as Old Harbour.\nThough often thought to have become extinct following contact with Europeans, the Ta\u00edno in fact still inhabited Jamaica when the English took control of the island in 1655. Some fled into interior regions, merging with African Maroon communities. The Jamaican National Heritage Trust is attempting to locate and document any remaining evidence of the Ta\u00edno.\nSpanish rule (1509\u20131655).\nChristopher Columbus was the first European to see Jamaica, claiming the island for Spain after landing there in 1494 on his second voyage to the Americas. His probable landing point was Dry Harbour, called Discovery Bay, and St. Ann's Bay was named \"Saint Gloria\" by Columbus, as the first sighting of the land. He later returned in 1503; however, he was shipwrecked and he and his crew were forced to live on Jamaica for a year while waiting to be rescued.\nOne and a half kilometres west of St. Ann's Bay is the site of the first Spanish settlement on the island, Sevilla, which was established in 1509 by Juan de Esquivel but abandoned around 1524 because it was deemed unhealthy. The capital was moved to Spanish Town, then called \"St. Jago de la Vega\", around 1534. Meanwhile, the Ta\u00ednos began dying in large numbers, both from introduced diseases and from enslavement by the Spanish. As a result, the Spanish began importing slaves from Africa to the island.\nMany slaves managed to escape, forming autonomous communities in remote and easily defended areas in the interior of Jamaica, mixing with the remaining Taino; these communities became known as Maroons. Many Jews fled the Spanish Inquisition to live on the island. They lived as conversos and were often persecuted by the Spanish rulers, and some turned to piracy against the Spanish Empire's shipping.\nBy the early 17th century it is estimated that no more than 2,500\u20133,000 people lived on Jamaica.\nEarly British period.\nThe English began taking an interest in the island and, following a failed attempt to conquer Santo Domingo on Hispaniola, Admiral William Penn and General Robert Venables led an invasion of Jamaica in 1655. Battles at Ocho Rios in 1657 and the Rio Nuevo in 1658 resulted in Spanish defeats; in 1660 the Maroon community under the leadership of Juan de Bolas switched sides from the Spanish, and began supporting the English. With their help, the Spanish defeat was secured. In 1661 English civil government was formed and Roundhead soldiers turned their attention to governance and agricultural responsibilities.\nWhen the English captured Jamaica, most Spanish colonists fled, with the exception of Spanish Jews, who chose to remain. Spanish slave holders freed their slaves before leaving. Many slaves dispersed into the mountains, joining the already established maroon communities. During the centuries of slavery, Jamaican Maroons established free communities in the mountainous interior of Jamaica, where they maintained their freedom and independence for generations, under the leadership of Maroon leaders such as Juan de Serras.\nMeanwhile, the Spanish made several attempts to re-capture the island, prompting the British to support pirates attacking Spanish ships in the Caribbean; as a result piracy became rampant on Jamaica, with the city of Port Royal becoming notorious for its lawlessness. Spain later recognised English possession of the island with the Treaty of Madrid (1670). After that, the English authorities sought to rein in the worst excesses of the pirates. During this period, Cromwell had begun to extradite Scottish criminals of war from Scotland to the island, with 1,200 Scots being sent to the island which had recently been colonised by England. The method of sending Scottish prisoners of war to the island continued, and as a result, Scots played a significant role in the development of the island, being credited as \"indentured and skilled labourers\".\nIn 1660, the population of Jamaica was about 4,500 white and 1,500 black. By the early 1670s, as the English developed sugar cane plantations worked by large numbers of slaves, black Africans formed a majority of the population. The Irish in Jamaica also formed a large part of the island's early population, making up two-thirds of the white population on the island in the late 17th century, twice that of the English population. They were brought in as indentured labourers and soldiers after the conquest of 1655. The majority of Irish were transported by force as political prisoners of war from Ireland as a result of the ongoing Wars of the Three Kingdoms. Migration of large numbers of Irish to the island continued into the 18th century.\nA limited form of local government was introduced with the creation of the House of Assembly of Jamaica in 1664; however, it represented only a tiny number of rich plantation owners. In 1692, the colony was rocked by an earthquake that resulted in several thousand deaths and the almost complete destruction of Port Royal.\n18th\u201319th centuries.\nDuring the 1700s the economy boomed, based largely on sugar and other crops for export such as coffee, cotton and indigo. All these crops were worked by black slaves, who lived short and often brutal lives with no rights, being the property of a small planter-class. In the 18th century, slaves ran away and joined the Maroons in increasing numbers, and resulted in The First Maroon War (1728 \u2013 1739/40), which ended in stalemate. The British government sued for peace, and signed treaties with the Leeward Maroons led by Cudjoe and Accompong in 1739, and the Windward Maroons led by Quao and Queen Nanny in 1740.\nA large slave rebellion, known as Tacky's War, broke out in 1760 but was defeated by the British and their Maroon allies. After the second conflict in 1795\u201396, many Maroons from the Maroon town of Cudjoe's Town (Trelawny Town) were expelled to Nova Scotia and, later, Sierra Leone.By the beginning of the 19th century, Jamaica's dependence on slave labour and a plantation economy had resulted in black people outnumbering white people by a ratio of almost 20 to 1. Although the British had outlawed the importation of slaves, some were still smuggled in from Spanish colonies and directly from Africa. While planning the abolition of slavery, the British Parliament passed laws to improve conditions for slaves. They banned the use of whips in the field and flogging of women; informed planters that slaves were to be allowed religious instruction, and required a free day during each week when slaves could sell their produce, prohibiting Sunday markets to enable slaves to attend church. The House of Assembly in Jamaica resented and resisted the new laws. Members, with membership then restricted to European-descended Jamaicans, claimed that the slaves were content and objected to Parliament's interference in island affairs. Slave owners feared possible revolts if conditions were lightened.\nThe British abolished the slave trade in 1807, but not the institution itself. In 1831 a huge slave rebellion, known as the Baptist War, broke out, led by the Baptist preacher Samuel Sharpe. The rebellion resulted in hundreds of deaths and the destruction of many plantations, and led to ferocious reprisals by the plantocracy class.\nAs a result of rebellions such as these, as well as the efforts of abolitionists, Britain outlawed slavery in its empire in 1834, with full emancipation from chattel slavery declared in 1838. The population in 1834 was 371,070, of whom 15,000 were white, 5,000 free black; 40,000 \"coloured\" or free people of colour (mixed race); and 311,070 were slaves.\nThe resulting labour shortage prompted the British to begin to \"import\" indentured servants to supplement the labour pool, as many freedmen resisted working on the plantations. Workers recruited from India began arriving in 1845, Chinese workers in 1854. Many Jamaicans are descendants of South Asian and Chinese people. Over the next 20 years, several epidemics of cholera, scarlet fever, and smallpox hit the island, killing almost 60,000 people (about 10 per day). Nevertheless, in 1871 the census recorded a population of 506,154 people, 246,573 of whom were males, and 259,581 females. Their races were recorded as 13,101 white, 100,346 coloured (known as the Browning Class), and 392,707 black. There was an economic slump in this period, with many Jamaicans living in poverty. Dissatisfaction with this, and continued racial discrimination and marginalisation of the black majority, led to the outbreak of the Morant Bay rebellion in 1865, led by Paul Bogle, which was put down by Governor John Eyre with such brutality that he was recalled from his position. His successor, John Peter Grant, enacted a series of social, financial and political reforms while aiming to uphold firm British rule over the island, which became a Crown Colony in 1866. In 1872 the capital was transferred from Spanish Town to Kingston.\nEarly 20th century.\nIn 1907, Jamaica was struck by an earthquake which, together with the subsequent fire, resulted in considerable destruction in Kingston and caused the deaths of between 800 and 1,000 people.\nUnemployment and poverty remained a problem for many Jamaicans. Various movements seeking political change arose as a result, most notably the Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League founded by Marcus Garvey in 1917. As well as seeking greater political rights and an improvement for the condition of workers, Garvey was also a prominent Pan-Africanist and proponent of the Back-to-Africa movement. He was also one of the chief inspirations behind Rastafari, a religion founded in Jamaica in the 1930s that combined Christianity with an Afrocentric theology focused on the figure of Haile Selassie, Emperor of Ethiopia. Despite occasional persecution, Rastafari grew to become an established faith on the island, later spreading abroad.\nThe Great Depression of the 1930s hit Jamaica hard. As part of the British West Indian labour unrest of 1934\u201339, Jamaica saw numerous strikes, culminating in a strike in 1938 that turned into a riot.\nAs a result, the British government instituted a commission to look into the causes of the disturbances; their report recommended political and economic reforms in Britain's Caribbean colonies. A new House of Representatives was established in 1944, elected by universal adult suffrage. During this period Jamaica's two-party system emerged, with the creation of the Jamaican Labour Party (JLP) under Alexander Bustamante and the People's National Party (PNP) under Norman Manley.\nJamaica slowly gained increasing autonomy from the United Kingdom. In 1958 it became a province in the Federation of the West Indies, a federation of several of Britain's Caribbean colonies. Membership of the Federation proved to be divisive, however, and a referendum on the issue saw a slight majority voting to leave. After leaving the Federation, Jamaica attained full independence on 6 August 1962. The new state retained, however, its membership in the Commonwealth of Nations (with the British monarch as head of state) and adopted a Westminster-style parliamentary system. Bustamante, at the age of 78, became the country's first prime minister.\nPost-independence era.\nStrong economic growth, averaging approximately 6% per year, marked the first ten years of independence under conservative JLP governments; these were led by successive Prime Ministers Alexander Bustamante, Donald Sangster (who died of natural causes within two months of taking office) and Hugh Shearer. The growth was fuelled by high levels of private investment in bauxite/alumina, tourism, the manufacturing industry and, to a lesser extent, the agricultural sector. In the 1967 Jamaican general election, the JLP were victorious again, winning 33 out of 53 seats, with the PNP taking 20 seats.\nIn terms of foreign policy Jamaica became a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, seeking to retain strong ties with Britain and the United States whilst also developing links with Communist states such as Cuba.\nThe optimism of the first decade was accompanied by a growing sense of inequality among many Afro-Jamaicans, and a concern that the benefits of growth were not being shared by the urban poor, many of whom ended up living in crime-ridden shanty towns in Kingston. This led to the voters electing the PNP under Michael Manley in 1972. The PNP won 37 seats to the JLP's 16.\nManley's government enacted various social reforms, such as a higher minimum wage, land reform, legislation for women's equality, greater housing construction and an increase in educational provision. Internationally he improved ties with the Communist bloc and vigorously opposed the apartheid regime in South Africa.\nIn 1976, the PNP won another landslide, winning 47 seats to the JLP's 13. The turnout was a very high 85 percent. However, the economy faltered in this period due to a combination of internal and external factors (such as the oil shocks). The rivalry between the JLP and PNP became intense, and political and gang-related violence grew significantly in this period.\nBy 1980, Jamaica's gross national product had declined to some 25% below its 1972 level. Seeking change, in 1980 Jamaicans voted the JLP back in under Edward Seaga, the JLP winning 51 seats to the PNP's nine seats. Firmly anti-Communist, Seaga cut ties with Cuba and sent troops to support the US invasion of Grenada in 1983. The economic deterioration, however, continued into the mid-1980s, exacerbated by a number of factors. The largest and third-largest alumina producers, Alpart and Alcoa, closed; and there was a significant reduction in production by the second-largest producer, Alcan. Reynolds Jamaica Mines, Ltd. left the Jamaican industry. There was also a decline in tourism, which was important to the economy. Owing to rising foreign and local debt, accompanied by large fiscal deficits, the government sought International Monetary Fund (IMF) financing, which was dependent on implementing various austerity measures. These resulted in strikes in 1985 and a decline in support for the Seaga government, exacerbated by criticism of the government's response to the devastation caused by Hurricane Gilbert in 1988. Having now de-emphasised socialism and adopting a more centrist position, Michael Manley and the PNP were re-elected in 1989, winning 45 seats to the JLP's 15.\nThe PNP went on to win a string of elections, under Prime Ministers Michael Manley (1989\u20131992), P. J. Patterson (1992\u20132005) and Portia Simpson-Miller (2005\u20132007). In the 1993 Jamaican general election, Patterson led the PNP to victory, winning 52 seats to the JLP's eight seats. Patterson also won the 1997 Jamaican general election, by another landslide margin of 50 seats to the JLP's 10 seats. Patterson's third consecutive victory came in the 2002 Jamaican general election, when the PNP retained power, but with a reduced seat majority of 34 seats to 26. Patterson stepped down on 26 February 2006, and was replaced by Portia Simpson-Miller, Jamaica's first female Prime Minister. The turnout slowly declined during this period of time, from 67.4% in 1993 to 59.1% in 2002.\nDuring this period various economic reforms were introduced, such as deregulating the finance sector and floating the Jamaican dollar, as well as greater investment in infrastructure, whilst also retaining a strong social safety net. Political violence, so prevalent in the previous two decades, declined significantly.\nIn 2007 the PNP was defeated by the JLP by a narrow margin of 32 seats to 28, with a turnout of 61.46%. This election ended 18 years of PNP rule, and Bruce Golding became the new prime minister. Golding's tenure (2007\u20132010) was dominated by the effects of the global recession, as well as the fallout from an attempt by Jamaican police and military to arrest drug lord Christopher Coke in 2010 which erupted in violence, resulting in over 70 deaths. As a result of this incident Golding resigned and was replaced by Andrew Holness in 2011.\nIndependence, however widely celebrated in Jamaica, has been questioned in the early 21st century. In 2011, a survey showed that approximately 60% of Jamaicans believe that the country would have been better off had it remained a British colony, with only 17% believing it would have been worse off, citing as problems years of social and fiscal mismanagement in the country. Holness and the JLP were defeated in the 2011 Jamaican general election, which saw Portia Simpson-Miller and the PNP return to power. The number of seats had been increased to 63, and the PNP swept to power with a landslide 42 seats to the JLP's 21. The voter turnout was 53.17%.\nHolness's JLP won the 2016 general election narrowly, defeating Simpson-Miller's PNP, on 25 February. The PNP won 31 seats to the JLP's 32. As a result, Simpson-Miller became Opposition Leader for a second time. The voter turnout dipped below 50% for the first time, registering just 48.37%.\nIn the 2020 general election, Andrew Holness secured a second consecutive win for the Jamaica Labour Party, winning 49 seats to 14 won by the PNP, led this time by Peter Phillips. The last time a consecutive win occurred for the JLP was in 1980. However, the turnout at this election was just 37%, probably affected by the coronavirus pandemic. However, this low turnout was a trend that continued in subsequent elections.\nIn the 2025 Jamaican general election, Holness created history, securing a third consecutive term for the JLP, the first time the party had won three general elections in a row. However, this victory was achieved with a much-reduced majority. The JLP won 34 seats to the 29 won by the Mark Golding led PNP. The turnout was again low, at just 39.5%.\nGovernment and politics.\nJamaica is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy. The head of state is the King of Jamaica (currently King Charles III), represented locally by the Governor-General of Jamaica. The governor-general is nominated by the Prime Minister of Jamaica and the entire Cabinet and then formally appointed by the monarch. All the members of the Cabinet are appointed by the governor-general on the advice of the prime minister. The monarch and the governor-general serve largely ceremonial roles, apart from their reserve powers for use in certain constitutional crisis situations. The position of the monarch has been a matter of continuing debate in Jamaica for many years; currently both major political parties are committed to transitioning to a republic with a president.\nJamaica's current constitution was drafted in 1962 by a bipartisan joint committee of the Jamaican legislature. It came into force with the Jamaica Independence Act, 1962, which was passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom, which gave Jamaica independence.\nThe Parliament of Jamaica is bicameral, consisting of the House of Representatives (Lower House) and the Senate (Upper House). Members of the House (known as Members of Parliament or \"MPs\") are directly elected, and the member of the House of Representatives who, in the governor-general's best judgement, is best able to command the confidence of a majority of the members of that House, is appointed by the governor-general to be the prime minister. Senators are nominated jointly by the prime minister and the parliamentary Leader of the Opposition and are then appointed by the governor-general.\nThe Judiciary of Jamaica operates on a common law system derived from English law and Commonwealth of Nations precedents. The court of final appeal is the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, a court of the British Crown based in London. A proposal has been made to replace the Privy Council with the Caribbean Court of Justice as part of a wider push toward full decolonization.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nJamaica has traditionally had a two-party system, with power often alternating between the People's National Party (PNP) and Jamaica Labour Party (JLP). The party with current administrative and legislative power is the Jamaica Labour Party, after its 2020 victory. There are also several minor parties who have yet to gain a seat in parliament; the largest of these is the National Democratic Movement (NDM).\nMilitary.\nThe Jamaica Defence Force (JDF) is the small but professional military force of Jamaica. The JDF is based on the British military model with similar organisation, training, weapons and traditions. Once chosen, officer candidates are sent to one of several British or Canadian basic officer courses depending on the arm of service. Enlisted soldiers are given basic training at Up Park Camp or JDF Training Depot, Newcastle, both in St. Andrew. As with the British model, NCOs are given several levels of professional training as they rise up the ranks. Additional military schools are available for speciality training in Canada, the United States and the United Kingdom.\nThe JDF is directly descended from the British Army's West India Regiment, which was formed during the colonial era. The West India Regiment was used extensively throughout the British Empire in policing the empire from 1795 to 1926. Other units in the JDF heritage include the early colonial Jamaica Militia, the Kingston Infantry Volunteers of WWI and reorganised into the Jamaican Infantry Volunteers in World War II. The West Indies Regiment was reformed in 1958 as part of the West Indies Federation, after dissolution of the Federation the JDF was established.\nThe Jamaica Defence Force (JDF) comprises an infantry Regiment and Reserve Corps, an Air Wing, a Coast Guard fleet and a supporting Engineering Unit. The infantry regiment contains the 1st, 2nd and 3rd (National Reserve) battalions. The JDF Air Wing is divided into three flight units, a training unit, a support unit and the JDF Air Wing (National Reserve). The Coast Guard is divided between seagoing crews and support crews who conduct maritime safety and maritime law enforcement as well as defence-related operations.\nThe role of the support battalion is to provide support to boost numbers in combat and issue competency training in order to allow for the readiness of the force. The 1st Engineer Regiment was formed due to an increased demand for military engineers and their role is to provide engineering services whenever and wherever they are needed. The Headquarters JDF contains the JDF Commander, Command Staff as well as Intelligence, Judge Advocate office, Administrative and Procurement sections.\nIn recent years the JDF has been called on to assist the nation's police, the Jamaica Constabulary Force (JCF), in fighting drug smuggling and a rising crime rate which includes one of the highest murder rates in the world. JDF units actively conduct armed patrols with the JCF in high-crime areas and known gang neighbourhoods. There has been vocal controversy as well as support of this JDF role. In early 2005, an Opposition leader, Edward Seaga, called for the merger of the JDF and JCF. This has not garnered support in either organisation nor among the majority of citizens. In 2017, Jamaica signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. In September 2024 the AP reported that \"20 soldiers and four police officers are scheduled to arrive in Haiti to support the UN-Kenya lead mission and they would provide command, planning and logistics support.\" Jamaica's PM had pledged a total of 170 soldiers and 30 police officers, but said that all would not deploy at once.\nAdministrative divisions.\nJamaica is divided into 14 parishes, which are grouped into three historic counties that have no administrative relevance.\nIn the context of local government the parishes are designated \"Local Authorities\". These local authorities are further styled as \"Municipal Corporations\", which are either city municipalities or town municipalities. Any new city municipality must have a population of at least 50,000, and a town municipality a number set by the Minister of Local Government. There are currently no town municipalities.\nThe local governments of the parishes of Kingston and St. Andrews are consolidated as the city municipality of Kingston &amp; St. Andrew Municipal Corporation. The newest city municipality is the Municipality of Portmore, created 2003. While it is geographically located within the parish of St. Catherine, it is governed independently.\nGeography and environment.\nJamaica is the third-largest island in the Caribbean. It lies between latitudes 17\u00b0 and 19\u00b0N, and longitudes 76\u00b0 and 79\u00b0W. Mountains dominate the interior: the Don Figuerero, Santa Cruz, and May Day mountains in the west, the Dry Harbour Mountains in the centre, and the John Crow Mountains and Blue Mountains in the east, the latter containing Blue Mountain Peak, Jamaica's tallest mountain at 2,256 m. They are surrounded by a narrow coastal plain. Jamaica has two cities, the first being Kingston, the capital city and centre of business, located on the south coast and the second being Montego Bay, one of the best known cities in the Caribbean for tourism, located on the north coast. Kingston Harbour is the seventh-largest natural harbour in the world, which contributed to the city being designated as the capital in 1872. Other towns of note include Portmore, Spanish Town, Savanna la Mar, Mandeville and the resort towns of Ocho R\u00edos, Port Antonio and Negril.\nTourist attractions include Dunn's River Falls in St. Ann, YS Falls in St. Elizabeth, the Blue Lagoon in Portland, a dormant volcano's crater, and Port Royal, site of a major earthquake in 1692 that helped form the island's Palisadoes tombolo.\nAmong the variety of terrestrial, aquatic and marine ecosystems are dry and wet limestone forests, rainforest, riparian woodland, wetlands, caves, rivers, seagrass beds and coral reefs. The authorities have recognised the tremendous significance and potential of the environment and have designated some of the more \"fertile\" areas as \"protected\". Among the island's protected areas are the Cockpit Country, Hellshire Hills, and Litchfield forest reserves. In 1992, Jamaica's first marine park, covering nearly , was established in Montego Bay. Portland Bight Protected Area was designated in 1999. The following year Blue and John Crow Mountains National Park was created, covering roughly of a wilderness area which supports thousands of tree and fern species and rare animals.\nThere are several small islands off Jamaica's coast, most notably those in Portland Bight such as Pigeon Island, Salt Island, Dolphin Island, Long Island, Great Goat Island and Little Goat Island, and also Lime Cay located further east. Much further out \u2013 some 50\u201380\u00a0km off the south coast \u2013 lie the very small Morant Cays and Pedro Cays.\nClimate.\nThe climate in Jamaica is tropical, with hot and humid weather, although higher inland regions are more temperate. Some regions on the south coast, such as the Liguanea Plain and the Pedro Plains, are relatively dry rain-shadow areas.\nJamaica lies within the Main Development Region for Atlantic tropical cyclone activity, and because of this, the island sometimes suffers significant storm damage. Hurricanes Charlie and Gilbert hit Jamaica directly in 1951 and 1988, respectively, causing major damage and many deaths. In the 2000s (decade), hurricanes Ivan, Dean, and Gustav also brought severe weather to the island. In 2025, Hurricane Melissa made landfall as a Category\u00a05, far surpassing Gilbert as the strongest landfalling storm in Jamaican history.\nFlora and fauna.\nJamaica's climate is tropical, supporting diverse ecosystems with a wealth of plants and animals. Its plant life has changed considerably over the centuries; when the Spanish arrived in 1494, except for small agricultural clearings, the country was deeply forested. The European settlers cut down the great timber trees for building and ships' supplies, and cleared the plains, savannas, and mountain slopes for intense agricultural cultivation. Many new plants were introduced including sugarcane, bananas, and citrus trees.\nJamaica is home to about 3,000 species of native flowering plants (of which over 1,000 are endemic and 200 are species of orchid), thousands of species of non-flowering flora, and about 20 botanical gardens, some of which are several hundred years old. Areas of heavy rainfall also contain stands of bamboo, ferns, ebony, mahogany, and rosewood. Cactus and similar dry-area plants are found along the south and southwest coastal area. Parts of the west and southwest consist of large grasslands, with scattered stands of trees. Jamaica is home to three terrestrial ecoregions, the Jamaican moist forests, Jamaican dry forests, and Greater Antilles mangroves.\nJamaica's fauna, typical of the Caribbean, includes highly diversified wildlife with many endemic species. As with other oceanic islands, land mammals are mostly several species of bats of which at least three endemic species are found only in Cockpit Country, one of which is at-risk. Other species of bat include the fig-eating and hairy-tailed bats. The only non-bat native mammal extant in Jamaica is the Jamaican hutia, locally known as the coney. Introduced mammals such as wild boar and the small Asian mongoose are also common. Jamaica is also home to about 50 species of reptiles, the largest of which is the American crocodile; however, it is only present within the Black River and a few other areas. Lizards such as anoles, iguanas and snakes such as racers and the Jamaican boa (the largest snake on the island), are common in areas such as the Cockpit Country. None of Jamaica's eight species of native snakes is venomous.\nJamaica is home to about 289 species of birds of which 27 are endemic including the endangered black-Billed parrots and the Jamaican blackbird, both of which are only found in Cockpit Country. It is also the indigenous home to four species of hummingbirds (three of which are found nowhere else in the world): the black-billed streamertail, the Jamaican mango, the Vervain hummingbird, and red-billed streamertails. The red-billed streamertail, known locally as the \"doctor bird\", is Jamaica's National Symbol. Other notable species include the Jamaican tody and the Greater flamingo,\nOne species of freshwater turtle is native to Jamaica, the Jamaican slider. It is found only on Jamaica and on a few islands in the Bahamas. In addition, many types of frogs are common on the island, especially treefrogs.\nJamaican waters contain considerable resources of fresh and saltwater fish. The chief varieties of saltwater fish are kingfish, jack, mackerel, whiting, bonito, and tuna. Fish that occasionally enter freshwater and estuarine environments include snook, jewfish, mangrove snapper, and mullets. Fish that spend the majority of their lives in Jamaica's fresh waters include many species of livebearers, killifish, freshwater gobies, the mountain mullet, and the American eel. Tilapia have been introduced from Africa for aquaculture, and are very common. Also visible in the waters surrounding Jamaica are dolphins, parrotfish, and the endangered manatee.\nInsects and other invertebrates are abundant, including the world's largest centipede, the Amazonian giant centipede. Jamaica is the home to about 150 species of butterflies and moths, including 35 indigenous species and 22 subspecies. It is also the native home to the Jamaican swallowtail, the western hemisphere's largest butterfly.\nAquatic life.\nCoral reef ecosystems are important because they provide people with a source of livelihood, food, recreation, and medicinal compounds and protect the land on which they live. Jamaica relies on the ocean and its ecosystem for its development. However, the marine life in Jamaica is also being affected. There could be many factors that contribute to marine life not having the best health. Jamaica's geological origin, topographical features and seasonal high rainfall make it susceptible to a range of natural hazards that can affect the coastal and oceanic environments. These include storm surge, slope failures (landslides), earthquakes, floods and hurricanes. Coral reefs in the Negril Marine Park (NMP), Jamaica, have been increasingly impacted by nutrient pollution and macroalgal blooms following decades of intensive development as a major tourist destination.\nAnother one of those factors could include tourism: being that Jamaica is a very touristy place, the island draws numerous people travelling here from all over the world. The Jamaican tourism industry accounts for 32% of total employment and 36% of the country's GDP and is largely based on the sun, sea and sand, the last two of these attributes being dependent on healthy coral reef ecosystems. Because of Jamaica's tourism, they have developed a study to see if the tourist would be willing to help financially to manage their marine ecosystem because Jamaica alone is unable to. The ocean connects all the countries all over the world, however, everyone and everything is affecting the flow and life in the ocean. Jamaica is a very touristy place specifically because of their beaches. If their oceans are not functioning at their best then the well-being of Jamaica and the people who live there will start to deteriorate. According to the OECD, oceans contribute $1.5 trillion annually in value-added to the overall economy. A developing country on an island will get the majority of their revenue from their ocean.\nPollution.\nPollution comes from run-off, sewage systems, and garbage. However, this typically all ends up in the ocean after there is rain or floods. Everything that ends up in the water changes the quality and balance of the ocean. Poor coastal water quality has adversely affected fisheries, tourism and mariculture, as well as undermining biological sustainability of the living resources of ocean and coastal habitats. Jamaica imports and exports many goods through their waters. Some of the imports that go into Jamaica include petroleum and petroleum products. Issues include accidents at sea; risk of spills through local and international transport of petroleum and petroleum products. Oil spills can disrupt the marine life with chemicals that are not normally found in the ocean. Other forms of pollution also occur in Jamaica. Solid waste disposal mechanisms in Jamaica are currently inadequate. The solid waste gets into the water through rainfall forces. Solid waste is also harmful to wildlife, particularly birds, fish and turtles that feed at the surface of the water and mistake floating debris for food. For example, plastic can be caught around birds' and turtles' necks, making it difficult to eat and breath as they begin to grow, causing the plastic to get tighter around their necks. Pieces of plastic, metal, and glass can be mistaken for the food fish eat. Each Jamaican generates 1\u00a0kg (2\u00a0lbs) of waste per day; only 70% of this is collected by National Solid Waste Management Authority (NSWMA)\u2014the remaining 30% is either burnt or disposed of in gullies/waterways.\nEnvironmental policies.\nThere are policies that are being put into place to help preserve the ocean and the life below water. The goal of integrated coastal zone management (ICZM) is to improve the quality of life of human communities who depend on coastal resources while maintaining the biological diversity and productivity of coastal ecosystems. Developing an underdeveloped country can impact the oceans ecosystem because of all the construction that would be done to develop the country. Over-building, driven by powerful market forces as well as poverty among some sectors of the population, and destructive exploitation contribute to the decline of ocean and coastal resources. Developing practices that will contribute to the lives of the people but also to the life of the ocean and its ecosystem. Some of these practices include: Develop sustainable fisheries practices, ensure sustainable mariculture techniques and practices, sustainable management of shipping, and promote sustainable tourism practices.\nDemographics.\nEthnic origins.\nBreakdown of responses to the 2011 census by the University of the West Indies.\nJamaica's diverse ethnic roots are reflected in the national motto \"Out of Many One People\". Some dispute the appropriateness of the motto because Jamaicans are overwhelmingly of a single race. The Jamaican founding fathers were mostly White or brown men and unrepresentative of the views of the country's majority Black population.\nMost of the population of 2,812,000 (July 2018 est.) are of African or partially African descent, with many being able to trace their origins to the West African countries of present-day Ghana and Nigeria. Other major ancestral areas are Europe, South Asia, and East Asia. It is uncommon for Jamaicans to identify themselves by race as is prominent in other countries such as the United States, with most Jamaicans seeing Jamaican nationality as an identity in and of itself, identifying as simply being \"Jamaican\" regardless of ethnicity. A study found that the average admixture on the island was 78.3% Sub-Saharan African, 16.0% European, and 5.7% East Asian.\nA more precise study was conducted by the local University of the West Indies \u2013 Jamaica's population is more accurately 76.3% African descent or Black, 15.1% Afro-European (or locally called the Brown Man or Browning Class), 3.4% East Indian and Afro-East Indian, 3.2% White, 1.2% Chinese and 0.8% Other. The Jamaican Maroons of Accompong and other settlements are the descendants of African slaves who fled the plantations for the interior, where they set up their own autonomous communities. Many Maroons continue to have their own traditions and speak their own language, known locally as Kromanti.\nAsians form the third-largest group (after the Browning Class \u2013 i.e. descendants of the mulattos during slavery and other interracial mixtures subsequent to emancipation) and include Indo-Jamaicans and Chinese Jamaicans. Most are descended from indentured workers brought by the British colonial government to fill labour shortages following the abolition of slavery in 1838. Along with their Indian counterparts, Chinese Jamaicans have also played an integral part in Jamaica's community and history. There are about 20,000 Jamaicans who have Lebanese and Syrian ancestry. Most were Christian immigrants who fled the Ottoman occupation of Lebanon in the early 19th century. Eventually, their descendants became very successful politicians and businessmen.\nThe first wave of English immigrants arrived on the island in 1655 after conquering the Spanish, and they have historically been the dominant group. The first Irish immigrants came to Jamaica in the 1600s as war prisoners and, later, as indentured laborers. War criminals identified by Oliver Cromwell from Scotland were exiled to Jamaica during the 1650s, and as a result, Scots and Scottish Jamaicans have made a significant impact on the island, including many Jamaicans having common Scottish surnames, place names across the island of Scottish origins, the establishments of Presbyterian churches by Scots across the island in the 17th century, as well as the national flag of Jamaica taking inspiration from the national flag of Scotland.\nThere is also a significant Jamaican population of Portuguese descent that is predominantly of Sephardic Jewish heritage. The first Jews arrived as explorers from Spain in the 15th century after being forced to choose between expulsion or conversion to Christianity. A small number of them became slave owners or pirates. Judaism eventually became very influential in Jamaica and can be seen today with many Jewish cemeteries around the country. During the Holocaust, Jamaica became a refuge for Jews fleeing persecution in Europe.\nBy 2015 immigration had increased, coming mainly from China, Haiti, Cuba, Colombia, and Latin America; 20,000 Latin Americans lived in Jamaica. In 2016, Prime Minister Andrew Holness suggested making Spanish Jamaica's second official language. About 7,000 Americans live in Jamaica.\nLanguages.\nJamaica is regarded as a bilingual country, with two major languages used by the population. The official language is (Jamaican) English, which is \"used in all domains of public life\", including the government, the legal system, the media, and education. However, the primary spoken language is an English-based creole language called Jamaican Patois (or Patwa). The two exist in a dialect continuum, with speakers using a different speech register depending on the context and to whom they speak. \"Pure\" Patois, though sometimes perceived as merely a particularly aberrant dialect of English, is essentially mutually unintelligible with standard English and linguists consider it a distinct language, though most of its vocabulary originally derives from English. A 2007 survey by the Jamaican Language Unit found that 17.1 percent of the population were monolingual in Jamaican Standard English (JSE), 36.5 percent were monolingual in Patois, and 46.4 percent were bilingual, although earlier surveys had pointed to a greater degree of bilingualism (up to 90 percent). The Jamaican education system had only in about 2015 begun to offer formal instruction in Patois while retaining JSE as the \"official language of instruction\".\nAdditionally, some Jamaicans use one or more of Jamaican Sign Language (JSL), American Sign Language (ASL) or the declining indigenous Jamaican Country Sign Language (Konchri Sain). Both JSL and ASL are rapidly replacing Konchri Sain for a variety of reasons.\nEmigration.\nMany Jamaicans have emigrated to other countries, especially the United Kingdom, the United States, and Canada. In the case of the United States, about 20,000 Jamaicans per year are granted permanent residence. There has also been emigration of Jamaicans to other Caribbeans countries such as Cuba, Puerto Rico, Guyana, and The Bahamas. It was estimated in 2004 that up to 2.5 million Jamaicans and Jamaican descendants lived abroad.\nAbout 800,000 Jamaicans live in the United Kingdom, making them by far the country's largest African-Caribbean group. Large-scale migration from Jamaica to the UK occurred primarily in the 1950s and 1960s when the country was still under British rule. There are Jamaican communities in most large UK cities. Concentrations of expatriate Jamaicans are quite considerable in numerous cities in the United States, including New York City, Buffalo, the Miami metro area, Atlanta, Chicago, Orlando, Tampa, Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, Hartford, Providence and Los Angeles. In Canada, the Jamaican population is centred in Toronto, with smaller communities in cities such as Hamilton, Montreal, Winnipeg, Vancouver and Ottawa. Jamaican Canadians comprise about 30% of the entire Black Canadian population.\nA notable though much smaller group of emigrants are Jamaicans in Ethiopia. These are mostly Rastafarians, in whose theological worldview Africa is the promised land, or \"Zion\", or more specifically Ethiopia, due to reverence in which former Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie is held. Most live in the small town of Shashamane about 150 miles (240\u00a0km) south of the capital Addis Ababa.\nCrime.\nWhen Jamaica gained independence in 1962, the murder rate was 3.9 per 100,000 inhabitants, one of the lowest in the world. By 2009, the rate was 62 per 100,000 inhabitants, one of the highest in the world. Gang violence became a serious problem, with organised crime being centred around Jamaican posses or \"Yardies\". Jamaica has had one of the highest murder rates in the world for many years, according to UN estimates. Some areas of Jamaica, particularly poor areas in Kingston, Montego Bay and elsewhere experience high levels of crime and violence.\nHowever, there were 1,683 reported murders in 2009 and 1,447 in 2010. After 2011 the murder rate continued to fall, following the downward trend in 2010, after a strategic programme was launched. In 2012, the Ministry of National Security reported a 30 percent decrease in murders. Nevertheless, in 2017, murders rose by 22% over the previous year.\nMany Jamaicans are hostile towards LGBT and intersex people, and mob attacks against gay people have been reported. Numerous high-profile dancehall and ragga artists have produced songs featuring explicitly homophobic lyrics. This has prompted the formations of LGBT rights organisations, such as Stop Murder Music. Homosexuality is illegal and punishable by imprisonment.\nMajor cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReligion.\nChristianity is the largest religion practised in Jamaica. About 70% are Protestants; Catholics are just 2% of the population. According to the 2001 census, the country's largest Protestant denominations are the Church of God (24%), Seventh-day Adventist Church (11%), Pentecostal (10%), Baptist (7%), Anglican (4%), United Church (2%), Methodist (2%), Moravian (1%) and Plymouth Brethren (1%). Bedwardism is a form of Christianity native to the island, sometimes viewed as a separate faith. The Christian faith gained acceptance as British Christian abolitionists and Baptist missionaries joined educated former slaves in the struggle against slavery.\nThe Rastafari movement has 29,026 adherents, according to the 2011 census, with 25,325 Rastafarian males and 3,701 Rastafarian females. The faith originated in Jamaica in the 1930s and though rooted in Christianity it is heavily Afrocentric in its focus, revering figures such as the Jamaican black nationalist Marcus Garvey and Haile Selassie, the former Emperor of Ethiopia. Rastafari has since spread across the globe, especially to areas with large black or African diasporas.\nVarious faiths and traditional religious practices derived from Africa are practised on the island, notably Kumina, Convince, Myal and Obeah.\nOther religions in Jamaica include Jehovah's Witnesses (2% population), the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed faith, which counts perhaps 8,000 adherents and 21 Local Spiritual Assemblies, Mormonism, Buddhism, and Hinduism. The Hindu Diwali festival is celebrated yearly among the Indo-Jamaican community.\nThere is also a small population of about 200 Jews, who describe themselves as Liberal-Conservative. The first Jews in Jamaica trace their roots back to early 15th-century Spain and Portugal. Kahal Kadosh Shaare Shalom, also known as the United Congregation of Israelites, is a historic synagogue located in the city of Kingston. Originally built in 1912, it is the official and only Jewish place of worship left on the island. The once abundant Jewish population has voluntarily converted to Christianity over time. Shaare Shalom is one of the few synagogues in the world that contains sand covered floors and is a popular tourist destination.\nOther small groups include Muslims, who claim 5,000 adherents. The Muslim holidays of Ashura (known locally as Hussay or Hosay) and Eid have been celebrated throughout the island for hundreds of years. In the past, every plantation in each parish celebrated Hosay. Today it has been called an Indian carnival and is perhaps most well known in Clarendon where it is celebrated each August. People of all religions attend the event, showing mutual respect.\nEducation.\nThe emancipation of the slaves heralded the establishment of an education system for the masses. Prior to emancipation there were few schools for educating locals and many sent their children off to England to access quality education. After emancipation the West Indian Commission granted a sum of money to establish Elementary Schools, now known as \"All Age Schools\". Most of these schools were established by the churches. This was the genesis of the modern Jamaican school system.\nPresently the following categories of schools exist:\nAdditionally, there are many community and teacher training colleges.\nEducation is free from the early childhood to secondary levels. There are also opportunities for those who cannot afford further education in the vocational arena, through the Human Employment and Resource Training-National Training Agency (HEART Trust-NTA) programme, which is opened to all working age national population and through an extensive scholarship network for the various universities.\nEconomy.\nJamaica is a mixed economy with both state enterprises and private sector businesses. Major sectors of the Jamaican economy include agriculture, mining, manufacturing, tourism, petroleum refining, financial and insurance services. Tourism and mining are the leading earners of foreign exchange. Half the Jamaican economy relies on services, with half of its income coming from services such as tourism. An estimated 4.3 million foreign tourists visit Jamaica every year. According to the World Bank, Jamaica is an upper-middle income country that, like its Caribbean neighbours, is vulnerable to the effects of climate change, flooding, and hurricanes. In 2018, Jamaica represented the CARICOM Caribbean Community at the G20 and the G7 annual meetings. In 2019 Jamaica reported its lowest unemployment rate in 50 years.\nSupported by multilateral financial institutions, Jamaica has, since the early 1980s, sought to implement structural reforms aimed at fostering private sector activity and increasing the role of market forces in resource allocation Since 1991, the government has followed a programme of economic liberalisation and stabilisation by removing exchange controls, floating the exchange rate, cutting tariffs, stabilising the Jamaican dollar, reducing inflation and removing restrictions on foreign investment. Emphasis has been placed on maintaining strict fiscal discipline, greater openness to trade and financial flows, market liberalisation and reduction in the size of government. During this period, a large share of the economy was returned to private sector ownership through divestment and privatisation programmes. The free-trade zones at Kingston, Montego Bay and Spanish Town allow duty-free importation, tax-free profits, and free repatriation of export earnings.\nPost\u2013independence.\nJamaica's economy grew strongly after the years of independence, but then stagnated in the 1980s, due to the heavy falls in price of bauxite and fluctuations in the price of agriculture. The financial sector was troubled in 1994, with many banks and insurance companies suffering heavy losses and liquidity problems. According to the Commonwealth Secretariat, \"The government set up the Financial Sector Adjustment Company (Finsac) in January 1997 to assist these banks and companies, providing funds in return for equity, and acquired substantial holdings in banks and insurance companies and related companies...\" but it only exasperated the problem, and brought the country into large external debt. From 2001, once it had restored these banks and companies to financial health, Finsac divested them.\" The Government of Jamaica remains committed to lowering inflation, with a long-term objective of bringing it in line with that of its major trading partners.\nIn 1996 and 1997 there was a decrease in GDP largely due to significant problems in the financial sector and, in 1997, a severe island-wide drought (the worst in 70 years) and hurricane that drastically reduced agricultural production. In 1997 and 1998, nominal GDP was approximately a high of about 8 percent of GDP and then lowered to 4\u00bd percent of GDP in 1999 and 2000. The economy in 1997 was marked by low levels of import growth, high levels of private capital inflows and relative stability in the foreign exchange market.\nRecent advancements.\nRecent economic performance shows the Jamaican economy is recovering. Agricultural production, an important engine of growth increased to 5.5% in 2001 compared to the corresponding period in 2000, signalling the first positive growth rate in the sector since January 1997. In 2018, Jamaica reported a 7.9% increase in corn, 6.1% increase in plantains, 10.4% increase in bananas, 2.2% increase in pineapples, 13.3% increase in dasheen, 24.9% increase in coconuts, and a 10.6% increase in whole milk production. Bauxite and alumina production increased 5.5% from January to December 1998, compared to the corresponding period in 1997. January's bauxite production recorded a 7.1% increase relative to January 1998 and continued expansion of alumina production through 2009 is planned by Alcoa. Jamaica is the fifth-largest exporter of bauxite in the world, after Australia, China, Brazil and Guinea. The country also exports limestone, of which it holds large deposits. The government is currently implementing plans to increase its extraction.\nTourism industry.\nTourism, which is the largest foreign exchange earner, showed improvement as well. In 1999 the total visitor arrivals was 2 million, an increase of 100,000 from the previous year. Since 2017, Jamaica's tourism has risen exponentially, rising to 4.3 million average tourists per year. Jamaica's largest tourist markets are from North America, South America, and Europe. In 2017, Jamaica recorded a 91.3% increase in stopover visitors from Southern and Western Europe (and a 41% increase in stopover arrivals from January to September 2017 over the same period from the previous year) with Germany, Portugal and Spain registering the highest percentage gains. In 2018, Jamaica won several World Travel Awards in Portugal winning the \"Chairman's Award for Global Tourism Innovation\", \"Best Tourist Board in the Caribbean\" \"Best Honeymoon Destination\", \"Best Culinary Destination\", \"World's Leading Beach Destination\" and \"World's Leading Cruise Destination\". Two months later, the Travvy Tourism Awards held in New York City, awarded Jamaica's Tourism Minister Edmund Bartlett, with the inaugural Chairman's Award for, \"Global Tourism Innovation for the Development of the Global Tourism Resilience and Crisis Management Centre (GTRCM)\". Bartlett has also won the Pacific Travel Writer's Association's award in Germany for the, \"2018 Best Tourism Minister of the Year\".\nIndustries.\nJamaica's agricultural exports are sugar, bananas, cocoa, coconut, molasses oranges, limes, grapefruit, rum, yams, allspice (of which it is the world's largest and \"most exceptional quality\" exporter), and Blue Mountain Coffee which is considered a world renowned gourmet brand.\nJamaica has a wide variety of industrial and commercial activities. The aviation industry is able to perform most routine aircraft maintenance, except for heavy structural repairs. There is a considerable amount of technical support for transport and agricultural aviation. Jamaica has a considerable amount of industrial engineering, light manufacturing, including metal fabrication, metal roofing, and furniture manufacturing. Food and beverage processing, glassware manufacturing, software and data processing, printing and publishing, insurance underwriting, music and recording, and advanced education activities can be found in the larger urban areas. The Jamaican construction industry is entirely self-sufficient, with professional technical standards and guidance.\nScience and technology.\nThe Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) sector is guided by the National Commission on Science and Technology (NCST) and the Scientific Research Council (SRC). Both are under the direction of the Ministry of Science, Energy, and Technology.\nSince the 1990s, the government has set an agenda to push the development of\u00a0science and technology in Jamaica. Despite some successes, such as the growth of the nutraceutical industry, it has been difficult to translate the results into domestic technologies, products and services \u2013 largely because of national budgetary constraints. However, with Jamaica's improved fiscal space, coming out of its recent IMF programme, the government has pledged to increase expenditure on research and development.\nJamaicans have made noteworthy scientific and medical contributions. Amongst these include the discovery of kwashiorkor, the pioneer of treatments for pediatric sickle cell anemia and the invention of various spacecraft support systems.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nThe transport infrastructure in Jamaica consists of roadways, railways and air transport, with roadways forming the backbone of the island's internal transport system.\nRoadways.\nThe Jamaican road network consists of almost of roads, of which over is paved. The Jamaican Government has, since the late 1990s and in cooperation with private investors, embarked on a campaign of infrastructural improvement projects, one of which includes the creation of a system of freeways, the first such access-controlled roadways of their kind on the island, connecting the main population centres of the island. This project has so far seen the completion of of freeway.\nRailways.\nRailways in Jamaica no longer enjoy the prominent position they once did, having been largely replaced by roadways as the primary means of transport. Of the of railway found in Jamaica, only remain in operation, currently used to transport bauxite. On 13 April 2011, a limited passenger service was resumed between May Pen, Spanish Town and Linstead.\nAir transport.\nThere are three international airports in Jamaica with modern terminals, long runways, and the navigational equipment required to accommodate the large jet aircraft used in modern and air travel: Norman Manley International Airport in Kingston; Ian Fleming International Airport in Boscobel, Saint Mary Parish; and the island's largest and busiest airport, Sir Donald Sangster International Airport in the resort city of Montego Bay. Manley and Sangster International airports are home to the country's national airline, Caribbean Airlines. In addition there are local commuter airports at Tinson Pen (Kingston), Port Antonio, and Negril, which cater to internal flights only. Many other small, rural centres are served by private airstrips on sugar estates or bauxite mines.\nPorts, shipping and lighthouses.\nOwing to its location in the Caribbean Sea in the shipping lane to the Panama Canal and relative proximity to large markets in North America and emerging markets in Latin America, Jamaica receives much traffic of shipping containers. The container terminal at the Port of Kingston has undergone large expansion in capacity in recent years to handle growth both already realised as well as that which is projected in coming years. Montego Freeport in Montego Bay also handles a variety of cargo like (though more limited than) the Port of Kingston, mainly agricultural products.\nThere are several other ports positioned around the island, including Port Esquivel in St. Catherine (WINDALCO), Rocky Point in Clarendon, Port Kaiser in St. Elizabeth, Port Rhoades in Discovery Bay, Reynolds Pier in Ocho Rios, and Boundbrook Port in Port Antonio.\nTo aid the navigation of shipping, Jamaica operates nine lighthouses. They are maintained by the Port Authority of Jamaica, an agency of the Ministry of Transport and Works.\nEnergy.\nJamaica depends on petroleum imports to satisfy its national energy needs. Many test sites have been explored for oil, but no commercially viable quantities have been found. The most convenient sources of imported oil and motor fuels (diesel, gasoline, and jet fuel) are from Mexico and Venezuela.\nJamaica's electrical power is produced by diesel (bunker oil) generators located in Old Harbour. This facility has been further equipped with liquid natural gas capability and storage. Other smaller power stations (most owned by the Jamaica Public Service Company, the island's electricity provider) support the island's electrical grid including the Hunts Bay Power Station, the Bogue Power Station Saint James, the Rockfort Power Station Saint Andrew and small hydroelectric plants on the White River, Rio Bueno, Morant River, Black River (Maggotty) and Roaring River. A wind farm, owned by the Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica, was established at Wigton, Manchester.\nJamaica has successfully operated a SLOWPOKE-2 nuclear reactor of 20\u00a0kW capacity since the early 1980s.\nIn 2024, the Government committed to adding small modular reactors (SMR) to the country's energy mix, signing a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with Atomic Energy of Canada Limited (AECL) and Canadian Nuclear Laboratories to promote the adoption of nuclear power in Jamaica.\nJamaica imports approximately of oil energy products per day, including asphalt and lubrication products. Just 20% of imported fuels are used for road transportation, the rest being used by the bauxite industry, electricity generation, and aviation. 30,000 barrels/day of crude imports are processed into various motor fuels and asphalt by the Petrojam Refinery in Kingston.\nJamaica produces enormous quantities of drinking alcohol (at least 5% water content), most of which appears to be consumed as beverages, and none used as motor fuel. Facilities exist to refine hydrous ethanol feedstock into anhydrous ethanol (0% water content), but as of 2007, the process appeared to be uneconomic and the production plant was idle. The facility has since been purchased by West Indies Petroleum Ltd. and repurposed for petroleum distillates.\nCommunication.\nJamaica has a fully digital telephone communication system with a mobile penetration of over 95%.\nThe country's two mobile operators \u2013 FLOW Jamaica (formerly LIME, bMobile and Cable and Wireless Jamaica) and Digicel Jamaica have spent millions in network upgrades and expansion. The newest operator, Digicel was granted a licence in 2001 to operate mobile services in the newly liberalised telecom market that had once been the sole domain of the incumbent FLOW (then Cable and Wireless Jamaica) monopoly. Digicel opted for the more widely used GSM wireless system, while a past operator, Oceanic (which became Claro Jamaica and later merged with Digicel Jamaica in 2011) opted for the CDMA standard. FLOW (formerly \"LIME\" \u2013 pre-Columbus Communications merger) which had begun with TDMA standard, subsequently upgraded to GSM in 2002, decommissioned TDMA in 2006 and only utilised that standard until 2009 when LIME launched its 3G network. Both operators currently provide islandwide coverage with HSPA+ (3G) technology. Currently, only Digicel offers LTE to its customers whereas FLOW Jamaica has committed to launching LTE in the cities of Kingston and Montego Bay, places where Digicel's LTE network is currently only found in, in short order.\nA new entrant to the Jamaican communications market, Flow Jamaica, laid a new submarine cable connecting Jamaica to the United States. This new cable increases the total number of submarine cables connecting Jamaica to the rest of the world to four. Cable and Wireless Communications (parent company of LIME) acquired the company in late 2014 and replaced their brand LIME with FLOW. FLOW Jamaica currently has the most broadband and cable subscribers on the island and also has 1 million mobile subscribers, second to Digicel (which had, at its peak, over 2 million mobile subscriptions on its network).\nDigicel entered the broadband market in 2010 by offering WiMAX broadband, capable of up to 6\u00a0Mbit/s per subscriber. To further their broadband share post-LIME/FLOW merger in 2014, the company introduced a new broadband service called Digicel Play, which is Jamaica's second FTTH offering (after LIME's deployment in selected communities in 2011). It is currently only available in the parishes of Kingston, Portmore and St. Andrew. It offers speeds of up to 200\u00a0Mbit/s down, 100\u00a0Mbit/s up via a pure fibre optic network. Digicel's competitor, FLOW Jamaica, has a network consisting of ADSL, Coaxial and Fibre to the Home (inherited from LIME) and only offers speeds up to 100\u00a0Mbit/s. FLOW has committed to expanding its Fibre offering to more areas in order to combat Digicel's entrance into the market.\nIt was announced that the Office and Utilities Regulations (OUR), Ministry of Science, Technology, Energy and Mining (MSTEM) and the Spectrum Management Authority (SMA) have given approval for another mobile operator licence in January 2016. The identity of this entrant was ascertained on 20 May 2016, when the Jamaican Government named the new carrier as Symbiote Investments Limited operating under the name Caricel. The company will focus on 4G LTE data offerings and will first go live in the Kingston Metropolitan Area and will expand to the rest of Jamaica thereafter.\nCulture.\nMusic.\nJamaican culture has a strong global presence. The musical genres reggae, ska, mento, rocksteady, dub, and, more recently, dancehall and ragga all originated in the island's vibrant, popular urban recording industry. These have themselves gone on to influence numerous other genres, such as punk rock (through reggae and ska), dub poetry, New Wave, two-tone, lovers rock, reggaeton, jungle, drum and bass, dubstep, grime and American rap music. Some rappers, such as The Notorious B.I.G., Busta Rhymes, and Heavy D, are of Jamaican descent.\nBob Marley is probably the best known Jamaican musician; with his band the Wailers he had a string of hits in 1960s\u201370s, popularising reggae internationally and going on to sell millions of records. Many other internationally known artists were born in Jamaica, including Toots Hibbert, Millie Small, Lee \"Scratch\" Perry, Gregory Isaacs, Half Pint, Protoje, Peter Tosh, Bunny Wailer, Big Youth, Jimmy Cliff, Dennis Brown, Desmond Dekker, Beres Hammond, Beenie Man, Shaggy, Grace Jones, Shabba Ranks, Super Cat, Buju Banton, Sean Paul, I Wayne, Bounty Killer and many others. Bands that came from Jamaica include Black Uhuru, Third World Band, Inner Circle, Chalice Reggae Band, Culture, Fab Five and Morgan Heritage.\nLiterature.\nThe journalist and author H. G. de Lisser used his native country as the setting for his many novels. Born in Falmouth, Jamaica, de Lisser worked as a reporter for the \"Jamaica Times\" at a young age and in 1920 began publishing the magazine \"Planters' Punch\". \"The White Witch of Rosehall\" is one of his better-known novels. He was named Honorary President of the Jamaican Press Association; he worked throughout his professional career to promote the Jamaican sugar industry. Roger Mais, a journalist, poet, and playwright wrote many short stories, plays, and novels, including \"The Hills Were Joyful Together\" (1953), \"Brother Man\" (1954), and \"Black Lightning\" (1955).\nIan Fleming, who had a home in Jamaica where he spent considerable time, repeatedly used the island as a setting in his James Bond novels, including \"Live and Let Die\", \"Doctor No\", \"For Your Eyes Only\", \"The Man with the Golden Gun\", and \"Octopussy and The Living Daylights\". Marlon James (1970), novelist has published three novels: \"John Crow's Devil\" (2005), \"The Book of Night Women\" (2009) and \"A Brief History of Seven Killings\" (2014), winner of the 2015 Man Booker Prize.\nFilm.\nJamaica has a history in the film industry dating from the early 1960s. A look at delinquent youth in Jamaica is presented in the 1970s musical crime film \"The Harder They Come\", starring Jimmy Cliff as a frustrated (and psychopathic) reggae musician who descends into a murderous crime spree. Other notable Jamaican films include \"Countryman\", \"Rockers\", \"Dancehall Queen\", \"One Love\", \"Shottas\", \"Out the Gate\", \"Third World Cop\" and \"Kingston Paradise\". Jamaica is also often used as a filming location, such as the James Bond film \"Dr. No\" (1962), \"Papillon\" (1973) starring Steve McQueen, \"Cocktail\" (1988) starring Tom Cruise, and the 1993 Disney comedy \"Cool Runnings\", which is loosely based on the true story of Jamaica's first bobsled team trying to make it in the Winter Olympics.\nCuisine.\nThe island is famous for its Jamaican jerk spice, curries and rice and peas which is integral to Jamaican cuisine. Jamaica is also home to Red Stripe beer and Jamaican Blue Mountain Coffee.\nSport.\nSport is an integral part of national life in Jamaica and the island's athletes tend to perform to a standard well above what might ordinarily be expected of such a small country. While the most popular local sport is cricket, on the international stage Jamaicans have tended to do particularly well at track and field athletics.\nThe country was one of the venues of 2007 Cricket World Cup and the West Indies cricket team is one of 12 ICC full member teams that participate in international Test cricket. The Jamaica national cricket team competes regionally, and also provides players for the West Indies team. Sabina Park is the only Test venue in the island, but the Greenfield Stadium is also used for cricket.\nSince independence, Jamaica has consistently produced world-class athletes in track and field. Over the past six decades Jamaica has produced dozens of world-class sprinters, including Olympic and world champion Usain Bolt, world record holder in the 100\u00a0m for men at 9.58s, and 200\u00a0m for men at 19.19s. Other noteworthy Jamaican sprinters are Arthur Wint, the first Jamaican Olympic gold medalist; Donald Quarrie, Elaine Thompson double Olympic champion from Rio 2016 in the 100\u00a0m and 200\u00a0m, Olympic champion and former 200\u00a0m world record holder; Roy Anthony Bridge, part of the International Olympic Committee; Merlene Ottey; Delloreen Ennis-London; Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce, the former world and two-time Olympic 100\u00a0m champion; Kerron Stewart; Aleen Bailey; Juliet Cuthbert; three-time Olympic gold medalist; Veronica Campbell-Brown; Sherone Simpson; Brigitte Foster-Hylton; Yohan Blake; Herb McKenley; George Rhoden, Olympic gold medalist; Deon Hemmings, Olympic gold medalist; as well as Asafa Powell, former 100\u00a0m world record holder and two-time 100\u00a0m Olympic finalist and gold medal winner in the men's 2008 Olympic 4 \u00d7 100 m. American Olympic winner Sanya Richards-Ross was also born in Jamaica.\nAssociation football and horse-racing are other popular sports in Jamaica. The national football team qualified for the 1998 FIFA World Cup. Horse racing was Jamaica's first sport. Today, horse racing provides jobs for about 20,000 people including horse breeders, groomers, and trainers. Also, several Jamaicans are known internationally for their success in horse racing including Richard DePass, who once held the Guinness Book of World Records for the most wins in a day, Canadian awards winner George HoSang, and American award winners Charlie Hussey, Andrew Ramgeet, and Barrington Harvey.\nRace car driving is also a popular sport in Jamaica with several car racing tracks and racing associations across the country.\nThe Jamaica national bobsled team was once a serious contender in the Winter Olympics, beating many well-established teams. Chess and basketball are widely played in Jamaica and are supported by the Jamaica Chess Federation (JCF) and the Jamaica Basketball Federation (JBF), respectively. Netball is also very popular on the island, with the Jamaica national netball team called The Sunshine Girls consistently ranking in the top five in the world.\nRugby league has been played in Jamaica since 2006.\nThe Jamaica national rugby league team is made up of players who play in Jamaica and from UK based professional and semi professional clubs (notably in the Super League and Championship). In November 2018 for the first time ever, the Jamaican rugby league team qualified for the Rugby League World Cup after defeating the USA and Canada. Jamaica will play in the 2021 Rugby League World Cup in England.\nAccording to ESPN, the highest paid Jamaican professional athlete in 2011 was Justin Masterson, starting pitcher for the baseball team Cleveland Indians in the United States.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15661", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15661", "title": "History of Jamaica", "text": "The Caribbean Island of Jamaica was initially inhabited in approximately 600 AD or 650 AD by the Redware people, often associated with redware pottery. By roughly 800 AD, a second wave of inhabitants occurred by the Arawak tribes, including the Tainos, prior to the arrival of Columbus in 1494. Early inhabitants of Jamaica named the land \"Xaymaca\", meaning \"land of wood and water\". The Spanish enslaved the Arawak, who were ravaged further by diseases that the Spanish brought with them. Early historians believe that by 1602, the Arawak-speaking Taino tribes were extinct. However, some of the Taino escaped into the forested mountains of the interior, where they mixed with runaway African slaves, and survived free from first Spanish, and then English, rule.\nThe Spanish also captured and transported hundreds of West African people to the island for the purpose of slavery. However, the majority of Africans were brought into Jamaica by the English.\nIn 1655, the English invaded Jamaica, and defeated the Spanish. Some African enslaved people took advantage of the political turmoil and escaped to the island's interior mountains, forming independent communities which became known as the Maroons. Meanwhile, on the coast, the English built the settlement of Port Royal, a base of operations where piracy flourished as so many European rebels had been rejected from their countries to serve sentences on the seas. Captain Henry Morgan, a Welsh plantation owner and privateer, raided settlements and shipping bases from Port Royal, earning him his reputation as one of the richest pirates in the Caribbean.\nIn the 18th century, sugar cane replaced piracy as British Jamaica's main source of income. The sugar industry was labour-intensive and the British brought hundreds of thousands of enslaved black Africans to the island. By 1850, the black and mulatto Jamaican population outnumbered the white population by a ratio of twenty to one. Enslaved Jamaicans mounted over a dozen major uprisings during the 18th century, including Tacky's Revolt in 1760. There were also periodic skirmishes between the British and the mountain communities of the Jamaican Maroons, culminating in the First Maroon War of the 1730s and the Second Maroon War of 1795\u20131796.\nThe aftermath of the Baptist War shone a light on the conditions of slaves which contributed greatly to the abolition movement and the passage of the Slavery Abolition Act 1833, which formally ended slavery in Jamaica in 1834. However, relations between the white and black community remained tense coming into the mid-19th century, with the most notable event being the Morant Bay Rebellion in 1865. The latter half of the 19th century saw economic decline, low crop prices, droughts, and disease. When sugar lost its importance, many former plantations went bankrupt, and land was sold to Jamaican peasants and cane fields were consolidated by dominant British producers.\nJamaica's first political parties emerged in the late 1920s, while workers association and trade unions emerged in the 1930s. The development of a new Constitution in 1944, universal male suffrage, and limited self-government eventually led to Jamaican Independence in 1962 with Alexander Bustamante serving as its first prime minister. The country saw an extensive period of postwar growth and a smaller reliance on the agricultural sector and a larger reliance on bauxite and mining in the 1960s and 1970s. Political power changed hands between the two dominant parties, the JLP and PNP, from the 1970s to the present day. While Jamaica's murder rate fell by nearly half after the 2010 Tivoli Incursion, the country's murder rate remains one of the highest in the world. Economic troubles hit the country in 2013, the IMF agreed to a $1 billion loan to help Jamaica meet large debt payments, making Jamaica a highly indebted country that spends around half of its annual budget on debt repayments.\nPre-Columbian Jamaica.\nThe first inhabitants of Jamaica probably came from islands to the east in two waves of migration. Before the arrival of Europeans, the Ta\u00edno developed a well-organized society with agricultural villages governed by caciques (chiefs). They cultivated cassava and sweet potatoes, fished, and created a vibrant spiritual tradition centered on zemis\u2014ancestral deities that reflected their cosmology and social structure. In about 600 CE the culture known as the \u201cRedware people\u201d arrived. Little is known of these people, however, beyond the red pottery they left behind. Alligator Pond in Manchester Parish and Little River in St. Ann Parish are among the earliest known sites of this Ostionoid person, who lived near the coast and extensively hunted turtles and fish.\nAround 800 CE, the Arawak tribes of the Tainos arrived, eventually settling throughout the island. Living in villages ruled by tribal chiefs called the caciques, they sustained themselves on fishing and the cultivation of maize and cassava. At the height of their civilization, their population is estimated to have numbered as much as 60,000.\nThe Arawak brought a South America system of raising yuca known as \"conuco\" to the island. To add nutrients to the soil, the Arawak burned local bushes and trees and heaped the ash into large mounds, into which they then planted yuca cuttings. Most Arawak lived in large circular buildings (\"bohios\"), constructed with wooden poles, woven straw, and palm leaves. The Arawak spoke an Arawakan language and did not have writing. Some of the words used by them, such as \"barbacoa\" (\"barbecue\"), \"hamaca\" (\"hammock\"), \"kanoa\" (\"canoe\"), \"tabaco\" (\"tobacco\"), \"yuca\", \"batata\" (\"sweet potato\"), and \"jurac\u00e1n\" (\"hurricane\"), have been incorporated into Spanish and English.\nSpanish period (1494\u20131655).\nSpanish colonization introduced the encomienda system, which forced the Ta\u00edno into hard labor and led to rapid depopulation due to disease, overwork, and violence. By the early 1600s, the Ta\u00edno population had nearly vanished, prompting the Spanish to begin importing enslaved Africans.\nChristopher Columbus is believed to be the first European to reach Jamaica. He landed on the island on 5 May 1494, during his second voyage to the Americas. Columbus returned to Jamaica during his fourth voyage to the Americas. He had been sailing around the Caribbean for nearly a year when a storm beached his ships in St. Ann's Bay, Jamaica, on 25 June 1503. Columbus and his men remained stranded on the island for one year, finally departing on June 1504.\nThe Spanish crown granted the island to the Columbus family, but for decades it was something of a backwater, valued chiefly as a supply base for food and animal hides. In 1509 Juan de Esquivel founded the first permanent European settlement, the town of Sevilla la Nueva (New Seville), on the north coast of the island. In 1534 the capital was moved to Villa de la Vega (later Santiago de la Vega), now called Spanish Town. This settlement served as the capital of both Spanish and English Jamaica, from its founding until 1872, after which the capital was moved to Kingston.\nThe Spanish enslaved many of the Arawak. Some escaped to the mountains to join the Maroons. However, most died from European diseases as well as from being overworked. The Spaniards also introduced the first African slaves into the island. By the early 17th century, when most of the Taino had died out, the population of the island was about 3,000, including a small number of African slaves. Disappointed in the lack of gold on the island, Jamaica was mainly used as a military base to supply colonization efforts in the mainland Americas.\nThe Spanish colonists did not bring women in the first expeditions and took Ta\u00edno women for their common-law wives, resulting in mestizo children.\nAlthough the Taino referred to the island as \"Xaymaca\", the Spanish gradually changed the name to \"Jamaica\". In the so-called Admiral's map of 1507 the island was labeled as \"Jamaiqua\" and in Peter Martyr's work \"Decades\" of 1511, he referred to it as both \"Jamaica\" and \"Jamica\".\nBritish rule (1655\u20131962).\n17th century.\nEnglish conquest.\nBritish rule transformed Jamaica into a plantation economy built on enslaved African labor. Conditions on sugar plantations were extremely harsh, with high mortality rates and strict punishments. Enslaved Africans resisted through rebellion, escape, and by forming independent Maroon communities in the mountainous interior.\nIn late 1654, English leader Oliver Cromwell launched the \"Western Design\" armada against Spain's colonies in the Caribbean. In April 1655, General Robert Venables led the armada in an attack on Spain's fort at Santo Domingo, Hispaniola. After the Spanish repelled this poorly executed attack, the English force then sailed for Jamaica, the only Spanish West Indies island that did not have new defensive works. In May 1655, around 7,000 English soldiers landed near Jamaica's capital, named Spanish Town and soon overwhelmed the small number of Spanish troops (at the time, Jamaica's entire population only numbered around 2,500).\nSpain never recaptured Jamaica, losing the Battle of Ocho Rios in 1657 and the Battle of Rio Nuevo in 1658. In 1660, a group of maroons, under the leadership of Juan de Bolas, broke their alliance with the Spanish and allied themselves with the English, which served as a turning point in the English domination of the island. For England, Jamaica was to be the \"dagger pointed at the heart of the Spanish Empire,\" but in fact, it was a possession of little economic value then. England gained formal possession of Jamaica from Spain in 1670 through the Treaty of Madrid. Removing the pressing need for constant defence against a Spanish attack, this change served as an incentive to planting.\nBritish colonization.\nCromwell increased the island's European population by sending indentured servants and prisoners to Jamaica. Due to Irish emigration resulting from the wars in Ireland at this time, two-thirds of this 17th-century European population was Irish. However, tropical diseases kept the number of Europeans under 10,000 until about 1740. Although the African slave population in the 1670s and 1680s never exceeded 10,000, by the end of the 17th century imports of slaves increased the black population to at least five times greater than the white population. Thereafter, Jamaica's African population did not increase significantly in number until well into the 18th century, in part because ships coming from the west coast of Africa preferred to unload at the islands of the Eastern Caribbean. At the beginning of the 18th century, the number of slaves in Jamaica did not exceed 45,000, but by 1800 it had increased to over 300,000.\nMaroons.\nWhen the English captured Jamaica in 1655, the Spanish colonists fled, leaving a large number of African slaves. These former Spanish slaves organised under the leadership of rival captains Juan de Serras and Juan de Bolas. These Jamaican Maroons intermarried with the Arawak people, and established distinct independent communities in the mountainous interior of Jamaica. They survived by subsistence farming and periodic raids of plantations. Over time, the Maroons came to control large areas of the Jamaican interior.\nIn the second half of the seventeenth century, de Serras fought regular campaigns against English colonial forces, even attacking the capital of Spanish Town, and he was never defeated by the English. Throughout the seventeenth century, and in the first few decades of the eighteenth century, Maroon forces frequently defeated the British in small-scale skirmishes. The British colonial authorities dispatched numerous expeditions in an attempt to subdue them, but the Maroons successfully fought a guerrilla campaign against the British in the mountainous interior, and forced the British government to seek peace terms to end the expensive conflict.\nIn the early eighteenth century, English-speaking escaped Ashanti slaves were at the forefront of the Maroon fighting against the British.\nThe House of Assembly.\nBeginning with the Stuart monarchy's appointment of a civil governor to Jamaica in 1661, political patterns were established that lasted well into the 20th century. The second governor, Lord Windsor, brought with him in 1662 a proclamation from the king giving Jamaica's non-slave populace the same rights as those of English citizens, including the right to make their own laws. Although he spent only ten weeks in Jamaica, Lord Windsor laid the foundations of a governing system that was to last for two centuries \u2013 a crown-appointed governor acting with the advice of a nominated council in the legislature. The legislature consisted of the governor and an elected but highly unrepresentative House of Assembly. For years, the planter-dominated Assembly was in continual conflict with the various governors and the Stuart kings; there were also contentious factions within the assembly itself. For much of the 1670s and 1680s, Charles II and James II and the assembly feuded over such matters as the purchase of slaves from ships not run by the royal English trading company. The last Stuart governor, Christopher Monck, 2nd Duke of Albemarle, who was more interested in treasure hunting than in planting, turned the planter oligarchy out of office. After the duke's death in 1688, the planters, who had fled Jamaica to London, succeeded in lobbying James II to order a return to the pre-Albemarle political arrangement (the local control of Jamaican planters belonging to the assembly).\nJamaica's pirates.\nFollowing the 1655 conquest, Spain repeatedly attempted to recapture Jamaica. In response, in 1657, Governor Edward D'Oyley invited the Brethren of the Coast to come to Port Royal and make it their home port. The Brethren was made up of a group of pirates who were descendants of cattle-hunting \"boucaniers\" (later Anglicised to buccaneers), who had turned to piracy after being robbed by the Spanish (and subsequently thrown out of Hispaniola). These pirates concentrated their attacks on Spanish shipping, whose interests were considered the major threat to the town. These pirates later became legal English privateers who were given letters of marque by Jamaica's governor. Around the same time that pirates were invited to Port Royal, England launched a series of attacks against Spanish shipping vessels and coastal towns. By sending the newly appointed privateers after Spanish ships and settlements, England had successfully set up a system of defense for Port Royal. Jamaica became a haven of privateers, buccaneers, and occasionally outright pirates: Christopher Myngs, Edward Mansvelt, and most famously, Henry Morgan.\nEngland gained formal possession of Jamaica from Spain in 1670 through the Treaty of Madrid. Removing the pressing need for constant defense against a Spanish attack, this change served as an incentive to planting. This settlement also improved the supply of slaves and resulted in more protection, including military support, for the planters against foreign competition. As a result, the sugar monoculture and slave-worked plantation society spread across Jamaica throughout the 18th century, decreasing Jamaica's dependence on privateers for protection and funds.\nHowever, the English colonial authorities continued to have difficulties suppressing the Spanish Maroons, who made their homes in the mountainous interior and mounted periodic raids on estates and towns, such as Spanish Town. The Karmahaly Maroons, led by Juan de Serras, continued to stay in the forested mountains, and periodically fought the English. In the 1670s and 1680s, in his capacity as an owner of a large slave plantation, Morgan led three campaigns against the Jamaican Maroons of Juan de Serras. Morgan achieved some success against the Maroons, who withdrew further into the Blue Mountains, where they were able to stay out of the reach of Morgan and his forces.\nAnother blow to Jamaica's partnership with privateers was the violent earthquake which destroyed much of Port Royal on 7 June 1692. Two-thirds of the town sank into the sea immediately after the main shock. After the earthquake, the town was partially rebuilt but the colonial government was relocated to Spanish Town, which had been the capital under Spanish rule. Port Royal was further devastated by a fire in 1703 and a hurricane in 1722. Most of the sea trade moved to Kingston. By the late 18th century, Port Royal was largely abandoned.\n18th century.\nJamaica's sugar boom.\nIn the mid-17th century, sugarcane was introduced to the British West Indies by the Dutch, from Brazil. Upon landing in Jamaica and other islands, they quickly urged local growers to change their main crops from cotton and tobacco to sugarcane. With depressed prices of cotton and tobacco, due mainly to stiff competition from the North American colonies, the farmers switched, leading to a boom in the Caribbean economies. Sugarcane was quickly snapped up by the British, who used it in cakes and to sweeten tea. In the 18th century, sugar replaced piracy as Jamaica's main source of income. The sugar industry was labor-intensive and the British brought hundreds of thousands of enslaved Africans to Jamaica. By 1832, the median-size plantation in Jamaica had about 150 slaves, and nearly one of every four bondsmen lived on units that had at least 250 slaves. In \"The Book of Night Women\", author Marlon James indicates that the ratio of slave owners to enslaved Africans is 1:33. James also depicts atrocities that slave owners subjected slaves to along with violent resistance from the slaves as well as numerous slaves who died in pursuit of freedom. After slavery was abolished in 1834, sugarcane plantations used a variety of forms of labour including workers imported from India under contracts of indenture.\nThe 18th century saw thousands of slaves imported into Jamaica into the now profitable sugar plantations. From 1740 to 1834, the estimated slave population continued to grow, reaching into the three hundred thousands by the end of the century. The sugar boom of Jamaica would change the dynamics of the slave market and the economics of the West Indies. Towards the end of the 18th century, Jamaica became the leader of sugar production for the British empire, producing up to 66% of the empire's sugar in 1796. The price of sugar would rise tremendously as the market for sugar in Great Britain was large, especially with the rich. From 1748 to 1755, the value of sugar exportations from Jamaica increased by nearly three times, going from \u00a3688,000 to \u00a31,618,000 over the period. With the high demand for sugar out of Jamaica, the demand for slaves increased, leading to an increase in prices for slaves. From 1750 to 1807, the average price for a slave in the Caribbean would continue to steadily rise, reaching a high of \u00a373 in 1805. Prices soared towards the dawn of the new century as a result of the plantation system in Saint-Domingue falling due to the Haitian revolution, putting more emphasis on Jamaica. Interestingly, the most efficient plantations employed fewer slaves per acre of land, which was observed in Saint Andrew Parish. This created a higher demand for slaves that were efficient and in good health and shape, inflating the prices of those individuals and creating a quality over quantity dynamic. Internal markets would also develop, namely in Kingston, that allowed for plantations to reallocate labor and to dissuade or break-up bonds and families made by slaves.\nWith an increase in traffic of ships, sugar, and slaves, British merchants implemented the guarantee system, in which a merchant would be appointed to guarantee payment upon the delivery of the enslaved. This system served as a safety net for merchants as they had no influence over the price of the enslaved sold as age, weight, and vitality effected price range. With a safe system of commerce and the rising prices of sugar, the opportunity to make riches presented itself and attracted thousands of merchants and sailors looking to gain riches. Most of the slaves and their sales would be run through middlemen known as \"Guinea Factors\" who served as \"the indispensable nexus between the transatlantic slave trade and the plantation complex,\" according to Radburn. These factors were instrumental in keeping the slave trade and economy running smoothly, as everything went in and out through them. Records of some of the factors and how many slaves they sold show just how much their work perpetuated the slave economy. From 1785 to 1796, five factors sold 78,258 slaves combined, with Alexandre Lindo accounting for 25,706 of them a 17% share of the entire Jamaican slave trade. Such a large number of slaves sold by one man in a little over ten years shows just how popular and profitable the slave market had become.\nFirst Maroon War.\nStarting in the late seventeenth century, there were periodic skirmishes between the English colonial militia and the Windward Maroons, alongside occasional slave revolts. In 1673 one such revolt in St. Ann's Parish of 200 slaves created the separate group of Leeward Maroons. These Maroons united with a group of Madagascars who had survived the shipwreck of a slave ship and formed their own maroon community in St. George's parish. Several more rebellions strengthened the numbers of this Leeward group. Notably, in 1690 a revolt at Sutton's plantation in Clarendon Parish of 400 slaves considerably strengthened the Leeward Maroons. The Leeward Maroons inhabited \"cockpits,\" caves, or deep ravines that were easily defended, even against troops with superior firepower. Such guerrilla warfare and the use of scouts who blew the abeng (the cow horn, which was used as a trumpet) to warn of approaching enemies allowed the Maroons to evade, thwart, frustrate, and defeat the British.\nEarly in the 18th century, the Maroons took a heavy toll on British colonial militiamen who sent against them in the interior, in what came to be known as the First Maroon War. In 1728, the British authorities sent Robert Hunter to assume the office of governor of Jamaica; Hunter's arrival led to an intensification of the conflict. However, despite increased numbers, the British colonial authorities were unable to defeat the Windward Maroons.\nIn 1739\u201340, the British government in Jamaica recognised that it could not defeat the Maroons, so they offered them treaties of peace instead. In 1739, the British, led by Governor Edward Trelawny, sued for peace with the Leeward Maroon leader, Cudjoe, described by British planters as a short, almost dwarf-like man who for years fought skilfully and bravely to maintain his people's independence. Some writers maintain that during the conflict, Cudjoe became increasingly disillusioned, and quarrelled with his lieutenants and with other Maroon groups. He felt that the only hope for the future was a peace treaty with the enemy which recognized the independence of the Leeward Maroons. In 1742, Cudjoe had to suppress a rebellion of Leeward Maroons against the treaty.\nThe First Maroon War came to an end with a 1739\u20131740 agreement between the Maroons and the British government. In exchange, they were asked to agree not to harbour new runaway slaves, but rather to help catch them. This last clause in the treaty naturally caused a split between the Maroons and the mainly mulatto population, although from time to time runaways from the plantations still found their way into maroon settlements, such as those led by Three Fingered Jack (Jamaica). Another provision of the agreement was that the Maroons would serve to protect the island from invaders. The latter was because the Maroons were revered by the British as skilled warriors.\nA year later, the even more rebellious Windward Maroons led by Quao also agreed to sign a treaty under pressure from both white Jamaican militias and the Leeward Maroons. Eventually, Queen Nanny agreed to a land patent which meant that her Maroons also accepted peace terms.\nThe Maroons were to remain in their five main towns (Accompong; Cudjoe's Town (Trelawny Town); Nanny Town, later known as Moore Town; Scott's Hall (Jamaica); and Charles Town, Jamaica), living under their own rulers and a British supervisor.\nTacky's revolt.\nIn May 1760, Tacky, a slave overseer on the Frontier plantation in Saint Mary Parish, led a group of enslaved Africans in taking over the Frontier and Trinity plantations while killing their enslavers. They then marched to the storeroom at Fort Haldane, where the munitions to defend the town of Port Maria were kept. After killing the storekeeper, Tacky and his men stole nearly 4 barrels of gunpowder and 40 firearms with shot, before marching on to overrun the plantations at Heywood Hall and Esher.\nBy dawn, hundreds of other slaves had joined Tacky and his followers. At Ballard's Valley, the rebels stopped to rejoice in their success. One slave from Esher decided to slip away and sound the alarm. Obeahmen (Caribbean witch doctors) quickly circulated around the camp dispensing a powder that they claimed would protect the men from injury in battle and loudly proclaimed that an Obeahman could not be killed. The confidence was high. Soon there were 70 to 80 mounted militia on their way along with some Maroons from Scott's Hall, who were bound by treaty to suppress such rebellions. When the militia learned of the Obeahman's boast of not being able to be killed, an Obeahman was captured, killed, and hung with his mask, ornaments of teeth and bone and feather trimmings at a prominent place visible from the encampment of rebels. Many of the rebels, confidence shaken, returned to their plantations. Tacky and 25 or so men decided to fight on. Tacky and his men went running through the woods being chased by the Maroons and their legendary marksman, Davy the Maroon. While running at full speed, Davy shot Tacky and cut off his head as evidence of his feat, for which he would be richly rewarded. Tacky's head was later displayed on a pole in Spanish Town until a follower took it down in the middle of the night. The rest of Tacky's men were found in a cave near Tacky Falls, having committed suicide rather than going back to slavery.\nSecond Maroon War.\nIn 1795, the Second Maroon War was instigated when two Maroons were flogged by a black slave for allegedly stealing two pigs. When six Maroon leaders came to the British to present their grievances, the British took them as prisoners. This sparked an eight-month conflict, spurred by the fact that Maroons felt that they were being mistreated under the terms of Cudjoe's Treaty of 1739, which ended the First Maroon War. The war lasted for five months as a bloody stalemate. The British colonial authorities could muster 5,000 men, outnumbering the Maroons ten to one, but the mountainous and forested topography of Jamaica proved ideal for guerrilla warfare. The Maroons surrendered in December 1795. A treaty signed in December between Major General George Walpole and the Maroon leaders established that the Maroons would beg on their knees for the King's forgiveness, return all runaway slaves, and be relocated elsewhere in Jamaica. The governor of Jamaica ratified the treaty but gave the Maroons only three days to present themselves to beg forgiveness on 1 January 1796. Suspicious of British intentions, most of the Maroons did not surrender until mid-March. The British used the contrived breach of the treaty as a pretext to deport the entire Trelawny Town Maroons to Nova Scotia. After a few years, the Maroons were again deported to the new British settlement of Sierra Leone in West Africa.\n19th century.\nSlave resistance.\nHundreds of runaway slaves secured their freedom by escaping and fighting alongside the Maroons of Trelawny Town. About half of these runaways surrendered with the Maroons, and many were executed or re-sold in slavery to Cuba. However, a few hundred stayed out in the forests of the Cockpit Country, and they joined other runaway communities. In 1798, a slave named Cuffee ran away from a western estate, and established a runaway community which was able to resist attempts by the colonial forces and the Maroons remaining in Jamaica to subdue them. In the early nineteenth century, colonial records describe hundreds of runaway slaves escaping to \"Healthshire\" where they flourished for several years before they were captured by a party of Maroons.\nIn 1812, a community of runaways started when a dozen men and some women escaped from the sugar plantations of Trelawny into the Cockpit Country, and they created a village with the curious name of Me-no-Sen-You-no-Come. By the 1820s, Me-no-Sen-You-no-Come housed between 50 and 60 runaways. The headmen of the community were escaped slaves named Warren and Forbes. Me-no-Sen-You-no-Come also conducted a thriving trade with slaves from the north coast, who exchanged their salt provisions with the runaways for their ground provisions. In October 1824, the colonial militias tried to destroy this community. However, the community of Me-no-Sen-You-no-Come continued to thrive in the Cockpit Country until Emancipation in the 1830s.\nThe Baptist War.\nIn 1831, enslaved Baptist preacher Samuel Sharpe led a strike among demanding more freedom and a working wage of \"half the going wage rate.\" Upon refusal of their demands, the strike escalated into a full rebellion, in part because Sharpe had also made military preparations with a rebel military group known as the Black Regiment led by a slave known as Colonel Johnson of Retrieve Estate, about 150 strong with 50 guns among them. Colonel Johnson's Black Regiment clashed with a local militia led by Colonel Grignon at old Montpelier on December 28. The militia retreated to Montego Bay while the Black Regiment advanced an invasion of estates in the hills, inviting more slaves to join while burning houses, fields, and other properties, setting off a trail of fires through the Great River Valley in Westmoreland and St. Elizabeth to St James.\nThe Baptist War, as it was known, became the largest slave uprising in the British West Indies, lasting 10 days and mobilised as many as 60,000 of Jamaica's 300,000 slaves. The rebellion was suppressed by colonial forces under the control of Sir Willoughby Cotton. The reaction of the Jamaican Government and plantocracy was far more brutal. Approximately five hundred slaves were killed in total: 207 during the revolt and somewhere in the range between 310 and 340 slaves were killed through \"various forms of judicial executions\" after the rebellion was concluded, at times, for quite minor offenses (one recorded execution indicates the crime being the theft of a pig; another, a cow). An 1853 account by Henry Bleby described how three or four simultaneous executions were commonly observed; bodies would be allowed to pile up until workhouse slaves carted the bodies away at night and buried them in mass graves outside town. The brutality of the plantocracy during the revolt is thought to have accelerated the process of emancipation, with initial measures beginning in 1833.\nEmancipation.\nThe British Parliament held two inquires as a result of the loss of property and life in the 1831 Baptist War rebellion. Their reports of the conditions of the slaves contributed greatly to the abolition movement and helped lead to the passage of the Slavery Abolition Act 1833, formally ending slavery in Jamaica on August 1, 1834. However, the act stipulated that all slaves above the age of 6 on the date abolition took effect, were bound (indentured) in service to their former owners', albeit with a guarantee of rights, under what was called the \"Apprenticeship System\". The length of servitude that was required varied based on the former slaves\u2019 responsibilities with \"domestic slaves\" owing four years of service and \"agriculture slaves\" owing six. In addition to the apprentice system, former slave owners were to be compensated for the loss of their \"property.\" By 1839, \"Twenty Million Pounds Sterling\" was paid out to the owners of slaves freed in the Caribbean and Africa under the Slavery Abolition Act 1833, half of whom were absentee landlords residing in Great Britain.\nThe apprentice system was unpopular amongst Jamaica's \"former\" slaves\u00a0\u2013 especially elderly slaves\u00a0\u2013 who unlike slave owners were not provided any compensation. This led to protests. In the face of mounting pressure, a resolution was passed on August 1, 1838, releasing all \"apprentices\" regardless of position from all obligations to their former masters.\nWith the abolition of the slave trade in 1808 and slavery itself in 1834, the island's sugar- and slave-based economy faltered. The period after emancipation in 1834 initially was marked by a conflict between the plantocracy and elements in the Colonial Office over the extent to which individual freedom should be coupled with political participation for blacks. In 1840 the assembly changed the voting qualifications in a way that enabled a majority of blacks and people of mixed race (browns or mulattos) to vote. But neither change in the political system, nor abolition of slavery, changed the planter's chief interest \u2013 which lay in the continued profitability of their estates \u2013 and they continued to dominate the elitist assembly. Nevertheless, at the end of the 19th century and in the early years of the 20th century, the Crown began to allow some Jamaicans \u2013 mostly local merchants, urban professionals, and artisans \u2013 to hold seats on appointed councils.\nRumblings of emancipation movements had begun as early as the 1780s which scared many planters. With the fear of being unable to purchase a sufficient labor force through the slave trade, the value of women increased. From 1788 to 1807, some planters began to buy women at a higher rate, trying to balance the gender ratio to 50\u201350. The reason for buying women in higher amounts was so that they could give birth to more slaves. This served two purposes, one was to supply their labor force even in the eventual passing of emancipation, and secondly to cut down on future spending by instead having your slave be born instead of purchased. Minimizing spending became a large priority following emancipation and the decline of the sugar based economy of Jamaica, making running a plantation very expensive. Merchants still found a way to stay wealthy in the wake of emancipation through the importation of British goods into Spanish America, enabling communities such as Kingston that were built on the economy of the slave trade to see continued economic prosperity.\nThe Morant Bay Rebellion.\nTensions between blacks and whites resulted in the October 1865 Morant Bay rebellion led by Paul Bogle. The rebellion was sparked on 7 October, when a black man was put on trial and imprisoned for allegedly trespassing on a long-abandoned plantation. During the proceedings, James Geoghegon, a black spectator, disrupted the trial, and in the police's attempts to seize him to remove him from the courthouse, a fight broke out between the police and other spectators. While pursuing Geoghegon, two policemen were beaten with sticks and stones. The following Monday, arrest warrants were issued for several men for rioting, resisting arrest, and assaulting the police. Among them was Baptist preacher Paul Bogle. A few days later on 11 October, Mr. Paul Bogle marched with a group of protesters to Morant Bay. When the group arrived at the courthouse they were met by a small and inexperienced volunteer militia. The crowd began pelting the militia with rocks and sticks, and the militia opened fire on the group, killing seven black protesters before retreating.\nGovernor John Eyre sent government troops, under Brigadier-General Alexander Nelson, to hunt down the poorly armed rebels and bring Paul Bogle back to Morant Bay for trial. The troops met with no organized resistance, yet they killed blacks indiscriminately, most of whom had not been involved in the riot or rebellion. According to one soldier, \"We slaughtered all before us... man or woman or child.\u201d In the end, 439 black Jamaicans were killed directly by soldiers, and 354 more (including Paul Bogle) were arrested and later executed, some without proper trials. Paul Bogle was executed \"either the same evening he was tried or the next morning.\" Other punishments included the flogging of over 600 men and women (including some pregnant women), and long prison sentences. Thousands of homes belonging to black Jamaicans were burned down without any justifiable reason.\nGeorge William Gordon, Jamaican-born plantation owner, businessman and politician, who was the mixed-race son of Scottish-born plantation owner of Cherry Gardens in St. Andrew, Joseph Gordon, and his black enslaved mistress. Gordon, had been critical of Governor John Eyre and his policies, and was later arrested by the Governor who believed he had been behind the rebellion. Despite having very little to do with the rebellion, Gordon was eventually executed. Though he was arrested in Kingston, he was transferred by Eyre to Morant Bay, where he could be tried under martial law. The execution and trial of Gordon via martial law raised some constitutional issues back in Britain, where concerns emerged about whether British dependencies should be ruled under the government of law, or through a military license. Gordon hanged on 23 October, after a speedy trial \u2013 just two days after his trial had begun. He and William Bogle, Paul's brother, \"were both tried together, and executed at the same time.\u201d\nDecline of the sugar industry.\nDuring most of the 18th century, the monocrop economy based on sugarcane production for export flourished. In the last quarter of the century, however, the Jamaican sugar economy declined as famines, hurricanes, colonial wars, and wars of independence disrupted trade. By the 1820s, Jamaican sugar became less competitive with the high-volume producers like Cuba, and production subsequently declined. By 1882 sugar output was less than half what it was in 1828. A major reason for the decline was the British Parliament's 1807 abolition of the slave trade, under which the transportation of slaves to Jamaica after 1 March 1808 was forbidden. The abolition of the slave trade was followed by the abolition of slavery in 1834 and full emancipation of slaves within four years. Unable to convert the ex-slaves into a sharecropping tenant class similar to the one established in the post-Civil War South of the United States, planters became increasingly dependent on wage labour and began recruiting workers abroad, primarily from India, China, and Sierra Leone. Many of the former slaves settled in peasant or small farm communities in the interior of the island like the \"yam belt,\" where they engaged in subsistence and some cash crop farming.\nThe second half of the 19th century was a period of severe economic decline for Jamaica. Low crop prices, droughts, and disease led to serious social unrest, culminating in the Morant Bay rebellions of 1865. However, renewed British administration after the 1865 rebellion, in the form of crown colony status, resulted in some social and economic progress as well as investment in the physical infrastructure. Agricultural development was the centrepiece of restored British rule in Jamaica. In 1868 the first large-scale irrigation project was launched. In 1895 the Jamaica Agricultural Society was founded to promote more scientific and profitable methods of farming. Also in the 1890s, the Crown Lands Settlement Scheme was introduced, a land reform program of sorts, which allowed small farmers to purchase two hectares or more of land on favorable terms.\nBetween 1865 and 1930, the character of landholding in Jamaica changed substantially, as sugar declined in importance. As many former plantations went bankrupt, some land was sold to Jamaican peasants under the Crown Lands Settlement whereas other cane fields were consolidated by dominant British producers, most notably by the British firm Tate and Lyle. Although the concentration of land and wealth in Jamaica was not as drastic as in the Spanish-speaking Caribbean, by the 1920s the typical sugar plantation on the island had increased to an average of 266 hectares. But, as noted, smallscale agriculture in Jamaica survived the consolidation of land by sugar powers. The number of small holdings in fact tripled between 1865 and 1930, thus retaining a large portion of the population as peasantry. Most of the expansion in small holdings took place before 1910, with farms averaging between two and twenty hectares.\nThe rise of the banana trade during the second half of the 19th century also changed production and trade patterns on the island. Bananas were first exported in 1867, and banana farming grew rapidly thereafter. By 1890, bananas had replaced sugar as Jamaica's principal export. Production rose from 5 million stems (32 percent of exports) in 1897 to an average of 20 million stems a year in the 1920s and 1930s, or over half of domestic exports. As with sugar, the presence of American companies, like the well-known United Fruit Company in Jamaica, was a driving force behind renewed agricultural exports. Competition was introduced by the Jamaican-Italian firm Lanasa &amp; Goffe raising the price paid for bananas in 1906. The British also became more interested in Jamaican bananas than in the country's sugar. Expansion of banana production, however, was hampered by serious labour shortages. The rise of the banana economy took place amidst a general exodus of up to 11,000 Jamaicans a year.\nCoffee plantations also suffered as a result of emancipation. Even with paid labor becoming a fixture on these coffee plantations, the newfound wages that ex-slaves were paid and lower profits made it difficult to effectively run the plantation financially. One planter found that running his plantation cost about \u00a32400 per year, which was about double of what it had cost in the years before 1839. Some planters attempted to tie the now free laborers to the land by making them have to pay rent if they worked and lived on the plantation. Many laborers of course rejected these arrangements, as with a declining plantation economy they sought to separate themselves from the plantation. Following these trends, the market for many of these workers declined on the plantation and shifted to the more urban centers such as Kingston, leaving the plantation economy of Jamaica behind.\nJamaica as a Crown Colony.\nIn 1846 Jamaican planters \u2013 adversely affected by the loss of slave labour \u2013 suffered a crushing blow when Britain passed the Sugar Duties Act, eliminating Jamaica's traditionally favoured status as its primary supplier of sugar. The Jamaica House of Assembly stumbled from one crisis to another until the collapse of the sugar trade, when racial and religious tensions came to a head during the Morant Bay rebellion of 1865. Although suppressed ruthlessly, the severe rioting so alarmed the planters that the two-centuries-old assembly voted to abolish itself and asked for the establishment of direct British rule. In 1866 the new governor John Peter Grant arrived to implement a series of reforms that accompanied the transition to a crown colony. The government consisted of the Legislative Council and the executive Privy Council containing members of both chambers of the House of Assembly, but the Colonial Office exercised effective power through a presiding British governor. The council included a few handpicked prominent Jamaicans for the sake of appearance only. In the late 19th century, crown colony rule was modified; representation and limited self-rule were reintroduced gradually into Jamaica after 1884. The colony's legal structure was reformed along the lines of English common law and county courts, and a constabulary force was established. The smooth working of the crown colony system depended on a good understanding and an identity of interests between the governing officials, who were British, and most of the nonofficial, nominated members of the Legislative Council, who were Jamaicans. The elected members of this body were in a permanent minority and without any influence or administrative power. The unstated alliance \u2013 based on shared color, attitudes, and interest \u2013 between the British officials and the Jamaican upper class was reinforced in London, where the West India Committee lobbied for Jamaican interests. Jamaica's white or near-white propertied class continued to hold the dominant position in every respect; the vast majority of the black population remained poor and disenfranchised.\nReligion.\nUntil it was disestablished in 1870, the Church of England in Jamaica was the established church. It represented the white English community. It received funding from the colonial government and was given responsibility for providing religious instruction to the slaves. It was challenged by Methodist missionaries from England, and the Methodists in turn were denounced as troublemakers. The Church of England in Jamaica established the Jamaica Home and Foreign Missionary Society in 1861; its mission stations multiplied, with financial help from religious organizations in London. The Society sent its own missionaries to West Africa. Baptist missions grew rapidly, thanks to missionaries from England and the United States, and became the largest denomination by 1900. Baptist missionaries denounced the apprentice system as a form of slavery. In the 1870s and 1880s, the Methodists opened a high school and a theological college. Other Protestant groups included the Moravians, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, Seventh-day Adventist, Church of God, and others. There were several thousand Roman Catholics. The population was largely Christian by 1900, and most families were linked with the church or a Sunday School. Traditional pagan practices persisted in an unorganized fashion, such as witchcraft.\nKingston, the new capital.\nIn 1872, the government passed an act to transfer government offices from Spanish Town to Kingston. Kingston had been founded as a refuge for survivors of the 1692 earthquake that destroyed Port Royal. The town did not begin to grow until after the further destruction of Port Royal by fire in 1703. Surveyor John Goffe drew up a plan for the town based on a grid bounded by North, East, West, and Harbour Streets. By 1716 it had become the largest town and the center of trade for Jamaica. The government sold the land to people with the regulation that they purchase no more than the amount of the land that they owned in Port Royal, and the only land on the sea front. Gradually wealthy merchants began to move their residences from above their businesses to the farm lands north on the plains of Liguanea. In 1755 the governor, Sir Charles Knowles, had decided to transfer the government offices from Spanish Town to Kingston. It was thought by some to be an unsuitable location for the Assembly in proximity to the moral distractions of Kingston, and the next governor rescinded the Act. However, by 1780 the population of Kingston was 11,000, and the merchants began lobbying for the administrative capital to be transferred from Spanish Town, which was by then eclipsed by the commercial activity in Kingston. The 1907 Kingston earthquake destroyed much of the city. Considered by many writers of that time one of the world's deadliest earthquakes, it resulted in the death of over 800 Jamaicans and destroyed the homes of over 10,000 more.\nEarly 20th century.\nBananas.\nThe earliest modern plantations originated in Jamaica and the related Western Caribbean Zone, including most of Central America. It involved the combination of modern transportation networks of steamships and railroads with the development of refrigeration that allowed more time between harvesting and ripening. North American shippers like Lorenzo Dow Baker and Andrew Preston, the founders of the Boston Fruit Company started this process in the 1870s, but railroad builders like Minor C. Keith also participated, eventually culminating in the multi-national giant corporations like today's Chiquita Brands International and Dole. These companies were monopolistic, vertically integrated (meaning they controlled growing, processing, shipping and marketing) and usually used political manipulation to build enclave economies (economies that were internally self-sufficient, virtually tax exempt, and export-oriented that contribute very little to the host economy). Alfred Constantine Goffe was a Jamaican Businessman whose St. Mary Banana co-op was the first in Jamaica, opposed the larger export companies and by 1909 had the largest Jamaican owned Banana export company. The resurgence of the Baltimore docks and newer, faster boats, refrigeration on board steamships and rail-cars enabled bananas to travel further to meet the demand for the yellow fruit, for which the firm of Lanasa and Goffe excelled .\nMarcus Garvey.\nMarcus Mosiah Garvey, a black activist, Trade Unionist, and husband to Amy Jacques Garvey founded the Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League in 1914, one of Jamaica's first political parties in 1929, and a workers association in the early 1930s. Garvey also promoted the Back-to-Africa movement, which called for those of African descent to return to the homelands of their ancestors. Garvey, a controversial figure, had been the target of a four-year investigation by the United States government. He was convicted of mail fraud in 1923 and had served most of a five-year term in an Atlanta penitentiary when he was deported to Jamaica in 1927. Garvey left the colony in 1935 to live in the United Kingdom, where he died heavily in debt five years later. He was proclaimed Jamaica's first national hero in the 1960s after Edward P.G. Seaga, then a government minister arranged the return of his remains to Jamaica. In 1987 Jamaica petitioned the United States Congress to pardon Garvey on the basis that the federal charges brought against him were unsubstantiated and unjust.\nRastafari movement.\nThe Rastafari movement, a new religion, emerged among impoverished and socially disenfranchised Afro-Jamaican communities in 1930s Jamaica. Its Afrocentric ideology was largely a reaction against Jamaica's then-dominant British colonial culture. It was influenced by both Ethiopianism and the Back-to-Africa movement promoted by black nationalist figures like Marcus Garvey. The movement developed after several Christian clergymen, most notably Leonard Howell, proclaimed that the crowning of Haile Selassie as Emperor of Ethiopia in 1930 fulfilled a Biblical prophecy. By the 1950s, Rastafari's counter-cultural stance had brought the movement into conflict with wider Jamaican society, including violent clashes with law enforcement. In the 1960s and 1970s, it gained increased respectability within Jamaica and greater visibility abroad through the popularity of Rasta-inspired reggae musicians like Bob Marley and Peter Tosh. Enthusiasm for Rastafari declined in the 1980s, following the deaths of Haile Selassie and Marley.\nThe Great Depression and worker protests.\nThe Great Depression caused sugar prices to slump in 1929 and led to the return of many Jamaicans. Economic stagnation, discontent with unemployment, low wages, high prices, and poor living conditions caused social unrest in the 1930s. Uprisings in Jamaica began on the Frome Sugar Estate in the western parish of Westmoreland and quickly spread east to Kingston. Jamaica, in particular, set the pace for the region in its demands for economic development from British colonial rule.\nBecause of disturbances in Jamaica and the rest of the region, the British in 1938 appointed the Moyne Commission. An immediate result of the commission was the Colonial Development Welfare Act, which provided for the expenditure of approximately \u01411 million a year for twenty years on coordinated development in the British West Indies. Concrete actions, however, were not implemented to deal with Jamaica's massive structural problems.\nNew unions and parties.\nThe rise of nationalism, as distinct from island identification or desire for self-determination, is generally dated to the 1938 labor riots that affected both Jamaica and the islands of the Eastern Caribbean. William Alexander Bustamante (formerly William Alexander Clarke), a moneylender in the capital city of Kingston who had formed the Jamaica Trade Workers and Tradesmen Union (JTWTU) three years earlier, captured the imagination of the black masses with his messianic personality, even though he himself was light-skinned, affluent, and aristocratic. Bustamante emerged from the 1938 strikes and other disturbances as a populist leader and the principal spokesperson for the militant urban working class, and in that year, using the JTWTU as a stepping stone, he founded the Bustamante Industrial Trade Union (BITU), which inaugurated Jamaica's worker's movement.\nA first cousin of Bustamante, Norman W. Manley, concluded as a result of the 1938 riots that the real basis for national unity in Jamaica lay in the masses. Unlike the union-oriented Bustamante, however, Manley was more interested in access to control over state power and political rights for the masses. On 18 September 1938, he inaugurated the People's National Party (PNP), which had begun as a nationalist movement supported by Bustamante and the mixed-race middle class (which included the intelligentsia) and the liberal sector of the business community with leaders who were highly educated members of the upper middle class. The 1938 riots spurred the PNP to unionize labor, although it would be several years before the PNP formed major labor unions. The party concentrated its earliest efforts on establishing a network both in urban areas and in banana-growing rural parishes, later working on building support among small farmers and in areas of bauxite mining.\nThe PNP adopted a socialist ideology in 1940 and later joined the Socialist International, allying itself formally with the social democratic parties of Western Europe. Guided by socialist principles, Manley was not a doctrinaire socialist. PNP socialism during the 1940s was similar to British Labour Party ideas on state control of the factors of production, equality of opportunity, and a welfare state, although a left-wing element in the PNP held more orthodox Marxist views and worked for the internationalization of the trade union movement through the Caribbean Labour Congress. In those formative years of Jamaican political and union activity, relations between Manley and Bustamante were cordial. Manley defended Bustamante in court against charges brought by the British for his labor activism in the 1938 riots and looked after the BITU during Bustamante's imprisonment.\nBustamante had political ambitions of his own, however. In 1942, while still incarcerated, he founded a political party to rival the PNP, called the Jamaica Labour Party (JLP). The new party, whose leaders were of a lower class than those of the PNP, was supported by conservative businessmen and 60,000 dues-paying BITU members, who encompassed dock and sugar plantation workers and other unskilled urban laborers. On his release in 1943, Bustamante began building up the JLP. Meanwhile, several PNP leaders organized the leftist-oriented Trade Union Congress (TUC). Thus, from an early stage in modern Jamaica, unionized labor was an integral part of organized political life.\nFor the next quarter-century, Bustamante and Manley competed for center stage in Jamaican political affairs, the former espousing the cause of the \"barefoot man\"; the latter, \"democratic socialism,\" a loosely defined political and economic theory aimed at achieving a classless system of government. Jamaica's two founding fathers projected quite different popular images. Bustamante, lacking even a high school diploma, was an autocratic, charismatic, and highly adept politician; Manley was an athletic, Oxford-trained lawyer, Rhodes scholar, humanist, and liberal intellectual. Although considerably more reserved than Bustamante, Manley was well-liked and widely respected. He was also a visionary nationalist who became the driving force behind the crown colony's quest for independence.\nFollowing the 1938 disturbances in the West Indies, London sent the Moyne Commission to study conditions in the British Caribbean territories. Its findings led in the early 1940s to better wages and a new constitution. Issued on 20 November 1944, the Constitution modified the crown colony system and inaugurated limited self-government based on the Westminster model of government and universal adult suffrage. It also embodied the island's principles of ministerial responsibility and the rule of law. Thirty-one percent of the population participated in the 1944 elections. The JLP \u2013 helped by its promises to create jobs, its practice of dispensing public funds in pro-JLP parishes, and the PNP's relatively radical platform \u2013 won an 18 percent majority of the votes over the PNP, as well as 22 seats in the 32-member House of Representatives, with 5 going to the PNP and 5 to other short-lived parties. In 1945 Bustamante took office as Jamaica's first premier (the pre-independence title for head of government).\nUnder the new charter, the British governor, assisted by the six-member Privy Council and 10-member Executive Council, remained responsible solely to the crown. The Jamaican Legislative Council became the upper house, or Senate, of the bicameral Parliament. House members were elected by adult suffrage from single-member electoral districts called constituencies. Despite these changes, ultimate power remained concentrated in the hands of the governor and other high officials.\nIndependent Jamaica (1962\u2013present).\n1960s.\nThe road to independence.\nAfter World War II, Jamaica began a relatively long transition to full political independence. Jamaicans preferred British culture over American, but they had a tumultuous relationship with the British and resented British domination, racism, and the dictatorial Colonial Office. Britain gradually granted the colony more self-government under periodic constitutional changes. Jamaica's political patterns and governmental structure were shaped during two decades of what was called \"constitutional decolonisation,\" the period between 1944 and independence in 1962.\nHaving seen how little popular appeal the PNP's 1944 campaign position had, the party shifted toward the centre in 1949 and remained there until 1974. The PNP actually won a 0.8-percent majority of the votes over the JLP in the 1949 election, but the JLP won a majority of the House seats. In the 1950s, the PNP and JLP became increasingly similar in their sociological composition and ideological outlook. During the Cold War years, socialism became an explosive domestic issue. The JLP exploited it among property owners and churchgoers, attracting more middle-class support. As a result, PNP leaders diluted their socialist rhetoric, and in 1952 the PNP moderated its image by expelling four prominent leftists who had controlled the TUC. The PNP then formed the more conservative National Workers Union (NWU). Henceforth, PNP socialism meant little more than national planning within a framework of private property and foreign capital. The PNP retained, however, a basic commitment to socialist precepts, such as public control of resources and more equitable income distribution. Manley's PNP came to the office for the first time after winning the 1955 elections with an 11-percent majority over the JLP and 50.5 percent of the popular vote.\nAmendments to the constitution that took effect in May 1953 reconstituted the Executive Council and provided for eight ministers to be selected from among House members. The first ministries were subsequently established. These amendments also enlarged the limited powers of the House of Representatives and made elected members of the governor's executive council responsible to the legislature. Manley, elected chief minister beginning in January 1955, accelerated the process of decolonisation during his able stewardship. Further progress toward self-government was achieved under constitutional amendments in 1955 and 1956, and cabinet government was established on 11 November 1957.\nAssured by British declarations that independence would be granted to a collective West Indian state rather than to individual colonies, Manley supported Jamaica's joining nine other British territories in the West Indies Federation, established on 3 January 1958. Manley became the island's premier after the PNP again won a decisive victory in the general election in July 1959, securing 30 out of 45 House seats.\nMembership in the federation remained an issue in Jamaican politics. Bustamante, reversing his previously supportive position on the issue, warned of the financial implications of membership \u2013 Jamaica was responsible for 43 percent of its own financing \u2013 and inequity in Jamaica's proportional representation in the federation's House of Assembly. Manley's PNP favoured staying in the federation, but he agreed to hold a referendum in September 1961 to decide on the issue. When 54 percent of the electorate voted to withdraw, Jamaica left the federation, which dissolved in 1962 after Trinidad and Tobago also pulled out. Manley believed that the rejection of his pro-federation policy in the 1961 referendum called for a renewed mandate from the electorate, but the JLP won the election of early 1962 by a fraction. Bustamante assumed the premiership that April and Manley spent his remaining few years in politics as leader of the opposition.\nThe push for independence intensified after World War II, with political leaders like Norman Manley and Alexander Bustamante advocating for self-government. Their efforts led to a series of constitutional changes in the 1940s and 1950s, laying the groundwork for full sovereignty.\nJamaica received its independence on 6 August 1962. The new nation retained, however, its membership in the Commonwealth of Nations and adopted a Westminster-style parliamentary system. Bustamante, at the age of 78, became the nation's first prime minister.\nJamaica under Bustamante.\nBustamante subsequently became the first Prime Minister of Jamaica. The island country joined the Commonwealth of Nations, an organisation of ex-British territories. Jamaica continues to be a Commonwealth realm, with the British monarch as King of Jamaica and head of state.\nAn extensive period of postwar growth transformed Jamaica into an increasingly industrial society. This pattern was accelerated with the export of bauxite beginning in the 1950s. The economic structure shifted from a dependence on agriculture that in 1950 accounted for 30.8 percent of GDP to an agricultural contribution of 12.9 percent in 1960 and 6.7 percent in 1970. During the same period, the contribution to the GDP of mining increased from less than 1 percent in 1950 to 9.3 percent in 1960 and 12.6 percent in 1970.\nBustamante's government also continued the government's repression of Rastafarians. During the Coral Gardens incident, one prominent example of state violence against Rastafarians, where following a violent confrontation between Rastafarians and police forces at a gas station, Bustamante issued the police and military an order to \"bring in all Rastas, dead or alive.\" 54 years later, following a government investigation into the incident, the government of Jamaica issued an apology, taking unequivocal responsibility for the Bustamante government's actions and making significant financial reparations to remaining survivors of the incident.\nJamaica under Donald Sangster and Hugh Shearer.\nBustamante was succeeded as the prime minister in February 1967 by Donald Sangster, who in the same year died in office. Hugh Shearer, a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Bustamante, succeeded Sangster and served from 1967 to 1972. Investments in tourism, bauxite mining, and light manufacturing industries fueled economic growth.\nIn October 1968 when the Shearer government banned Dr. Walter Rodney from returning to his teaching position at the University of the West Indies, so-called Rodney riots started. They were a part of an emerging black consciousness movement in the Caribbean.\nPost-Independence Culture.\nSince 1962, Jamaica has developed a rich cultural identity shaped by music, religion, and national pride. Reggae music, led by global icons like Bob Marley, has come to symbolize Jamaica\u2019s voice on the world stage. Rastafarianism, a spiritual and cultural movement rooted in Afrocentrism and resistance to oppression, also became a defining part of Jamaican national identity.\nReggae.\nJamaica's reggae music developed from Ska and rocksteady in the 1960s. The shift from rocksteady to reggae was illustrated by the organ shuffle pioneered by Jamaican musicians like Jackie Mittoo and Winston Wright and featured in transitional singles \"Say What You're Saying\" (1967) by Clancy Eccles and \"People Funny Boy\" (1968) by Lee \"Scratch\" Perry. The Pioneers' 1968 track \"Long Shot (Bus' Me Bet)\" has been identified as the earliest recorded example of the new rhythm sound that became known as reggae.\nEarly 1968 was when the first \"bona fide\" reggae records were released: \"Nanny Goat\" by Larry Marshall and \"No More Heartaches\" by The Beltones. That same year, the newest Jamaican sound began to spawn big-name imitators in other countries. American artist Johnny Nash's 1968 hit \"Hold Me Tight\" has been credited with first putting reggae in the American listener charts. Around the same time, reggae influences were starting to surface in rock and pop music, one example being 1968's \"Ob-La-Di, Ob-La-Da\" by The Beatles. Other significant reggae pioneers include Prince Buster, Desmond Dekker and Ken Boothe.\nBob Marley.\nThe Wailers, a band started by Bob Marley, Peter Tosh and Bunny Wailer in 1963, is perhaps the most recognised band that made the transition through all three stages of early Jamaican popular music: ska, rocksteady and reggae. The Wailers would go on to release some of the earliest reggae records with producer Lee Scratch Perry. After the Wailers disbanded in 1974, Marley then went on to pursue a solo career that culminated in the release of the album \"Exodus\" in 1977, which established his worldwide reputation and produced his status as one of the world's best-selling artists of all time, with sales of more than 75 million records. He was a committed Rastafari who infused his music with a sense of spirituality.\n1970s and 1980s.\nMichael Manley.\nIn the election of 1972, the PNP's Michael Manley defeated the JLP's unpopular incumbent Prime Minister Hugh Shearer. Under Manley, Jamaica established a minimum wage for all workers, including domestic workers. In 1974, Manley proposed free education from primary school to university. The introduction of universally free secondary education was a major step in removing the institutional barriers to the private sector and preferred government jobs that required secondary diplomas. The PNP government in 1974 also formed the Jamaica Movement for the Advancement of Literacy (JAMAL), which administered adult education programs with the goal of involving 100,000 adults a year.\nLand reform expanded under his administration. Historically, land tenure in Jamaica has been rather inequitable. Project Land Lease (introduced in 1973), attempted an integrated rural development approach, providing tens of thousands of small farmers with land, technical advice, inputs such as fertilisers, and access to credit. An estimated 14 percent of idle land was redistributed through this program, much of which had been abandoned during the post-war urban migration and/or purchased by large bauxite companies.\nThe minimum voting age was lowered to 18 years, while equal pay for women was introduced. Maternity leave was also introduced, while the government outlawed the stigma of illegitimacy. The Masters and Servants Act was abolished, and a Labour Relations and Industrial Disputes Act provided workers and their trade unions with enhanced rights. The National Housing Trust was established, providing \"the means for most employed people to own their own homes,\" and greatly stimulated housing construction, with more than 40,000 houses built between 1974 and 1980.\nSubsidised meals, transportation and uniforms for schoolchildren from disadvantaged backgrounds were introduced, together with free education at primary, secondary, and tertiary levels. Special employment programmes were also launched, together with programmes designed to combat illiteracy. Increases in pensions and poor relief were carried out, along with a reform of local government taxation, an increase in youth training, an expansion of day care centres. and an upgrading of hospitals.\nA worker's participation program was introduced, together with a new mental health law and the family court. Free health care for all Jamaicans was introduced, while health clinics and a paramedical system in rural areas were established. Various clinics were also set up to facilitate access to medical drugs. Spending on education was significantly increased, while the number of doctors and dentists in the country rose.\nOne Love Peace Concert.\nThe One Love Peace Concert was a large concert held in Kingston on April 22, 1978, during a time of political civil war in Jamaica between the rival Jamaican Labour Party and the People's National Party. The concert reached its peak during Bob Marley &amp; The Wailers' performance of \"Jammin'\", when Marley joined the hands of political rivals Michael Manley (PNP) and Edward Seaga (JLP).\nEdward Seaga.\nIn the 1980 election, Edward Seaga and the JLP won by an overwhelming majority \u2013 57 percent of the popular vote and 51 of the 60 seats in the House of Representatives. Seaga immediately began to reverse the policies of his predecessor by privatising the industry and seeking closer ties with the US. Seaga was one of the first foreign heads of government to visit newly elected US president Ronald Reagan early the next year and was one of the architects of the Caribbean Basin Initiative, which was sponsored by Reagan. He delayed his promise to cut diplomatic relations with Cuba until a year later when he accused the Cuban government of giving asylum to Jamaican criminals.\nSeaga supported the collapse of the Marxist regime in Grenada and the subsequent US-led invasion of that island in October 1983. On the back of the Grenada invasion, Seaga called snap elections at the end of 1983, which Manley's PNP boycotted. His party thus controlled all seats in parliament. In an unusual move, because the Jamaican constitution required an opposition in the appointed Senate, Seaga appointed eight independent senators to form an official opposition.\nSeaga lost much of his US support when he was unable to deliver on his early promises of removing the bauxite levy, and his domestic support also plummeted. Articles attacking Seaga appeared in the US media and foreign investors left the country. Rioting in 1987 and 1988, the continued high popularity of Michael Manley, and complaints of governmental incompetence in the wake of the devastation of the island by Hurricane Gilbert in 1988, also contributed to his defeat in the 1989 elections.\nHurricane Gilbert.\nIn 1988, Hurricane Gilbert produced a storm surge and brought up to of rain in the mountainous areas of Jamaica, causing inland flash flooding. 49 people died. Prime Minister Edward Seaga stated that the hardest hit areas near where Gilbert made landfall looked \"like Hiroshima after the atom bomb.\" The storm left US$4\u00a0billion (in 1988 dollars) in damage from destroyed crops, buildings, houses, roads, and small aircraft. Two people eventually had to be rescued because of mudslides triggered by Gilbert and were sent to the hospital. The two people were reported to be fine. No planes were going in and out of Kingston, and telephone lines were jammed from Jamaica to Florida.\nAs Gilbert lashed Kingston, its winds knocked down power lines, uprooted trees, and flattened fences. On the north coast, waves hit Ocho Rios, a popular tourist resort where hotels were evacuated. Kingston's airport reported severe damage to its aircraft, and all Jamaica-bound flights were cancelled at Miami International Airport. Unofficial estimates state that at least 30 people were killed around the island. Estimated property damage reached more than $200 million. More than 100,000 houses were destroyed or damaged and the country's banana crop was largely destroyed. Hundreds of miles of roads and highways were also heavily damaged. Reconnaissance flights over remote parts of Jamaica reported that 80 percent of the homes on the island had lost their roofs. The poultry industry was also wiped out; the damage from agricultural loss reached $500\u00a0 million (1988 USD). Hurricane Gilbert was the most destructive storm in the history of Jamaica and the most severe storm since Hurricane Charlie in 1951.\nBirth of Jamaica's film industry.\nJamaica's film industry was born in 1972 with the release of \"The Harder They Come\", the first feature-length film made by Jamaicans. It starred reggae singer Jimmy Cliff, was directed by Perry Henzell, and was produced by Island Records founder Chris Blackwell. The film is famous for its reggae soundtrack that is said to have \"brought reggae to the world\". Jamaica's other popular films include 1976's \"Smile Orange\", 1982's \"Countryman\", 1991's \"The Lunatic\", 1997's \"Dancehall Queen\", and 1999's \"Third World Cop\". Major figures in the Jamaican film industry include actors Paul Campbell and Carl Bradshaw, actress Audrey Reid, and producer Chris Blackwell.\n1990s and 2000s.\n18 years of PNP rule.\nThe 1989 election. was the first election contested by the People's National Party since 1980, as they had boycotted the 1983 snap election. Prime Minister Edward Seaga announced the election date on January 15, 1989, at a rally in Kingston. He cited emergency conditions caused by Hurricane Gilbert in 1988 as the reason for extending the parliamentary term beyond its normal five-year mandate.\nThe date and tone of the election were shaped in part by Hurricane Gilbert, which made landfall in September 1988 and decimated the island. The hurricane caused almost $1 billion worth of damage to the island, with banana and coffee crops wiped out and thousands of homes destroyed. Both parties engaged in campaigning through the distribution of relief supplies, a hallmark of the Jamaican patronage system. Political commentators noted that prior to the hurricane, Edward Seaga and the JLP trailed Michael Manley and the PNP by twenty points in opinion polls. The ability to provide relief as the party in charge allowed Seaga to improve his standing among voters and erode the inevitability of Manley's victory. However, scandals related to the relief effort cost Seaga and the JLP some of the gains made immediately following the hurricane. Scandals that emerged included National Security Minister Errol Anderson personally controlling a warehouse full of disaster relief supplies and candidate Joan Gordon-Webley distributing American-donated flour in sacks with her picture on them.\nThe election was characterised by a narrower ideological difference between the two parties on economic issues. Michael Manley facilitated his comeback campaign by moderating his leftist positions and admitting mistakes made as prime minister, saying he erred when he involved government in economic production and had abandoned all thoughts of nationalising industry. He cited the PNP's desire to continue the market-oriented policies of the JLP government, but with a more participatory approach. Prime Minister Edward Seaga ran on his record of economic growth and the reduction of unemployment in Jamaica, using the campaign slogan \"Don't Let Them Wreck It Again\" to refer to Manley's tenure as prime minister. Seaga during his tenure as prime minister emphasised the need to tighten public sector spending and cut close to 27,000 public sector jobs in 1983 and 1984. He shifted his plans as elections neared with a promise to spend J$1 billion on a five-year Social Well-Being Programme, which would build new hospitals and schools in Jamaica. Foreign policy also played a role in the 1989 election. Prime Minister Edward Seaga emphasised his relations with the United States, a relationship that saw Jamaica receiving considerable economic aid from the U.S. and additional loans from international institutions. Manley pledged better relations with the United States while at the same time pledging to restore diplomatic relations with Cuba that had been cut under Seaga. With Manley as prime minister, Jamaican-American relations had significantly frayed as a result of Manley's economic policies and close relations with Cuba.\nThe PNP was ultimately victorious and Manley's second term focused on liberalising Jamaica's economy, with the pursuit of a free-market programme that stood in marked contrast to the interventionist economic policies pursued by Manley's first government. Various measures were, however, undertaken to cushion the negative effects of liberalisation. A Social Support Programme was introduced to provide welfare assistance for poor Jamaicans. In addition, the programme focused on creating direct employment, training, and credit for much of the population. The government also announced a 50% increase in the number of food stamps for the most vulnerable groups (including pregnant women, nursing mothers, and children) was announced. A small number of community councils were also created. In addition, a limited land reform programme was carried out that leased and sold the land to small farmers, and land plots were granted to hundreds of farmers. The government also had an admirable record in housing provision, while measures were also taken to protect consumers from illegal and unfair business practices.\nIn 1992, citing health reasons, Manley stepped down as prime minister and PNP leader. His former Deputy Prime Minister, Percival Patterson, assumed both offices. Patterson led efforts to strengthen the country's social protection and security systems\u00a0\u2013 a critical element of his economic and social policy agenda to mitigate, reduce poverty and social deprivation. His massive investments in modernisation of Jamaica's infrastructure and restructuring of the country's financial sector are widely credited with having led to Jamaica's greatest period of investment in tourism, mining, ICT and energy since the 1960s. He also ended Jamaica's 18-year borrowing relationship with the International Monetary Fund, allowing the country greater latitude in pursuit of its economic policies.\nPatterson led the PNP to resounding victories in the 1993 and 1997 elections. Patterson called the 1997 election in November 1997, when his People's National Party was ahead in the opinion polls, inflation had fallen substantially and the national football team had just qualified for the 1998 World Cup. The previous election in 1993 had seen the People's National Party win 52 of the 60 seats.\nA record 197 candidates contested the election, with a new political party, the National Democratic Movement, standing in most of the seats. The National Democratic Movement had been founded in 1995 by a former Labour Party chairman, Bruce Golding, after a dispute over the leadership of the Jamaica Labour Party.\nThe 1997 election was mainly free of violence as compared to previous elections, although it began with an incident where rival motorcades from the main parties were fired on. The election was the first in Jamaica where a team of international election monitors attended. The monitors were from the Carter Center and included Jimmy Carter, Colin Powell and former heavyweight boxing world champion Evander Holyfield. Just before the election the two main party leaders made a joint appeal for people to avoid marring the election with violence. Election day itself saw one death and four injuries relating to the election, but the 1980 election had seen over 800 deaths.\nIn winning the election the People's National Party became the first party to win three consecutive terms. The opposition Jamaica Labour Party only had two more seats in Parliament after the election but their leader Edward Seaga held his seat for a ninth time in a row. The National Democratic Movement failed to win any seats despite a pre-election prediction that they would manage to win a seat.\nThe 2002 election. was a victory for the People's National Party, but their number of seats fell from 50 to 34 (out of 60 total). PNP leader P. J. Patterson retained his position as Prime Minister, becoming the first political leader to win three successive elections. Patterson stepped down on 26 February 2006, and was replaced by Portia Simpson-Miller, Jamaica's first female prime minister.\nThe 2007 elections. had originally been scheduled for August 27, 2007, but were delayed to September 3 due to Hurricane Dean.https:// The preliminary results indicated a slim victory for the opposition Jamaican Labour Party led by Bruce Golding, which grew by two seats from 31\u201329 to 33\u201327 after official recounts. The JLP defeated the People's National Party after 18 years of unbroken governance.\nEconomic challenges.\nIn the 1990s, Jamaica and other Caribbean banana producers argued for the continuation of their preferential access to EU markets, notably the United Kingdom. They feared that otherwise the EU would be flooded with cheap bananas from the Central American plantations, with devastating effects on several Caribbean economies. Negotiations led in 1993 to the EU agreeing to maintain the Caribbean producers' preferential access until the end of Lom\u00e9 IV, pending possible negotiation on an extension. In 1995, the United States government petitioned to the World Trade Organization to investigate whether the Lom\u00e9 IV convention had violated WTO rules. Then later in 1996, the WTO Dispute Settlement Body ruled in favor of the plaintiffs, effectively ending the cross-subsidies that had benefited ACP countries for many years. But the US remained unsatisfied and insisted that all preferential trade agreements between the EU and ACP should cease. The WTO Dispute Settlement Body established another panel to discuss the issue and concluded that agreements between the EU and ACP were indeed not compatible with WTO regulations. Finally, the EU negotiated with the US through WTO to reach an agreement.\nIn tourism, after a decrease in volume following the 11 September attacks in the U.S., the number of tourists going to Jamaica eventually rebounded, with the island now receiving over a million tourists each year. Services now account for over 60 percent of Jamaica's GDP and one of every four workers in Jamaica works in tourism or services. However, according to the World Bank, around 80% of the money tourism makes in Jamaica does not stay on the island, but goes instead to the multinational resorts.\n2007 Cricket World Cup and 2008 Olympics.\nThe 2007 Cricket World Cup was the first time the ICC Cricket World Cup had been held in the Caribbean. The Jamaican Government spent US$81 million for \"on the pitch\" expenses. This included refurbishing Sabina Park and constructing the new multi-purpose facility in Trelawny \u2013 through a loan from China. Another US$20 million is budgeted for \"off-the-pitch\" expenses, putting the tally at more than US$100 million or JM$7 billion. This put the reconstruction cost of Sabina Park at US$46 million whilst the Trelawny Stadium will cost US$35 million. The total amount of money spent on stadiums was at least US$301 million. The 2007 World Cup organisers were criticised for restrictions on outside food, signs, replica kits and musical instruments, despite Caribbean cricketing customs, with authorities being accused of \"running [cricket and cricketing traditions] out of town, then sanitising it out of existence\". Sir Viv Richards echoed the concerns. The ICC were also condemned for high prices for tickets and concessions, which were considered unaffordable for the local population in many of the locations. In a tragic turn of events, Pakistan coach Bob Woolmer was found dead on 18 March 2007, one day after his team's defeat to Ireland put them out of the running for the World Cup. Jamaican police performed an autopsy which was deemed inconclusive. The following day police announced that the death was suspicious and ordered a full investigation. Further investigation revealed the cause of death was \"manual strangulation\", and that the investigation would be handled as a murder. After a lengthy investigation the Jamaican police rescinded the comments that he was not murdered, and confirmed that he died from natural causes.\nIn sprinting, Jamaicans had begun their domination of the 100 metres world record in 2005. Jamaica's Asafa Powell set the record in June 2005 and held it until May 2008, with times of 9.77 and 9.74\u00a0seconds respectively. However, at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, Jamaica's athletes reached heights by nearly doubling the country's total gold medal count and breaking the nation's record for the number of medals earned in a single game. Usain Bolt won three of Jamaica's six gold medals at Beijing, breaking an Olympic and world record in all three of the events in which he participated. Shelly-Ann Fraser led an unprecedented Jamaican sweep of the medals in the Women's 100 m.\nDancehall goes global.\nAlthough Jamaican dancehall music originated in the late 1970s, it greatly increased in popularity in the late 1980s and 1990s. Initially dancehall was a more sparse version of reggae than the roots style, which had dominated much of the 1970s. Two of the biggest stars of the early dancehall era were Yellowman and Eek-a-Mouse. Dancehall brought a new generation of producers, including Linval Thompson, Gussie Clarke and Jah Thomas. In the mid-1980s, digital instrumentation became more prevalent, changing the sound considerably, with digital dancehall (or \"ragga\") becoming increasingly characterised by faster rhythms.\nIn the early 1990s songs by Dawn Penn, Shabba Ranks, Patra and Chaka Demus and Pliers were the first dancehall megahits in the US and abroad. Other varieties of dancehall achieved crossover success outside of Jamaica during the mid-to-late 1990s. In the 1990s, dancehall came under increasing criticism for anti-gay lyrics such as those found in Buju Banton's 1988 hit \"Boom Bye Bye,\" which is about shooting a gay man in the head: \"It's like boom bye bye / Inna batty boy head / Rude boy nah promote no nasty man / Dem haffi dead.\"\nThe early 2000s saw the success of newer charting acts such as Elephant Man, Tanya Stephens, and Sean Paul. Dancehall made a resurgence within the pop market in the late 2000s, with songs by Konshens, Mr. Vegas, Popcaan, Mavado, Vybz Kartel, Beenie Man among others. In 2011, Vybz Kartel\u00a0\u2013 at the time, one of dancehall's biggest stars\u00a0\u2013 was arrested for the murder of Clive \"Lizard\" William. In 2014 he was sentenced to life in prison after a 65-day trial, the longest in Jamaican history.\n2010s.\nTivoli Incursion.\nPolitically and socially, the 2010s in Jamaica have been shaped by the Tivoli Incursion\u00a0\u2013 a 2010 gun-battle between police and the gang of Christopher \"Dudus\" Coke. Over seventy Jamaicans were killed during the gun battle and the inquiry into police actions during the incursion continues today.\nCoke took over the \"Shower Posse\" gang of Tivoli Gardens from his father, Lester \"Jim Brown\" Coke, in the 1990s. Under Christopher Coke's leadership, the gang trafficked drugs and dabbled in visa fraud (using a high-school athletics team) and extortion, charging small traders in the nearby market for \"protection money\". The gang had close political ties. Tivoli Gardens is part of the Kingston Western parliamentary district, a seat was held for years by Edward Seaga, long-time leader of the JLP. That helped Coke expand into construction, with his company winning numerous government contracts. Within Tivoli Gardens, the gang operated as a government unto itself.\nOn 23 May 2010, Jamaica security forces began searching for Coke after the United States requested his extradition, and the leader of the criminal gang that attacked several police stations. The violence, which largely took place over 24\u201325 May, killed at least 73 civilians and wounded at least 35 others. Four soldiers/police were also killed and more than 500 arrests were made, as Jamaican police and soldiers fought gunmen in the Tivoli Gardens district of Kingston.\nCoke was eventually captured on 23 June, after initial rumours that he was attempting to surrender to the United States. Kingston police arrested Coke on the outskirts of the city, apparently while a local reverend, Reverend Al Miller, was helping negotiate his surrender to the United States Embassy. In 2011, Coke pleaded guilty to racketeering and drug-related charges in a New York Federal court, and was sentenced to 23 years in prison on 8 June 2012.\nIn the four years following Coke's capture, Jamaica's murder rate decreased by nearly half. However, the murder rate remains one of the highest in the world and Jamaica's morgues have not been able to keep up. The lack of facilities to store and study murder victims has been one of the reasons that few murders are solved, with the conviction rate for homicides standing at around five percent. In 2007, following the botched investigation into the death of Pakistan cricket coach Bob Woolmer, who died unexpectedly while the island hosted the sport's world cup, Jamaican politicians debated the need for a modern public morgue.\n2011 election.\nThe Tivoli Incursion and LGBT rights were both major issues in the 2011 election.\nAlthough the JLP survived an election called shortly after the 2010 Tivoli Gardens incident, the following year the date of the 2011 election was set as 29 December, and major local media outlets viewed the election as \"too close to call\", though as Simpson-Miller campaigned in key constituencies the gap widened to favour the PNP. Days before the election, Simpson-Miller came out fully in favor of LGBT rights in a televised debate, saying that she \"has no problem giving certain positions of authority to a homosexual as long as they show the necessary level of competence for the post.\" However, since taking power her government has not attempted to repeal the laws which criminalise homosexuality.\nIn 2012, Dane Lewis launched a legal challenge to Jamaica's Offenses Against Persons Act of 1864, commonly known as the \"buggery\" laws, on the grounds that they are unconstitutional and promote homophobia throughout the Caribbean. The legal challenge was taken to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. The Offenses Against Persons Act does not formally ban homosexuality, but clause 76 provides for up to 10 years' imprisonment, with or without hard labour, for anyone convicted of the \"abominable crime of buggery committed either with mankind or any animal\". Two further clauses outlaw attempted buggery and gross indecency between two men.\nLGBT rights returned to Jamaican headlines the next year, following the violent murder in July 2013 of a 16-year-old boy who showed up at a party in women's clothing. Advocates called for the repeal of a nearly 150-year-old anti-sodomy law that bans anal sex, legislation which is accused of helping spur anti-LGBT violence.\nFurther economic troubles.\nIn 2013, the International Monetary Fund announced a $1 billion loan to help Jamaica meet large debt payments. The loan required the Jamaican government to institute a pay freeze amounting to a 20% real-terms cut in wages. Jamaica is one of the most indebted countries and spends around half of its annual federal budget on debt repayments.\nThe 2010s look to be a bad time for Jamaica's sugarcane industry. After a brief increase sugar prices, the outlook for Jamaican sugar took a hit in 2015 when the EU began moving towards ending a cap on European sugar beet production. Jamaica exports 25% of the sugar it produces to Britain and prices for Jamaican sugar are expected to fall in the wake of the end of the cap on the EU's subsidised sugar beet industry.\nHowever, marijuana may become a new cash crop and tourist-draw for Jamaica, depending on future legislation. On 25 February 2015, the Jamaican House of Representatives passed a law decriminalizing possession of up to 2 ounces of cannabis. The new law includes provisions legalizing the cultivation for the personal use of up to five plants, as well as setting up regulations for the cultivation and distribution of cannabis for medical and religious purposes\n2016 election.\nIn February 2016, opposition Labour Party won a narrow victory in the general election. Prime Minister Portia Simpson Miller of the People's National Party was replaced by Andrew Holness, the leader of the Labour Party.\nCOVID-19 Pandemic.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic was confirmed in Jamaica on 10 March 2020, during the 2019\u20132020 dengue fever epidemic that affected Latin America and the Caribbean. The government announced a travel ban between China and Jamaica with all people entering Jamaica from China subject to immediate quarantine for at least 14 days, and anyone who was allowed to land and shows symptoms of the virus put in immediate isolation. In keeping with the new policy, 19 Chinese nationals who arrived at the Norman Manley International Airport on the evening of 31 January were denied entry, quarantined, and put on a flight back to China on 1 February. On 10 March, the Ministry of Health and Wellness (MoHW) confirmed the first case in Jamaica, a female patient who arrived from the United Kingdom on 4 March. The health minister reported that the patient has been in isolation since 9 March after showing respiratory symptoms. Following the update, the travel ban imposed was expanded to include France, Germany, and Spain. On 11 March, the country's health minister Christopher Tufton confirmed the second \"imported\" case of COVID-19. On 13 March, the country announced six additional cases \u2013 including the father and another female patient of the first patient. Later that day, the government announced that the community of Bull Bay \u2013 where the funeral attended by the first patient took place\u00a0\u2013 was placed under quarantine for 14 days. With four of the cases involving patients travelling through or from the United Kingdom, the country's foreign minister Kamina Johnson-Smith announced that the travel ban would be expanded to include the United Kingdom. On 15 March, the Ministry of Health and Wellness (MoHW) confirmed that 19 suspected cases were reported and the patients tested. Of the 19 suspected cases, only two patients were confirmed as having the virus \u2013 one coming from Trinidad and Tobago and the other who had \"contact tracing from the index case\". In the same update, the Ministry confirmed that there were twenty-seven patients in isolation facilities and that Patients 1 and 2 no longer exhibit any symptoms. On 16 March, the Ministry of Health and Wellness (MoHW) and the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) reported that there were five \"preliminary confirmed\" cases. Later that day, the government confirmed that only two of the five reported cases tested positive for COVID-19. In response to the increase in cases, the government announced further social distancing measures such as imposed remote work directives, the banning of all mass gatherings of more than 20 people, and the shuttering of bars, restaurants, sporting events, et cetera.\n2020 election.\nIn September 2020, the ruling centre-right Labour Party won a landslide victory in the general election. It took 49 of 63 parliamentary seats, meaning the incumbent Prime Minister Andrew Holness will serve a second term.\nHurricane Melissa.\nIn October 2025, Hurricane Melissa struck western Jamaica as an extremely powerful and destructive Category 5 hurricane. As of November 23, at least 45 people on the island have died due to the storm. Monetary losses due to the hurricane are anticipated to be near US$10 billion, equivalent to over 40% of the nation's GDP in 2024. 156,000 homes were damaged, with 24,000 of them considered beyond repair. Agriculture, animal husbandry, and forestry, all significant industries in the country, were particularly affected. Melissa damaged at least 102,277 acres of farmland, affecting more than 70,000 farmers and killing over 1.25 million animals. More than half of all of Jamaica's forests, or approximately 667,000 acres of trees, were damaged.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15662", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15662", "title": "Geography of Jamaica", "text": " \nJamaica lies 140\u00a0km (87\u00a0mi) south of Cuba and west of Haiti. At its greatest extent, Jamaica is long, and its width varies between . Jamaica has a small area of . However, Jamaica is the largest island of the Commonwealth Caribbean and the third largest of the Greater Antilles, after Cuba and Hispaniola. Many small islands are located along the south coast of Jamaica, such as the Port Royal Cays. Southwest of mainland Jamaica lies Pedro Bank, an area of shallow seas, with a number of cays (low islands or reefs), extending generally east to west for over . To the southeast lies Morant Bank, with the Morant Cays, from Morant Point, the easternmost point of mainland Jamaica. Alice Shoal, southwest of the main island of Jamaica, falls within the Jamaica\u2013Colombia Joint Regime. It has an Exclusive Economic Zone of .\nGeology and landforms.\nJamaica (which is a very mountainous country) and the other islands of the Antilles evolved from an arc of ancient volcanoes that rose from the sea millions of years ago. During periods of submersion, thick layers of limestone were laid down over the old igneous and metamorphic rock. In many places, the limestone is thousands of feet thick. The country can be divided into three landform regions: the eastern mountains, the central valleys and plateaus, and the coastal plains.\nThe highest area is the Blue Mountains range. These eastern mountains are formed by a central ridge of metamorphic rock running northwest to southeast from which many long spurs jut to the north and south. For a distance of over , the crest of the ridge exceeds . The highest point is Blue Mountain Peak at . The Blue Mountains rise to these elevations from the coastal plain in the space of about , thus producing one of the steepest general gradients in the world. In this part of the country, the old metamorphic rock reveals itself through the surrounding limestone. To the north of the Blue Mountains lies the strongly tilted limestone plateau forming the John Crow Mountains. This range rises to elevations of over . To the west, in the central part of the country, are two high rolling plateaus: the Dry Harbour Mountains to the north and the Manchester Plateau to the south. Between the two, the land is rugged and here, also, the limestone layers are broken by the older rocks. Streams that rise in the region flow outward and sink soon after reaching the limestone layers.\nThe limestone plateau covers two-thirds of the country, so that karst formations dominate the island. Karst is formed by the erosion of the limestone in solution. Sinkholes, caves and caverns, disappearing streams, hummocky hills, and terra rosa (residual red) soils in the valleys are distinguishing features of a karst landscape; all these are present in Jamaica. To the west of the mountains is the rugged terrain of the Cockpit Country, one of the world's most dramatic examples of karst topography.\nThe Cockpit Country is pockmarked with steep-sided hollows, as much as deep in places, which are separated by conical hills and ridges. On the north, the main defining feature is the fault-based \"Escarpment\", a long ridge that extends from Flagstaff in the west, through Windsor in the centre, to Campbells and the start of the Barbecue Bottom Road (B10). The Barbecue Bottom Road, which runs north\u2013south, high along the side of a deep, fault-based valley in the east, is the only drivable route across the Cockpit Country. However, there are two old, historical trails that cross further west, the Troy Trail, and the Quick Step Trail, both of which are seldom used as of 2006[ [update]] and difficult to find. In the southwest, near Quick Step, is the district known as the \"Land of Look Behind,\" so named because Spanish horsemen venturing into this region of hostile runaway slaves were said to have ridden two to a mount, one rider facing to the rear to keep a precautionary watch. Where the ridges between sinkholes in the plateau area have dissolved, flat-bottomed basins or valleys have been formed that are filled with terra rosa soils, some of the most productive on the island. The largest basin is the Vale of Clarendon, long and wide. Queen of Spains Valley, Nassau Valley, and Cave Valley were formed by the same process.\nCoasts.\nThe coastline of Jamaica is one of many contrasts. The northeast shore is severely eroded by the ocean. There are many small inlets in the rugged coastline, but no coastal plain of any extent. A narrow strip of plains along the northern coast offers calm seas and white sand beaches. Behind the beaches is a flat raised plain of uplifted coral reef.\nThe southern coast has small stretches of plains lined by black sand beaches. These are backed by cliffs of limestone where the plateaus end. In many stretches with no coastal plain, the cliffs drop straight to the sea. In the southwest, broad plains stretch inland for a number of kilometres. The Black River courses through the largest of these plains. The Rio Minho is 92.8\u00a0km long and is the longest river in Jamaica (previously, the Black River was thought to be the longest). The swamplands of the Great Morass and the Upper Morass fill much of the plains. The western coastline contains the island's finest beaches.\nClimate.\nTwo types of climate are found in Jamaica. An upland tropical climate prevails on the windward side of the mountains, whereas a semiarid climate predominates on the leeward side. Warm trade winds from the east and northeast bring rainfall throughout the year. The rainfall is heaviest from May to October, with peaks in those two months. The average rainfall is per year. Rainfall is much greater in the mountain areas facing the north and east, however. Where the higher elevations of the John Crow Mountains and the Blue Mountains catch the rain from the moisture-laden winds, rainfall exceeds per year. Since the southwestern half of the island lies in the rain shadow of the mountains, it has a semiarid climate and receives fewer than of rainfall annually.\nTemperatures in Jamaica are fairly constant throughout the year, averaging in the lowlands and at higher elevations. Temperatures may dip to below at the peaks of the Blue Mountains. The island receives, in addition to the northeast trade winds, refreshing onshore breezes during the day and cooling offshore breezes at night. These are known on Jamaica as the \"Doctor Breeze\" and the \"Undertaker's Breeze,\" respectively.\nJamaica lies in the Main Development Region for tropical cyclone activity in the Atlantic, and as a result, it sometimes experiences significant storm damage. Powerful hurricanes which have hit the island directly causing death and destruction include Hurricane Charlie in 1951 and Hurricane Gilbert in 1988. Several other powerful hurricanes have passed near to the island with damaging effects. In 1980, for example, Hurricane Allen destroyed nearly all Jamaica's banana crop. Hurricane Ivan (2004) swept past the island causing heavy damage and a number of deaths; in 2005, Hurricanes Dennis and Emily brought heavy rains to the island. A Category 4 hurricane, Hurricane Dean, caused some deaths and heavy damage to Jamaica in August 2007. In 2025, the western part of the country was struck by the full force of Hurricane Melissa, which made landfall in New Hope, Westmoreland Parish, far surpassing any previous tropical cyclone landfall in the country.\nThe first recorded hurricane to hit Jamaica was in 1519. The island has been struck by tropical cyclones regularly. During two of the coldest periods in the last 250 years (1780s and 1810s), the frequency of hurricanes in the Jamaica region was unusually high. Another peak of activity occurred in the 1910s, the coldest decade of the 20th century. On the other hand, hurricane formation was greatly diminished from 1968 to 1994, which coincides with the great Sahel drought.\nVegetation and wildlife.\nAlthough most of Jamaica's native vegetation has been stripped in order to make room for cultivation, some areas have been left virtually undisturbed since the time of European colonization. Indigenous vegetation can be found along the northern coast, from Rio Bueno to Discovery Bay, in the highest parts of the Blue Mountains, and in the heart of the Cockpit Country.\nAs in the case of vegetation, considerable loss of wildlife has occurred, beginning with the settlement of the Ta\u00edno in the region millennia ago. For example, the Caribbean monk seal (\"Neomonachus tropicalis\") once occurred in Jamaican waters, and has now been driven to extinction. Mongooses (\"Urva auropunctata\"), introduced to Jamaica in 1872 to reduce rat populations that damaged commercial sugarcane (\"Saccharum officinarum\") crops, prey on several Jamaican species, including the critically endangered Jamaican iguana (\"Cyclura collei\"), and have been implicated in the historical population declines and extinctions of many others.\nOther wildlife species inhabiting the island include the West Indian manatee (\"Trichechus manatus\"), the American crocodile (\"Crocodylus acutus\"), and the endemic and endangered Homerus swallowtail butterfly (\"Papilio homerus\"), which is the largest butterfly species in the Western Hemisphere.\nEnvironmental policy.\nThere are policies that are being put into place to help preserve the ocean and the life below water. The goal of integrated coastal zone management (ICZM) is to improve the quality of life of human communities who depend on coastal resources while maintaining the biological diversity and productivity of coastal ecosystems. Developing an underdeveloped country can impact the ocean's ecosystem because of all the construction that would be done to develop the country. Over-building, driven by powerful market forces as well as poverty among some sectors of the population, and destructive exploitation contribute to the decline of ocean and coastal resources. Developing practices that will contribute to the lives of the people but also to the life of the ocean and its ecosystem. Some of these practices include: Develop sustainable fisheries practices, ensure sustainable mariculture techniques and practices, sustainable management of shipping, and promote sustainable tourism practices. As for tourism, tourism is the number one source of foreign exchange earnings in Jamaica and, as such is vital to the national economy. Tourists typically go to countries unaware of issues and how they impact those issues. Tourists are not going to be used to living in a different style compared to their own country. Practices such as: providing sewage treatment facilities for all tourist areas, determining carrying capacity of the environment prior to planning tourism activities, and providing alternative types of tourist activities can help to get desired results, such as the development of alternative tourism which will reduce the current pressure on resources that support traditional tourism activities. A study was conducted to see how tourism could help with sustainable financing for ocean and coastal management in Jamaica. Instead of using tourist fees they would call them environmental fees. This study aims to inform the relevant stakeholders of the feasibility of implementing environmental fees as well as the likely impact of such revenue generating instruments on the current tourist visitation rates to the island. The development of a user fee system would help fund environmental management and protection. The results show that tourists have a high consumer surplus associated with a vacation in Jamaica, and have a significantly lower willingness to pay for a tourism tax when compared to an environmental tax. The findings of the study show that the \"label\" of the tax and as well as the respondent's awareness of the institutional mechanisms for environmental protection and tourism are important to their decision framework. Tourist are more willing to pay for environmental fees rather than tourist tax fees. A tax high enough to fund for environmental management and protection but low enough to continue to bring tourist to Jamaica. It has been shown that if an environmental tax of $1 per person were introduced it would not cause a significant decline in visitation rates and would generate revenues of US$1.7M per year.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15663", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15663", "title": "Demographics of Jamaica", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJamaica is an island country in the Caribbean. The country had a population of 2,825,352 as of 2023, having the fourth largest population in the region.\nJamaica's annual population growth rate stood at 0.08% in 2022. As of 2023, 68.9% of Jamaicans were Christians in 2011, predominantly Protestant.\nThe racial demographics in the island of Jamaica are as follows: 76.3% African, 15.1% Afro-European, 3.4% Indian or Afro-Indian, 3.2% White, 1.2% Chinese or Afro-Chinese and 0.8% Others (2024 est.).\nWealth or economic power in Jamaica is disproportionately held by White Jamaicans, Chinese Jamaicans, Lebanese/Syrian Jamaicans, Indian Jamaicans and mixed-race Jamaicans (or locally called the \"Brown Man\" or \"Browning\")\u2014 despite being minority groups (less than 25% of the country's population), they control most of the country's wealth.\nRoughly 10 per cent of the population, controls over 60% of Jamaica\u2019s wealth.\nPopulation size and structure.\nAccording to the total population was in , compared to only 1,403,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 29%, 63.1% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 7.8% was 65 years or older.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by sex and age group (Census 04.IV.2011): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population estimates by sex and age group (01.VII.2019): \n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nVital statistics.\nRegistered births and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nLife expectancy at birth.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nEthnic groups.\nIn the 2011 Census, Jamaicans reported their race as the following, broken down by percentage:\nBlack 92.11% \nEast Indian 0.75% \nMixed 6.06% \nChinese 0.19% \nWhite 0.16% \nOther 0.07% \nNot Reported 0.65 %\n76.3% African, 15.1% Afro-European, 3.4% Indian or Afro-Indian, 3.2% White, 1.2% Chinese or Afro-Chinese and 0.8% Others (2024 est.)\nMulatto/Mixed-race.\nThe group in Jamaica\u2014composed largely of mixed-race and lighter-skinned \u2014has played a crucial role in shaping the country\u2019s political and economic structures since the colonial era. Their shared experiences, social networks, and cultural practices have distinguished them from the Black majority in meaningful ways.\nOrigins and Colonial Foundations.\nDuring slavery, mixed-race Jamaicans\u2014often the offspring of white plantation owners and enslaved Black women\u2014were granted privileges that darker-skinned enslaved people did not receive. They were more likely to be educated, inherit property, and secure administrative positions within the colonial system. This created a distinct social identity, reinforced by their proximity to whiteness and European cultural norms.\nAfter emancipation in 1838, the colonial government relied on this buffer class to manage administrative affairs and maintain order. They were groomed to uphold British cultural standards, including speaking \"the Queen\u2019s English\" and rejecting Jamaican Patois, which was associated with the formerly enslaved and indentured population.\nPost-Independence Role.\nFollowing Jamaica\u2019s independence in 1962, the buffer class transitioned into a modern technocratic elite. They occupied influential positions in government, business, and academia, often aligning with foreign economic interests. This class was instrumental in shaping Jamaica\u2019s political economy, ensuring that colonial-era structures of wealth and power remained largely intact.\nCultural Distinctions.\nIn the past, members of the buffer class were often educated in British-style institutions and spoke Standard English, distancing themselves from Jamaican Patois, which was associated with the working-class Black population. This linguistic divide reinforced social hierarchies.\nMany attended traditional schools such as Jamaica College, Wolmer\u2019s, and Campion College et al., which historically catered to upper class Jamaicans. These institutions fostered tight-knit social circles, reinforcing their distinct status.\nIn the past, the buffer class tended to intermarry within their own group, maintaining their social advantages. This practice helped preserve their economic and political influence across generations.\nHistorically, mixed-race elites dominated commerce, banking, and managerial positions, while the Black majority was largely confined to labor-intensive roles. To a lesser extent remnants of this economic stratification persist.\nWhile some members of the buffer class supported progressive movements, many aligned with conservative or technocratic governance, favoring policies that maintained economic stability rather than radical redistribution.\nThe buffer class often embraced European fashion, music, and social etiquette, distinguishing themselves from Afro-Jamaican cultural expressions. This was evident in their participation in exclusive clubs and organizations.\nHistorical Context and Persistence.\nThe buffer class emerged as colonial intermediaries, managing plantations, businesses, and administrative roles. After independence, they transitioned into modern technocrats, maintaining their influence in government and industry. While racial barriers have eroded, class divisions remain deeply entrenched.\nComparative Perspectives.\nSimilar patterns existed in Haiti, Brazil, and other Caribbean islands, where lighter skin elites occupied privileged positions, reinforcing colonial hierarchies. In Jamaica, the persistence of this group highlights how race and class remain intertwined, shaping access to wealth and power.\nLanguages.\nEnglish, Jamaican Patois\nReligion.\nProtestant 64.8% (includes Seventh Day Adventist 12.0%, Pentecostal 11.0%, Other Church of God 9.2%, New Testament Church of God 7.2%, Baptist 6.7%, Church of God in Jamaica 4.8%, Church of God of Prophecy 4.5%, Anglican 2.8%, United Church 2.1%, Methodist 1.6%, Revived 1.4%, Brethren 0.9%, and Moravian 0.7%), Roman Catholic 2.2%, Jehovah's Witness 1.9%, Rastafarian 1.1%, other 6.5%, none 21.3%, unspecified 2.3% (2011 est.)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15664", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15664", "title": "Politics of Jamaica", "text": " \nPolitics in Jamaica takes place in the framework of a representative parliamentary democratic constitutional monarchy. The 1962 Constitution of Jamaica established a parliamentary system whose political and legal traditions closely follow those of the United Kingdom. As the head of state, King Charles III \u2013 on the advice of the prime minister of Jamaica \u2013 appoints a governor-general as his representative in Jamaica. The governor-general has a largely ceremonial role, with their parliamentary function consisting simply of granting royal assent to bills which have passed Parliament. Jamaica constitutes an independent Commonwealth realm.\nThe Constitution vests executive power in the Cabinet, led by the prime minister. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested both in the government and in the Parliament of Jamaica. The prime minister is appointed by the governor-general, the common convention being the leader of the largest party in Parliament.\nA bipartisan joint committee of the Jamaican legislature drafted Jamaica's current Constitution in 1962. That Constitution came into force with the Jamaica Independence Act, 1962 of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, which gave Jamaica political independence. Constitutional safeguards include freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of worship, freedom of movement, and freedom of association.\nThe judiciary operates independently of the executive and the legislature, with jurisprudence based on English common law.\nThe Economist rated Jamaica a 'flawed democracy' in 2023.\nLegislative branch.\nParliament is composed of an appointed Senate and an elected House of Representatives. The House consists of 63 directly elected members, who appoint their own speaker and deputy speaker. The senate has 21 members appointed for a single parliamentary term; 13 senators are nominated on the advice of the prime minister and 8 on the advice of the Leader of the Opposition. Senate members then elect their own president and deputy president, as long as they are not a minister or parliamentary secretary.\nThe House of Representatives is where most bills are initiated and where most members of the Cabinet, the Prime Minister included, sit. Every bill, to be passed into law, must be approved by the House, with a quorum of 16 members, in addition to the presiding officer, required for a vote to take place. The House determines all government finance, allocating funds and levying taxes. The House is presided over by the Speaker, who ensures the rules of the chamber are observed, and the Leader of the House, who determines what business will be done each day.\nThe Senate's main role is reviewing bills passed by the House, however, it may initiate bills as long as they are not to do with money. It may not delay budget bills for more than one month or other bills for more than seven months. No more than 4 members of the cabinet may be selected from the Senate.\nAny Commonwealth citizen aged 21 or over who has lived in Jamaica for at least a year before the election is eligible to be elected to the legislature. Those ineligible to be elected consist of those in the defence force, those serving a foreign government, those serving in a public office or justices of the Supreme Court or Court of Appeals.\nExecutive branch.\nThe 1962 Constitution established a parliamentary system based on the United Kingdom's Westminster model. As head of state, King Charles III appoints a governor-general, on the advice of the prime minister, as his representative in Jamaica. The governor-general's role is largely ceremonial. Their role is to appoint senior officials of the state, on request from the prime minister, and to grant royal assent to bills that have passed Parliament.\nExecutive power is vested in the , but exercised mostly by the Cabinet of Jamaica; led by the prime minister, currently Andrew Holness. The Cabinet consists of at least 11 ministers, each delegated a ministry to preside over and direct government policy from. Additionally, there are special bodies called statutory bodies which have direct authority over certain aspects of Government business.\nElections.\nGeneral elections must be held within five years of the forming of a new government, however, a general election can be held early if the governing party advises the governor-general to do so, or if a majority of members of the House pass a no-confidence motion against the government.\nJudicial branch.\nThe judiciary also is modelled on the British system. The Court of Appeal is the highest appellate court in Jamaica. Under certain circumstances, cases may be appealed to Britain's Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. Jamaica's parishes have elected councils that exercise limited powers of local government.\nFirearms offences, including possession of unlicensed guns and ammunition, are tried before a dedicated Gun Court established in 1974. The Gun Court hears cases \"in camera\" and practices jury trial only for cases of treason or murder. All other cases are tried by resident magistrates or justices of the Supreme Court of Jamaica.\nAdministrative divisions.\nJamaica is divided in 14 parishes: Clarendon, Hanover, Kingston, Manchester, Portland, St. Andrew, St. Ann, St. Catherine, St. Elizabeth, St. James, St. Mary, St. Thomas, Trelawny, Westmoreland. All parishes are governed by a directly elected parish council, except for Kingston and St. Andrew's which are governed by the same body. According to the Jamaican government website, these authorities are responsible for 'maintaining infrastructure and public facilities such as parochial roads, water supplies, drains, parks and recreational centres, markets, transportation centres and public sanitary conveniences'. Some parish capitals also have mayors.\nRegulatory services.\nResponsibility for water and sanitation policies within the government rests with the Ministry of Water and Housing, and the main service provider is the National Water Commission. An autonomous regulatory agency, the Office of Utilities Regulation (OUR), approves tariffs and establishes targets for efficiency increases, and also oversees the telecommunications industry.\nForeign relations.\nJamaica has diplomatic relations with most nations and is a member of the United Nations, The Commonwealth and the Organization of American States. Historically, Jamaica has had close ties with the UK. Trade, financial, and cultural relations with the United States are now predominant. Jamaica is linked with the other countries of the English-speaking Caribbean through the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), and more broadly through the Association of Caribbean States (ACS).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15665", "revid": "45883451", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15665", "title": "Economy of Jamaica", "text": "The economy of Jamaica is heavily reliant on services, accounting for 71% of the country's GDP. Jamaica has natural resources and a climate conducive to agriculture and tourism. The discovery of bauxite in the 1940s and the subsequent establishment of the bauxite-alumina industry shifted Jamaica's economy from sugar, and bananas. Weakness in the financial sector, speculation, and lower levels of investment erode confidence in the productive sector. The government continues its efforts to raise new sovereign debt in local and international financial markets to meet its U.S. dollar debt obligations, to mop up liquidity to maintain the exchange rate and to help fund the current budget deficit. The Jamaican government's economic policies encourage foreign investment in areas that earn or save foreign exchange, generate employment, and use local raw materials. The government also provides a wide range of incentives to investors.\nFree trade zones have stimulated investment in garment assembly, light manufacturing, and data entry by foreign firms. However, over the last 5 years, the garment industry has suffered from reduced export earnings, continued factory closures, and rising unemployment. The Government of Jamaica hopes to encourage economic activity through a combination of privatisation, financial sector restructuring, reduced interest rates, and by boosting tourism and related productive activities. Since the first quarter of 2006, the economy of Jamaica has undergone a period of staunch growth. With inflation for the 2006 calendar year down to 6.0% and unemployment down to 8.9%, the nominal GDP grew by an unprecedented 2.9%. An investment programme in island transportation and utility infrastructure and gains in the tourism, mining, and service sectors all contributed this figure. All projections for 2007 show an even higher potential for economic growth with all estimates over 3.0% and hampered only by urban crime and public policies. Jamaica was ranked 79th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.\nIn 2006, Jamaica became part of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME) as one of the pioneering members. The global economic downturn had a significant impact on the Jamaican economy for the years 2007 to 2009, resulting in negative economic growth. The government implemented a new Debt Management Initiative, the Jamaica Debt Exchange (JDX) on 14 January 2010. The initiative would see holders of Government of Jamaica (GOJ) bonds returning the high interest earning instruments for bonds with lower yields and longer maturities. The offer was taken up by over 95% of local financial institutions and was deemed a success by the government.\nEconomic history.\nBefore independence, Jamaica's economy was largely focused on agriculture with the vast majority of the labour force engaged in the production of sugar, bananas, and tobacco. According to one study, 18th century Jamaica had the highest wealth inequality in the world, as a very small, slave-owning elite was extremely wealthy while the rest of the population lived on the edge of subsistence. These products were mainly exported to the United Kingdom, Canada, and to the United States of America. \nJamaica's trade relationships expanded substantially from 1938 to 1946, with total imports almost doubling from \u00a36,485,000 to \u00a312,452,000.\nAfter 1962, the Jamaican government pushed for economic growth and all sectors excluding bauxite/alumina, energy, and tourism had shrunk between 1998 and 1999. In 2000, Jamaica experienced its first year of positive growth since 1995 due to continued tight macroeconomic policies.\nInflation fell from 25% in 1995 to single digits in 2000, reaching a multidecade low of 4.3% in 2004. Through periodic intervention in the market, the central bank also has prevented any abrupt drop in the exchange rate. The Jamaican dollar has been slipping, despite intervention, resulting in an average exchange rate of J$73.40 per US$1.00 and J136.2 per \u20ac1.00 (February 2011). In addition, inflation has been trending upward since 2004 and is projected to once again reach a double digit rate of 12\u201313% through the year 2008 due to a combination of unfavorable weather damaging crops and increasing agricultural imports and high energy prices.\nOver the last 30 years, real per capita GDP increased at an average of just one per cent per year, making Jamaica one of the slowest growing developing countries in the world. To reverse this trajectory, the Government of Jamaica embarked on a comprehensive and ambitious program of reforms for which it has garnered national and international support: a four-year Extended Fund Facility (EFF) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) providing a support package of US$932\u00a0million; World Bank Group and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) programs providing US$510\u00a0million each to facilitate the GoJ's economic reform agenda to stabilise the economy, reduce debt and create the conditions for growth and resilience. In addition, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) will continue to support private sector development. The Bruce Golding-led government was successful in entering into a borrowing arrangement with the IMF on 4 February 2010 for the amount of US$1.27b. The loan agreement is for a period of three years.\nIn April 2014, the Governments of Jamaica and China signed the preliminary agreements for the first phase of the Jamaican Logistics Hub (JLH) \u2013 the initiative that aims to position Kingston as the fourth node in the global logistics chain, joining Rotterdam, Dubai and Singapore, and serving the Americas. The Project, when completed, is expected to provide many jobs for Jamaicans, Economic Zones for multinational companies and much needed economic growth to alleviate the country's heavy debt-to-GDP ratio. Strict adherence to the IMF's refinancing programme and preparations for the JLH has favourably affected Jamaica's credit rating and outlook from the three biggest rating agencies. In 2018, both Moody's and Standard and Poor Credit ratings upgraded Jamaica's ratings to both \"stable and positive\" respectively.\nThe reform program is beginning to bear fruit: Institutional reforms and measures to improve the environment for the private sector have started to restore confidence in the Jamaican economy. Jamaica jumped 27 places to 58 among 189 economies worldwide in the 2015 Doing Business ranking, the country's credit rating has improved and the Government has successfully raised more than US$2 billion in the international capital in the markets in 2014 and 2015. Despite some revival, economic growth is still low: the Jamaican Government is forecasting real gross domestic product (GDP) growth of 1.9 per cent for the fiscal year 2015/2016 and the country continues to be confronted by serious social issues that predominantly affect youth, such as high levels of crime and violence and high unemployment. Jamaica, which had seen its poverty rate drop almost 20 per cent over two decades, saw it increase by eight per cent in a few years. The unemployment rate in Jamaica is approximately 6.0% (April 2022, Statistical Institute of Jamaica), with youth unemployment more than twice the national rate, albeit trending downwards (15%). However, among Jamaica's assets are its skilled labour force and strong social and governance indicators.\nPrimary industries.\nAgriculture.\nAgricultural production is an important contributor to Jamaica's economy. However, it is vulnerable to extreme weather, such as hurricanes and to competition from neighbouring countries such as the USA. Other difficulties faced by farmers include thefts from the farm, known as praedial larceny. Agricultural production accounted for 7.4% of GDP in 1997, providing employment for nearly a quarter of the country. Jamaica's agriculture, together with forestry and fishing, accounted for about 6.6% of GDP in 1999. Sugar has been produced in Jamaica for centuries, it is the nation's dominant agricultural export. Sugar is produced in nearly every parish. The production of raw sugar in the year 2000 was estimated at 175,000 tons, a decrease from 290,000 tons in 1978.\nJamaican agriculture has been less prominent in GDP in the 2000s than other industries, hitting an all-time low between 2004 and 2008. This may have been due to a reaction to increased competition as international trade policies were enacted. For example, as NAFTA was enacted in 1993, a significant amount of Caribbean exports to the United States diminished, being out competed by Latin American exports. Another example is the Banana Import Regime's 3rd phase, in which EU nations had first given priority in banana imports to previously colonised nations. Under pressure by the World Trade Organization, the EU policy was altered to provide a non-discriminatory trade agreement. Jamaica's banana industry was easily outpriced by American companies exporting Latin American goods. Jamaica's agriculture industry is now bouncing back, growing from being 6.6% of GDP to 7.2%.\nSugar formed 7.1% of the exports in 1999 and Jamaica made up about 4.8% of the total production of sugar in the Caribbean. Sugar is also used for the production of by-products such as molasses, rum and some wallboard is made from bagasse.\nBanana production in 1999 was 130,000 tons. Bananas formed 2.4% of the exports in 1999 and Jamaica formed around 7.5% of the total production of banana in the Caribbean. Jamaica stopped exporting banana in 2008 after suffering from several years of hurricanes that devastated the plantations.\nCoffee is mainly grown around the Blue Mountains and in hilly areas. One type in particular, Jamaican Blue Mountain Coffee, is considered among the best in the world because at those heights in the Blue Mountains, the cooler climate causes the berries to take longer to ripen and the beans develop more of the substances which on roasting give coffee its flavor. Coffee formed 1.9% of exports in 1999. The picking season lasts from August to March. The coffee is exported from Kingston.\nCocoa is grown throughout Jamaica and local sales absorb about 1/3 of the output to be made into instant drinks and confectionery. Citrus fruit is mainly grown in the central parts of Jamaica, particularly between the elevations of 1,000\u20132,500 feet. The picking season lasts from November to April. Two factories in Bog Walk produce fruit juices, canned fruit, essential oils and marmalade. Coconuts are grown on the northern and eastern coasts, which provide enough copra to supply factories to make butterine, margarine, lard, edible oil and laundry soap.\nVanilla is also grown.\nOther export crops are pimento, ginger, tobacco, sisal and other fruit are exported. Rice is grown around swampy areas around the Black River &amp; around Long Bay in Hanover and Westmoreland parishes for local consumption.\nAs tastes have changed in Jamaica in favour of more meat and packaged food the national food import bill has grown to the point that it threatens the health of the economy. The government has responded by encouraging gardening and farming, a response which has had limited success. For example, the percentage of potatoes grown locally has increased, but imports of french fries have continued at a high level.\nAnimal husbandry.\nPastures form a good percentage of the land in Jamaica. Many properties specialise in cattle rearing. Livestock holdings include 400,000 head of cattle, 440,000 goats and 180,000 pigs. Dairying has increased since the erection of a condensed milk factory at Bog Walk in 1940. Even so, the supply of dairy products is not enough for local requirements and there are large imports of powdered milk, butter and cheese.\nFishing.\nThe fishing industry grew during the 1900s, primarily from the focus on inland fishing. Several thousand fishermen make a living from fishing. The shallow waters and cays off the south coast are richer than the northern waters. Other fishermen live on the Pedro Cays, to the south of Jamaica.\nJamaica supplies about half of its fish requirements; major imports of frozen and salted fish are imported from the United States and Canada.\nThe total catch in 2000 was 5,676 tons, a decrease from 11,458 tons in 1997; the catch was mainly marine, with freshwater carp, barbel, etc., crustaceans &amp; molluscs.\nForestry.\nBy the late 1890, only of Jamaica's original of forest remained. Roundwood production was 881,000 cu m (31.1\u00a0million cu ft) in 2000. About 68% of the timber cut in 2000 was used as fuel wood while 32% was used for industrial use. The forests that once covered Jamaica now exist only in mountainous areas. They only supply 20% of the island timber requirements. The remaining forest is protected from further exploitation. Other accessible mountain areas are being reforested, mainly with pines, mahoe and mahogany.\nMining.\nJamaica was the third-leading producer of bauxite and alumina in 1998, producing 12.6\u00a0million tons of bauxite, accounting for 10.4% of world production, and 3.46\u00a0million tons of alumina, accounting for 7.4% of world production. 8,540 million tons of bauxite was mined in 2012 and 10,200\u00a0million tons of bauxite in 2011. \nMining and quarrying made up 4.1% of the nation's gross domestic product in 1999. Bauxite and alumina formed 55.2% of exports in 1999 and are the second-leading money earner after tourism. Jamaica has reserves of over 2\u00a0billion tonnes, which are expected to last 100 years. Bauxite is found in the central parishes of St. Elizabeth, Manchester, Clarendon, St. Catherine, St. Ann, and Trelawny. There are four alumina plants and six mines.\nJamaica has deposits of several million tons of gypsum on the southern slopes of the Blue Mountains. Jamaica produced 330,441 tons of gypsum in the year 2000, some of which was used in the local cement industry and in the manufacturing of building materials.\nOther minerals present in Jamaica include marble, limestone, and silica, as well as ores of copper, lead, zinc, manganese and iron. Some of these are worked in small quantities. Petroleum has been sought, but so far none has been found.\nSecondary Industries.\nManufacturing.\nThe manufacturing sector is an essential contributor to the Jamaican economy. Though manufacturing accounted for 13.9% of GDP in 1999. Jamaican companies contribute many manufactures such as food processing; oil refining; produced chemicals, construction materials, plastic goods, paints, pharmaceuticals, cartons, leather goods and cigars &amp; assembled electronics, textiles and apparel. The garment industry is a major job employer for thousands of hundreds of locals and they formed 12.9% of exports in 1999 earning US$159\u00a0million. Chemicals formed 3.3% of the exports in 1999 earning US$40\u00a0million.\nA portion of the bauxite mined on the island is processed into alumina before export.\nAn oil refinery is located near Kingston converts crude petroleum obtained from Venezuela into gasoline and other products. These are mainly for local use. The construction industry is growing due to new hotels and attractions being built for tourism. Construction and installation formed 10.4% of the GDP in 1999.\nManufactured goods were imported and formed 30.3% of the imports and cost US$877\u00a0million in 1999.\nSince the launch of the Jamaican Logistics Hub initiative, various economic zones have been proposed throughout the country to assemble goods from other parts of the world for distribution to the Americas.\nPetroleum industry.\nPetrojam, Jamaica's national and only petroleum refinery, is co-owned by the Government of Venezuela. Petrojam, \"..operates a 35,000 barrel per day hydro-skimming refinery, to produce Automotive Diesel Oil; Heavy Fuel Oil; Kerosene/Jet Fuel, Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG), Asphalt and Gasoline.\" Customers include the Power industry, Aircraft refuellers, and Local Marketing companies. On 20 February 2019, the Jamaican Government voted to retake ownership of Venezuela's 49% share.\nTertiary industries.\nTourism.\nTourism is tied with remittances as Jamaica's top source of revenue. The tourism industry earns over 50 per cent of the country's total foreign exchange earnings and provides about one-fourth of all jobs in Jamaica. Most tourist activity is centered on the island's northern coast, including the communities of Montego Bay, Ocho Rios, and Port Antonio, as well as in Negril on the island's western tip.\nSome destinations include Ocho Rios, Green Grotto Caves, Y.S. Falls and Appleton Estate. Most of the tourist sites are landmarks as well as homes for many Jamaicans. Many of the most frequented tourist sites are located mainly by water such as rivers and beaches where fishermen make a living from seafood. One of the most famous beach towns in Jamaica is Ocho Rios, a located in the parish of Saint Ann on the north coast of Jamaica. It was once a fishing village but now attracts millions of tourists yearly. The site is popular today because of the food and culture that can be found there.\nAnother famous location in Jamaica that attracts millions yearly is Dunn's River Falls, located in Ocho Rios; this waterfall is approximately 600 feet long and runs off into the sea. Around the location many hotels and restaurants are available and many street vendors sell food around the clock. Another well-known beach town is Negril, the party capital of the country. This beach town has many different factors to add to the night life.\nLogistics.\nIn April 2014, the Governments of Jamaica and China signed the preliminary agreements for the first phase of the Jamaican Logistics Hub (JLH) \u2013 the initiative that aims to position Kingston as the fourth node in the global logistics chain, joining Rotterdam, Dubai and Singapore, and serving the Americas. The Project, when completed, is expected to provide many jobs for Jamaicans, Economic Zones for multinational companies and much needed economic growth to alleviate the country's heavy debt-to-GDP ratio. Strict adherence to the IMF's refinancing programme and preparations for the JLH has favourably affected Jamaica's credit rating and outlook from the three biggest rating agencies.\nICT/BPO.\nJamaica has made strides in developing its Information and Communications Technology (ICT) infrastructure. \nAs the largest English speaking territory in the Caribbean, Jamaica is the region's leading contact centre location with over 87 information communications technology/business process outsourcing (ICT/BPO) companies operating in the country employing 44,000 full-time agents.\nTaxation/Tax Rates.\nJamaican tax rates are extremely favourable in world standards, the brackets are as follows:\nSeparate Tax Rates apply for foreign nationals.\nEconomic Data.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132024. Inflation below 5% is in green.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15666", "revid": "36746535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15666", "title": "Telecommunications in Jamaica", "text": "Telecommunications in Jamaica include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephony, and Internet services. The sector is regulated by the \"Office of Utilities Regulation (OUR)\" and the \"Spectrum Management Authority (SMA)\" under the \"Ministry of Science, Energy and Technology (MSET).\"\nJamaica\u2019s telecom market is one of the most advanced in the Caribbean, with near-universal mobile coverage and growing broadband access. Liberalization in the early 2000s led to rapid expansion in mobile services, driven by \"Digicel Jamaica\" and \"Flow Jamaica\" (formerly LIME/Cable &amp; Wireless).\nHistory.\nBefore liberalization, the market was dominated by \"Cable &amp; Wireless Jamaica\" which provided fixed-line and international services, until new entrants were allowed in the early 2000s.\nIn 2001, the government opened the telecom market to competition, issuing mobile licenses to \"Digicel\" and \"Oceanic Digital (MiPhone)\". By 2004, overall teledensity surpassed 100 per 100 inhabitants (driven by explosive mobile growth), placing Jamaica among the leaders in the Caribbean at that time.\n\"MiPhone\" (Oceanic Digital) was acquired by \"Am\u00e9rica M\u00f3vil\" in 2007 and rebranded as \"Claro Jamaica.\" In 2011-2012 the Government approved and Digicel completed the acquisition of \"Claro Jamaica\", consolidating the market into two main operators (Digicel and Flow/Cable &amp; Wireless).\nIn the 2010s, both companies expanded 3G and LTE networks. \"Digicel\" launched LTE service in June 2016, followed by \"Flow\" which progressed its LTE rollout during 2016-2017 after spectrum applications and initial site activations.\nFrom 2021 onward, the regulator initiated consultations and spectrum processes to prepare for next-generation services (including 5G). Public statements and industry events in 2022-2024 discussed trials and readiness, though widescale commercial deployment remained limited.\nTelecommunications.\nJamaica is a member of the North American Numbering Plan (NANP). The NANP Administrator (NANPA) has allocated the area codes 876 and 658 for use in the country, which is a single numbering plan area (NPA) with an overlay numbering plan. The national telephone number format is NPA-NXX-XXXX, where N is one of the digits 2 through 9, and X is any digit.\nFor international dialing to Jamaica, the country code is \"1\".\nFor accessing international destinations from within Jamaica, the international call prefix is \"011\".\nCalls from Jamaica to other NANP nations, such as the U.S. and Canada, are dialed as 1 + NANP area code + 7-digit number.\nJamaica has a fully digital telephone communication system.\nMobile telephony.\nThe country's three mobile operators \u2013 Cable and Wireless (once marketed as LIME \u2013 Landline, Internet, Mobile and Entertainment now named FLOW), Digicel, and at one point Oceanic Digital (operating as MiPhone and now known as Claro since late 2008) until the carrier was acquired and the relevant spectrum sold to Digicel \u2013 have spent millions in network upgrade and expansion. Both Digicel and Oceanic Digital were granted licences in 2001 to operate mobile services in the newly liberalised telecom market that had once been the sole domain of the incumbent Cable and Wireless monopoly. Digicel opted for the more widely used GSM wireless system, while Oceanic opted for the CDMA standard. Cable and Wireless, which had begun with TDMA standard, subsequently upgraded to GSM, and currently utilises both standards on its network.\nWith wireless usage increasing, landlines supplied by Cable and Wireless have declined from just over half a million to roughly three hundred thousand as of 2006. In a bid to grab more market share, Cable and Wireless recently launched a new land line service called HomeFone Prepaid that would allow customers to pay for minutes they use rather than pay a set monthly fee for service, much like prepaid wireless service.\nTwo more licenses were auctioned by the Jamaican government to provide mobile services on the island, including one that was previously owned by AT&amp;T Wireless but never utilized, and one new license.\nAnother entrant to the Jamaican communications market, FLOW, laid a new submarine cable connecting Jamaica to the United States. This new cable increases the total number of submarine cables connecting Jamaica internationally to four. The company's parent was acquired by Cable and Wireless Communications in November 2014 and finalized in March 2015. The new FLOW was re-launched as a successor to LIME and the old Flow on August 31, 2015; offering mobile, fixed voice, fixed broadband and TV services to the market. It has now become the first quad-play provider in Jamaica. The company runs a vast copper network (inherited from LIME) islandwide as well as a Hybrid Fiber and Coaxial network (from the old Flow) in the metropolitan areas of Kingston and Montego Bay. They also have small Fiber-to-the-home operations in certain sections of St. James that began in 2011 (under LIME). On the mobile side, the company had completed its 4G HSPA+ rollout (capable of speeds up to 21\u00a0Mbit/s) across the island in November 2015 and has announced plans to move to LTE within the year 2016. However, Digicel has become the first LTE network operator in Jamaica, going live with their network on June 9, 2016.\nInternet.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight.\nThe law provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. An independent press, generally effective judicial protection, and a functioning democratic political system combine to ensure freedom of speech and press. The independent media are active and express a wide variety of views without restriction. Broadcast media were largely state owned, but open to pluralistic points of view. Although the constitution prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, in practice the police conduct searches without warrants.\nA law decriminalizing defamation was passed by the Jamaican House of Representatives in November 2013 after being approved unanimously by the Senate the previous July. It took six years to amend the libel and slander laws, which \u2013 although little used \u2013 made media offences punishable by imprisonment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15667", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15667", "title": "Transport in Jamaica", "text": " \nTransport in Jamaica consists of roadways, railways, ship and air transport, with roadways forming the backbone of the island's internal transport system.\nRoadways.\nThe Jamaican road network consists of almost 21,000 kilometres of roads, of which over 15,000 kilometres are paved. The Jamaican Government has, since the late 1990s and in cooperation with private investors, embarked on a campaign of infrastructural improvement projects, one of which includes the creation of a system of freeways, the first such access-controlled roadways of their kind on the island, connecting the main population centres of the island. This project has so far seen the completion of 33 kilometres of freeway.\nThe Highway 2000 project, which seeks ultimately to link Kingston with Montego Bay and the north coast, is currently undergoing a series of phases/legs. Phase 1 is the highway network between Kingston and Mandeville, which itself has been divided into sub-phases: Phase 1a (Kingston-Bushy Park (in actuality, Kingston-Sandy Bay) highway and the upgrade of the Portmore Causeway), which was completed June 2006, and Phase 1b (Sandy Bay-Williamsfield). Phase 2a is the highway between Old Harbour and Ocho Rios, and Phase 2b is the highway between Mandeville and Montego Bay.\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\" .\n&lt;br&gt;\"paved:\" .\n&lt;br&gt;\"unpaved:\" (1997 est.).\nBuses.\nThe Jamaica Omnibus Service (JOS) was a municipal bus system that served the Kingston metropolitan area that ran from 1953 to 1983. After being run by British Electric Traction, the JOS was nationalised by the Jamaican government in 1974. It was replaced by a hodgepodge of privately operated buses, and a national bus system called the Jamaica Urban Transit Company (JUTC) was established in 1998 after complaints. The JUTC presently oversees more than 70 routes in areas including Kingston and Spanish Town.\nCoaches are a notable means of travel in Jamaica; a popular privately operated coach service is the Knutsford Express. The JUTC also provides charter buses. As for minibuses and route taxis, PPV number plates indicate licensed public transport, whereas JUTA plates indicate tourist routes.\nHaving been proposed in 2019, the JUTC began testing floating solar electric buses in 2022, hoping to gradually introduce electric buses into the fleet and eventually phase out diesel buses.\nRailways.\nRailways in Jamaica, as in many other countries, no longer enjoy the prominent position they once did, having been largely replaced by roadways as the primary means of transport. Of the 272 kilometres of railway found in Jamaica, only 57 kilometres remain in operation, currently used to transport bauxite.\nIn 2008, with increasing traffic congestion, moves are being made to reconstruct old railway lines.\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\" 370\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"standard gauge:\" 370\u00a0km gauge. Of these, 207\u00a0km belong to the Jamaica Railway Corporation in common carrier service but are no longer operational. The other 163\u00a0km is privately owned and used to transport bauxite.\nAir Transport.\nThere are two international airports in Jamaica with modern terminals, long runways, and the navigational equipment required to accommodate the large jet aircraft used in modern air travel: Norman Manley International Airport in the capital, Kingston and Sangster International Airport in the resort city of Montego Bay. Both airports were once home to the country's (now defunct) national airline, Air Jamaica. In addition there are local commuter airports at Tinson Pen (Kingston), Port Antonio, Ocho Rios, Mandeville, and Negril that cater to internal flights only. The Ian Fleming International Airport opened in February 2011 to serve the Ocho Rios - Port Antonio area. Many other small, rural centres are served by private fields on sugar estates or bauxite mines.\nPorts and Shipping.\nOwing to its location in the Caribbean Sea in the shipping lane to the Panama Canal and relative proximity to large markets in North America and emerging markets in Latin America, Jamaica receives high container traffic. The container terminal at the Port of Kingston has undergone large expansion in capacity in recent years to handle growth both already realised as well as what is projected in coming years.\nThere are several other ports positioned around the island, including the alumina ports, Port Esquivel in St. Catherine (WINDALCO), Rocky Point in Clarendon and Port Kaiser in St. Elizabeth. Port Rhoades in Discovery Bay is responsible for transporting bauxite dried at the adjacent Kaiser plant. Reynolds Pier in Ocho Rios is responsible for exporting sugar. Montego Freeport in Montego Bay also handles a variety of cargo like (though more limited than) the Port of Kingston, mainly agricultural products. Boundbrook Port in Port Antonio exports bananas. There are also three cruise ship piers along the island, in Ocho Rios, Montego Bay and Port Antonio.\nThe Kingston port is situated in the Kingston Harbour, which is the 7th largest natural (i.e. not man made) harbour in the world.\nLighthouses.\nAs the island is a large exporter of bauxite, there is considerable freighter traffic. To aid navigation, Jamaica operates nine lighthouses\nPipelines.\nPetroleum products: .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15668", "revid": "271068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15668", "title": "Military of Jamaica", "text": ""}
{"id": "15669", "revid": "42975076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15669", "title": "Foreign relations of Jamaica", "text": " \nJamaica has diplomatic relations with many nations and is a member of the United Nations and the Organization of American States. Jamaica chairs the Working Group on smaller Economies.\nJamaica is an active member of the Commonwealth of Nations and the Non-Aligned Movement (G-77). Jamaica is a beneficiary of the Lome Conventions, through which the European Union (EU) grants trade preferences to selected states in Asia, the Caribbean, and the Pacific, and has played a leading role in the negotiations of the successor agreement in Fiji in 2000.\nJamaica has been a member of The Forum of Small States (FOSS) since the group's founding in 1992.\nDisputes - international:\nnone\nIllicit drugs:\nTransshipment point for cocaine from Central and South America to North America and Europe; illicit cultivation of cannabis; government has an active manual cannabis eradication program\nThe Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade is the government ministry responsible for handling Jamaica's external relations and foreign trade.\nHistory.\nHistorically, Jamaica has had close ties with the UK. Trade, financial, and cultural relations with the United States are now predominant. Jamaica is linked with the other countries of the English-speaking Caribbean through the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), and more broadly through the Association of Caribbean States (ACS). Jamaica has served two 2-year terms on the United Nations Security Council, in 1979-80 and 2000-2001.\nIn the follow-on meetings to the December 1994 Summit of the Americas, Jamaica\u2014together with Uruguay\u2014was given the responsibility of coordinating discussions on invigorating society.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Jamaica maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nJamaica maintains economic and cultural relations with Taiwan via Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Canada.\nJamaica and the Commonwealth.\nJamaica has been a member state of the Commonwealth of Nations since 1962 when it became an independent Commonwealth realm.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15670", "revid": "1752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15670", "title": "Science and technology in Jamaica", "text": "The Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) sector in Jamaica is guided by two primary institutions \u2013 the National Commission on Science and Technology (NCST) and the Scientific Research Council (SRC). Both operate under the Ministry of Science, Energy, Telecommunications and Transport (MSETT).\nHistory.\nJamaica\u2019s earliest known scientific practices were those of the Ta\u00edno, a subgroup of the Arawak who migrated from South America c.\u202fAD\u202f600\u2013900. They detoxified cassava, farmed in conuco mounds for soil conservation and drainage, and used native plants such as \"Guaiacum\" for medicinal purposes. Some of these traditions continue to shape agriculture and medicine on the island today.\nThe British colonial period marked the start of institutionalised science and technology in Jamaica. In 1768, the island became the first in the Caribbean to adopt steam power for sugarcane processing, installing one of the earliest steam engines in the Americas. In 1779, the colonial government established the Bath Botanic Garden to introduce new plant species and conduct agricultural experiments in support of economic development. By 1798, Jamaica had built one of the first piped water systems in the Western Hemisphere, powered by a large Persian water wheel on the Martha Brae River. In 1845, Jamaica opened its first railway line \u2013 the second in the British colonies and among the earliest in the Western Hemisphere outside the United States \u2013 using rail technology to boost trade and connect communities. By the 1870s, innovations such as vacuum pans for sugar refining and steam\u2011powered mills were significantly improving the efficiency of sugarcane production. In 1879, Governor Sir Anthony Musgrave founded the Institute of Jamaica \u2013 the island\u2019s first institution dedicated to the public dissemination of scientific knowledge. The 1890s brought another leap forward: in 1892, Kingston became one of the first cities in the world to have electricity \u2013 only thirteen years after Edison\u2019s invention of the electric lamp. Alongside these advances, Jamaica was one of the earliest developing countries to enact measures guiding the use of science in managing its natural resources.\nPost\u2013Second World War advancements strengthened Jamaica\u2019s science, technology, and innovation (STI) framework. The University of the West Indies (UWI), established in 1948, pioneered medical research on regional health challenges such as diabetes and sickle cell disease. Its Tropical Metabolism Research Unit, founded in 1958 and later incorporated into the Caribbean Institute for Health Research (CAIHR), made significant contributions to tropical metabolism and epidemiology. Around the same time, the Jamaica Institute of Technology was established and became the College of Arts, Science and Technology (CAST) in 1959, focusing on technical education before evolving into the University of Technology, Jamaica in 1995. In 1960, the Scientific Research Council (SRC) was established to collect, evaluate and disseminate scientific and technical knowledge, advancing research in agriculture, industry, and environmental sustainability. These institutions supported applied research and innovation, such as the work of UWI chemist Professor Kenneth Magnus, who in the late 1950s discovered the antibiotic Monamycin \u2013 named after the Mona Campus. By the early 1960s, Jamaica had the beginnings of a scientific and technical infrastructure that offered potential for supporting post\u2011independence national development.\nScience and technology policy.\nBackground and Early Challenges.\nSince gaining independence in 1962, Jamaica has pursued national development through industrialisation, education reform, and public sector modernisation. Science, technology, and innovation (STI) have gradually emerged as strategic tools to support these efforts \u2013 particularly in improving productivity, expanding infrastructure and enhancing service delivery. In 1990, the government formalised its commitment to STI with the National Science and Technology Policy \u2013 laying the groundwork for integrating innovation into key sectors. In 1993, the National Commission on Science and Technology (NCST) was established to advise on and coordinate national STI policy, whilst the Scientific Research Council (SRC) promoted nationwide scientific research and its application. However, systemic challenges (such as inadequate funding, fragmented governance, and limited resources) hindered progress in subsequent decades. In 2016, the government established the Ministry of Science, Energy and Technology (MSET), followed by a Science Division in 2018 \u2013 marking a shift in national priorities by transferring Jamaica\u2019s scientific leadership from the SRC and NCST to direct ministerial oversight. Building on this, the government intensified its focus through updated policies and national strategies to modernise infrastructure, increase investment, and better integrate STI into development goals. The overarching aim is to position Jamaica as a key contributor in information technology and scientific innovation.\nNational Development Strategy and Digital Infrastructure.\nIn 2009, Jamaica launched Vision 2030, a national development plan to achieve developed status by 2030. National Outcome 11, \"A Technology\u2011Enabled Society\", prioritises digital innovation and technological advancement as key drivers of economic growth. In pursuit of this vision, the government has enacted a range of policies to build digital capacity. The National Broadband Initiative, launched in December 2020, aims for universal high-speed internet access by 2025, treating connectivity as a public good. By 2021, broadband covered 77 per cent of the population, with efforts ongoing to close gaps. The Public Wi-Fi Hotspot Programme, led by the Universal Service Fund, expanded from 13 hotspots in 2021 to over 380 by mid-2025, providing free access to hundreds of thousands in townships and underserved areas to promote digital inclusion. The Data Protection Act (2020), which came into effect in December 2023, establishes a framework for responsible data management. These initiatives aim to drive digital trust, broaden access and enable innovation.\nFurther reforms between 2019 and 2025 focused on strengthening research capacity, public-private collaboration, digital readiness and targeted enterprise development programmes. A key milestone was the finalisation of the National Science, Technology and Innovation Policy: Catalysing National Development, which replaced the 1990 framework. Other major initiatives included the National Digital Transformation Strategy, open data expansion, and STEM education recommendations. The Coding in Schools Programme, piloted in 2021 and integrated into the national curriculum, equips students with foundational skills in logic, creativity and digital problem-solving. The Amber HEART Coding Academy, a 2021 public-private partnership with the Amber Group, offers year-long residential training in software development and industry internships. Alongside this, the STEM Ambassador Programme, run by the Scientific Research Council, connects students with mentors for career guidance and workshops to sustain interest in science and technology. Workforce development was also advanced through the Global Services Sector Project (2019\u20132024), which enhanced post-secondary training systems and supported the transition into high-value digital occupations. The Boosting Innovation, Growth and Entrepreneurship Ecosystem Programme, launched in 2020, funds start-ups, MSMEs and research commercialisation.\nIntellectual Property Protection.\nJamaica has one of the strongest intellectual property (IP) regimes in Latin America and the Caribbean, ranking fourth in the 2024 \"International Property Rights Index\". The Patents and Designs Act\u202f2020, effective February\u202f2022, simplified patent and design applications\u202f\u2014\u202faligning with the Patent Cooperation Treaty and the Hague Agreement on Industrial Designs. Amendments to the Trade Marks Act in\u202f2021 enabled Jamaica\u2019s accession to the Madrid Protocol in March\u202f2022, streamlining international trademark registration. Additionally, the Trade Marks (Amendment) Rules\u202f2022, effective September\u202f2023, expedited examination processes and revised fee structures.\nNuclear Science and Regulatory Institutions.\nSince the 1980s, Jamaica has successfully operated a 20 kW SLOWPOKE-2 nuclear reactor \u2014 the only such facility in the Caribbean. Managed by the International Centre for Environmental and Nuclear Sciences (ICENS) at the University of the West Indies, it supports neutron activation analysis for environmental monitoring, geochemical mapping, food studies, health research and agricultural trace-element analysis for land use and crop management. In 2015, over 30 years after commissioning, its core was converted to low-enriched uranium to enhance safety and non-proliferation.\nIn late 2020, Jamaica became the first CARICOM member state to establish an independent nuclear\u2010safety regulator \u2014 the Hazardous Substances Regulatory Authority (HSRA). Industry Minister Audley Shaw noted the move would allow Jamaica to \u201cconfidently forge ahead\u201d in applying nuclear science to national development and wealth-creation strategies. Under the 2019 Nuclear Safety and Radiation Protection Regulations, HSRA oversees facilities utilising ionising radiation and nuclear technology, including the SLOWPOKE reactor. Supported by the International Atomic Energy Agency, Jamaica has strengthened its nuclear infrastructure \u2014 training technicians, certifying operators and upgrading facilities to meet international phytosanitary and export standards, while also expanding irradiation programmes into new fields such as agriculture and public health. This has positioned Jamaica as a regional leader in radiation safety, actively sharing expertise and best practices with other CARICOM member states.\nBuilding on this foundation, in October 2024, Jamaica signed a memorandum of understanding with Atomic Energy of Canada Limited (AECL) and Canadian Nuclear Laboratories (CNL) to explore small modular reactors (SMRs) for cutting energy costs and reducing reliance on fossil fuels. While deployment remains a long-term goal, this initiative aligns with Vision 2030 objectives of advancing energy security, reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and promoting sustainable economic growth through advanced nuclear technology. Challenges include high upfront costs, complex licensing and the need for disaster\u2011resilient infrastructure in a hurricane\u2011prone region. Ongoing consultation with the HSRA and international partners aims to address these through phased research and capacity\u2011building.\nRenewable Energy.\nWhile nuclear energy remains a long-term ambition, Jamaica is actively expanding renewable electricity through solar, wind and hydropower. Key projects include:\nWigton Windfarm (Manchester): The largest wind energy facility in the English-speaking Caribbean, with a capacity of 63 MW.\nParadise Park Solar Farm (Westmoreland): A 51 MWp solar installation generating over 80 GWh annually\u2014one of the region\u2019s largest.\nMaggotty Hydropower Plant (St. Elizabeth): A 7.2 MW facility commissioned in 2014, contributing to Jamaica\u2019s hydropower capacity.\nBattery Storage Systems: A 171.5 MW project is planned to replace the Hunts Bay Power Plant by 2028, integrating 133 MW of solar and 43.02 kWh of lithium-based storage to enhance grid stability.\nPolicies supporting these efforts include the Electricity (Net Billing) Regulations, 2022, which enable households and businesses to sell excess solar power to the grid through contracts with the Jamaica Public Service Company. Net billing also provides credit for surplus electricity exported, encouraging broader adoption of distributed renewable energy. Additionally, the Integrated Resource Plan 2, approved in 2024, sets a target of 50 per cent renewable electricity by 2030 through solar, wind, hydro and storage.\nPolicy Impact.\nJamaica\u2019s policy framework is beginning to deliver tangible results, as seen in recent developments in science, technology, and innovation:\nSoftware development is gaining momentum, supported by government policy and a growing local tech ecosystem. Initiatives such as Coding in Schools and Amber HEART Coding Academy have trained nearly 500 graduates by early 2024, with Amber aiming to train 20,000 by 2029 \u2014 advancing digital education and driving growth in the software sector.\nJamaica's global services industry is diversifying beyond traditional business process outsourcing (BPO), expanding into knowledge process outsourcing (KPO), IT support, healthcare, cybersecurity, finance, and data analytics. This shift aligns with the Global Digital Services Sector Project (2021\u20132025), which promotes higher-value service roles through training and digital infrastructure. International firms like reported a 2,100 per cent increase in Jamaican hires from 2020 to 2022, reflecting the expansion of the country\u2019s skilled digital workforce trained through national programmes. Platforms such as The Hive Careers further strengthen workforce development by providing industry-recognised certifications and matching professionals with opportunities across the tech industry.\"\"\nJamaica\u2019s innovation ecosystem has seen measurable progress through the Boosting Innovation, Growth and Entrepreneurship Ecosystem (BIGEE) programme, launched in 2020. By early 2024, BIGEE had disbursed over US$9.9 million to 1,462 micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and supported 50 ecosystem institutions, leading to an average 25 per cent increase in sales and 15 per cent growth in employment among participating firms. These businesses also raised over J$100 million in additional funding, enhancing their financial capacity. The programme\u2019s IGNITE component backed 82 early-stage ventures, which reported a 60 per cent average sales increase. BIGEE also launched a J$100 million Patent Grant Fund in October 2022, providing up to J$4 million per applicant to cover 80 per cent of costs for local and international filings. The first cycle supported four Jamaican inventors, whose innovations span agriculture, health, manufacturing, and clean energy, with patent applications filed in Jamaica, the United States, the United Kingdom, China, and the European Union.\nJamaica\u2019s renewable energy sector continues to expand. By early 2024, 436 solar systems were licensed under the Electricity (Net Billing) Regulations, 2022, adding 8.5 MW of distributed capacity to the grid. Following Cabinet approval of the Integrated Resource Plan 2 (IRP-2) in November 2024, 99.83 MW of new solar capacity was competitively secured, with contracts awarded to Wigton Energy and Sunterra Energy Jamaica. By year-end, total installed renewable capacity reached 188 MW\u2014representing 10\u201315 per cent of national electricity generation. Jamaica\u2019s progress is reflected in its Bloomberg NEF Climatescope ranking, climbing eight spots to 39th globally and reaching 10th in Latin America and the Caribbean for renewable energy investment attractiveness.\nJamaica\u2019s nuclear sector is evolving, demonstrated by its use of technology to support national development. Key policies, such as the 2019 Nuclear Safety and Radiation Protection Regulations, have been pivotal in establishing the regulatory framework that underpins these advancements. A notable example is the 2022 opening of a public nuclear medicine centre, established to reduce cancer diagnostic wait times through advanced imaging and treatment. Another outcome is the Mango Irradiation Programme, which reopened access to the U.S. market after a 20-year hiatus. Updated regulations enabled import compliance and programme participation. By mid-2025, the installation of a multi-purpose gamma irradiator at the International Centre for Environmental and Nuclear Sciences (ICENS) facilitated domestic irradiation for pest control, agricultural research, and medical sterilisation.\nTogether, these developments offer growing evidence that targeted policy efforts are driving digital and economic progress. If sustained, this trajectory could elevate Jamaica\u2019s prominence in science, technology and innovation. While the country currently ranks 83rd out of 133 economies on the 2025 Global Innovation Index, continued momentum and investment may support gradual improvements in future assessments.\nExpenditure on research and development.\nPublic Investment.\nIn 2002, gross domestic expenditure on research and development (GERD) was just 0.06\u202fper\u202fcent of GDP \u2014 far below the global average of 2.03\u202fper\u202fcent at the time. By 2024, the \"UNESCO GO\u2011SPIN\" country profile estimated GERD at 0.07 per cent \u2014 still well under the global average of 2.01\u202fper\u202fcent and the Latin America and Caribbean average of 0.6\u20130.7\u202fper\u202fcent. Improved economic conditions enabled the first dedicated J$200\u202fmillion grant for research and development (R&amp;D) in the 2019\u20132020 Budget. In 2020, R&amp;D was formally integrated into GDP calculations, a step Finance Minister Nigel Clarke deemed vital for research investment. Momentum continued with J$2\u202fbillion seed capital allocation for a micro, small and medium\u2011sized enterprise (MSME) equity fund (public\u2011private partnership) in the 2021\u20132022 Budget. By 2023/24, R&amp;D allocations reached J$834.9 million, up six per cent, supporting the Scientific Research Council (SRC) in enhancing laboratories and testing capacity. For 2024/25, J$828.8 million was allocated to the SRC\u2019s product research activities, supporting MSMEs, agricultural innovation, science education and technology transfer. Despite this progress, spending remains well below international benchmarks, with the government targeting 1.5 per cent of GDP by 2029.\nPrivate Sector Participation and Incentives.\nPrivate-sector expenditure on R&amp;D remains unevenly documented. A 2019 editorial in \"The Gleaner\" noted the absence of systematic data on firm-level investment. Available evidence suggests private firms contribute mainly to agriculture, agro\u2011processing, digital services, biotechnology and nutraceuticals. While these pockets of activity exist, indicators point to low private\u2011sector R&amp;D intensity. Recent policies \u2014 including targeted fiscal incentives, innovation grants, BIGEE and broader investment reforms outlined in the National Investment Policy (2022) \u2014 aim to stimulate greater private-sector participation in applied research and product development.\nInstitutions.\nA range of institutions support Jamaica\u2019s scientific, technical, and professional research capacity:\nScience output &amp; publications.\nJamaica\u2019s scientific research output has grown steadily over the past decade, with notable activity in health sciences. According to the \"UNESCO Science Report 2021,\" publication volume rose by 26 per cent from 265 articles in 2011 to 335 in 2019. Between 2014 and 2016, Jamaica ranked fourth within CARICOM for average of relative citations, achieving a score of 1.36 \u2013 surpassing the G20 average of 1.02. From 2017 to 2019, Jamaican researchers contributed over 20\u202fper cent of CARICOM\u2019s published health\u2011science articles, highlighting the country\u2019s regional prominence in this field. During the same period, Jamaican scholars co-authored 379 publications with the United States, 118 with the United Kingdom, 95 with Canada, 52 with France and 51 with Mexico, focusing on public health, agriculture, and environmental sustainability. In 2018, Jamaica had 282 researchers per million inhabitants, primarily in higher education, and in 2019, produced 114 publications per million inhabitants across all disciplines. The \"UNESCO GO-SPIN 2024\" country profile reports that Jamaican authors published 358 Scopus-indexed articles in 2023, ranking second within CARICOM. Approximately 90 per cent of national output originated from the University of the West Indies (UWI), underscoring its institutional dominance in regional science. Between 1 May 2024 and 30 April 2025, the \"Nature Index\" recorded a total research output of 21 articles (Share\u202f2.93) for the University of the West Indies. Subject-area totals included biological sciences (Count\u202f8, Share\u202f0.23), earth and environmental sciences (Count\u202f8, Share\u202f1.49), health sciences (Count\u202f9, Share\u202f0.85) and physical sciences (Count\u202f2, Share\u202f0.66). During that period, UWI ranked first internationally among academic institutions by Share in both biological sciences and earth and environmental sciences. It also ranked first internationally among academic institutions overall, and second internationally across all sectors, based on the proportion of its research published outside its home country.\nJamaica\u2019s research landscape includes a number of institutions contributing across diverse fields. The \"\" globally ranks 2,626,677 scientists from 24,577 universities and institutions across 222 countries. Within this framework, it lists 13 Jamaican universities and research institutions, comprising a total of 570 ranked scientists. The University of the West Indies (UWI) has the highest number of ranked scientists among Jamaican institutions. Of UWI\u2019s listed researchers, 17 are in the top 10 per cent globally (including one in the top three per cent), 52 are in the top 20 per cent, with 91 in the top 30 per cent. These researchers are active in areas such as medical and health sciences, engineering, and environmental studies. Other institutions listed include the University of Technology, Jamaica (UTech), which has published work in engineering and applied sciences, and has one scientist ranked in the top 30 per cent globally. Jamaica\u2019s 2025 ranking in the \"AD Index\" places it 14th in Latin America and the Caribbean, higher than any other CARICOM member state. While the \"UNESCO Science Report 2021\" highlights a moderate per capita publication rate (114 publications per million inhabitants in 2019 \u2013 ranking ninth among CARICOM countries), the AD \"Index\" assesses research quality and productivity through citation-based metrics \u2013 highlighting a Jamaican research landscape defined less by per capita volume and more by depth, influence and international visibility. The Scientific Research Council (SRC) plays a complementary role in science output, completing 13,918 analyses across sectors like food, water and environment in 2023\u20132024, and developing 49 unique products through its Food Product Development Unit.\nAmong Jamaica\u2019s most notable scholarly publications is the \"Jamaica Journal\", a peer\u2011reviewed periodical issued by the Institute of Jamaica since 1967. It publishes work in history, natural sciences, literature and the arts, and attracts an international readership that includes the Jamaican diaspora in North America and Europe. Complementing this is the \"Jamaican Journal of Science and Technology\", published by the Scientific Research Council since 1990 (building on earlier SRC journals from the 1960s), which focuses on applied research in environmental science, engineering, innovation and technology transfer. Another longstanding publication is the \"West Indian Medical Journal\", produced by the University of the West Indies, Mona, since 1951 (originally the \"Jamaica Medical Review\"), which publishes clinical and biomedical research relevant to the Caribbean and frequently features work by Jamaican authors.\nScience activities.\nNotable activities aimed at promoting science and innovation include:\nScience Resource Centre &amp; Innovation Laboratory: Opened in 2018, this facility supports the development of revenue-generating clean technology enterprises across the region. It is the first of its kind in the Caribbean.\nPublic Wi-Fi Hotspot Programme: As of 2025, more than 380 public Wi-Fi hotspots have been established across Jamaica, providing free internet access and supporting digital inclusion initiatives.\nScience and Technology Fairs: These events offer students and researchers a platform to showcase innovations and engage the public in scientific exploration and learning.\nInnovation and Invention Competitions: Jamaica encourages grassroots innovation through national competitions that promote creativity, problem-solving, and entrepreneurship. These include the National Innovation Competition, organized by the National Commission on Science and Technology, as well as youth-focused invention challenges supported by public agencies and private sector partners. Such initiatives aim to identify promising ideas, support commercialization, and foster a culture of innovation aligned with national development goals.\nRecognition and awards.\n\"See also: List of Jamaicans - Science and medicine\"\nThe following is a selection of scientists of Jamaican heritage who have received international awards and distinctions for their contributions to science, technology, and innovation:\nContributions.\nThose of Jamaican heritage have made numerous contributions across diverse fields of science and technology\u2014including medicine, computing, climate science, chemistry astronomy, and astrophysics. Notable examples include:\nMedicine and Health.\nThe discovery of Kwashiorkor \u2013 Cicely Williams identified and named Kwashiorkor, a severe form of protein-energy malnutrition, and developed a treatment plan that saved countless lives. Her pioneering work corrected widespread misdiagnoses and helped reshape global understanding of pediatric malnutrition. She also fundamentally changed the global approach to the care of mothers and children\u2014shifting it from centralized institutions to community-based support led by auxiliaries and lay health workers. This model laid the groundwork for maternal and child health to become a formal discipline, now taught worldwide\u2014from training colleges to leading universities.\nThe discovery of Monamycin \u2013 Jamaican chemist Kenneth Magnus discovered and co-synthesised the antibiotic Monamycin from \"Streptomyces jamaicensis\", a bacterium found in Jamaican soil. Monamycin\u2019s structural analysis led to the discovery of piperazic acids\u2014rare amino acids that became key building blocks in the development of cilazapril, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE inhibitor). Cilazapril was widely used to help patients manage high blood pressure and reduce cardiovascular risk. The piperazic acid framework has since influenced a range of medicines, including anti-inflammatory, antitumor, and immunosuppressant agents, underscoring its importance in modern medicinal chemistry.\nThe development of ACRJ-PC28 \u2013 Simone Badal McCreath created the first Caribbean-derived prostate cancer cell line, addressing a critical gap by providing a model that better represents African-Caribbean genetics, historically underrepresented in cancer research. This breakthrough enables more accurate testing of cancer treatments for Black populations and marks a pivotal step toward equitable oncology research.\nThe development of the Jaipur Knee \u2013 Jamaican-born engineer Joel Sadler was the primary inventor and project lead behind the Jaipur Knee, a groundbreaking prosthetic joint designed to restore mobility to above-knee amputees in low-resource settings. Developed during his graduate studies at Stanford University, the device uses a polycentric, four-bar linkage system made from oil-filled nylon\u2014delivering durability, flexibility, and stability at a cost of around US$20. Created in partnership with the Jaipur Foot Organization in India, the Jaipur Knee was named one of \"Time\" magazine\u2019s best inventions of 2009. It has since been distributed across many countries including India, the Philippines, and Vietnam, enabling thousands of individuals to achieve greater mobility and independence.\nPioneering Sickle Cell Treatments \u2013 Yvette Francis-McBarnette was the first to use prophylactic antibiotics in the treatment of children with sickle cell anemia, dramatically improving survival rates. Her clinic screened more than 20,000 schoolchildren, enabling early detection and lifelong management that significantly improved quality of life. Her early intervention model\u2014screening children and placing them on continuous treatment\u2014created a paradigm shift in how the disease was managed in the United States. Her influence extended to national policy through her role in shaping the 1972 National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act, which institutionalized many of the practices she had already proven effective. Over time, her approach helped inform global best practices in sickle cell care, particularly in regions with high disease prevalence. In a separate but equally significant development, Jamaica established the only comprehensive sickle cell unit in the English-speaking Caribbean and has played a pioneering role in global sickle cell research and care. Based at the University of the West Indies, the Sickle Cell Unit led one of the world\u2019s most influential cohort studies, shaping international understanding of the disease\u2019s natural history. It was also among the first globally to introduce newborn screening in a low-resource setting and developed a day-care model for managing acute pain crises\u2014now recognized as a best practice. The unit\u2019s research has informed WHO and UN policies, while its training programmes have helped expand care across the Caribbean.\nPioneering work on diabetes mellitus \u2013 Errol Morrison was widely recognized as one of the first to characterize and elaborate on phasic (J-type) diabetes, a malnutrition-related form of diabetes mellitus first identified by Philip Hugh-Jones in Jamaica in 1955. Morrison\u2019s research detailed its intermittent insulin dependence in young, lean individuals and linked it to pancreatic damage from chronic malnutrition or dietary toxins like cyanogenic glycosides in cassava, with evidence of impaired glucagon secretion. His work supported its recognition as part of malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus (MRDM) by the World Health Organization and its reclassification as Type 5 diabetes by the International Diabetes Federation in 2025, reflecting its distinct pathology. Morrison also established the Diabetes Association of Jamaica, a comprehensive care facility offering laser therapy, kidney dialysis, foot care, and pharmaceutical services. He also researched medicinal plants for their potential in diabetes management in the Caribbean.\nThe development of the \u2018Goffe\u2019 strain \u2013 Alan Powell Goffe created this attenuated measles strain, also known as the \u2018Beckenham\u2019 strain, which became the foundation for numerous measles vaccines used worldwide. Goffe also played a key role in refining early polio vaccines, improving their safety for use in Britain and beyond. His scientific contributions were instrumental in advancing vaccines that protected millions from the devastating effects of polio and childhood measles. He was also among the first to conduct large-scale studies of human papillomavirus (HPV), laying critical foundations for its later recognition as a cause of cervical cancer.\nThe invention of the Ramphal Cardiac Surgery Simulator (RCSS) \u2013 Developed in 2001 by Jamaican-born Paul S. Ramphal at the University of the West Indies, alongside Professor Daniel N. Coore and Dr. Michael P. Craven, the Ramphal Cardiac Surgery Simulator (RCSS) is a high-fidelity training device that uses a reanimated pig heart to replicate human cardiovascular procedures like bypass grafting. Unlike earlier simulators and pig heart models, the RCSS features a realistic, beating heart housed within an artificial human chest cavity, with synthetic blood flowing through its vessels \u2014 creating the illusion of a living organ in surgery. Its affordable and ethical design enables trainees to experience true-to-life cardiac physiology, including arrhythmias, cardiac arrest, and dynamic blood pressure changes \u2014 all without the use of live animals or human subjects. As noted in the \"European Journal of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery\", the simulator \u201ccan also be used to demonstrate the function of technology specific to cardiac surgical procedures in a way that previously has only been possible via the conduct of a procedure on a live animal or human being\u201d \u2014 a capability that sets it apart from conventional models. Praised in 2018 as \u201cperhaps the most exciting\u201d beating-heart model, the RCSS was recognised for its innovation with a U.S. patent. Commercialised for clinical education, the RCSS has been adopted by \"s\"everal leading hospitals and institutions across the United States, including Johns Hopkins Hospital, Mayo Clinic and the University of Washington in Seattle. Since 2008, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill has incorporated the RCSS into its Thoracic Surgery Directors Association (TSDA) Boot Camp, training numerous surgical residents in complex cardiac procedures. Other U.S. adopters include the University of Rochester Medical Centre. Internationally, the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland integrated the simulator into its curriculum in 2023.\nComputing.\nThe invention of Lingo \u2013 John Henry Thompson, a Jamaican-born computer scientist, invented Lingo, a high-level scripting language for Adobe Director, in the late 1980s. Lingo enabled artists and developers to create animations, games, and interactive multimedia without extensive programming knowledge. It powered interactive CD-ROMs, educational software, and early web content via Shockwave. Thompson\u2019s innovation bridged coding and creativity, democratizing multimedia development and influencing modern gaming, web design, and interactive experience.\nCAD/CAM advancements and IGES common data format \u2013 Walt W. Braithwaite provided the technical vision and leadership behind Boeing\u2019s CAD/CAM data exchange format \u2014 directing its development and guiding the team with his expertise. As lead engineer for CAD/CAM integration, he implemented the Computer Integrated Information Network (CIIN), enabling fully digital aircraft design and significantly reducing development time and cost. His development of Boeing\u2019s internal format and translation systems would ultimately serve as the groundwork for the Initial Graphics Exchange Specification (IGES), a landmark standard that allowed CAD systems across industries to communicate and collaborate seamlessly. In recognition of his contributions, Braithwaite received the IGES/PDES Award in 1990 for leadership and outstanding technical achievement.\nChemistry.\nArmed\u2013disarmed principle \u2013 Bertram Fraser-Reid, a Jamaican-born chemist, developed the armed\u2013disarmed principle in the 1980s, advancing carbohydrate chemistry by enabling selective glycosylation for efficient oligosaccharide synthesis. This concept, distinguishing \u201carmed\u201d and \u201cdisarmed\u201d glycosyl donors, facilitates the construction of complex sugars critical for vaccine development, including malaria and tuberculosis research. Fraser-Reid\u2019s team also pioneered the manual synthesis of large, structurally complex oligosaccharides. This principle underpins modern glycosylation strategies, shaping pharmaceutical development and glycobiology research.\nMetallocene catalysis \u2013 John Alexander Ewen, a Jamaican-born chemist, developed a class of metallocene catalysts that revolutionized the production of polyolefins like polyethylene and polypropylene. These catalysts enabled precise control over plastic properties, yielding stronger, heat-resistant, tear-proof, and transparent materials for industries including packaging, automotive, medical devices, and consumer goods. Ewen also formulated the Ewen Symmetry Rules, a foundational guide for catalyst design in polymer chemistry. His innovations spurred hundreds of patents and transformed the global plastics industry, earning him the National Medal of Technology, the highest U.S. honor in the field.\nAstronomy and Astrophysics.\nPioneer of spectroscopic tomography in astronomy \u2013 Mercedes Richards, a Jamaican-born astronomer, was the first to adapt medical imaging techniques for astronomical use through spectroscopic tomography. This innovative method visualizes gas flows in interacting binary star systems, advancing research on Algol binaries and magnetic fields in stellar interactions. Her work deepened understanding of how Sun-like stars influence binary system evolution.\nFood Science.\nInvention of the Barley Abrasion Process \u2013 Sir Geoff Palmer, a Jamaican-born scientist, made transformative contributions to brewing science and cereal technology. His groundbreaking discovery\u2014that enzymes critical to malting originate in the bran, not the germ\u2014overturned decades of scientific consensus and reshaped global malt production for beer and spirits. Palmer invented the barley abrasion process, an industrial technique that enhances malting efficiency by mechanically scuffing barley grains to stimulate enzyme activity. Widely adopted in the British brewing industry, this method has saved millions of pounds annually through faster production and higher extract yields. Palmer was also the first to use scanning electron microscopy to study malt production, revealing new insights into grain microstructure. His innovations continue to influence commercial brewing and food science globally.\nClimate Science and Environmental Research.\nJamaica has made significant contributions to climate science. As a small island developing state, it faces serious climate change impacts\u2014including tropical cyclones, sea-level rise, and coastal erosion. Yet, despite these challenges, Jamaica has emerged as a regional leader in climate research, advocacy, and innovation\u2014championing sustainable development and climate resilience across the Caribbean. Central to these efforts is the Climate Studies Group, Mona (CSGM), founded in 1994 by Nobel Peace Prize laureate Professor Anthony Chen. The group has produced over 200 peer-reviewed publications, trained more than 30 graduate students, shaping regional expertise in climate modeling and resilience planning. Among its key innovations are solar and wind energy mapping, statistical models for seasonal rainfall forecasting, and the Caribbean Climate Interactive Database\u2014developments that laid the groundwork for practical tools such as dengue outbreak early warning systems, customized seasonal forecasting models, and the \"State of the Caribbean Climate Report 2020\", a resource widely used by Caribbean policymakers to guide climate adaptation and resilience strategies. CSGM researchers have played key roles in multiple Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reports, including \"Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis\" and the \"Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5\u00b0C\". Their work has informed national and regional policies on disaster preparedness, agriculture, public health, and renewable energy. Through international collaborations and significant research funding, CSGM has positioned Jamaica as a key contributor to global climate science.\nAmong Jamaica\u2019s most influential contributors to climate science is Thomas J. Goreau, a Jamaican-born biogeochemist and marine biologist whose work has impacted coral reef restoration, climate monitoring, and ecosystem regeneration. Highlights of Goreau\u2019s work include:\nCo-discovery and co-development of Biorock technology \u2014 In 1976, architect Wolf Hilbertz invented a mineral accretion process using low-voltage currents to build underwater structures. In 1987, Thomas Goreau invited Hilbertz to Jamaica, where they co-discovered its ability to boost coral growth and resilience. They co-developed and patented Biorock, a technology for reef restoration and coastal protection. Biorock corals grow 3\u20135 times faster and survive bleaching better than natural corals. Deployed in over 40 countries, with notable successes in Bali and Gili Trawangan, it has restored reefs, prevented beach erosion, and boosted eco-tourism and local economies.\nCo-invention of the Goreau-Hayes Hotspot Method \u2014 First introduced in the early 1990s, this approach analyzes satellite-derived sea surface temperature (SST) data to spot thermal anomalies over 1\u00a0\u00b0C above the average peak month, highlighting potential coral bleaching events. This technique formed the scientific foundation for NOAA\u2019s Coral Reef Watch program, which adopted it in 1997 to launch its Coral Bleaching HotSpot product\u2014enabling global monitoring and forecasting of bleaching events. The Goreau-Hayes method remains a vital tool for researchers worldwide, underpinning studies and operational systems for assessing thermal stress on coral reefs, with ongoing research refining its thresholds for greater regional accuracy.\nDevelopment of soil carbon stabilization techniques \u2014 Goreau\u2019s research into soil metabolism and remineralization has led to strategies for enhancing carbon sequestration in degraded soils. He promotes this as a key tool in reversing climate change and restoring agricultural productivity.\nSpace Exploration.\nRobert Rashford is a Jamaican-born aerospace engineer recognised for his innovations in spacecraft design, mission safety, and nondestructive testing technologies \u2014 many of which were developed through Genesis Engineering Solutions, the company he founded in 1993. He has played a significant role in systems flown aboard NASA\u2019s human spaceflight programs, including the Hubble Space Telescope servicing missions, International Space Station payloads and the James Webb Space Telescope. His work has enhanced the reliability, efficiency and safety of space systems across multiple missions and platforms. Key highlights of Rashford\u2019s work include:\nCo-inventing the world\u2019s first portable 3D nondestructive evaluation (NDE) system, used for maintenance on the Hubble Space Telescope. This system detects internal flaws in spacecraft materials without disassembly, improving mission reliability.\nDeveloping a single\u2011person spacecraft for Orbital Reef \u2014 a compact, pressurised pod for solo orbital operations, incorporating a crew cabin, external equipment bay, and integrated sensors. Designed at Genesis Engineering Solutions, it supports satellite servicing, object handling, and space tourism. Its pressurised environment allows non\u2011astronaut operators to work comfortably, while reducing risks such as decompression sickness and suit leaks, thereby enhancing commercial spaceflight safety.\nDesigning protective enclosures for orbital replacement units (ORUs) to safeguard critical Hubble components during servicing missions in 1993, 1997, 1999 and 2002. Constructed from honeycombed aluminium sheets and connectors, these lightweight enclosures reduced spacecraft mass while protecting high\u2011value hardware.\nEngineering leadership in major aerospace projects \u2014 Rashford designed advanced systems for the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) while at Orbital Sciences Corporation, contributed to commercial and military spacecraft programs at General Electric, and worked on nuclear reactor infrastructure projects at Bechtel Corporation.\nAnother notable figure is Christopher Huie, an aerospace engineer, astronaut, and speaker. In 2023, Huie became the first person of Jamaican heritage to travel to space, serving as a Mission Specialist aboard Virgin Galactic\u2019s Unity 25. As a senior manager, he has contributed to the design, development, and operation of air-launched spaceflight systems. Beyond his technical work, Huie advocates for equity in STEM and frequently speaks at educational and nonprofit events. He also co-founded the Black Leaders in Aerospace Scholarship and Training (BLAST) Program, which mentors students from underrepresented backgrounds to pursue aerospace careers\u2014supporting diversity and inclusion in the aerospace industry.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15673", "revid": "41030369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15673", "title": "Jan Mayen", "text": "Norwegian island in the Arctic Ocean\nJan Mayen () is a Norwegian volcanic island in the Arctic Ocean with no permanent population. It is long (southwest-northeast) and in area, partly covered by glaciers (an area of around the Beerenberg volcano). It has two parts: larger northeast Nord-Jan and smaller S\u00f8r-Jan, linked by a wide isthmus. It lies northeast of Iceland (495\u00a0km [305\u00a0mi] NE of Kolbeinsey), east of central Greenland, and northwest of Vester\u00e5len, Norway. \nThe island is mountainous, the highest summit being the Beerenberg volcano in the north. The isthmus is the location of the two largest lakes of the island, S\u00f8rlaguna (South Lagoon) and Nordlaguna (North Lagoon). A third lake is called Ullerenglaguna (Ullereng Lagoon). Jan Mayen was formed by the Jan Mayen hotspot and is defined by geologists as a microcontinent.\nAlthough administered separately, in the ISO 3166-1 standard, Jan Mayen and Svalbard are collectively designated as \"Svalbard and Jan Mayen\", with the two-letter country code \"SJ\". It was also given the web domain of .sj. However, the domain is not in use and Norway's .no is used in its place.\nJan Mayen is home to Beerenberg, which is the northernmost subaerial active volcano in the world.\nNatural resources.\nJan Mayen Island has one exploitable natural resource, gravel, from a site located at Trongskaret. Other than this, economic activity is limited to providing services for employees of Norway's radio communications and meteorological stations located on the island. Jan Mayen has one unpaved airstrip, Jan Mayensfield, which is about long. The coast has no ports or harbors, only offshore anchorages.\nThere are important fishing resources, and the existence of Jan Mayen establishes a large exclusive economic zone (EEZ) around it. Norway has asserted a EEZ around the island since 1980 encompassing more than a quarter of a million square kilometers. The Norwegian Coast Guard is responsible for conducting fishery and other maritime surveillance and enforcement in these waters. \nNorway has found large deposits of minerals along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge between Jan Mayen and southern Svalbard/Bear Island, including copper, zinc, cobalt, gold and silver. The expeditions have also discovered high concentrations of lithium and scandium. In total, it is estimated that the amount of copper could amount to 21.7 million tonnes, but other estimates are around 7 million tonnes. License for deep sea mining is now under consideration. \nA dispute between Norway and Denmark regarding the fishing exclusion zone between Jan Mayen and Greenland was settled in 1988 granting Denmark the greater area of sovereignty. Geologists suspect significant deposits of petroleum and natural gas lie below Jan Mayen's surrounding seafloors.\nStatus.\nJan Mayen Island is an integral part of the Kingdom of Norway. Since 1995, Jan Mayen has been administered by the County Governor (\"statsforvalter\") of the northern Norwegian county of Nordland, to which it is closest. However, some authority over Jan Mayen has been assigned to the station commander of the Norwegian Defence Logistics Organisation, a branch of the Norwegian Armed Forces.\nSociety.\nDemography.\nThe only inhabitants on the island are personnel working for the Norwegian Armed Forces and the Norwegian Meteorological Institute. Eighteen people spend the winter on the island, but the population may roughly double (35) during the summer, when heavy maintenance is performed. Personnel serve either six months or one year and are exchanged twice a year in April and October. The support crew, including mechanics, cooks, and a nurse, are among the military personnel. The military personnel operated a Loran-C base until it closed at the end of 2015. Both the LORAN transmitter and the meteorological station are located a few kilometres away from the settlement Olonkinbyen (Olonkin Town), where all personnel live.\nTransport.\nTransport to the island is provided by C-130 Hercules military transport planes operated by the Royal Norwegian Air Force which land at Jan Mayensfield's gravel runway. The planes fly in from Bod\u00f8 Main Air Station eight times a year. Since the airport does not have any instrument landing capabilities, good visibility is required, and it is not uncommon for the planes to have to return to Bod\u00f8 Airport, two hours away, without landing. For heavy goods, freight ships visit during the summer, but since there are no harbours, the ships must anchor. Tourists arrive with cruise ships which are allowed to bring passengers onshore if weather permits.\nCommunication.\nThe island has no indigenous population but is assigned the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country code SJ (together with Svalbard). It uses the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) .no (.sj is allocated but not used) and data code JN. Jan Mayen has telephone and internet connection over satellite, using Norwegian telephone numbers (country code 47). Its amateur radio call sign prefix is JX; the island is occasionally the venue for a DXpedition. It has a postal code, NO-8099 JAN MAYEN, but delivery time varies, especially during the winter.\nBusiness.\nThere are no exploitable resources on Jan Mayen, except fish in the surrounding waters of the Island and gravel. The economic activity is limited to the operation of the station that is staffed by the Norwegian Cyberdefence and the Meteorological Agency of Norway. There has also been established a reference station for EGNOS. There is also a reference station for the satellite navigation system Galileo on Jan Mayen. There was also an earlier Jan Mayen LORAN-C Transmitter, but the transmitter is now decommissioned and demolished.\nJan Mayen Radio.\nJan Mayen Radio was a Norwegian coastal radio station on Jan Mayen. The first radiostation was built in 1921 on a part of the island called \"Eldsmetten - Norwegian\" on the eastern side of the Island. The radiostation consisted of a 3\u00a0kW Telefunken spark-gap transmitter and a wooden radiomast. The station was destroyed by Norwegian forces in September 1940, and the crew was sent to Iceland.\nIn 1941 a new radiostation was constructed on the western side of the island, it was moved to a plateau above. In 1962 this station was again moved to \"Helenesanden - Norwegian\" about north from the Norwegian army's LORAN-station.\nIn 1984 the station was moved to the Norwegian army's station. In 1989 there was an VHF-receiver installed, and later in October 1994 the local control of the radio station was terminated. Before the local control was terminated a MF-Digital-Selcall-receiver was installed and controlled remotely from Bod\u00f8-Radio. The station is still (Jan 2024) controlled remotely via satellite, but can be taken in local control by a disconnection against Eik Satellite Earth Station in Rogaland Norway.\nHistory.\nUnverified \"discoveries\" of a \"terra nullius\".\nBetween the fifth and ninth centuries (400\u2013900 AD), numerous communities of monks originating in Ireland (Papar) navigated throughout the north Atlantic in leather boats, exploring and sometimes settling in distant islands where their monastic communities could be separated from close contact with others. Strong indicators exist of their presence in the Faroe Islands and Iceland before the arrival of the Vikings, and medieval Gaelic chronicles such as the famous \"Voyage of Saint Brendan the Abbot\" testify to the extensive interest in exploration at the time. \nA modern-day trans-Atlantic journey proved the ability of the early navigators to reach all lands of the north Atlantic even further from Ireland than Jan Mayen \u2013 and, given favourable winds, at a speed roughly equal to that of modern yachts. Though quite feasible, there is nevertheless no direct physical trace of medieval landings or settlement on Jan Mayen.\nThe land named \"Svalbar\u00f0\" (\"cold coast\") by the Vikings in the early medieval book Landn\u00e1mab\u00f3k may have been Jan Mayen (instead of Spitsbergen, renamed Svalbard by the Norwegians in modern times); the distance from Iceland to \"Svalbar\u00f0\" mentioned in this book is two days' sailing (with favorable winds), consistent with the approximate to Jan Mayen and not with the minimum to Spitsbergen. However much Jan Mayen may have been known in Europe at that time, it was subsequently forgotten for some centuries.\nIn the 17th century, many claims of the island's rediscovery were made, spurred by the rivalry on the Arctic whaling grounds, and the island received many names. According to Thomas Edge, an early 17th-century whaling captain who was often inaccurate, \"William [\"sic\"] Hudson\" discovered the island in 1608 and named it \"Hudson's Touches\" (or \"Tutches\"). However, the well-known explorer Henry Hudson could only have come by on his voyage in 1607 (if he had made an illogical detour) and he made no mention of it in his journal.\nAccording to William Scoresby (1820: p.\u00a0154), referring to the mistaken belief that the Dutch had discovered the island in 1611, Hull whalers discovered the island \"about the same time\" and named it \"Trinity Island\". Muller (1874: pp.\u00a0190\u2013191) took this to mean they had come upon Jan Mayen in 1611 or 1612, which was repeated by many subsequent authors. There were, in fact, no Hull whalers in either of these years, the first Hull whaling expedition having been sent to the island only in 1616 (see below). As with the previous claim made by Edge, there is no cartographical or written proof for this supposed discovery.\nDuring the Golden Age of Dutch exploration and discovery (c. 1590s\u20131720s).\nFirst verified discoveries: mapping and naming.\nThe first verified discoveries of Jan Mayen, by three separate expeditions, occurred in the summer of 1614, probably within one month of each other. The Dutchman Fopp Gerritsz, whilst in command of a whaling expedition sent out by the Englishman John Clarke, of Dunkirk, claimed (in 1631) to have discovered the island on 28 June and named it \"Isabella\". In January the \"Noordsche Compagnie\" (Northern Company), modelled on the Dutch East India Company, had been established to support Dutch whaling in the Arctic. Two of its ships, financed by merchants from Amsterdam and Enkhuizen, reached Jan Mayen in July 1614. \nThe captains of these ships\u2014Jan Jacobszoon May van Schellinkhout (after whom the island was ultimately named) on the \"Gouden Cath\" (Golden Cat), and Jacob de Gouwenaer on the \"Orangienboom\" (Orange Tree)\u2014named it \"Mr. Joris Eylant\" after the Dutch cartographer Joris Carolus who was on board and mapped the island. The captains acknowledged that a third Dutch ship, the \"Cleyn Swaentgen\" (Little Swan) captained by Jan Jansz Kerckhoff and financed by \"Noordsche Compagnie\" shareholders from Delft, had already been at the island when they arrived. They had assumed the latter, who named the island \"Maurits Eylandt\" (or Mauritius) after Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange, would report their discovery to the States General. However, the Delft merchants had decided to keep the discovery secret and returned in 1615 to hunt for their own profit. The ensuing dispute was only settled in 1617, though both companies were allowed to whale at Jan Mayen in the meantime.\nIn 1615, the English whaler Robert Fotherby went ashore. Apparently thinking he had made a new discovery, he named the island \"Sir Thomas Smith's Island\" and the volcano \"Mount Hakluyt\". On a map of c. 1634, Jean Vrolicq renamed the island \"\u00cele de Richelieu\".\nJan Mayen first appeared on Willem Jansz Blaeu's 1620 edition map of Europe, originally published by Cornelis Doedz in 1606. Blaeu, who lived in Amsterdam, named it \"Jan Mayen\" after captain Jan Jacobszoon May van Schellinkhout of the Amsterdam-financed \"Gouden Cath\". Blaeu made the first detailed map of the island in his famous \"Zeespiegel\" atlas of 1623, establishing its current name.\nDutch whaling base.\nFrom 1615 to 1638, Jan Mayen was used as a whaling base by the Dutch \"Noordsche Compagnie\", which had been given a monopoly on whaling in the Arctic regions by the States General in 1614. Only two ships, one from the \"Noordsche Compagnie\", and the other from the Delft merchants, were off Jan Mayen in 1615. \nThe following year a score of vessels were sent to the island. The \"Noordsche Compagnie\" sent eight ships escorted by three warships under Jan Jacobsz. Schrobop; while the Delft merchants sent up five ships under Adriaen Dircksz. Leversteyn, son of one of the above merchants. There were also two ships from Dunkirk sent by John Clarke, as well as a ship each from London and Hull.\nHeertje Jansz, master of the \"Hope\", of Enkhuizen, wrote a day-by-day account of the season. The ships took two weeks to reach Jan Mayen, arriving early in June. On 15 June they met the two English ships, which Schrobop allowed to remain, on condition they gave half their catch to the Dutch. The ships from Dunkirk were given the same conditions. By late July the first ship had left with a full cargo of whale oil; the rest left early in August, several filled with oil.\nThat year 200 men were seasonally living and working on the island at six temporary whaling stations (spread along the northwest coast). During the first decade of whaling, more than ten ships visited Jan Mayen each year, while in the second period (1624 and later) five to ten ships were sent. With the exception of a few ships from Dunkirk, which came to the island in 1617 and were either driven away or forced to give a third of their catch to the Dutch, only the Dutch and merchants from Hull sent up ships to Jan Mayen from 1616 onward. In 1624 ten wooden houses were built in South Bay. About this time the Dutch appear to have abandoned the temporary stations consisting of tents of sail and crude furnaces, replacing them with two semi-permanent stations with wooden storehouses and dwellings and large brick furnaces, one in the above-mentioned South Bay and the other in the North Bay. In 1628 two forts were built to protect the stations. Among the sailors active at Jan Mayen was the later admiral Michiel Adriaensz de Ruyter. In 1633, at the age of 26, he was for the first time listed as an officer aboard \"de Groene Leeuw\" (The Green Lion). He again went to Jan Mayen in 1635, aboard the same ship.\nIn 1632 the \"Noordsche Compagnie\" expelled the Danish-employed Basque whalers from Spitsbergen. In revenge, the latter sailed to Jan Mayen, where the Dutch had left for the winter, to plunder the Dutch equipment and burn down the settlements and factories. Captain Outger Jacobsz of Grootebroek was asked to stay the next winter (1633/34) on Jan Mayen with six shipmates to defend the island. While a group with the same task survived the winter on Spitsbergen, all seven on Jan Mayen died of scurvy or trichinosis (from eating raw polar bear meat) combined with the harsh conditions.\nDuring the first phase of whaling the hauls were generally good, some exceptional. For example, Mathijs Jansz. Hoepstock caught 44 whales in Hoepstockbukta in 1619, which produced 2,300 casks of whale oil. During the second phase the hauls were much lower. While 1631 turned out to be a very good season, the following year, due to the weather and ice, only eight whales were caught. In 1633 eleven ships managed to catch just 47 whales; while a meager 42 were caught by the same number in 1635. The bowhead whale was locally hunted to near-extinction around 1640 (approximately 1000 had been killed and processed on the island), at which time Jan Mayen was abandoned and stayed uninhabited for two and a half centuries.\n19th and 20th century expeditions.\nDuring the International Polar Year 1882\u20131883 the Austro-Hungarian North Pole Expedition stayed one year at Jan Mayen. The expedition performed extensive mapping of the area, their maps being of such quality that they were used until the 1950s. The Austrian polar station on Jan Mayen Island was built and equipped in 1882 fully at Count Wilczek's own expense.\nPolar bears appear on Jan Mayen, although in diminished numbers compared with earlier times. Between 1900 and 1920, there were a number of Norwegian trappers spending winters on Jan Mayen, hunting Arctic foxes in addition to some polar bears. But the exploitation soon made the profits decline, and the hunting ended. Polar bears in this region of the Arctic are genetically distinguishable from those living elsewhere.\nThe League of Nations gave Norway jurisdiction over the island, and in 1921 Norway opened the first meteorological station. The Norwegian Meteorological Institute annexed the middle part of the island for Norway in 1922 and the whole island in 1926 when Hallvard Devold was head of the weather observations base on the island. On 27 February 1930, the island was made \"de jure\" a part of the Kingdom of Norway.\nSecond World War.\nDuring World War II, continental Norway was invaded and occupied by Germany in spring 1940. The four-man team on Jan Mayen stayed at their posts and in an act of defiance began sending their weather reports to the United Kingdom instead of Norway. The British codenamed Jan Mayen 'Island X' and attempted to reinforce it with troops to counteract any German attack. \nOn 8 November 1940 the Norwegian patrol boat ran aground on Nansenflua, one of the islands' many uncharted lava reefs, and the 68-man crew abandoned ship and joined the Norwegian team on shore. The British expedition commander, prompted by the loss of the gunboat, decided to abandon Jan Mayen until the following spring and radioed for a rescue ship. Within a few days a ship arrived and evacuated the four Norwegians and their would-be reinforcements, after demolishing the weather station to prevent it from falling into German hands. \nThe Germans attempted to land a weather team on the island on 16 November 1940; the German naval trawler carrying the team crashed on the rocks just off Jan Mayen after a patrolling British destroyer had picked them up on radar. The detection was not by chance, as the German plan had been compromised from the beginning with British wireless interceptors of the Radio Security Service following the communications of the Abwehr (the German Intelligence service) concerning the operation, and the destroyer had been waiting. Most of the crew struggled ashore and were taken prisoner by a landing party from the destroyer.\nThe Allies returned to the island on 10 March 1941, when the Norwegian ship \"Veslekari\", escorted by the patrol boat \"Honningsvaag\", dropped 12 Norwegian weathermen on the island. The team's radio transmissions soon betrayed its presence to the Axis, and German planes from Norway began to bomb and strafe Jan Mayen whenever weather permitted, but did little damage. Soon supplies and reinforcements arrived, and even some anti-aircraft guns, giving the island a garrison of a few dozen weathermen and soldiers. By 1941, Germany had given up hope of evicting the Allies from the island and the constant air raids stopped.\nOn 7 August 1942, a German Focke-Wulf Fw 200 \"Condor\", probably on a mission to bomb the station, crashed into the nearby mountainside of Danielssenkrateret in fog, killing its crew of nine, and at an unknown date another German plane with four crew members crashed on the southwest side of the island, this crash only becoming public knowledge when the crash site was discovered in 1950. In 1943, the Americans established a radio locating station named Atlantic City in the north to try to locate German radio bases in Greenland.\nCold War.\nAfter the war, the meteorological station was located at Atlantic City, but moved in 1949 to a new location. Radio Jan Mayen also served as an important radio station for ship traffic in the Arctic Ocean. In 1959 NATO started building the LORAN-C network in sites on the Atlantic Ocean; one of the transmitters was to be on Jan Mayen. By 1961 the new military installations, including a new airfield, were operational.\nFor some time scientists doubted that the Beerenberg volcano would become active, but in 1970 it erupted for about three weeks, adding another of land area to the island. It also erupted in 1973 and 1985. During an eruption, the sea temperature around the island may increase from just above freezing to about .\nIceland and Norway had a brief territorial dispute over the island from 1979-1980, with the dispute being resolved with Iceland recognising Norwegian sovereignty over the island.\nHistoric stations and huts on the island are Hoyberg, Vera, Olsbu, Puppebu (cabin), Gamlemetten or Gamlestasjonen (the old weather station), Jan Mayen Radio, Helenehytta, Margarethhytta, and Ulla (a cabin at the foot of the Beerenberg).\nEnvironment.\nNature reserve.\nA regulation dating from 2010 renders the island a nature reserve under Norwegian jurisdiction. The aim of this regulation is to ensure the preservation of a pristine Arctic island and the marine life nearby, including the ocean floor. Landings at Jan Mayen can be done by boat. However, this is permitted only at a small part of the island, named B\u00e5tvika (Boat Bay). \nAs there is no commercial airline operating at the island, one cannot get there by plane except by chartering one. Permission for landings by a charter plane has to be obtained in advance. Permission to stay on the island has to be obtained in advance, and is generally limited to a few days (or even hours). Putting up a tent or setting up camp is prohibited. There is a separate regulation for the stay of foreigners.\nGeography and geology.\nJan Mayen consists of two geographically distinct parts. Nord-Jan has a round shape and is dominated by the high Beerenberg volcano with its large ice cap (), which can be divided into twenty individual outlet glaciers. The largest of those is S\u00f8rbreen, with an area of and a length of . South-Jan is narrow, comparatively flat and unglaciated. Its highest elevation is Rudolftoppen at . The station and living quarters are located on South-Jan. The island lies at the northern end of the Jan Mayen Microcontinent. The microcontinent was originally part of the Greenland Plate, but now forms part of the Eurasian Plate.\nImportant Bird Area.\nThe island was identified as an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because it is a breeding site for large numbers of seabirds, supporting populations of northern fulmars (78,000\u2013160,000 pairs), little auks (10,000\u2013100,000 pairs), thick-billed guillemot (74,000\u2013147,000 pairs) and black guillemots (100\u20131,000 pairs).\nClimate.\nJan Mayen has an oceanic polar climate with a K\u00f6ppen classification of \"ET\", sometimes reckoned as \"EM\" (maritime polar). Jan Mayen is situated in between the cold East Greenland Current to the west and the warm Gulf Stream to the east of the island, and is the only landmass in the northern hemisphere where warm and cold ocean currents meet. The surrounding seas makes seasonal temperature variations very small considering the latitude of the island, with ranges from around in August to in March, but also makes the island extremely cloudy with little sunshine even during the continuous polar day. The deep snow cover prevents any permafrost from developing. As a result of warming, the 1991\u22122020 temperature normal shows a mean annual temperature warmer than during 1961\u22121990, pushing the annual temperature above freezing.\nIn popular culture.\nJan Mayen is featured as an easter egg in several grand strategy video games published by Paradox Interactive, such as \"Europa Universalis IV and Victoria 3\". In \"Europa Universalis IV\", typing \"bearhaslanded\" into the command console will spawn Jan Mayen as a country in a random location. Players can also specify where Jan Mayen will spawn by including a province ID in the command. In \"Hearts of Iron IV\", also published by Paradox Interactive, players can play as Jan Mayen controlled by the polar bear \"Grand Admiral Johan Mayan\" by completing an elaborate easter egg chain as Poland during the Second World War. In \"Victoria 2\", set in the nineteenth century, certain decisions will see polar bears take charge of Jan Mayen's military.\nIn the 2008 game \"\", Lara Croft visits Jan Mayen Island in search of Thor's Hammer. The ruin that she finds there is supposedly the source of the Valhalla myth.\nThe 2022 film \"Tales of Jan Mayen\", directed by Hugo Pettit, documents the recreation of the 1921 British expedition to the summit of Mount Beerenberg.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15674", "revid": "37740198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15674", "title": "Jan Mayen/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "15675", "revid": "37740198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15675", "title": "Jan Mayen/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "15676", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15676", "title": "Jan Mayen/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "15677", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15677", "title": "Jan Mayen/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "15678", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15678", "title": "Jan Mayen/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "15679", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15679", "title": "Jan Mayen/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "15680", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15680", "title": "Jan Mayen/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "15681", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15681", "title": "Jan Mayen/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "15683", "revid": "44812869", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15683", "title": "Jarvis Island", "text": "Coral island in the South Pacific Ocean\nJarvis Island (; formerly known as Bunker Island or Bunker's Shoal) is an uninhabited coral island located in the South Pacific Ocean, about halfway between Hawaii and the Cook Islands. It is an unincorporated, unorganized territory of the United States, administered by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service of the United States Department of the Interior as part of the National Wildlife Refuge system. Unlike most coral atolls, the lagoon on Jarvis is wholly dry.\nJarvis is one of the Line Islands and, for statistical purposes, is also grouped as one of the United States Minor Outlying Islands. Jarvis Island is the largest of three U.S. equatorial possessions, which include Baker Island and Howland Island.\nThe United States claimed it in the 19th century and mined it for guano. In the 20th century, it was the subject of a small settlement. It was attacked during World War II and evacuated, leaving some buildings and a day beacon. In modern times, it is managed as a nature reserve.\nGeography and ecology.\nWhile a few offshore anchorage spots are marked on maps, Jarvis Island has no ports or harbors, and swift currents are a hazard. There is a boat landing area in the middle of the western shoreline near a crumbling day beacon and another near the island's southwest corner. The center of Jarvis island is a dried lagoon where deep guano deposits accumulated, which were mined for about 20 years during the nineteenth century. The island has a tropical desert climate, with high daytime temperatures, constant wind, and intense sun. Nights, however, are quite cool. The ground is mostly sandy and reaches at its highest point. The low-lying coral island has long been noted as hard to sight from small ships and is surrounded by a narrow fringing reef.\nJarvis Island is one of two United States territories that are in the Southern Hemisphere (the other is American Samoa). Located only south of the equator, Jarvis has no known natural freshwater lens and scant rainfall. This creates a very bleak, flat landscape without any plants larger than shrubs. There is no evidence that the island has ever supported a self-sustaining human population. Its sparse bunch grass, prostrate vines, and low-growing shrubs are primarily a nesting, roosting, and foraging habitat for seabirds, shorebirds, and marine wildlife.\nJarvis Island was submerged during the latest interglacial period, roughly 125,000 years ago, when sea levels were higher than today. As the sea level declined, the horseshoe-shaped lagoon formed in Jarvis Island's center.\nTopographic isolation.\nJarvis Island's highest point has a topographic isolation of , with Joe's Hill on Kiritimati being the nearest higher neighbor.\nTime zone.\nJarvis Island is located in the Samoa Time Zone (UTC -11:00), the same time zone as American Samoa, Kingman Reef, Midway Atoll, and Palmyra Atoll.\nBirds.\nJarvis Island once held some of the largest seabird breeding colonies in the tropical ocean. Still, guano mining and the introduction of rodents have ruined much of the island's native wildlife. Eight breeding species were recorded in 1982, compared to thirteen in 1996 and fourteen in 2004. The Polynesian storm petrel had made its return after over 40 years of absence from Jarvis Island, and the number of brown noddies multiplied from just a few birds in 1982 to nearly 10,000. Just twelve spectacled terns were recorded in 1982, but by 2004, over 200 nests were found there. The island, with its surrounding marine waters, has been recognized as an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because it supports colonies of lesser frigatebirds, brown and masked boobies, red-tailed tropicbirds, Polynesian storm petrels, blue noddies and sooty terns, as well as serving as a migratory stopover for bristle-thighed curlews.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nJarvis Island is unlikely to have hosted permanent human occupation before its use for guano mining. However, it is possible the island was utilized as a waypoint or stopover island by Polynesian voyagers. The remoteness of the island and a lack of freshwater resources have prevented large-scale archaeological surveys from taking place.\nDiscovery.\nThe island's first known sighting by the British on August 21, 1821, by the British ship \"Eliza Francis\" (or \"Eliza Frances\") owned by Edward, Thomas and William Jarvis and commanded by Captain Brown. The island was visited by whaling vessels until the 1870s.\nThe U.S. Exploring Expedition surveyed the island in 1841. In March 1857 the island was claimed for the United States under the Guano Islands Act and formally annexed on February 27, 1858.\nNineteenth-century guano mining.\nThe American Guano Company, incorporated in 1857, established claims regarding Baker Island and Jarvis Island, recognized under the U.S. Guano Islands Act of 1856. Beginning in 1858, several support structures were built on Jarvis Island, along with a two-story, eight-room \"superintendent's house\" featuring an observation cupola and wide verandahs. Tram tracks were laid down to bring mined guano to the western shore. One of the first loads was taken by Samuel Gardner Wilder.\nLaborers for the mining operations came from around the Pacific, including from Hawai\u02bbi; the Hawaiian laborers named Baker Island \"\", meaning 'out of breath' or 'exhausted', which is indicative of the hard work needed.\nFor the following 21 years, Jarvis was commercially mined for guano sent to the United States as fertilizer. The island was abruptly abandoned in 1879, leaving behind about a dozen buildings and of mined guano.\nNew Zealand entrepreneurs, including photographer Henry Winkelmann, then made unsuccessful attempts to continue guano extraction on Jarvis, and the two-story house was sporadically inhabited during the early 1880s. Squire Flockton was left alone on the island as caretaker for several months and committed suicide there in 1883, apparently from gin-fueled despair. His wooden grave marker was a carved plank which could be seen in the island's tiny four-grave cemetery for decades.\nJohn T. Arundel &amp; Co. resumed mining guano from 1886 to 1899. The United Kingdom annexed the island on June 3, 1889. Phosphate and copra entrepreneur John T. Arundel visited the island in 1909 on the maiden voyage of the \"S.S. Ocean Queen\", and near the beach landing on the western shore, members of the crew built a pyramidal day beacon made from slats of wood, which was painted white. The beacon was standing in 1935, and remained until at least 1942.\nWreck of barquentine \"Amaranth\".\nOn August 30, 1913, the barquentine \"Amaranth\" (C. W. Nielson, captain) was carrying a cargo of coal from Newcastle, New South Wales, to San Francisco when it wrecked on Jarvis' southern shore. Ruins of ten wooden guano-mining buildings, the two-story house among them, could still be seen by the \"Amaranth\" crew, who left Jarvis aboard two lifeboats. One reached Pago Pago, American Samoa, and the other made Apia in Samoa. The ship's scattered remains were noted and scavenged for many years, and rounded fragments of coal from the \"Amaranth\"'s hold were still being found on the south beach in the late 1930s.\nMillersville (1935\u20131942).\nJarvis Island was reclaimed by the United States government and colonized from March 26, 1935, onwards, under the American Equatorial Islands Colonization Project. President Franklin D. Roosevelt assigned administration of the island to the U.S. Department of the Interior on May 13, 1936. Starting as a cluster of large, open tents pitched next to the still-standing white wooden day beacon, the Millersville settlement on the island's western shore was named after a bureaucrat with the United States Department of Air Commerce. The settlement grew into a group of shacks built mostly with wreckage from the \"Amaranth\" (lumber from which was also used by the young Hawaiian colonists to build surfboards), but later, stone and wood dwellings were built and equipped with refrigeration, radio equipment, and a weather station. A crude aircraft landing area was cleared on the island's northeast side, and a T-shaped marker intended to be seen from the air was made from gathered stones, but no airplane is known to have ever landed there. According to the 1940 U.S. census, Jarvis Island had a population of three people.\nAt the beginning of World War II, an Imperial Japanese Navy submarine surfaced off the west coast of the island. Believing that a U.S. Navy submarine had come to fetch them, the four young colonists rushed down the steep western beach in front of Millersville towards the shore. The submarine answered their waves with fire from its deck gun, but no one was hurt in the attack. On February 7, 1942, the USCGC \"Taney\" evacuated the colonists, then shelled and burned the dwellings. The roughly cleared landing area on the island's northeast end was later shelled by the Japanese, leaving crater holes.\nInternational Geophysical Year.\nJarvis was visited by scientists during the International Geophysical Year from July 1957 until November 1958. In January 1958, all scattered building ruins from the nineteenth-century guano diggings and the 1935\u20131942 colonization attempt were swept away without a trace by a severe storm that lasted several days and was witnessed by scientists. When the IGY research project ended, the island was abandoned again. By the early 1960s, a few sheds, a century of accumulated trash, the scientists' house from the late 1950s, and a solid, short lighthouse-like day beacon built two decades before were the only signs of human habitation on Jarvis.\nNational Wildlife Refuge.\nOn June 27, 1974, Secretary of the Interior Rogers Morton created Jarvis Island National Wildlife Refuge, which was expanded in 2009 to add submerged lands within of the island. The refuge now includes of land and of water. Along with six other islands, the island was administered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as part of the Pacific Remote Islands National Wildlife Refuge Complex. In January 2009, that entity was upgraded to the Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument by President George W. Bush.\nA feral cat population, descendants of cats likely brought by colonists in 1937, wrought disruption to the island's wildlife and vegetation. Including the complete removal of rats, but not the mice, which had been introduced to the island previously. These cats were removed through efforts which began in the mid-1960s and lasted until 1990 when they were completely eradicated. Since cats were removed, seabird numbers and diversity have increased. Among the seabirds that returned to Jarvis Island with gray-backed terns rebuilding quickly and petrels taking longer to reestablish themselves on the island.\nNineteenth-century tram track remains can be seen in the dried lagoon bed at the island's center, and the late 1930s-era lighthouse-shaped day beacon still stands on the western shore at the site of Millersville.\nPublic entry to anyone, including U.S. citizens, on Jarvis Island requires a special-use permit and is generally restricted to scientists and educators. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the United States Coast Guard periodically visit Jarvis.\nTransportation.\nThere is no airport on the island, nor does the island contain any large terminal or port. A day beacon near the middle of the west coast is in poor condition and no longer painted. Some offshore anchorage is available.\nMilitary.\nAs a U.S. territory, the defense of Jarvis Island is the responsibility of the United States. The laws of the United States apply when applicable.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15684", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15684", "title": "Jarvis Island/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "15685", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15685", "title": "Geography of Jarvis Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "15686", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15686", "title": "Jarvis Island/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "15687", "revid": "10049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15687", "title": "Politics of Jarvis Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "15688", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15688", "title": "Jarvis Island/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "15689", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15689", "title": "Jarvis Island/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "15690", "revid": "10049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15690", "title": "Transportation on Jarvis Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "15691", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15691", "title": "Jarvis Island/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "15693", "revid": "28326684", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15693", "title": "Jersey", "text": "British Crown Dependency and country in Europe\nJersey ( ; ), officially the Bailiwick of Jersey, is an autonomous and self-governing British Crown Dependency in Northwestern Europe off the Cotentin Peninsula of north-west France. At , the main island, Jersey, is the largest of the Channel Islands. Although not a sovereign state, Jersey has its own legal, fiscal and governmental systems; on that basis, it is regarded as a small nation or island country. Jersey's territory also includes some surrounding uninhabited islands and rocks. As of 2021, the island had a population of 103,267.\nHistorically part of the Duchy of Normandy, Jersey remained loyal to the English Crown when the English kings lost mainland Normandy, but it never became part of the Kingdom of England. From then until the end of the Napoleonic Wars, Jersey was at the frontline of Anglo-French Wars and was invaded a number of times, leading to the construction of fortifications such as Mont Orgueil Castle and to a thriving smuggling industry. The island was invaded and occupied by Nazi German forces during the Second World War until 9 May 1945, now celebrated as the island's national day.\nJersey is a parliamentary democracy under a constitutional monarchy, with its own financial, legal and judicial systems, and the power of self-determination. The Bailiff is the civil head of the island, the Chief Minister leads the island's government, and the Lieutenant Governor represents the British monarch, who is the head of state. The island is not part of the United Kingdom and has a separate international identity, but the UK government manages its defence, international representation and certain policy areas, such as nationality law.\nThe island has a large financial services industry, as well as agriculture and tourism. Its currency is the Pound sterling with a local issue of banknotes and coins. British cultural influence on the island is evident in its use of English as the main language and its participation in British sporting leagues, but the island also has a strong Norman-French culture, reflected by its historic dialect of the Norman language, J\u00e8rriais.\nName.\nThe Channel Islands are mentioned in the Antonine Itinerary as the following: \"Sarnia\", \"Caesarea\", \"Barsa\", \"Silia\" and \"Andium\", but Jersey cannot be identified specifically because none corresponds directly to the present names. The name has been used as the Latin name for Jersey (also in its French version ) since William Camden's \"Britannia\", and is used in titles of associations and institutions today. The Latin name was also applied to the colony of New Jersey as .\n\"Andium\", \"Agna\" and \"Augia\" were used in antiquity.\nScholars variously surmise that \"Jersey\" and \"J\u00e8rri\" derive from (Old Norse for 'earth') or ('earl'), or perhaps the Norse personal name (thus , 'Geirr's Island'). The ending denotes an island, as in Guernsey or Surtsey.\nHistory.\nPrehistoric and ancient Jersey.\nHumans have lived on the island since at latest 12,000 BCE, with evidence of habitation in the Palaeolithic period (La Cotte de St Brelade) and Neolithic dolmens, such as La Hougue Bie. Evidence of Bronze Age and early Iron Age settlements can be found in many locations around the island.\nArchaeological evidence of Roman influence has been found, in particular at Les Landes. \nChristianity was brought to the island by migrants from Brittany in c. fifth \u2013 sixth century CE. In the sixth century, the island's patron saint Helier lived at the Hermitage on L'Islet (now Elizabeth Castle). Legend states that Helier was beheaded by raiders and subsequently lifted his head and walked to shore.\nEarly Medieval period.\nIn the ninth century the island was raided by Vikings and in 933 it was annexed to Normandy by William Longsword. When Duke William the Conqueror became King of England in 1066, the island remained part of the Norman possessions. However, in 1204, when Normandy was returned to the French king, the island remained a possession of the English crown, though never incorporated into England. Traditionally it is said that Jersey's self-governance originates from the \"Constitutions of King John\", however this is disputed. Nevertheless, the island continued to follow Norman customs and laws. The King also appointed a Bailiff and a Warden (now Lieutenant-Governor). The period of English rule was marked by wars between England and France, as such a military fortress was built at Mont Orgueil.\nDuring the Tudor period, the split between the Church of England and the Vatican led to islanders adopting the Protestant religion. During the reign of Elizabeth, French refugees brought strict Calvinism to the island, which remained the common religion until 1617. In the late 16th century, islanders travelled across the North Atlantic to participate in the Newfoundland fisheries. \nIn recognition for help given to him during his exile in Jersey in the 1640s, King Charles II of England gave Vice Admiral Sir George Carteret, bailiff and governor, a large grant of land in the American colonies in between the Hudson and Delaware rivers, which he promptly named New Jersey. It is now a state in the United States.\nEarly modern period.\nIn 1769, the island suffered food supply shortages, leading to an insurrection on 28 September known as the Corn Riots. The States met at Elizabeth Castle and decided to request help from the King. However, in 1771 the Crown demanded reforms to the island's governance, leading to the Code of 1771 and removed the powers of the Royal Court to make laws without the States. \nIn 1781, during the American Revolutionary War, the island was invaded by a French force which captured St Helier, but was defeated by Major Peirson's army at the Battle of Jersey.\nThe 19th century saw the improvement of the road network under General Don, the construction of two railway lines, the improvement of transport links to England, and the construction of new piers and harbours in St Helier. This grew a tourism industry in the island and led to the immigration of thousands of English residents, leading to a cultural shift towards a more anglicised island culture. \nIsland politics in this period was divisively split between the conservative Laurel party and the progressive Rose party, as the lie of power shifted increasingly to the States from the Crown. In the 1850s, the French author Victor Hugo lived in Jersey, but was expelled for insulting the Queen, so he moved on to Guernsey.\n20th century\u2013present.\nDuring the Second World War, 6,500 Jersey residents were evacuated by their own choice to the UK out of a total population of 50,000. Jersey was occupied by Germany from 1 July 1940 until 9 May 1945, when Germany surrendered. During this time the Germans constructed many fortifications using slave labour imported onto the island from many different countries occupied or at war with Germany. After 1944, supplies from France were interrupted by the D-Day landings, and food on the island became scarce. The \"SS Vega\" was sent to the island carrying Red Cross supplies and news of the success of the Allied advance in Europe. During the Nazi occupation, a resistance cell was created by communist activist Norman Le Brocq and the Jersey Communist Party, whose communist ideology of forming a 'United Front' led to the creation of the Jersey Democratic Movement. \nThe Channel Islands had to wait for the German surrender to be liberated. 9 May is celebrated as the island's Liberation Day, where there are celebrations in Liberation Square. After Liberation, the States was reformed, becoming wholly democratically elected, and universal franchise was implemented. Since liberation, the island has grown in population and adopted new industries, especially the finance industry.\nPolitics.\nJersey is a Crown Dependency. It is not part of the United Kingdom, but it is part of the 'British Islands', a legal definition encompassing the UK and the Crown Dependences. As a Crown Dependency, Jersey is autonomous and self-governing, with its own independent legal, administrative and fiscal systems. Jersey's government has described Jersey as a \"self-governing, democratic country with the power of self-determination\". Jersey and its people have historically been described as a nation.\nBecause Jersey is a dependency of the British Crown, King Charles III reigns in Jersey. \"The Crown\" is defined by the Law Officers of the Crown as the \"Crown in right of Jersey\". The King's representative and adviser in the island is the Lieutenant Governor of Jersey \u2013 Vice-Admiral Jerry Kyd since 8 October 2022. He is a formal point of contact between Jersey ministers and the UK Government and carries out some ceremonial functions in relation to immigration control, deportation, naturalisation and the issue of passports.\nIn 1973, the Royal Commission on the Constitution set out the duties of the Crown to the island as including: ultimate responsibility for the 'good government' of the Crown Dependencies; ratification of island legislation by Order-in-Council (royal assent); international representation, subject to consultation with the island authorities before concluding any agreement which would apply to them; ensuring the islands meet their international obligations; and defence.\nLegislature and government.\nThe States Assembly is Jersey's legislature. It is a unicameral body formed of 49 elected members: 12 \"conn\u00e9tables\" (often called \"constables\", heads of parishes) and 37 deputies, all elected for four-year terms. Since the 2022 elections, the 37 deputies are elected from nine constituencies. Prior to this election, there were also \"senators\", who were elected by voters across the island. At the time of this reform, some efforts were made the remove the \"conn\u00e9tables\" from the Assembly, but this was not passed.\nJersey has a lower voter turnout. Over the last 30 years, turnout at elections in Jersey has averaged 44.1%, which is lower than any OECD country and the lowest of the three Crown Dependencies. Surveys conducted following the 2022 election found that the most common reasons for not voting were apathy, mistrust and disinterest in the political system.\nThere are also five non-voting members of the States, all of which are appointed by the Crown: the bailiff, the Lieutenant Governor of Jersey, the Dean of Jersey, the attorney general and solicitor general. The Bailiff is the presiding officer of the States Assembly, head of the judiciary and, as civic head of the island, carries out various ceremonial roles.\nThe Council of Ministers, consisting of a chief minister and nine ministers, makes up the leading body of the government of Jersey. Each minister may appoint up to two assistant ministers. A chief executive is head of the civil service. Some governmental functions are carried out in the island's parishes.\nLaw.\nJersey is a distinct jurisdiction for cases in multiple jurisdictions (conflict of laws). It is separate from the other jurisdictions in the British Islands, including the other Channel Islands and England and Wales.\nJersey law has been influenced by several different legal traditions, in particular Norman customary law, English common law and modern French civil law. Jersey's legal system is therefore described as 'mixed' or 'pluralistic'. Sources of law are in both the French and English languages, although since the 1950s the main working language of the legal system is English.\nThe principal court is the Royal Court, with appeals to the Jersey Court of Appeal and, ultimately, to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. The Bailiff is head of the judiciary; the Bailiff and the Deputy Bailiff are appointed by the Crown. Other members of the island's judiciary are appointed by the Bailiff. The convening of the Assize d'Heritage is that of the Royal Court of Jersey, the oldest surviving land court in Europe.\nExternal relations.\nAlthough diplomatic representation is reserved to the Crown, Jersey has been developing its own external relations, especially since in 2007 the UK and Jersey signed an agreement for the development of the international identity of Jersey. It negotiates directly with foreign governments on various matters: for example, tax information exchange agreements have been signed directly by the island. \nThe external relations of Jersey are overseen by the External Relations Minister of the Government of Jersey. Jersey is a member of the British-Irish Council, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and the Assembl\u00e9e parlementaire de la Francophonie. The government maintains offices (some in partnership with Guernsey) in Caen, London and Brussels.\nJersey independence has in the past been discussed in the States Assembly. Former external relations minister Sir Philip Bailhache has at various times warned that the island may need to become independent. It is not Jersey government policy to seek independence, but the government has stated that the island is prepared if needs to do so.\nJersey's relationship with the European Union is governed by the EU\u2013UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement. It was not part of the EU prior to Brexit. Under this agreement, goods trade between the island and the EU are not subject to tariffs, and Jersey retains sole responsibility for its territorial waters. This latter point has led to tensions between France and Jersey over the permits of French fishermen to fish in Jersey waters.\nJersey also has close relations with Portugal, including the exchangement of tax information; these relations are specifically strong with the Autonomous Region of Madeira, where St. Helier has one of its sister cities, Funchal.\nAdministrative divisions.\nJersey is divided into twelve parishes (which have civil and religious functions), the largest being St Ouen and the smallest St Clement. They are all named after their parish church. The \"conn\u00e9table\" is the head of the parish. They are elected at island general elections and sit \"ex oficio\" in the States Assembly.\nThe parishes have various civil administrative functions, such as roads (managed by the Road Committee) and policing (through the Honorary Police). Each parish is governed through direct democracy at parish assemblies, consisting of all eligible voters resident in the parish. The \"Procureurs du Bien Public\" are the legal and financial representatives of these parishes.\nThe parishes of Jersey are further divided into \"vingtaines\" (or, in St Ouen, \"cueillettes\").\nGeography.\nJersey is an island measuring {{convert|119.6|km2|order=flip}} (or 66,436 verg\u00e9es), including reclaimed land and intertidal zone. It lies in the English Channel, about {{convert|12|nmi|km mi|lk=on}} from the Cotentin Peninsula in Normandy, France, and about {{convert|87|nmi|km mi}} south of Great Britain.{{efn|name=\"not BI\"}} It is the largest and southernmost of the Channel Islands and part of the British Isles, with a maximum land elevation of {{convert|143|m}} above sea level.\nAbout 24% of the island is built-up. Land area dedicated to cultivation is 52% of the island, and around 18% is natural environment.\nIt lies within longitude -2\u00b0 W and latitude 49\u00b0 N. It has a coastline that is {{convert|70|km|order=flip}} long and a total area of {{convert|119.6|km2|order=flip}}. It measures roughly {{convert|9|mi}} from west to east and {{convert|5|mi|0}} north to south, which gives it the affectionate name among locals of \"nine-by-five\".\nThe island is characterised by a number of valleys which generally run north-to-south, such as Waterworks Valley, Grands Vaux, Mont les Vaux, although a few run in other directions, such as Le Mourier Valley. The highest point on the island is Les Platons at {{cvt|136|m}}.\nThere are several smaller island groups that are part of the Bailiwick of Jersey, such as Les Minquiers and Les \u00c9crehous, however unlike the smaller islands of the Bailiwick of Guernsey, none of these are permanently inhabited.\nSettlements.\nThe largest settlement is the town of St Helier, including the built-up area of southern St Helier and neighbouring areas such as Georgetown, which also plays host to the island's seat of government. The town is the central business district, hosting a large proportion of the island's retail and employment, such as the finance industry.\nOutside of the town, many islanders live in suburban and rural settlements, especially along main roads leading out of town, and even the more rural areas of the island have considerable amounts of development (St Ouen, the least densely populated parish, still has 270 persons per square kilometre). The south and east coasts from St Aubin to Gorey are largely urbanised. The second smaller urban area is the Les Quennevais area in St Brelade, which is home to a small precinct of shops, a school, a park, and a leisure centre.\nMost people across Jersey regularly travel from the rural settlements to St Helier and from the town to the rural areas for work and leisure purposes.\nHousing costs in Jersey are very high. The Jersey House Price Index has at least doubled between 2002 and 2020. The mix-adjusted house price for Jersey is \u00a3567,000, higher than any UK region (UK average: \u00a3249,000) including London (average: \u00a3497,000; highest of any UK region).\nClimate.\nJersey has an oceanic climate (Koppen: Cfb), with cool to mild winters and lukewarm to warm summers, both greatly moderated and extremes reduced by the relatively stable sea surface temperatures surrounding the island. The highest temperature recorded was {{Convert|37.9|C|F}}, on 18 July 2022, and the lowest temperature recorded was {{convert|\u221210.3|\u00b0C|\u00b0F|1|disp=or}}, on 5 January 1894. 2022 was the warmest (and sunniest) year on record; the mean daily air temperature was {{convert|13.56|C|F||disp=}}. Typical wind speeds vary between {{convert|20|km/h|mph|order=flip}} and {{convert|40|kph|mph|abbr=on|order=flip}}. During the cooler months, extratropical cyclones can produce gales somewhat regularly. Snow is very rare in Jersey. The last significant snowfall event occurred in March 2013, when {{convert|14|cm|sigfig=2}} fell, and most recent measurable snowfall occurred on 8\u20139 January 2024, when {{convert|3|to|5|cm|abbr=on|in|sigfig=2}} fell. \nExtreme weather is rare due to the island's mild climate, but Atlantic windstorms are fairly common in autumn and winter. In November 2023, Jersey was hit by Storm Ciar\u00e1n, causing heavy rainfall, extremely high winds with gusts of up to {{convert|104|mph|0|abbr=on}} and a supercell thunderstorm, producing unusually large hail and the strongest tornado in the British Isles since 2005. \nThe following table contains the official data for 1981\u20132010 at Jersey Airport, located {{convert|7.2|km|order=flip}} from St. Helier.\nEconomy.\nJersey's economy is highly developed and services-focused, with a GDP per capita of \u00a345,320 in 2019. It is a mixed market economy, with free market principles and an advanced social security infrastructure. 53,460 people were employed in Jersey {{as of|2010|December|lc=y}}: 24% in financial and legal services; 16% in wholesale and retail trades; 16% in the public sector; 10% in education, health and other private sector services; 10% in construction and quarrying; 9% in hotels, restaurants and bars.\nThanks to specialisation in a few high-return sectors, at purchasing power parity Jersey has high economic output per capita, substantially ahead of all of the world's large developed economies. Gross national income in 2009{{needs update|date=May 2024}} was \u00a33.7\u00a0billion (a mean of about \u00a340,000 per head of population). However, there is wide variation, and the typical (median) individual resident's purchasing power and standard of living in Jersey is comparable to that in the UK outside central London.\nTourism is an important economic sector for the island, however travel to Jersey is very seasonal. Accommodation occupancy is much higher in the summer months, especially August, than in the winter months (with a low in November). The majority of visitors to the island arrive by air from the UK. On 18 February 2005, Jersey was granted Fairtrade Island status.\nIn 2017, 52% of the Island's area was agricultural land (a decrease since 2009). Major agricultural products are potatoes and dairy produce. Jersey cattle are a small breed of cow widely known for their rich milk and cream; the quality of their meat is also appreciated on a small scale. The herd total in 2009 was 5,090 animals. Fisheries and aquaculture make use of Jersey's marine resources to a total value of over \u00a36\u00a0million in 2009.\nAlong with Guernsey, Jersey has its own lottery called the Channel Islands Lottery, which was launched in 1975.\nTaxation.\nJersey is not a tax-free jurisdiction. Taxes are levied on properties (known as 'rates') and there are taxes on personal income, corporate income and goods and services. Before 2008, Jersey had no value-added tax (VAT). Many companies, such as Amazon and Play.com, took advantage of this and a loophole in European law, known as low-value consignment relief, to establish a tax-free fulfilment industry from Jersey. This loophole was closed by the European Union in 2012, resulting in the loss of hundreds of jobs.\nThere is a 20% standard rate for Income Tax and a 5% standard rate for GST. The island has a 0% default tax rate for corporations; however, higher rates apply to financial services, utility companies and large corporate retailers. Jersey is considered to be a tax haven. Until March 2019 the island was on the EU tax haven blacklist, but it no longer features on it. In January 2021, the chair of the EU Tax Matters Subcommittee, Paul Tang, criticised the list for not including such \"renowned tax havens\" as Jersey. In 2020, Tax Justice ranked Jersey as the 16th on the Financial Secrecy Index, below larger countries such as the UK, but still placing it at the lower end of the 'extreme danger zone' for offshore secrecy. The island accounts of 0.46% of the global offshore finance market, making it a small player in the total market. In 2020, the Corporate Tax Haven Index ranked Jersey eighth for 2021, with a haven score (a measure of the jurisdiction's systems to be used for corporate tax abuse) of 100 out of 100; however, the island only has 0.51% on the Global Scale Weight ranking.\nTransport.\nThe primary mode of transport on the island is the motor vehicle. Jersey has a road network consisting of {{convert|557|km|order=flip}} of roads and there are a total of 124,737 motor vehicles registered on the island as of 2016. Jersey has a large network of narrow country lanes, some of which are classified as 'Green Lanes', which have a 15 mph speed limit and where priority is afforded to pedestrians, cyclists and horse riders.\nThe public bus network in Jersey has been regulated by the Government since 2002, replacing a de-regulated, commercial service. It is operated on a sole-operator franchise model, currently contracted to LibertyBus, a company owned by Kelsian Group. LibertyBus also operate the school bus services. \nJersey has an airport and a number of ports, which are all operated by Ports of Jersey.\nCurrency.\nJersey's monetary policy is linked to the Bank of England. The official currency of Jersey is the pound sterling. Jersey issues its own postage stamps, banknotes (including a \u00a31 note which is not issued in the UK) and coins that circulate alongside all other sterling coinage. Jersey currency is not legal tender outside Jersey; however it is \"acceptable tender\" in the UK and can be surrendered at banks in exchange for UK currency.\nIn July 2014, the Jersey Financial Services Commission approved the establishment of the world's first regulated Bitcoin fund, at a time when the digital currency was being accepted by some local businesses.\nDemography.\nCensuses have been undertaken in Jersey since 1821. In the 2021 census, the total resident population was estimated to be 103,267, of whom 35% live in St Helier, the island's only town. Approximately half the island's population was born in Jersey; 29% of the population were born elsewhere in the British Isles, 8% in continental Portugal or Madeira, 9% in other European countries and 5% elsewhere.{{Historical populations\nNationality and citizenship.\nJersey people are the native nation on the island;{{r|Minahan 2000 349|Quayle 1815 48|IDBoard}} however, they do not form a majority of the population. Jersey people are often called Islanders or, in individual terms, Jerseyman or Jerseywoman. Jersey people did not generally identify themselves as English prior to the Union of Britain. Jersey was culturally and geographically much closer to Normandy and there were limited cross-Channel links. However, wars with France, including invasions of Jersey, grew loyalty to Britain over time and the French came more and more to be seen as a distinct people. By the start of the 19th century, Jersey people generally identified as British, which can be seen through the treatment of the Breton immigrants of the time as a distinct nation. The growth of the British migrant population strengthened the role of English and the British cultural influence. Finally, the introduction of compulsory education \u2013 which was exclusively in English \u2013 and the period of the Occupation reduced the traditional and Norman cultural influences and increased British cultural practices and pride in British nationhood among the island population.\nNationality law in Jersey is conferred by the British Nationality Act 1981 extended to the island by an Order in Council with the consent of the States of Jersey. British nationality law confers British citizenship onto those with suitable connections to Jersey. The Lieutenant Governor's office issues British passports (specifically the Jersey variant) to British citizens with a connection to Jersey by residency or birth.\nImmigration.\nJersey is constitutionally entitled to restrict immigration by non-Jersey residents, but control of immigration at the point of entry cannot be introduced for British, certain Commonwealth and EEA nationals without change to existing international law.\nJersey is part of the Common Travel Area (CTA), a zone which encompasses the Crown Dependencies, the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland. This means that for citizens of the Common Travel Area jurisdictions a passport is not required to travel from Jersey to any of these jurisdictions (or vice versa). The Government recommends all travellers bring photo ID, since it may need to be checked by customs or police officers and is generally required by commercial transport providers into the island. Due to the CTA, Jersey-born British citizens in the rest of the CTA and British and Irish citizens in Jersey have the right to access social benefits, access healthcare, access social housing support and to vote in general elections.\nFor non-CTA travel, Jersey maintains its own immigration and border controls (although most travel into the Bailiwick is from the rest of the CTA), however UK immigration legislation may be extended to Jersey (subject to exceptions and adaptations) following consultation with Jersey and with Jersey's consent.\nTo control population numbers, Jersey operates a system of registration which restricts the right to live and work in the island according to certain requirements. To move to Jersey or work in Jersey, everyone (including Jersey-born people) must be registered and have a registration card. There are a number of statuses:\nHistory of immigration.\nUntil the 19th century, there was generally limited immigration to the island, especially by English people. Jersey was quite far from Britain (taking days to travel between England and the islands){{fact|date=May 2024}} and culturally distinct (the locals predominantly speaking Norman French). However, from the 16th to 19th centuries, Jersey became home to French religious refugees, particularly Protestants after the repeal of the Edict of Nantes.\nFrom the early 19th century, the island's economic boom attracted economic migrants. By 1841, of the 47,544 population, 11,338 were born in the British Isles outside of Jersey. From the 1840s onwards, agricultural workers came from neighbouring Brittany and mainland Normandy, both due to the booming economy of Jersey and the economic situation in northern France. The new potato season coincided with the time of least agricultural activity in Brittany and Normandy. While many returned to France, some settled in the island.\nBetween 1851 and 1921, the Jersey population fell by 12.8% (possibly up to 18%). The economic boom ended in the 1850s leading to significant emigration, including to British colonies. A 1901 report by the States concluded that by 1921, the number of births to foreign-born fathers would be equal to those to Jersey-born fathers, describing the immigration situation as a \"formidable invasion, although peaceful\", and predicted this would have a large impact on the island's socio-political situation.\nAfter World War II, when the island had only 55,244 residents, it saw a period of rapid population increase. By 1991, the population was 84,082. The booming tourism industry required a large volume of relatively low cost labour, so the island turned to Madeira for seasonal staff. Between 1961 and 1981, the Portuguese-born population grew 0.2% to 3.1% of the population. In 2021, this figure was 8%. Since the fall of the Berlin Wall, the new source of cheap labour for the island has been Polish people, whose population has grown from non-existent to 3%.\nImmigration has helped give aspects of Jersey a distinct urban character, particularly in and around the parish of St Helier. This has led to ongoing debates about the incompatibility of development and sustainability throughout the island.\nReligion.\nJersey's patron saint is Saint Helier, after whom the capital town is named. From the fifth century, the island was under the Bishop of Coutances, until being transferred to the Diocese of Winchester in 1568. Jersey became \"formally attached\" to the Diocese of Salisbury in November 2022. The established church is the Church of England, presided over in the island by the Dean, who is \"ex officio\" a States Member, but has no vote. The primary churches are the parish churches, which are 12 ancient Anglican churches, one in each parish centre, though other churches do exist.\nAccording to a 2015 survey of islanders, 54% of adults have a religion. Christianity is the predominant religion in the island, with over half of islanders identifying as Christian in some form. The largest belief demographic is \"no religion\" with 39% of the population.\nCulture.\nCultural events.\nThe Battle of Flowers is a carnival that has been held annually in August since 1902. Other festivals include {{lang|nrf|La F\u00eate d\u00e9 Nou\u00e9}} (Christmas festival), {{lang|nrf|La Fa\u00ees'sie d'Cidre}} (cidermaking festival), the Battle of Britain air display, Weekender Music Festival, food festivals, and parish events.\nThe Jersey Eisteddfod is an annual festival celebrating local culture. It is split into performing arts (e.g. dance, music, modern languages) and creative arts (e.g. needlework, photography, craft).\nArt.\nArchaeologists have discovered stone planquettes with abstract designs made by the Magdalenians and dating to the Upper Palaeolithic; these are the oldest pieces of art discovered in the British Isles as of 2023.\nThe island has produced a number of notable artists. John St Helier Lander (1868\u20131944) was a portrait painter born in St Helier in 1868; he was a portraitist for the Royal Family. Edmund Blampied also lived around the same period; he was known for his etchings and drypoint. Other famous historic artists include John Le Capelain, John Everett Millais and Philip Ouless. There are also several contemporary Jersey artists, such as Ian Rolls, known for painting quirky landscape paintings.\nJersey also has historic connections to French art. French artist Ren\u00e9 Lalique created the stained glass windows at St Matthew's Church. No similar Lalique commission survives elsewhere in the world. Artist partners Claude Cahun and Marcel Moore were born in France but moved to and died in the island.\nTelevision and media.\nThe popular 1980s BBC detective drama \"Bergerac\", starring John Nettles, was set in Jersey. The series was recently revived with a new cast by UKTV.BBC Radio Jersey provides a radio service, and BBC Channel Islands News provides a joint television news service with Guernsey. ITV Channel Television is a regional ITV franchise shared with the Bailiwick of Guernsey but with its headquarters in Jersey. Radio services are also provided by Channel 103, among other companies.\nBailiwick Express is one of Jersey's digital online news sources. Jersey has only one newspaper, the \"Jersey Evening Post\", which is printed six days a week, and has been in publication since 1890.\nMusic.\nLittle is known of the history of music in the islands, though fieldwork has recorded folk songs from the Channel Islands, mostly in French. The folk song {{lang|nrf|Chanson de Peirson}} is unique to the island.\nIn contemporary music, Guru Josh, who was born in Jersey, produced house and techno music. He was most notable for his internationally successful debut hit Infinity and its re-releases, reaching number one in numerous European countries. Rock and pop artist Nerina Pallot was raised on the island and has enjoyed international success, and has written songs for famous artists like Kylie Minogue.\nThe island has a summer music festival scene stretching from mid-June to late September including Good Vibrations, Out-There, the Weekender (the largest festival in the Channel Islands) and Electric Park.\nTheatre.\nThere are two theatres on the island: the Jersey Opera House and the Jersey Arts Centre. Lillie Langtry is probably the most famous actress from the island. She was born in Jersey and became an actress on the West End in the late 19th century. She was the first socialite to appear on stage and the first celebrity to endorse a commercial product. She was also famous for her relationships with notable figures, including the Prince of Wales, later Edward VII. She is buried in St Saviour's Church graveyard.\nCinema.\nIn 1909, T. J. West established the first cinema in the Royal Hall in St. Helier, which became known as West's Cinema in 1923 and was demolished in 1977. The first talking picture, \"The Perfect Alibi\", was shown on 30 December 1929 at the Picture House in St. Helier. The Jersey Film Society was founded on 11 December 1947 at the Caf\u00e9 Bleu, West's Cinema. The large Art Deco Forum Cinema was opened in 1935; during the German occupation this was used for German propaganda films.\nThe Odeon Cinema was opened 2 June 1952 and was later rebranded in the early 21st century as the Forum cinema. Its owners, however, struggled to meet tough competition from the Cineworld Cinemas group, which opened a 10-screen multiplex on the waterfront centre in St. Helier on reclaimed land in December 2002, and the Odeon closed its doors in late 2008. The Odeon is now a listed building.\nFirst held in 2008, the Branchage Jersey International Film Festival attracts filmmakers from all over the world.\nThe 2001 movie \"The Others\" was set on the island in 1945 shortly after liberation.\nFood and drink.\nSeafood has traditionally been important to the cuisine of Jersey: mussels (called {{lang|nrf|moules}} in the island), oysters, lobster and crabs \u2013 especially spider crabs \u2013 ormers and conger.\nJersey milk being very rich, cream and butter have played a large part in insular cooking. Jersey Royal potatoes are the local variety of new potato, and the island is famous for its early crop of Chats (small potatoes) from the south-facing c\u00f4tils (steeply sloping fields). They were originally grown using vraic as a natural fertiliser, giving them their own individual taste; only a small portion of those grown in the island still use this method. They are eaten in a variety of ways, often simply boiled and served with butter or when not as fresh fried in butter.\nApples historically were an important crop. {{lang|nrf|Bourd\u00e9lots}} are apple dumplings, but the most typical speciality is black butter ({{lang|nrf|l\u00e9 ni\u00e8r beurre}}), a dark spicy spread prepared from apples, cider and spices. Cider used to be an important export. After decline and near-disappearance in the late 20th century, apple production is being increased and promoted. Besides cider, apple brandy is produced. Other production of alcohol drinks includes wine, and in 2013 the first commercial vodkas made from Jersey Royal potatoes were marketed.\nAmong other traditional dishes are cabbage loaf, Jersey wonders ({{lang|nrf|les m\u00e8rvelles}}), fliottes, bean crock ({{lang|nrf|les pais au fou}}), nettle ({{lang|nrf|ortchie}}) soup, and vraic buns.\nSport.\nIn its own right, Jersey participates in the Commonwealth Games and in the biennial Island Games, which it first hosted in 1997 and more recently in 2015.\nThe Jersey Football Association supervises football in Jersey. As of 2022, the Jersey Football Combination has nine teams in its top division. Jersey national football team plays in the annual Muratti competition against the other Channel Islands. Rugby union in Jersey comes under the auspices of the Jersey Rugby Association (JRA), which is a member of the Rugby Football Union of England. Amateur side, Jersey RFC, won the English Regional Two South Central Division in the 2023/24 season and will play in fifth tier Regional One South Central next campaign.\nJersey Cricket Board is the official governing body of the sport of cricket in Jersey. Jersey Cricket Board is Jersey's representative at the International Cricket Council (ICC). It has been an ICC member since 2005 and an associate member since 2007. The Jersey cricket team plays in the Inter-insular match, as well as in ICC tournaments around the world in One Day Internationals and Twenty20 Internationals.\nFor Horse racing, Les Landes Racecourse can be found at Les Landes in St. Ouen next to the ruins of Grosnez Castle.\nJersey has two public indoor swimming pools: AquaSplash, St Helier and Les Quennevais, St Brelade. Swimming in the sea, windsurfing and other marine sports are practised. Jersey Swimming Club has organised an annual swim from Elizabeth Castle to Saint Helier Harbour for over 50 years. A round-island swim is a major challenge: the record for the swim is Ross Wisby, who circumnavigated the island in 9 hours 26 minutes in 2015. The Royal Channel Island Yacht Club is based in St Brelade.\nTwo professional golfers from Jersey have won the Open Championship seven times between them; Harry Vardon won six times and Ted Ray won once, both around the turn of the 20th century. Vardon and Ray also won the U.S. Open once each. Harry Vardon's brother, Tom Vardon, had wins on various European tours.\nJersey Sport, an independent body that promotes sports in Jersey and support clubs, was launched in 2017.\nLanguages.\nUntil the 19th century, indigenous J\u00e8rriais \u2013 a variety of Norman \u2013 was the language of the island though French was used for official business. During the 20th century, British cultural influence saw an intense language shift take place and Jersey today is predominantly English-speaking.{{r|facts gov}} J\u00e8rriais nonetheless survives; around 2,600 islanders (3%) are thought to be habitual speakers, and some 10,000 (12%) in all claim some knowledge of the language, particularly among the elderly in rural parishes. There have been efforts to revive J\u00e8rriais in schools.\nThe dialects of J\u00e8rriais differ in phonology and, to a lesser extent, lexis between parishes, with the most marked differences to be heard between those of the west and east. Many place names are in J\u00e8rriais, and French and English place names are also to be found. Anglicisation of the place names increased apace with the migration of English people to the island.\nLiterature.\nWace was a 12th-century poet born in Jersey. He is the earliest known Jersey writer, authoring \"Roman de Brut\" and \"Roman de Rou\", among others. Some believe him to be the earliest J\u00e8rriais writer and he is known as the founder of Jersey literature, but the language in which he wrote is very different from modern J\u00e8rriais.\nAs J\u00e8rriais was not an official language in Jersey, it had no standard written form, which meant that Jersey literature is very varied, written in multiple forms of J\u00e8rriais alongside Standard English and French.\nMatthew Le Geyt was the first poet to publish in J\u00e8rriais after the introduction of printing to the island in the 18th century. Philippe Le Sueur Mourant wrote in J\u00e8rriais in the 19th century.{{r|facts gov}} Jerseyman George d'la Forge is named the 'Guardian of the Jersey Norman Heritage'. Though he lived in America for most of his life, he felt a strong attachment to Jersey and his native language. His works were turned into books in the 1980s.\nAfter the failure of the 1848 revolution, thirty-nine French revolutionaries were exiled in Jersey, including the famous French author Victor Hugo, as Jersey's culture had a relation to their native French. Gerald Durrell, the famous zoologist who set up Jersey Zoo, was also an author, writing novels, non-fiction and children's books. He wrote in order to fund and further his conservation work.\nEducation.\nEducation in the island is managed by the Department for Children, Young People, Education and Skills of the Government of Jersey. The education system in Jersey is based on the English system. Full time education is compulsory for children aged 5 to 16. The Government provides limited free pre-school education to parents. Jersey schools must teach the Jersey Curriculum, which is based on the English National Curriculum, with differences to account for Jersey's unique position.\nAs of 2022, there are 24 States primary schools, seven private primary or preparatory schools, four comprehensive States secondary schools, two fee-paying States secondary schools, two private secondary schools and one provided grammar school and sixth form, Hautlieu School. Highlands College provides alternative post-16 and all post-18 education available on the island. However, higher education facilities are limited, so many students study off-island. In the UK, Jersey students pay the same rate as Home students.\nEnvironment.\nEnvironmental protection.\nThree areas of land are protected for their ecological or geological interest as Sites of Special Interest (SSI). Jersey has four designated Ramsar sites: Les Pierres de Lecq, Les Minquiers, Les \u00c9cr\u00e9hous and Les Dirouilles and the south east coast of Jersey (a large area of intertidal zone).\nLand use planning.\nJersey operates a planning system based on the discretionary system in use in the UK, where the States of Jersey passes a development plan, known as the Island Plan, which sets out zoning, development policies and sites allocated for development. Planning is regulated by the Island Planning Law 1964.\nGeopark bid.\nThe Aspiring Jersey Island Geopark (AJIG) project is a local campaign supported by the Government of Jersey and Jersey Heritage to achieve geopark status for the island of Jersey. The campaign intends to submit an application to UNESCO to designate the island as a Global Geopark. As part of this, Jersey Heritage launched a call for islanders to nominate sites of natural and cultural significance for individual nomination for geopark status.\nBiodiversity.\nFour species of small mammal are considered native: wood mouse, bank vole (an endemic subspecies \"Clethrionomys glareolus caesarius\"), lesser white-toothed shrew and crowned shrew. Three wild mammals are well-established introductions: rabbit (introduced in the Middle Ages), red squirrel and hedgehog (both introduced in the 19th century). The stoat became extinct in Jersey between 1976 and 2000, and may have been outcompeted by feral ferrets which probably became established on the island in the 1960s.\nThe red-billed chough became extinct in Jersey around 1900, when changes in farming and grazing practices led to a decline in the coastal slope habitat required by this species. Birds on the Edge, a project between the Government of Jersey, Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust and National Trust for Jersey, is working to restore Jersey's coastal habitats and reinstate the red-billed chough (and other bird species) to the island.\nFour species of reptiles occur on Jersey: western green lizard, wall lizard, slow worm, and barred grass snake. There are three species of amphibians: spiny toad (known locally as the Crapaud), agile frog, and palmate newt. All are protected species, with Jersey being the only native habitat in the British Isles for the green lizard, wall lizard, spiny toad and agile frog. \nThe remaining population of agile frogs on Jersey is very small and is restricted to the south west of the island. The species is the subject of an ongoing programme to save it from extinction in Jersey via a collaboration between the Government of Jersey, Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust and Jersey Amphibian and Reptile Group (JARG), with support and sponsorship from several other organisations. The programme includes captive breeding and release, public awareness and habitat restoration activities. \nNotable marine species include the ormer, conger, bass, undulate ray, grey mullet, ballan wrasse and garfish. Marine mammals include the bottlenosed dolphin and grey seal.\nTrees generally considered native are the alder, silver birch, sweet chestnut, hazel, hawthorn, beech, ash, aspen, wild cherry, blackthorn, holm oak, pedunculate oak, sallow, elder, elm and medlar. Among notable introduced species, the cabbage palm has been planted in coastal areas and may be seen in many gardens.\nHistorically the island has given its name to a variety of overly-large cabbage, the Jersey cabbage, also known as Jersey kale or cow cabbage.\nJapanese knotweed is an invasive species that threatens Jersey's biodiversity. It is easily recognisable and has hollow stems with small white flowers that are produced in late summer. Other non-native species on the island include the Colorado beetle, burnet rose and oak processionary moth.\nZoological park.\nJersey is the home of the Jersey Zoo (formerly known as the Durrell Wildlife Park) founded by the naturalist, zookeeper and author Gerald Durrell.\nPublic services.\nHealthcare.\nHealth services on the island are overseen by the Department for Health and Social Care. Jersey does not have a nationalised health service and the service is not part of the National Health Service. Many healthcare treatments are not free at the point of use; however, treatment in the accident and emergency department is free. For residents, prescriptions and some hospital treatments are free, but GP services are paid for.\nEmergency services.\nEmergency services are provided by the States of Jersey Police with the support of the Honorary Police as necessary, States of Jersey Ambulance Service, Jersey Fire and Rescue Service and the Jersey Coastguard. The Jersey Fire and Rescue Service, Jersey Lifeboat Association and the Royal National Lifeboat Institution operate an inshore rescue and lifeboat service; Channel Islands Air Search provides rapid response airborne search of the surrounding waters.\nThe States of Jersey Fire Service was formed in 1938 when the States took over the Saint Helier Fire Brigade, which had been formed in 1901. The first lifeboat was equipped, funded by the States, in 1830. The RNLI established a lifeboat station in 1884. Border security and customs controls are undertaken by the States of Jersey Customs and Immigration Service. Jersey has adopted the 112 emergency number alongside its existing 999 emergency number.\nSupply services.\nWater supplies in Jersey are managed by Jersey Water. Jersey Water supply water from two water treatment works, around 7.2\u00a0billion litres in 2018. Water in Jersey is almost exclusively from rainfall-dependent surface water. The water is collected and stored in six reservoirs and there is also a desalination plant that produces up to 10.8\u00a0million litres per day (around half of the Island's average daily usage). In 2017, 101 water pollution incidents were reported, an increase of 5% on 2016. Another estimated 515,700 m3 of water is abstracted for domestic purposes from private sources (around 9% of the population).\nElectricity in Jersey is provided by a sole supplier, Jersey Electricity, of which the States of Jersey is the majority shareholder. Jersey imports 95 per cent of its power from France. 35% of the imported power derives from hydro-electric sources and 65% from nuclear sources. Jersey Electricity claims the carbon intensity of its electricity supply is 35g CO2 e / kWh compared to 352g CO2 e / kWh in the UK."}
{"id": "15694", "revid": "7930436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15694", "title": "History of Jersey", "text": " \nJersey \u2013 the largest of the Channel Islands \u2013 has been an island for around 6,000 years. Early inhabitation is evidenced by various neolithic monuments and hoards. In the 10th century, Jersey became part of Normandy. When the Normans conquered England in the 11th century, Jersey remained a part of the Duchy of Normandy, but when Normandy and England were finally split in the 13th century, the Channel Islands remained loyal to the English Crown, splitting Jersey politically from mainland Normandy.\nDue to the English kings' continuing claim to the Duchy of Normandy, Jersey's Norman political and legal structures remained after the split, which led to the establishment of self-governance as a Crown Dependency. Between the 11th and 15th centuries, political tensions between England and France placed Jersey at the frontline of frequent wars.\nDuring the Tudor period, the English Crown split from the Roman Church and immigration to the island of French religious refugees led to the establishment of Calvinism as the major religion of the island. In 1617, the Privy Council separated the powers of Governor and Bailiff, establishing that the Bailiff had sole jurisdiction over justice and civil affairs in the island. During the English Civil War, Jersey remained more loyal to the Crown due to the loyalties of the de Carteret family, though the island was eventually captured by Parliamentarian forces. After restoration, the de Carterets were gifted land in the American colonies, establishing New Jersey.\nIn the 18th century, Jersey experienced bouts of unrest, culminating in the Corn Riots of 1769. As a result, legislative power was concentrated in the States in 1771, stripping the Royal Court of its lawmaking abilities. Island politics was then split between the Magot and Charlot parties through much of the 19th century. In 1781, the island was invaded by the French, but was defeated by an army led by Major Francis Peirson in the Battle of Jersey. From 1815, new peace with the French meant the island lost strategic military value. Improvements in transport infrastructure led to non-political increased links with the United Kingdom. Alongside this, a rising sense of British nationalism led the island's culture, which had previously retained many Norman-French qualities, to become highly anglicised.\nThe islands were away from the frontline of the First World War, but during the Second World War, the Channel Islands were the only part of the British Isles to be occupied by enemy forces. From 1940 to 1945, Jersey was occupied by German forces. The islands were liberated on 9 May 1945, which is still celebrated as the island's national day. After liberation, the island became a popular tourist destination and has become a major offshore finance centre.\nName of the island.\nAlthough Jersey was part of the Roman world, there is a lack of evidence to give a better understanding of the island during the Gallo-Roman and early Middle Ages. The tradition is that the island was called \"Caesarea\" by the Romans as laid down in the Antonine Itinerary, however this is disputed by some, who claim \"Caesarea\", \"Sarnia\" and \"Riduna\" are the Scilly Isles off the southwestern tip of England, nevertheless \"Sarnia\" in particular has a large cultural influence as the historic name of Guernsey (for example the national anthem of Guernsey is \"Sarnia ch\u00e9rie\"). \"Andium\" however is also mentioned on the list and this name is very often attributed to Jersey. Therefore, it is possible another island, such as the Minquiers were in fact \"Caesarea\" and Jersey \"Andium\".\nThe name is claimed to be the source of the modern name Jersey, \"-ey\" being a Norse signification of an island, and \"Jer-\" possibly being a contraction of Caesar, similar to Cherbourg, therefore the island meaning Caesar's island. Another claim for the origin of the name is as \"Geirr's Island\" from the Norse name Geirr or as \"the grassy isle\" from the Frisian \"gers\".:16 The Roman name for the Channel Islands was \"I. Lenuri\" (Lenur Islands)\nSome claim that the pre-Roman name for the island was \"Augia\" (alternatively \"Andium\"), and it was given by this name by King Childebert of France to Archbishop Samson of Dol in 550 CE. In the past the island's name has various variations of its spelling, such as Gersey, Jarz\u00e9, Gerzai and Gersui (including re-latinisations such as \"Gersoium\" and \"Grisogium\") Andium has considerable popularity as the former name for Jersey, being for example the name of the island's social housing corporation.\nOrigins of other place names on the island.\nL'Etacq is of Norse origin, a derivative of L'Estack, from the Norse \"stakkr\", meaning high rock. This word also gives name to various places called Etacquerel.:16\nPrehistory.\nThe earliest evidence of human activity in Jersey dates to about 250,000 years ago in the Middle Paleolithic (before Jersey became an island) when bands of Neanderthal nomadic hunters used the caves at La Cotte de St Brelade as a base for hunting mammoth and woolly rhinoceros.\nDue to rising sea levels, Jersey has been an island for approximately 6,000 years. The geology of the Channel Islands, has its origins in the Hercynian mountain building period, which also accounts for the hills of Brittany and the moors of Devon and Cornwall. At its current extremes it measures east to west and north to south. Evidence of Ice Age period engravings dating from at least 12,000 BC has been found, showing occupation by Homo sapiens.\nEvidence also exists of settled communities in the Neolithic period, which is marked by the building of the ritual burial sites known as dolmens. The number, size, and visible locations of these megalithic monuments (especially La Hougue Bie) have suggested that social organisation over a wide area, including surrounding coasts, was required for the construction. Archaeological evidence also shows that trading links with Brittany and the south coast of England existed during this time.\nHoards.\nEvidence of occupation and wealth has been discovered in the form of hoards. In 1889, during construction of a house in Saint Helier, a 746-gram gold torc of Irish origin was unearthed. A Bronze Age hoard consisting of 110 implements, mostly spears and swords, was discovered in Saint Lawrence in 1976 \u2013 probably a smith's stock. Hoards of coins were discovered at La Marquanderie, in Saint Brelade, Le C\u00e2tel, in Trinity, and Le C\u00e2tillon, in Grouville (1957).\nIn June 2012, two metal detectorists announced that they had uncovered what could be Europe's largest hoard of Iron Age Celtic coins, 70,000 late Iron Age and Roman coins. The hoard is thought to have belonged to a Curiosolitae tribe fleeing Julius Caesar's armies around 50 to 60 BC.\nIn October 2012, another metal detectorist reported an earlier Bronze Age find, the Trinity Hoard.\nEarly history.\nPrior to Normandy.\nAlthough there is no evidence of a Roman occupation of Jersey, historians consider that it is entirely feasible it was occupied by the Romans. Various Roman archeological artefacts have been found on the island, such as coins discovered on the north coast at Ile Agois. There are several sites attributed to the Romans on the island, such as Caesar's fort at Mont Orgeuil. Roman influence has been found, in particular at , the coastal headland site at Le Pinacle, where remains of a primitive structure are attributed to Gallo-Roman temple worship (\"fanum\").\nWhen Augustus Caesar divided Gaul into four provinces, Jersey was part of the province headquartered at Lyons. Roman influence has a strong grounding in the development of Jersey culture, bringing vernacular Latin to the isle, which would later develop into Standard French and J\u00e8rriais (and influence English).\nDuring the migration of the Britons from Britain to Brittany (c. 5th \u2013 6th century AD), specifically during the invasion led by St Samson, Bishop of Dol, it is believed the Channel Islands came to be settled by them. There are numerous references to the habitation of Jersey by Breton people. This likely brought Christianity to the island. Various saints such as the Celts Samson of Dol and Branwalator (Brelade) were active in the region. Tradition has it that Saint Helier from Tongeren in modern-day Belgium first brought Christianity to the island in the 6th century; part of the walls of the Fishermen's Chapel dates from this period and Charlemagne sent his emissary to the island (at that time called \"Angia\", also spelt \"Agna\") in 803. A chapel built around 911 now forms part of the nave of the Parish Church of St Clement.\nDuchy of Normandy (873\u20131204).\nFrom 873, Jersey was affected by the conquests by the Normans of the western coast of France (the Channel Islands were territory of the Kingdom of France at this time). During the reign of Charles III the Simple, the territory of modern Normandy was yielded to Rollo, the leader of the Normans, with the title of the \"Duke of Normandy\". While the Duchy was held in fief to the French Crown, the Crown only had limited rights in the province.\nIn around 933, Duke William I (William Longsword), seized Jersey, which until then had been politically linked to Brittany, and it is likely that the pre-Norman form of government and way of life was replaced at this point. The island adopted the Norman law system, still the basis of Jersey law today. During Norman rule, the island redeveloped after the devastation brought by the Vikings and developed agriculture. Immigration from the Norman mainland at this time first brought the modern Norman cultural influences found in the island today.:19\nA key part of the early administrative structure of Jersey was the fief. Alongside the parish, the fief provided a basic framework for rural life; the system began with the Norman system and largely remained similar to it. In Jersey, the dues, services and rents owed by tenants were extensive and often onerous. Jersey peasants retained a degree of freedom lost elsewhere, probably due to the insignificance of the island in the Duchy. More is known of the origins of the fief than of the parishes and early documents show that Jersey was thoroughly feudalised (the majority of the residents were tenants holding land from Seigneurs). The fief of St Ouen, the most senior fief in Jersey's feudal structure, was by 1135 in the hands of the de Carteret family. They held extensive lands in Carteret as well, but these were lost by them after King John's loss of Normandy, so they decided to settle on the island. Between the 12th and 20th centuries, there were an estimated 245 fiefs in Jersey, though not all simultaneously.\nIn 1066, the Duke William the Conqueror defeated Harold Godwinson at Hastings to become the King of England; however, he continued to rule his French possessions, including Jersey, as a separate entity, as fealty was owed to the King of France. This initial association of Jersey with England did not last long, as William split his possessions between his two elder sons: Robert Curthose became Duke of Normandy and William Rufus gained the English Crown. After William Rufus' death his younger brother Henry I claimed the English throne, and recaptured Normandy for England in 1106. The island was then part of the English King's realm (though still part of Normandy and France). Around 1142, it is recorded that Jersey was under the control of the Count of Anjou, who administered Normandy for the Duke.23\nAccording to the Rolls of the Norman Exchequer, in 1180 Jersey was divided for administrative purposes into three ministeria: , and (possibly containing four parishes each). Gorroic is an old spelling for Gorey, containing St Martin, St Saviour, Grouville and St Clement; Groceio could derive from de Gruchy, and contains St John, Trinity, St Lawrence and St Helier; and Crapoudoit, likely referring to the stream of St Peter's Valley, contains the remainder of the parishes in the West. This was a time of building or extending churches with most parish churches in the island being built/rebuilt in a Norman style chosen by the abbey or priory to which each church had been granted. St Mary and St Martin being given to Cerisy Abbey. By Norman times, the parish boundaries were firmly fixed and remain largely unchanged since. It was likely set in place due to the tithe system under Charlemagne, where each property must contribute to the church, so each property would have had to be established within a parish. The parish system is much more important in Jersey than in England or post-Napoleon France.:15\nAfter the death of Henry II in 1189 and the short reign of Richard I, the island (and the rest of the Empire) fell to King John in 1199. In 1200, John agreed to render homage of his Norman territories to the King Philip Augustus of France, but in 1204, King Philip re-conquered the Duchy. Though the French initially occupied the Channel Islands from 1204 to 1206 (and again in 1216 to 1217), John recognised their strategic importance and recovered them. However, thanks to Pierre de Pr\u00e9aux, a governor of Rouen who possessed the isles, who decided to support King John, the islands remained in the personal possession of the English king and were described as being a Peculiar of the Crown.\n13th century.\nIt is said, in tradition, that the island's autonomy derives from the \"Constitutions of King John\", however this is disputed. Until King James II, successive English monarchs have then granted to Jersey by charter its certain privileges, likely to ensure the island's continued loyalty, accounting for its advantageous position at the boundary of the European continent. As John (and later Henry III) maintained his title as the rightful Duke of Normandy until 1259, the island's courts were originally established as Norman, not English territory (to use English law would de-legitimise the English Crown's claim to the ducal title), so are based upon traditional Norman laws and customs, such as the \"Coutumier de Normandie\".\nNow sited on the French-English border, the Channel Islands ceased to be a peaceful backwater and became a potential flashpoint on the international stage. Under the wardenships of Philippe d'Aubigny (1212\u20131224, 1232\u20131234), the island was attacked by Eustace the Monk, a pirate, while the warden was fighting for the King in the Barons' war. In 1217, Louis, the son of Philip II of France, ordered after the Treaty of Lambeth, that the supporters of Eustace should return the islands to England. The same year, Eustace was beheaded after being captured at Sandwich. Therefore, the Warden, de Suligny, constructed a castle at Gorey, known as Mont Orgueil, to serve as a royal fortress and military base. This was needed as the Island had few defences and had previously been suppressed by a fleet commanded by a French exile, Eustace the Monk working with the English King until in 1212 he changed sides and raided the Channel Islands on behalf of the French King.\nAn inquest was held into the loyalty of the Jersey landowners. Most Jersey landowners had their main estates on the Mainland, so John needed to re-organise the land to remove the unfaithful lords. Most lords forfeited their insular land in favour of their French territory, but some remained, notably the de Carteret family of St Ouen. The old aristocracy gave way to a new one, with landowners drawn from royal officials, who soon came to think of themselves as islanders rather than Englishmen. This saw the firm establishment of the feudal system in Jersey, with fiefs headed by Seigneurs.:30\nIn the Treaty of Paris (1259), the King of France gave up claim to the Channel Islands. The claim was based upon his position as feudal overlord of the Duke of Normandy. The King of England gave up claim to mainland Normandy and therefore the Channel Islands were split from the rest of Normandy. The Channel Islands were never absorbed into the Kingdom of England and the island has had self-government since. The administration of the island was handled by an insular government. The King appointed a Warden (later \"Capitain\" or \"Governor\", now the Lieutenant-Governor of Jersey), a position largely occupied with the defence of the island. From 1415 until the second half of the 15th century, the islands were governed by a Lord (or Lady). Despite the end to Norman rule, the churches of the island were permitted to continue to be under the Diocese of Coutances for another 300 years to appease islanders, however at times of war the liberties of the clergy were often restricted.\nThe existing Norman customs and laws were allowed to continue and there was no attempt to introduce English law. The formerly split administrative system was replaced with a centralised legal system, of which the head was the King of England rather than the Duke of Normandy. The law was conducted through 12 jurats, constables () and a bailiff (). These titles have different meanings and duties to those in England. Any oppression by a bailiff or a warden was to be resolved locally or failing that, by appeal to the King who appointed commissioners to report on disputes. In the late 1270s, Jersey was given its own Bailiff and from the 1290s, the duties of Bailiff and Warden were separated. The (Sub-)Warden became responsible for taxation and defence, while the Bailiff became responsible for justice. While probably originally a temporary arrangement by Otto de Grandison, this became permanent and the foundation for Jersey's modern separation of Crown and justice. It also lessened the Warden's authority relative to the Bailiff, who had much more interaction with the community.\nThe role of the jurats when the King's court was mobile would have been preparatory work for the visit of the Justices in Eyre. It is unknown for how long the position of the jurats has existed, with some claiming the position dates to time immemorial. After the cessation of the visits of the Justices in Eyre (and with the frequent absence of the Warden), the Bailiff and jurats took on a much wider role, from jury to justice.:28\nFor geographic reasons, during the thirteenth century, the Channel Islands became a strategic stopping point for fleets carrying goods, particularly wine, across the Channel. This led to an economic boom, islanders becoming highly wealthy, and a population boom. Jersey's population probably numbered around 12,000, beyond what the island's agriculture was able to sustain itself.\nIn 1294, Philip IV the Fair of France refused to return Aquitainian fortresses surrendered to his men by EdwardI and his brother Edmund Crouchback as a show of good faith after an outbreak of piracy and informal war between the two countries. Jersey was attacked the same year as part of the ensuing Gascon War and in revenge for the destruction of a French fleet in the Channel. Churches, homes, and crops were destroyed and many islanders died.\n14th and 15th centuries.\nPlague and Hundred Year's War (1337\u20131455).\nIn 1336, the Scots king David Bruce attacked the Channel Islands, committing arson, murder and other atrocities.40 Due to this attack, other attacks and the threat of further attacks from the Scots, an Island Militia was formed in 1337, which was compulsory for the next 600 years for all men of military age. In November 1337, King Edward III broke off negotiations with the French, starting the Hundred Year's War.\nIn March 1338, a French force led by Admiral B\u00e9huchet landed on Jersey, intent on capturing the island.41 The French devastated the island. In four parishes, all tithe corn was burnt.41 Although the island was overrun, Mont Orgueil remained in English hands, besieged by B\u00e9huchet.41 The French remained until September, when they sailed off to conquer Guernsey, Alderney, and Sark. In 1339, the French returned, allegedly with 8,000 men in 17 Genoese galleys and 35 French ships. Led by Robert Bertrand, to whom the islands had been transferred by the French King, the French forces promised islanders their ancient liberties, which had not been ratified by the English King in recent times. A number of senior islanders were pro-French at the time. Again, they failed to take the castle and, after causing damage, withdrew.\nIn 1341, in recognition of islanders' efforts during the war, Edward III declared that Jerseymen should 'hold and retain all privileges, liberties, immunities and customs granted by our forebares'. This began the tradition of successive Monarchs devolving powers over the island to Islanders, giving them certain privileges and protecting the separation between the Channel Islands and the rest of their royal realm. In 1342, the Warden Sir Thomas of Hampton attempted to recapture Castle Cornet with a contingent of Jerseymen. His Lieutenant Henry de la More however lost the faith gained from the islanders by the King's charter. Islanders petitioned the King to punish de la More and Hampton. The island was thrown in a sullen revolt, which sometimes broke out into fighting.42\u20133\nThe change in England to a written language in \"English\" was not taken up in Jersey, where Norman-French continued until the 20th century.\nIn 1348, when the Black Death would likely have reached the island, there are no kept records for the number of deaths seen on the island. Coastal France was highly affected by the plague and it is likely that the death toll was around 30\u201340 percent in Jersey. In the wake of the plague, the island experienced economic stagnation but high levels of employment, with population numbers kept down by late marriage and declining fertility.\nIn July 1373, Bertrand du Guesclin overran Jersey and besieged Mont Orgueil. His troops succeeded in breaching the outer defences, forcing the garrison back to the keep. The garrison came to an agreement that they would surrender if not relieved by Michaelmas and du Guesclin sailed back to Brittany, leaving a small force to carry on the siege. An English relief fleet arrived in time.\nIn 1378, the island was placed in an awkward position during the Western Schism. The island was under the Diocese of Coutances in France, while administered politically by England. Therefore, as France supported Clement's claim to the Papal see and England supported Urban's, there was tension in the island between the Government and Church. The Warden ordered the banishment of the Dean, labelled a 'supporter of the anti-Pope'. The island was placed under an Urbanite Administrator, as a separately administered part of the Coutances diocese.48\nIn the 1390s, under Richard II who was eager for peace with France, the island was almost recognised as an integral part of Normandy and returned to the French Crown.49 He did however in 1394 grant the islands the right of exemption from tolls, duties and customs in England.17\nHowever, this matter was interrupted by the usurpation of Henry IV in England in 1399. When he seized the throne, Henry renewed the charters confirming the privileges of Jersey. Henry's much firmer stance on relations with the French caused the war with France to resume.49 On 7 October 1406, 1,000 French men at arms led by Pedro de Ni\u00f1o, a Castilian nobleman turned corsair, invaded Jersey, landing at St Aubin's Bay and defeated the 3,000 defenders but failed to capture the island. They landed in St Aubin's Bay (at the islet where Elizabeth Castle now stands) at night, then the next morning advanced across the beach towards the town, but lost the battle. The next day they moved towards Mont Orgueil. An agreement was reached with the invaders that the island would pay a hefty ransom and they left on 9 October.37\nIn 1412, Henry V came to the throne with a renewed vigour to reclaim England's former continental possessions. In 1413, Parliament ordered the transfer of all foreign-owned property to the Crown, which led to the closure of six priorities in England and the cessation of tithes to the Church in France. Instead, the tithes from the Church's land in Jersey was reverted to the Crown. Henry's successful campaign against the French involved Jerseymen: in the siege of Cherbourg in 1418, every boat on the island was called out to support the blockade. In 1420, Henry entered Paris, leaving Jersey no longer an outpost of the English realm, leading to years of prosperity and the enlargement of many parish churches. When Henry called the bishops of Normandy to do him homage in Rouen, only Coutances obeyed. As a result, Jersey was returned to his full jurisdiction.52\u20133\nFrom 1429, animosity towards the English rulers by the French and the subsequent rise of Joan of Arc inspired France to evict the English from mainland France, with the exception of Calais, returning Jersey to the front line. This eviction cemented Jersey's Britishness. Had England not lost its possessions, France would certainly have become the dominant part of the Anglo-French combined realm, and its relative geographic and cultural proximity would have made Jersey markedly part of France.54\nWar of the Roses (1455\u20131487).\nDuring the Hundred Years' War (1337\u20131453), the French did not succeed in capturing Jersey. However, during the War of the Roses (1455\u20131487), Margaret of Anjou, queen consort of England, made a secret deal with Pierre de Br\u00e9z\u00e9 to gain French support for the Lancastrians, leading to the French capturing Mont Orgueil in the summer of 1461. In 1462, de Br\u00e9z\u00e9 issued ordinances outlining the role of the bailiff and the jurats.38 Jersey was occupied by French forces until 1468 when Yorkist forces and local militia recaptured the castle.\nEdward IV oversaw the administrative separation of Jersey and Guernsey. In 1469, he issued separate charters of privilege for the bailiwicks and from 1478 the islands had different captains (albeit with a common captain in chief).60\nIt may well be during this occupation that the island saw the establishment of the States. Comte Maulevrier, who had led the invasion of the island, ordered the holding of an Assize in the island. Maulevrier confirmed the place of existing institutions, however created the requirement for Jurats to be chosen by Bailiffs, Jurats, Rectors and Constables.\nTudors and Reformation (1485\u20131603).\nThe accession of Henry VII is determined as the 'final separation [of the Channel Islands] from Normandy'. The end of the War of the Roses marked the end of the previously complex, war-torn relationship with Normandy.61 In 1496, King Henry VII obtained a Papal bull to transfer the islands from the Bishop of Coutances to Salisbury, although for nearly 50 years after, due to the proximity of the isles to Coutances, the Bishop continued to act as the de facto bishop of the islands.:67\nDuring the 16th century, ideas of the reformation of the church coupled with the split with the Catholic Faith by Henry VIII, resulted in the islanders adopting the Protestant religion, in 1569 the churches moved under the control of the Diocese of Winchester. During the reign of Edward VI, the Government issued a new prayer book, which was translated into French, however did not arrive in the island until the throne had changed hands to Queen Mary, who led the restoration of Catholicism in England. However, Jersey did not have any death sentences issued for Catholicism, due to the island being kept out of the limelight by its Governor Poulet. The island did not become Catholic, with numerous anti-Papists still in position.:79\nDuring the reign of Elizabeth I, Calvinism took hold in Jersey due to the immigration of French Huguenot refugees. This meant that life became very austere: laws were strictly enforced, punishment for wrong doers was severe, but education was improved \u2013 a school was started in every parish and support was given for Jersey boys to attend Oxford. Each elder knew every family within his vingtaine, 'whether they have household prayers morning and evening, say grace after meals and live in peace and concord.' The excommunication of Elizabeth by the Pope increased the military threat to the island and the increasing use of gunpowder on the battlefield meant that the fortifications on the island had to be adapted. A new fortress was built to defend St Aubin's Bay, the new Elizabeth Castle was named after the queen by Sir Walter Raleigh when he was governor. The island militia was reorganised on a parish basis and each parish had two cannon which were usually housed in the church \u2013 one of the St Peter cannon can still be seen at the bottom of Beaumont Hill.\nIn 1540, there was an outbreak of plague on the island, and the Lieutenant Governor, Robert Raymond, ordered the closure of all markets, fairs and public assemblies.:70\nIn 1541, the Privy Council, which had recently given a seat to Calais, intended to give two seats in Parliament to Jersey. Seymour, the Lieutenant-Governor of the Island, wrote to the Jurats, instructing them to send two Burgesses for the isle. However, no further steps seemed to have been taken since the letter did not arrive in front of the States Assembly until the day the elected persons were required to arrive in London.:70\nJersey's role in early colonialism.\nDuring the Elizabethan Era, Europeans began to explore and establish colonies in the Americas. The J\u00e8rriais were no exception to this. Jersey was a notable trading port, on the route linking the Netherlands to Spain and between England and France. A number of locals were colonialists to Newfoundland from its discovery by Europeans in 1497. By 1591, Jerseymen were sailing small boats across the Atlantic in the spring and not returning to the island until the autumn ploughing. In 1611, St Brelade's Church was allowed to hold Communion early, such that the travellers could communicate before sailing from St Aubin. Southampton was also an important port for the Jersey people, with a number of them settling and taking important roles in the town.\nOne of the favourable trade deals with England was the ability to import wool (England needing an export market but was at war with most of Europe). The production of knitwear in the island reached such a scale that it threatened the island's ability to produce its own food, so laws were passed regulating who could knit with whom and when. The name jersey being synonymous for a sweater, shows its importance.\n17th century.\nGovernorship of John Peyton (1603\u20131620).\nJames VI of Scotland became King of England, and hence of Jersey, after the death of Elizabeth I in 1603. The Governor of the time, Walter Ralegh, was tried and imprisoned for conspiring against the King after the death of Elizabeth and replaced with Sir John Peyton. Peyton strongly disliked Presbyterianism, including Calvinism, and attempted to abolish the religion in Jersey. The king initially allowed the island's to continue under their present faith system. However, Calvinism was increasingly unpopular among islanders, which aided Peyton's caused. When St Peter's rectory became vacant in 1613, Peyton appointed Elie Messervy to the position. The Colloquy called a Synod to meet to discuss, however Peyton banned the meeting. Both sides sent parties to Westminster \u2013 the Colloquy sending George Poulet, the Bailiff \u2013 however a compromise was found locally, with Messervy agreeing to continue using the Huguenot prayer book.Peyton was also against democracy in the form of the States and the freedoms of the Courts in Jersey. In 1615, Jean H\u00e9rault was appointed Bailiff by the King, having been promised the role by letters patent in 1611. Peyton disputed this appointment, claiming it was the Governor's jurisdiction to appoint the Bailiff. H\u00e9rault asserted it was the King's jurisdiction to directly appoint the Bailiff. An Order in Council (dated 9 August 1615) sided with H\u00e9rault, which H\u00e9rault took to claim the Bailiff was the real head of government and the Governor was simply a military officer. H\u00e9rault took steps to assert the precedence of the Bailiff over Governor: he ordered his name to be placed before the Governor's in church prayers and was the first Bailiff to wear red robes (in the style of English judges). To back his claims, he cited that in the Norman administrative tradition, the Bailiffs had \"noone above them except the Duke\". He frequently reported neglect of duty by Peyton, such as the reduction in the guard at Elizabeth Castle.\nThis dispute led to one of the most major turning points in Jersey's constitutional history, as the division of powers between the Governor and Bailiff were clearly demarcated. Though the Privy Council did not agree with H\u00e9rault's extreme position on the precedence of the Bailiff, on 18 February 1617 it declared that the \"charge of military forces be wholly in the Governor, and the care of justice and civil affairs in the Bailiff.\" This secured for both the Bailiff and the States precedence over the Governor on justice and civil affairs, the constitutional precedent which limits the involvement of the Lieutenant-Governor in domestic affairs today.\nIn 1617, the Royal Commissioners Sir Edward Conway and Sir William Bird visited the island. This led to the recommendation that the island should have a Dean. The appointment was David Bandinel, the Italian Rector of St Brelade's, taking office in 1620. This was not popular with the States, with some Rectors stating they would not recognise the position of the Dean. He took office nonetheless and, by order of the King, Anglicanism was hence effectively established as the state religion of the island. The Book of Discipline lost its validity and the prayer book was changed to a translated version of the Book of Common Prayer, and all future Ministers had to be appointed from then on by a Bishop. Bandinel enforced these changes, including removing the Rector of St Mary from office for speaking against the prayer book, however the order that Communion should be taken kneeling was not.\nAside from religion, the Commissioners also ordered that the island's garrisons be increased and for better training for the militia. They did not recognise the Bailiff as being the island's true Governor, ordering that the States must receive permission from the Governor before being permitted to meet, however did also affirm the precedence of the Bailiff in the civil administrative spheres.\nWars of the Three Kingdoms (1646\u20131651).\nDuring the 1640s, England, Ireland and Scotland were embroiled in the War of the Three Kingdoms. The civil war also divided Jersey, and while the sympathy of islanders lay with Parliament, the de Carterets (particularly Sir George Carteret and Sir Philippe de Carteret II) held the island for the king. The Prince of Wales, the future Charles II visited the island in 1646 and again in October 1649 following the trial and execution of his father, Charles I. In the Royal Square in St. Helier on 17 February 1649, Charles was publicly proclaimed king after his father's death (following the first public proclamation in Edinburgh on 5 February 1649). Parliamentarian forces eventually captured the island in 1651 and Elizabeth Castle seven weeks later.\nCommonwealth and Restoration (1651-1689).\nThe Puritan Col. James Heane was appointed Governor of Jersey in 1651. There were complaints from islanders about the new resident soldiers. Despite the fact that Heane had prohibited looting, many soldiers stole things from islanders and secularised a number of holy buildings, for example burning all the pews in St Helier's church. Many soldiers attending services at the island's churches disrespected services because they could not understand them, as Jersey services were in the local French language. Printed slips were brought from England which Jerseymen were required to sign, swearing allegiance to the 'Republic of England ... without King or House of Lords'.\nThe Royalist landowners could redeem their land by paying between one and two years' income. However Jersey's system of \"rentes\" were complicated from an English perspective and the process of extracting the value of incomes from the landlords was laborious. The Receiver-General stormed because he could not get enough funds for his department, leading to him affronting the Bailiff and being imprisoned in Mont Orgeuil.140\nThere was concern over the new republican Government's powers to reform Jersey's system of governance. At the time, all but one Jurat had been deposed of office and Parliament had prevented any election in the island until it had control of the situation. The Council recommended that the island's government be fully restored, but that all entrusted with public office should be freely elected and not to enjoy continuance for life. However, before the reforms could be implemented, the English Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell dissolved the Long Parliament in 1653. As such, the replacement Parliament recommended that year that ten new Jurats be elected, provided they were loyal to Parliament and to hold office for two years only. However, this new Parliament was also dissolved, so only one Jurat remained. Attempts were also made to incorporate Jersey into England. In 1652, Parliament had treated it as an English county, appointing a county committee, and in 1653, an Instrument decreed that Jersey should send one member to the House of Commons. In the end, the States never met during the nine years of the Commonwealth as the Bailiff, Lempri\u00e8re, refused to call on the Rectors.\nInstead the island was governed by the Royal Court (called \"L'\u00c9tat\" or the Court of the Lord Protector). Cromwell directly appointed \u2013 as opposed to the islanders electing \u2013 eleven Jurats to serve on the Court, however many of these were absent and neither able to govern nor administer justice.141\u20132\nWhile Charles was proclaimed King in London on 8 May 1660, it was not until 2 June that that news reached the island, and Charles II was proclaimed King for the second time in the Royal Square.146 In recognition for all the help given to him during his exile, Charles II gave George Carteret, Bailiff and governor, a large grant of land in the American colonies, which he promptly named New Jersey, now part of the United States of America. Furthermore, Charles II presented to the island a royal mace as a 'perpetual remembrance of [the Bailiffs'] fiedelity'; since then, it has always been carried before the Bailiff at sittings of the Royal Court and the States (even during the Occupation).\nAnother reward given to the island by Charles was the perquages. These are a series of routes that offered sanctuary to malefactors to leave the island. All except St Ouen and St Martin lead to the south coast. For example, St Mary, St John and St Lawrence leave via St Peter's Valley and Beaumont (today a cycle track leading to the south coast). Where a case did not amount to felony, wrongdoers could request to \"vider le pays\", being entitled to nine days of sanctuary in any of the parish churches and then having to leave the island using a perquage route. This theory of the perquages as being routes of sanctuary is disputed. However, it is likely the clergy used these ancient ways to convey outlaws to the sea and records show sanctions for blocking the perquage way.147\nIn 1666, it was reported by English spies in Paris that Louis XIV intended to invade Jersey after his declaration of war with England. The Governor rallied the militia, intent on dying to defend the island, but peace was agreed before any invasion could happen.150\u20131\nIn 1673, there were concerns over the growing number of houses on the island. The construction of houses on arable land was putting the island's self-sustenance and food security at risk. Therefore, the States declared that new houses should only be built in St Aubin and Gorey, or where surrounded by 20 verg\u00e9es of land.154\nIn 1680, the States voted in favour of requesting the island's first dedicated prison be constructed in town in order to be nearer the Royal Court (previously prisoners had been held at Mont Orgueil, the King's tenants in the east being required to guard them). The building arching over Charing Cross (at the time the entrance to town from the west) was completed by 1699, where the prison would remain until its 1811 relocation to the present site of the General Hospital (on Gloucester Street, not at Westmount).\nReign of William of Orange (1689\u20131699).\nIn 1689, William of Orange became the King of England; and England, as a Dutch ally, went to war against the French. Although due to the scale of the war, the island did not come into much focus, it was at this time the Privilege of Neutrality which had long been enjoyed by the islands was lost. William had banned all trade with France, a proclamation which applied to Jersey as well, however due to corruption in the higher levels of Jersey's government, namely the Lieutenant-Governor himself Edward Harris, a large smuggling trade thrived, operating from the bailiwick. Smugglers would be alerted by a fire set by French merchants on the \u00c9crehous reef, a part of Jersey's bailiwick, to which Jersey boats, under the approval of the Lieutenant-Governor, would travel to conduct illegal trade. Despite attempts from parish authorities to stop the boats, the fact that the reef was part of Jersey and that these boats had permission from the government to travel to the islets, no action could be taken.\nDuring William's wars with France, Jersey was on the whole at peace, with the notable exception of 1692, when Louis XIV permitted an army to gather at La Hougue on the Cotentin. James II himself also went to the Cotentin, however Jersey's allegiance was now against the Stuarts. However, in a naval battle in 1692, the French fleet at La Hougue were destroyed. Although the threat of foreign powers was numb during this period, on island tensions were high. The Governors and Bailiffs were generally absent \u2013 the Governor Henry Lumley never visited the island at all during his time in office and after the death of Sir Edouard de Carteret, no bailiff was appointed for five years. The eventual successor Charles de Carteret faced large opposition, especially from his own tenants in St. Ouen. A group of jurats complained to the Privy Council that de Carteret was absent and not well accustomed to the law and culture of the island. Charles attempted to oppose this by blocking sittings of the Jurats in court, claiming they could not sit since they were related to the plaintiff or defendant (which they most often were since everyone in Jersey was somehow related to one another). With Charles ended the male line of de Carteret seigneurs.\nTowards the end of the 17th century, Jersey strengthened its links with the Americas when many islanders emigrated to New England and north east Canada. The Jersey merchants built up a thriving business empire in the Newfoundland and Gasp\u00e9 fisheries. Companies such as Robins and the Le Boutilliers set up thriving businesses.\n18th century.\nPublic unrest in the early century.\nBy the 1720s, a discrepancy in coinage values between Jersey and France was threatening economic stability. The States of Jersey therefore resolved to devalue the liard to six to the sou. The legislation to that effect implemented in 1729 caused popular riots that shook the establishment. The devaluation was therefore cancelled.\nIn the 1730s, there was sporadic violence against the collectors of Crown tithes, especially in St Ouen, St Brelade and Trinity.\nCorn Riots.\nA revolt, known as the Corn Riots or the Jersey Revolution, occurred in 1769. They were centred around the balance of power between the island's parliament, the States, and the Royal Court, both of which had powers to create legislation. An anti-Seigneurial sentiment \u2013 opposition to the feudal economic system \u2013 also contributed to the popular revolt. The spark for the riots was a corn shortage, in part caused by corruption in the ruling classes, led by the Lieutenant Bailiff Charles Lempri\u00e8re, whose style of rule was authoritarian.\nOn 28 September 1769, men from the northern parishes marched into town and rioted, including breaking into the Royal Court in a threatening manner. The States retreated to Elizabeth Castle and called on the Privy Council for help under false pretences. The Council sent five companies of Royal Scots, who discovered the islanders' grievances.\nThe protestors demands include reductions in price of wheat and the abolition of certain, or all, Seigneurial privileges. In reaction, the Crown issued the Code of 1771, which attempted to separate the island's judiciary and legislature. The Code codified Jersey's laws and removed lawmaking powers from the Royal Court. While the abolition of the Seigneurial system woas not achieved, tighter restrictions were placed on the collection of Crown revenues.\nPolitics and religion in the 18th century.\nThe Chamber of Commerce founded 24 February 1768 is the oldest English-speaking Chamber of Commerce.\nThe late 18th century was the first time political parties in some form came into existence on the island. Jean Dumaresq was an early Liberal who called for democratic reforms (that the States should be democratically elected Deputies and should have vested in them executive power). His supporters were known as (\"maggots\", initially an insult from his opponents, which the reclaimed as their own term) and his opponents as the \"\" (supporters of the Lieutenant Baliff Charles Lempi\u00e8re). Dumaresq is quoted as saying \"we shall make these Seigneurs bite the dust\". In 1776, he was elected as Conn\u00e9table for St Peter.:200\nMethodism arrived in Jersey in 1774, brought by fishermen returning from Newfoundland. Conflict with the authorities ensued when men refused to attend militia drill when that coincided with chapel meetings. The Royal Court attempted to proscribe Methodist meetings, but King George III refused to countenance such interference with liberty of religion. The first Methodist minister in Jersey was appointed in 1783, and John Wesley preached in Jersey in August 1789, his words being interpreted into the vernacular for the benefit of those from the country parishes. The first building constructed specifically for Methodist worship was erected in St. Ouen in 1809.\nBattle of Jersey.\nThe 18th century was a period of political tension between Britain and France, as the two nations clashed all over the world as their ambitions grew. Because of its position, Jersey was more or less on a continuous war footing.\nDuring the American Wars of Independence, two attempted invasions of the island were made. In 1779, the Prince of Nassau-Siegen was prevented from landing at St Ouen's Bay; on 6 January 1781, a force led by Baron de Rullecourt captured St Helier in a daring dawn raid, but was defeated by a British army led by Major Francis Peirson in the Battle of Jersey. A short-lived peace was followed by the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars which, when they had ended, had changed Jersey forever. In 1799\u20131800, over 6000 Russian troops under the command of Charles du Houx de Viom\u00e9nil were quartered in Jersey after an evacuation of Holland.\nAfter the Battle.\nThe end of war with France and America saw the growth of trade between Jersey and the New World, especially Canada and Newfoundland. By 1763, around a third of the fish being exported from Conception Bay was carried by Jersey vessels. In the 1780s, a number of Jersey families settled permanently, such as the de Quettevilles in Forteau, Labrador. The first printing press was introduced to Jersey in 1784.\nAnti-seigneurial attitudes remained in Jersey, despite the reforms of 1771. In 1785, an anti-seigneurial document containing 36 articles was included in St Ouen's Parish Assembly minutes. It included demands for reform such as the abolition of Seigneurial services and an end to the seizure of goods following bankruptcy. These demands were paralleled in St Helier and St John and by an article in , the only newspaper at the time. These demands formed the basis for a sustained anti-feudal struggle during the next century.\n19th century.\nThe 19th century saw massive changes in Jersey society. A large influx of immigrants from England made Jersey a more connected island than ever before, and brought with it cultural changes and the desire for political reform. During this period, the States reformed to become more representative of the population and the Jersey culture became more anglicised and less religious. The island also grew economically and the built-up areas of the island expanded, especially St Helier, with the development of public transport on the island.\nPre-Victoria.\nThe pre-existing road network was an intricate network of roads and lanes. During the nineteenth century, many parishes took on the administration of more and more of these lanes. The network was criticised at the time for being subpar. A common J\u00e8rriais saying is , which means 'as old as the roads'. In the early 19th century, the military roads were constructed (on occasion at gunpoint in the face of opposition from landowners) by the governor, General George Don, to link coastal fortifications with the town harbour. Much of the opposition to the plans came from islanders, who thought the country's best defence was its convoluted network of narrow lanes. The new road system was met with considerable opposition, particularly due to its expense. The St Helier Parish Assembly forbade the completion of the Trinity main road within its boundaries. The new network allowed greater communication between disparate parts of the island. These had an unexpected effect on agriculture once peace restored reliable trade links. Farmers in previously isolated valleys were able to swiftly transport crops grown in the island's microclimate to waiting ships and then on to the markets of London and Paris ahead of the competition. In conjunction with the later introduction of steamships and the development of the French and British railway systems, Jersey's agriculture was no longer as isolated as before.\nThe early 19th century was a period of growth of trade for Jersey. In the wake of the Napoleonic wars after the defeat of France in 1815, the Channel Islands lost their strategic value, as points of conflict between the British and foreign powers moved to the North Sea. The UK had a need to reduce its forces to cut spending, but the Channel Islands defence costs reached \u00a3500,000 pa, even in peacetime. The utility of possessing the islands came into question. John Ramsay McCulloch described the advantages the islands provided to the UK as \"neither very obvious nor material\". However, in 1845, the Duke of Wellington strongly defended the islands in the Memorandum on the Defence of the United Kingdom.\nAn English Custom House was established in the island in 1810. A key turning point in Jersey history was the introduction of steamships. Previous to that, travel to the island was long and unpredictable. In the mid-1820s, the post office switched to steam as well. The first paddle steamer to visit Jersey was the Medina on 11 June 1823. In 1824, two shipping companies were established, each operating weekly steamship services to England.\nThis brought thousands of passengers to the country. By 1840, there were 5,000 English residents, who some say did not mix well or interact deeply with the native J\u00e8rriais. The number of English-speaking soldiers stationed in the island and the number of retired officers and English-speaking labourers who came to the islands in the 1820s led to the island gradually moving towards an English-speaking culture in town. This new immigration had a large impact on local architecture, with a number of mainland Georgian-style houses and terraces erected on the main roads out of St Helier. The town also expanded with many new streets, such as Burrard Street, first developed in 1812. In 1831, street lighting was first used. In 1843 it was agreed to erect street names. The rapid growth of St. Helier was one of the most significant changes in the landscape of Jersey during the 19th century. The town developed from a small settlement by the coast to encompassing most of the parish and spreading out into St. Clement and St. Saviour.\nAn important growth for St Helier in the early 19th century was the construction of the harbour. Previously, ships coming into the town had only a small jetty at the site now called the English Harbour and the French Harbour. The Chamber of Commerce urged the States to build a new harbour, but the States refused, so the Chamber took it into their own hands and paid to upgrade the harbour in 1790. A new breakwater was constructed to shelter the jetty and harbours. In 1814, the merchants constructed the roads now known as Commercial Buildings and Le Quai des Marchands to connect the harbours to the town and in 1832 construction was finished on the Esplanade and its sea wall. A rapid expansion in shipping led the States in 1837 to order the construction of two new piers: the Victoria and Albert Piers.\nA new island politics.\nThe post-Napoleonic War period was a divisive period politically for the island. In 1821, there was an election for Jurat. The St Laurentine Laurelites (conservatives, the eventual name for the ') attacked the Inn in their village where Rose men (the progressive descendants of the ') were holding a meeting. They damaged the building and injured both the innkeeper and his wife. On election day in St Martin, the a number of Rose voters were attacked, after which most Rose men refrained from voting. Although the Rose candidate won overall, he faced a number of lawsuits over claims of voter fraud, so in the end the Laurel candidate George Bertram took office.:232\nAt this time, the national administration system, despite reform, still resembled a feudal system of governance. They also remained dominated by judicial and legislative overlap. In the nineteenth century, the growth of the town shifted economic power from the country parishes to St Helier, where also resided a large English population. During this century, Jersey's power structure shifted from the English Crown to the Jersey States, establishing Jersey as a near-independent state, however ultimate authority over the island shifted from the Crown to the British Parliament, aligning with the shift in the UK's politics towards a purely ceremonial monarch. The Privy Council put pressure of the island to reform its institutions, in the belief these reforms should align the country with a more English model of government and law. In 1883, John Stuart Blackie recounted an Englishman's comment that only one thing was needed to make Jersey perfect, and that was \"a full participation in the benefits of English law\". However, the Lieutenant Governor at the time stated that the absence of English law was what had brought Jerseymen such prosperity.\nMany locals blamed this push for reform on the island's new immigrants, who were unaccustomed to the island's distinct political and legal systems (although a major part of the mainstream reformer movement was in fact made of Jerseymen). Many English who had moved to the island discovered an alien environment, with unfamiliar laws (in a foreign language they could not understand) and no recourse to access the local power to counter them. The reformers of English heritage mostly came from the middle classes, and sought to further their own rights, not necessarily those of the working class. These Englishmen formed a pressure group known as the Civil Assembly of St Helier. This group was effectively split into two, one organised around Abraham Le Cras' hard-code English reformism and the other, a larger looser corpus of English reformists. The former was never representative of a significant proportion of the English community. One thing both shared however was a belief that the English systems were far superior to the historic Norman-based structures.\nAbraham Le Cras was an outspoken new resident \u2013 though with Jersey heritage \u2013 opposed to Jersey's self-government. He not only thought Jersey should be integrated into England fully, but disputed the right of the States to even make its own laws. He is noted as saying, 'the States have no more power to make laws for Jersey than I have'. In 1840 he won a court case challenging the States' ability to naturalise people as citizens. The Privy Council determined that the long-standing precedent of the States doing so had been invalidated since Jersey had been ruled under civil law since 1771. In 1846, he persuaded the MP for Bath to push for a Parliamentary Committee to enquire into the law of Jersey, however HM Government instead promised a Royal Commission. The Commission advised the abolition of the Royal Court run by the Jurats and the replacement of it with three Crown-appointed judges and the introduction of a paid police force. Le Cras left the island to live in England in 1850.\nIn 1852, the island experienced somewhat of a constitutional crisis when the Privy Council issued three Orders in Council: establishing a police court, a petty debts court and a paid police force for St Helier. This sparked controversy locally, with claims that the move threatened Jersey's independence. Both parties united against the move and around 7000 islanders signing a petition. By 1854, the council had agreed to revoke the Orders, on the condition that the States passed most of the council's requirements. In 1856, further constitutional reform brought deputies into the States for the first time, with one deputy from each country parish and three from town.\nThe threats to Jersey's autonomy continued. In the 1860s, there was raised a threat of an intervention in the island's government by the British Parliament itself, in order to impose change on the island's structures.\nNonconformism and reform.\nNonconformity challenged traditional Jersey society from within; it had always been a part of Jersey life, and non-conformists such as the Methodists had generally been tolerated during peacetime. This isn't to say there weren't some tensions between the Established Church and non-conformists, but these were generally exceptional. Most country people had at least one non-conformist within their own family, so the othering of non-conformists never took much hold. However, non-conformists were often unable to fully participate in country life as the church played a central role in the secular parish, and were notably absent from honorary roles within the parish. The Established Church had to reassess itself and reform and the parish structure altered itself to become a more civil-focused organisation, preserving itself while allowing its community more religious freedom.\nAnglicisation.\nAt the start of the 19th century, Jersey people as a nation were British, rather French nor Norman. Due to the cultural divergence between the Island and the Norman mainland, relationships between individual Islanders and Frenchmen were less common. Due to an increase in French immigrants, the differences between the Islanders and the French became more apparent, and thus France and the French people were seen as foreign to the Island's population. Furthermore, increased links between Jersey and mainland Britain, such as through the improvement of St Helier's shipping capabilities and an increase in mainland Brits, made Jersey a more British nation.38\nThis led to a change in the linguistic demography in the Island. In the early parts of the century, mostly due to increased immigration from the rest of the British Isles, the town became a predominantly English-speaking place, though bilingualism was still common. This created a divided linguistic geography, as the people of the countryside continued to use J\u00e8rriais, and many did not even know English.38\u20139 English became seen as 'the language of commercial success and moral and intellectual achievement'.\nThe growth of English and the decline of French brought about the adoption of more values and social structures from Victorian England. From 1912, the new compulsory education was delivered solely in English, following the cultural norms, and teaching subjects from the perspective, of England. Eventually, this has led to the Island's culture becoming anglicised and much of the traditional Norman-based culture of the Island being disregarded or lost. Kelleher identifies anglicisation as a challenge Le Feuvre argues that this cultural change created a sense of inferiority about native Jersey culture and the language \u2013 viewed as a 'corruption, rather than an improvement' of Standard French by the English immigrant population \u2013 which only served to accelerate the process of anglicisation.41\u20132\nAnglicisation was supported by the British state. It was suggested that, although the islands had proven themselves loyal to the British Sovereign, that this was out of hereditary impression, rather than affinity towards the English people, and that anglicisation would not only encourage loyalty and congeniality between the nations, but also provide economic prosperity and improved \"general happiness\". In 1846, through a lens of growing nationalism in the UK, there was concern against sending young islanders to France for education, where they might bring French principles, friendships and views of policy and government to the British Islands. The Jersey gentry adopted this policy of anglicisation, due to the social and economic benefits it would bring. Anglophiles such as John Le Couteur strove to introduce England to Jersey. In 1856, the Jersey Times, an English-language newspaper, was established in Jersey. The use of the English language in the States was first suggested by the Rev. Abraham Le Sueur of Grouville in 1880.\nVictorian Era (1837\u20131901).\nQueen Victoria was crowned Queen of the United Kingdom in the right of Jersey in 1837. The first notable event of the Victorian era for Jersey was the change in currency. The \"livre tournois\" had been used as the legal currency for centuries, however it had been abolished during the French Revolutionary period. Although the coins were no longer minted, they remained the legal currency in Jersey until 1837, when dwindling supplies and consequent difficulties in trade and payment obliged the adoption of the pound sterling as legal tender. Keen to prevent a repeat of the \"Six-sou\" Revolt, the authorities wanted to ensure a fair exchange rate; 520 sous would be the equivalent of one Pound sterling. Jersey issued its first coins in 1841, including the 1/13 shilling coin, which was closer in value to the old \"sou\" than the English penny.\nIn the 1840s, the Rose leader Pierre Le Sueur was elected as Conn\u00e9table of St Helier. From 1845, he orchestrated the construction of a complete sewer system for the town. He remained in office for 15 years and on his death an obelisk was erected in the Broad Street square.\nThe population of Jersey rose rapidly, from 47,544 in 1841 to 56,078 20 years later, despite a 20% mortality rate amongst new born children. Life expectancy was 35 years. Both immigration and emigration increased. In 1851, the English immigrant population numbered around 12,000, compared with a total island population of 57,000 people. In St Helier, they constituted 7,000 of the parish's 30,000 residents. As with in England, the English community in Jersey was not coherent, but divided by social class. At the top of the social ladder were those of independent means, who chose to retire in the island: they did not participate much in the local lifestyle or politics, instead creating a mini-English social life for themselves. While at the bottom, there was the English-born working class, who often lacked basic rights such as accessing welfare.\nIn 1852, the French author and poet Victor Hugo arrived to seek refuge in Jersey, as had many other revolutionaries and socialists from the Continent, facing exile from France and Belgium. If any of these \"proscrits\" died on the island, they were buried in Macpela cemetery in Sion, St John. In 1855, these refugees republished in their weekly paper an open letter from a number of French socialists living in London, which stated 'You have sacrificed your dignity as a Queen, your fastidiousness as a woman, your pride as an aristocrat, even your honour.' The Lieutenant-Governor banished the three editors two days later. Although Hugo had disapproved of the letter, he joined a protest against the expulsion, and hence too was exiled from the island. He and his family left for Guernsey.\nThe Theatre Royal was built, as were Victoria College in 1852 and exhibited 34 items at The Great Exhibition in 1851, the world's first ever Pillar box was installed in 1852 and a paid police force was created in 1854.\nThis century saw Jersey develop a public transport network. Towards the end of the last century, omnibuses came into use for the first time in the island. Two railways, the Jersey Western Railway in 1870, and the Jersey Eastern Railway in 1874, were opened. The western railway from St Helier (Weighbridge) to La Corbi\u00e8re and the eastern railway from St Helier (Snow Hill) to Gorey Pier. The two railways were never connected.\nJersey was the fourth-largest shipbuilding area in the 19th-century British Isles, building over 900 vessels around the island. Shipbuilding declined with the coming of iron ships and steam. A number of banks on Jersey, guarantors of an industry both onshore and off, failed in 1873 and 1886, even causing strife and discord in far-flung societies. The population fell slightly in the twenty years to 1881.\nIn the late 19th century, as the former thriving cider and wool industries declined, island farmers benefited from the development of two luxury products \u2013 Jersey cattle and Jersey Royal potatoes. The former was the product of careful and selective breeding programmes; the latter was a total fluke.\nThe anarchist philosopher, Peter Kropotkin, who visited the Channel Islands in 1890, 1896, and 1903, described the agriculture of Jersey in \"The Conquest of Bread\".\nThe 19th century also saw the rise of tourism as an important industry (linked with the improvement in passenger ships) which reached its climax in the period from the end of the Second World War to the 1980s.\n20th century.\nElementary education became obligatory in 1899, and free in 1907. Queen Victoria died in 1901, and Edward VII was proclaimed as King in the Royal Square. His coronation a year later was marked by the first Battle of Flowers. The years before the First World War saw the foundation of the Jersey Eisteddfod by the Dean of Jersey, Samuel Falle. The first aeroplanes arrived in Jersey in 1912.\nIn 1914, the British garrison was withdrawn at the start of the First World War and the militia were mobilised. Jersey men served in the British and French armed forces. Numbers of German prisoners of war were interned in Jersey. The influenza epidemic of 1918 added to the toll of war.\nIn 1919, imperial measurements replaced, for the most part, the traditional Jersey system of weights and measures; women aged over 30 were given the vote; and the endowments of the ancient grammar schools were repurposed as scholarships for Victoria College.\nIn 1921, the visit of King George V was the occasion for the design of the parish crests.\nIn 1923, the British government asked Jersey to contribute an annual sum towards the costs of the Empire. The States of Jersey refused and offered instead a one-off contribution to war costs. After negotiations, Jersey's one-off contribution was accepted.\nThe first motor car had arrived in 1899 and buses started running on the island in the 1920s, and by the 1930s, competition from motor buses had rendered the railways unprofitable, with final closure coming in 1935 after a fire disaster (except for the later German reintroduction of rail during the military occupation). Jersey Airport was opened in 1937 to replace the use of the beach of Saint Aubin's bay as an airstrip at low tide, and the railways could not cope with the competition.\nEnglish was first permitted in debates in the States of Jersey in 1901, and the first legislation to be drawn up primarily in English was the Income Tax Law of 1928.\nOccupation 1940\u20131945.\nFollowing the withdrawal of defences by the British government and German bombardment, Jersey was occupied by German troops between 1940 and 1945. The Channel Islands were the only British soil occupied by German troops in World War II. This period of occupation had about 8,000 islanders evacuated, 1,200 islanders deported to camps in Germany, and over 300 islanders sentenced to the prison and concentration camps of mainland Europe. Twenty died as a result. The islanders endured near-starvation in the winter of 1944\u201345, after the Channel Islands had been cut off from German-occupied Europe by Allied forces advancing from the Normandy beachheads, avoided only by the arrival of the Red Cross supply ship \"Vega\" in December 1944. Liberation Day \u2013 9 May is marked as a public holiday.\nPost-Liberation.\nAfter five years of occupation, the people of Jersey began to rebuild the island. In 1944, a group of exiled islanders, called \"Nos Iles\", set out what the Channel Islands would need after the war. Examples include better education, development of the economy, especially tourism, and greater cooperation between the islands. They also emphasised the need for efficient land management.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We have a limited amount of space and much to fit into it.\u2014\u200a\nSome Jersey men were enlisted in national service in occupied Germany. The UK donated more than \u00a34 million to clear Jersey's occupation debt, as well as sending gifts of essential items. There were over 50,000 mines to be cleared. Sir Edward Grasett was sworn in as Lieutenant Governor in August 1945.\nThe 1945 census showed that 44,382 people were resident in the island (an increase of 4000 since Liberation). By the next year, there were 50,749, and the majority lived in St Helier. Many returned to their pre-war homes to find them in a state of dereliction and were given grants to repair the damage.\nMany islanders called for the reform and modernisation of the States: a poll by the JEP showed that only 88 of the 1,784 surveyed thought Rectors should stay in the States and a vast majority wanted the legislature and judiciary separated. The Jersey Democratic Movement campaigned for either the incorporation of the island as a county of England or at least the abolition of the States. The other political party to emerge during this period was the Progressive Party, consisting of some present States members, who opposed the JDM. In the 1945 Deputies' election, the Progressives won a landslide victory, giving a mandate for change.\nThe franchise was extended to all British adults, previously voting rights in Jersey had only been to men and women over 30 according to property ownership. The largest reform came in the form of the 1948 States reform. Jurats were no longer States members and were to be elected by an Electoral College. It also introduced a retirement age for Jurats of 70. In all cases, the Bailiff shall be the judge of the law, and the Jurats the \"judge of fact\". The Jurats' role in the States was replaced by 12 senators, four of whom would retire every three years. The Church also lost most of its representation in the States, with the role of Rector being abolished and the number of Deputies increased to 28.\nThe island adopted free, universal secondary education and a social security system. The bill for the social security system was passed in May 1950. A paid police force to cover the whole island was established to work alongside the honorary police. Divorce was legalised in 1949. In 1952, a state secondary school for boys was opened at Hautlieu and a girls' secondary was opened at Rouge Bouillon. Ten years later these would combine to form a single co-ed grammar school at Hautlieu, and two other schools: one for boys (d'Hautr\u00e9e) and another for girls (at the Rouge Bouillon site) were opened. Later the two St Helier schools were combined into one comprehensive school and two other comprehensives were opened at Les Quennevais and Le Rocquier. Highlands College was purchased by the States in 1973 to provide further education.:280\nThere was an expansion of housing to deal with growing population and to improve the quality of existing housing. There was also a slum clearance programme involving States-funded homes (either for social housing or sale) and States-funded mortgages. By 1948, since the end of the war, two estates had been built: Grasett Park and Princess Place. A sum of \u00a352,000 was agreed to build more houses on land already owned by the States.\nThe population saw growth from wealthy immigrants looking for lower taxes and seasonal essential workers from the Continent and mainland. Jersey was particularly attractive to retired civil servants in former British colonies as these obtained independence throughout the 20th century. This created a need for new infrastructure. Street lighting began to spread to the country parishes and a new sewage farm was built at Bellozane. Mains drainage was extended beyond St Helier and new water production facilities were constructed.:281 The island saw a growth in tourism and the reopening of the Battle of Flowers parade (for the first time since World War I) as well as new cinemas and the International Road Race.\nThe military establishments of the island were handed over by the British Government to the Island and Jersey's Militia abolished. For the first time since Edward III, there was no permanent military presence on the island. The arsenals, forts are castles were converted to museums and housing (or in the case of Fort Regent, into the main leisure centre for town). There was a dispute over the ownership of Jersey's islets \u2013 the Minquiers and the Ecr\u00e9hous \u2013 between the UK and France. The International Court of Justice ruled in favour of British ownership of the reefs.\nBetween 1945 and the Queen's coronation in 1952, there were outbreaks of polio and tuberculosis and the opening of the Jersey Maternity hospital and St John Ambulance headquarters. Agriculture was hit by a series of foot-and-mouth outbreaks.\nThe first senatorial election was brief. Each Senator was elected for either nine, six or three years depending on where they came in the polling list. Philip Le Feuvre topped the poll and was elected for nine years. On 8 December 1945 at the Deputies' election, Ivy Forster of the Progressive Party became the first woman to ever be elected to the States. Other notable successful candidates include John Le Marquand Jr. (whose father has recently been returned as Senator) and Cyril Le Marquand.\nThe event which has had the most far-reaching effect on Jersey in modern times is the growth of the finance industry in the island from the 1960s onwards,:287 which has led to debate that Jersey constitutes a tax haven.\n21st century.\nJersey's role as a finance centre has occasionally brought the island global media attention. For example in 2017, the Paradise Papers \u2013 a global leak of confidential documents relating to offshore investments \u2013 revealed that Apple had made two international subsidiaries tax resident in Jersey in 2015.\nIn 2008, a police investigation at children's home found a record of abuse at the home dating back since liberation. More than 500 alleged offences were recorded and eight people were prosecuted.\nAs of 2024 Jersey Heritage is inviting locals to nominate sites of natural and cultural significance for potential UNESCO Global Geopark status, highlighting geological features like Anne Port and Portelet Bay alongside historical landmarks such as Le Dolmen des Geonnais and St Clement\u2019s Church, to showcase Jersey's unique heritage and join the network of 213 Global Geoparks worldwide.\nFurther reading.\nThe most widely regarded history of Jersey is \"Balleine's History of the Island of Jersey\", written by G. R. Balleine in 1959, and later adapted by the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Jersiaise, most notably two of its members Marguerite Syvret and Joan Stevens.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15695", "revid": "28326684", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15695", "title": "Geography of Jersey", "text": " \nJersey (J\u00e8rriais: \"J\u00e8rri\") is the largest of the Channel Islands, an island archipelago in the St. Malo bight in the western English Channel. It has a total area of and is part of the British Isles archipelago. It lies from the Cotentin Peninsula in Normandy, France and about from the south coast of Great Britain. Jersey lies within longitude -2\u00b0 W and latitude 49\u00b0 N.\nIt has a coastline of 70 kilometres and no land connections to any other territories. Jersey claims a territorial sea of and an exclusive fishing zone of and shares maritime borders with the Bailiwick of Guernsey to the north and France to the south and east.\nJersey is the main island of the Bailiwick of Jersey, which also consists of islet groups known as Les \u00c9cr\u00e9hous, Les Minquiers, Les Dirouilles and Les Pierres de Lecq.\nIt is a highly densely populated territory, being the 13th most densely populated country or territory. About 30% of the population of the island is concentrated in the parish of Saint Helier, which contains the main town of the island.\nClimate.\nThe island has an oceanic climate, with cool to mild winters and lukewarm to warm summers. The highest temperature recorded was 37.9\u00a0\u00b0C (100.2\u00a0\u00b0F), on 18 July 2022, and the lowest temperature recorded was , on 5 January 1894. 2022 was the warmest (and sunniest) year on record; the mean daily air temperature was . For tourism advertising, Jersey often claims to be \"the sunniest place in the British Isles\", as Jersey has over 1,900 hours of sunlight. Jersey is indeed one of the sunniest places in the British Isles, especially during the warmer months, as it is subject to more influence from the Azores High, which acts as a blocking mechanism for depressions that originate in the North Atlantic and that produce stratiform clouds and rain; these are deflected northwards towards the UK mainland. The Azores High further reduces the type of convective cloud formations (particularly Cumulus and Stratocumulus) that are common over more northern and inland areas of the UK during summer through subsidence.\nIn 2011, Jersey generated controversy for calling itself \"the warmest place in the British Isles\" during an advertising campaign, as Jersey is neither the place with the highest maximum temperature in the British Isles ( was recorded in Coningsby, Lincolnshire in July 2022) or the highest winter temperatures in the British Isles (which would be the Isles of Scilly).\nTypical wind speeds vary between and . During the cooler months, extratropical cyclones can produce gales somewhat regularly.\nSnow is very rare in Jersey. The last significant snowfall event occurred in March 2013, when fell. The most recent measurable snowfall occurred on 8\u20139 January 2024, when fell. Initially, a fall of only had been forecast, so the event was more significant than expected.\nExtreme weather is rare due to the island's mild climate. Spring and summer thunderstorms originating from the European mainland occasionally occur, but are usually not severe. Thunderstorms advecting north from the Bay of Biscay tend to occur during the summer if the influence of the Azores High temporarily weakens and a cut-off low develops in the region. Cool season thunderstorms are more common compared with other parts of Europe, as the relatively warm sea-surface temperatures drive moderate surface-based convection into the cold, dry air aloft. This tends to result in small hail and weak waterspouts driven by convection and frequent shear brought on by cold fronts.\nIn November 2023, Jersey was hit by extratropical Storm Ciar\u00e1n, causing heavy rainfall, extremely high winds with gusts of up to . A supercell thunderstorm associated with the cold front of this system hit Jersey at around midnight on 2 November 2023. With severe wind shear and a significant temperature contrast of the upper atmosphere and sea surface, the storm produced extremely large hail and a tornado, which devastated the eastern half of the Island and was subsequently rated T6/EF3 by TORRO, making it one of the most severe tornadoes ever recorded in the British Isles.\nThe Government of Jersey's official meteorological department provides a five-day forecast for Jersey and Guernsey, including detailed shipping forecasts and aviation forecasts. \nJersey has a generally mild, temperature and oceanic climate. The mean daily air temperature for 2019 was 12.79\u00a0\u00b0C - the eighth warmest year since 1894. The record warmest year was 2014, with a mean daily air temperature of 13.34\u00a0\u00b0C.\nThere are very few extreme weather events in Jersey, however there are regular heatwaves and storm periods. This can lead to disruption across the island. For example, in February 2020, Storm Ciara led to the closure of a number of roads (especially Victoria Avenue).\nPhysical geography.\nBesides the main island, the bailiwick includes other islets and reefs with no permanent population: Les \u00c9cr\u00e9hous, Les Minquiers, Les Pierres de Lecq, Les Dirouilles.\nThe highest point in the island is Les Platons on the north coast, at . Parts of the parish of St Clement in the south were previously below sea-level but the construction of a seawall and infilling of low land has probably left only a few pockets of land below mean sea level. The terrain is generally low-lying on the south coast, with some rocky headlands, rising gradually to rugged cliffs along the north coast. On the west coast there are sand dunes. Small valleys run north to south across the island. Very large tidal variation exposes large expanses of sand and rock to the southeast at low tide.\nSnow falls rarely in Jersey; some years will pass with no snow fall at all.\nNatural resources.\nThe main natural resource on this island is arable land. 66% of the island's land is used as such, and the remaining 34% is used for other purposes.\nThere are two laws that govern agricultural land in Jersey: Agricultural Land (Control of Sales and Leases) (Jersey) Law 1947 and Protection of Agricultural Land (Jersey) Law 1964. Temporary changes of land use can be granted by the Land Controls scheme, which means land over 2 verg\u00e9es (0.36 ha) can be used for an alternative purpose, however permanent changes require planning permission.\nThe Channel Islands are located in an area with a large tidal range. The development of tidal energy in the archipelago has long been suggested. Studies suggest the primary sites for tidal energy development would be located in the Bailiwick of Guernsey, especially in the Alderney Race, which could potentially produce up to 5.10 GW of power.\nEnvironment.\nJersey is facing localised impacts due to anthropogenic climate change. The island is party to the Kyoto Protocol but does not have an emissions cap. In 2017, Jersey has emissions of around 400 ktCO2 eq., a decrease of around 350 ktCO2 eq since the peak in 1998. Under a 3\u00a0\u00b0C rise in temperature, Jersey may have four to five times the number of hot days in summer and a 45% decrease in summer rainfall.\nClimate change could have impacts on Jersey's economy. Climate change will increase soil temperatures, shifting growing seasons more to winter seasons, impacting the current husbandry practices. Being at the boundary of two marine regions, Jersey's waters could see a change in fish species. A rise in temperature could be beneficial to the island's tourist industry, with more annual warm days and less rainfall in the summer attracting longer and more frequent stays from travellers.\nIn May 2019, the States Assembly declared the island was undergoing a climate emergency. This commits the island to carbon neutrality by 2030. On 31 Dec 2019, the Government of Jersey published the Carbon Neutral Strategy which aims to meet the island's carbon neutrality target. Plans of the Carbon Neutral Strategy include:\nIn order to adapt to the effects of sea level rise on the island, the Government has prepared a Shoreline Management Plan.\nHuman geography.\nJersey has a population of 107,800 and a population density of roughly 917 people per square kilometre. The population is spread out throughout Jersey's twelve parishes, with population concentrated in the seven southern parishes.\nOutside of the town, the land is largely separated into small closes, dissimilar to the larger fields found on Great Britain or the European continent. This land division structure has a long history in the island. In 1815, Quayle stated \"no country is more strongly enclosed than Jersey\".\nSettlements.\nThe settlement geography of Jersey has always been dispersed across the island, though with a much smaller population in the past. In the 19th century, Jersey had no tendency towards village or centralised settlement, except in the growing town of St. Helier. On the 1795 Richmond Map, the land appears \"excessively divided\" into small closes and even around the parish churches, the houses are no denser than elsewhere.\nJersey can be defined as an urban island. The 2011 Island Plan defines the island's built-up areas as three main entities. The island effectively operates as a single conurbation, consisting of an urban core, suburbs and exurban rural communities.\nThe largest settlement is the town of St Helier, which also plays host to the island's seat of government. The town consists of the built-up area of southern St Helier, including First Tower, and some adjoining parts of St Saviour and St Clement, such as Georgetown. The town is the central business district, hosting a large proportion of the island's retail and employment, such as the finance industry.\nThe primary suburban areas of St Helier consist of the Five Oaks area in St Saviour, and developments along the coast, primarily along main roads to east and west of the town. The south and east coasts from St Aubin to Gorey are largely urbanised, with only small gaps in their development, such as the Royal Golf Course in Grouville.\nOutside of the town, many islanders live in rural and village settlements and even the more rural areas of the island have considerable amounts of development (even St Ouen, the least densely populated parish still has 270 persons per square kilometre). The most notable exurban development is the Les Quennevais area, which is home to a small precinct of shops, a park and a leisure centre. Many people in these communities regularly travel to St Helier for work and leisure purposes.\nMost of the villages are the namesake settlement of their parish, for example St John's Village in St John, however some are not, such as Maufant Village on the border of St Saviour and St Martin. Another semantic term used for smaller settlements are (different in meaning from the term with the same name meaning 'Town') such as in St. Lawrence.\nHousing costs in Jersey are very high. The Jersey House Price Index has at least doubled between 2002 and 2020. The mix-adjusted house price for Jersey is \u00a3567,000, higher than any UK region (UK average: \u00a3249,000) including London (average: \u00a3497,000; highest of any UK region).\nPlanning and development control.\nLand use is tightly controlled in Jersey, especially due to the high density population. The Planning Team of the Customer and Local Services Department manages planning applications, but approval is granted by the Planning Committee, made of States Members.\nThe governing development plan for the island is the Island Plan, last published in 2011 and voted on by the States Assembly. The plan decides the overall vision for development on the island as well as issuing baseline planning guidance. The current Island Plan was issued in 2011 and revised in 2014. In 2021, the Island Plan is under review, with a bridging Island Plan expected to be in place from 2022.\nThe Revised 2011 Island Plan is centred of three simple concepts of countryside protection, the wise use of resources and urban regeneration. It aims to meet most development needs in the existing built-up areas, especially the town of St Helier.\nJersey has a single national park known as the Coastal National Park, formed of a number of separate areas. The park includes St Ouen's Bay, Gorey Common, the north and south-west coast and certain valleys such as St Catherine's Woods. It also includes the offshore reefs part of the Bailiwick. In the national park, most forms of development are not permitted.\nJersey has a green belt policy known as the Green Zone. This consists of most rural areas on the island except the national park. There is a general presumption against development in the zone. According to the plan the policy has \"vigorous\" public support.\nPolitical geography.\nThe Bailiwick of Jersey is a British Crown Dependency. It is self-governing with its own legislature, the States Assembly, and government. It is sovereign territory of the Crown and not part of the United Kingdom, however the UK is internationally responsible for Jersey. The Jersey government is \"with some important caveats, content with their relationship with the Ministry of Justice\".:para 13\nJersey is part of the British-Irish Council, which is formed of the national governments of each of the countries and dependencies in the British Isles. Jersey is neither a member of the United Nations nor the European Union.\nThe island is divided into twelve administrative regions, known as parishes, the largest of which is St Ouen and the smallest of which is St Clement.\nEconomic geography.\nJersey has a highly developed economy driven by international financial and legal services, which accounted for 40.4% of total GVA in 2023. Its gross national income per capita is among the highest in the world. The island has been criticised by some as a tax haven as it attracts deposits from customers outside the island seeking lower taxes. However, the Jersey financial sector disputes this claim. Other important sectors to the Jersey economy include construction, retail and wholesale, agriculture and tourism.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15696", "revid": "30689378", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15696", "title": "Demographics of Jersey", "text": "Jersey is the most populated of the crown dependencies and of the Channel Islands. The Demographic statistics of the island includes population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nThe population of Jersey has grown in each census record since 1931 (although those did not include records during the Occupation by Nazi Germany).\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;The resident population of Jersey has been increasing during the last 60 years. The resident population increased by 9,100 between 2010 and 2011. The estimated 2020 growth rate is 0.72%.\nPre-census data, there are a number of estimates for Jersey's population. It was around 2,000 in 4000-3000 BC; 6,000 in 1050; 10,000 in 1331; and between 10,000 and 20,000 in the 16th and 17th centuries.\nFrom the 16th to 19th centuries, Jersey was home to a number of French religious refugees, possibly up to 4,000 at a time. In the first half of the 19th century, tax advantages and a better climate saw a boom in Jersey's population. This also needed a large immigrant population, with significant movement from Scotland and Ireland.\nBefore 1851 and 1921, Jersey's population fell significantly, but the number of French people rose by more than 3,000. These were mostly agricultural workers (not replacing the British migrants).\nFrom 1821, Jersey conducted an annual census (figures to the right). In 1951, the population was 55,244. It has grown every decade since then, and the rate of growth now is very high (1% per year in 2019). This is due to the growth of the finance industry and tourism.\nPopulation.\nIn 2021, the total resident population of Jersey is 103,267, although the CIA World Factbook estimates it as 101,073 (this may be due to a different estimate).\nGeographic distribution.\nJersey is divided into twelve parishes. The most populous parish is St Helier, with 35% of the island's population. In 1798, around 6,000 people lived in St. Helier, or one-fifth of the island's population at the time.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 27.III.2011): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 21.III.2021): \nIn 2011, there were 64,353 people of working age (16 to 64 for men, and 16 to 59 for women; 66% of the population). The dependency ratio for Jersey was 52% (similar to 2011); the dependency ratio is around the same value as that in 1931, however was higher (60%) in 1971, and lower (47%) in 1991.\nPlace of birth.\nHalf of the population of Jersey was born on the island, with the majority of the remainder from elsewhere in the British Islands. 7% of the population was born in Portugal, conspicuously from Madeira Autonomous Region, a sister province, the largest overseas place of birth. In 1981, only 3% of the population was born in Portugal and 5% elsewhere.\nOf the category 'Other European country', the primary countries were France and Romania and for 'Elsewhere in the world', the primary countries were South Africa and India.\nStatistics.\nThe following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\nBirth rate.\n11.0 births/1,000 population (2005)\nDeath rate.\n8.5 deaths/1,000 population (2005)\nNet immigration rate.\n2.81 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2000 est.)\nInfant mortality.\n4 deaths/1,000 live births (2005)\nLife expectancy at birth.\n\"total population:\"\n78.48 years\n&lt;br&gt;\"male:\"\n76.07 years\n&lt;br&gt;\"female:\"\n81.07 years (2000 est.)\nTotal fertility rate.\n1.56 children born/woman (2000 est.)\n1.32 children born/woman (2023) \nNationality.\n\"noun:\"\nJerseyman, Jerseywoman, J\u00e8rriais, J\u00e8rriaise\n&lt;br&gt;\"adjective:\"\nJersey\nEthnic groups.\nIndigenous Jersey-Normans and those of British and French descent. Portuguese, Polish, Irish and Romanian minorities.\nReligions.\nAnglican, Roman Catholic, Baptist, Methodist and Presbyterian.\nSee \"Languages of Jersey\"\nLanguages.\nEnglish (official), French (official), J\u00e8rriais (official: though only spoken by a few native elderly in rural areas, used as a first language by around 1,900 people).\nPortuguese commonly spoken by migrant workers and is sometimes found in written form, e.g. government informational signs.\nLiteracy.\n82% of children in state schools achieve their reading targets \u2013 the UK average is 90%. This leads to some cases of illiteracy in Jersey."}
{"id": "15697", "revid": "5795946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15697", "title": "Politics of Jersey", "text": "The Bailiwick of Jersey is a British Crown dependency, unitary state and parliamentary representative democracy and constitutional monarchy. Since 2005, Jersey has a system of ministerial government, with a Chief Minister and Council of Ministers appointed from among the 49 elected members of the States Assembly. The Bailiff is chief judge, President of the States Assembly, and civic head. The current monarch and head of state is King Charles III.\nOther powers are exercised by the Conn\u00e9table and Parish Assembly in each of the twelve parishes.\nAs one of the Crown dependencies, Jersey is sovereign territory of the Crown, but is not part of the United Kingdom. Jersey can be best described as \"neither a colony nor a conquest, but a peculiar and immediate dependency of the Crown.\" The island is part of the British Islands, a political term encompassing the United Kingdom and the Crown Dependencies. This island is for the most part self-governing, with its own independent legal, administrative and fiscal systems.\nThe link between the island and the monarchy, rather than through Parliament, has led to an effectively independent political development on the island. In medieval times, the island was treated as a possession of the King by the English government, rather than part of the English state.\nHistory.\nPrior to English rule.\nWhen Augustus Caesar divided Gaul into four provinces, Jersey was part of the province headquartered at Lyons.\nIn around 933, Duke William I (William Longsword), seized Jersey, which until then had been politically linked to Brittany, and it is likely that the pre-Norman form of government and way of life was replaced at this point. The island adopted the Norman law system, still the basis of Jersey law today.:19\nA key part of the early administrative structure of Jersey was the fief. Alongside the parish, the fief provided a basic framework for rural life; the system began with the Norman system and largely remained similar to it. In Jersey, the dues, services and rents owed by tenants were extensive and often onerous. Jersey peasants retained a degree of freedom lost elsewhere, probably due to the insignificance of the island in the Duchy. More is known of the origins of the fief than of the parishes and early documents show that Jersey was thoroughly feudalised (the majority of the residents were tenants holding land from Seigneurs). The fief of St Ouen, the most senior fief in Jersey's feudal structure, was by 1135 in the hands of the de Carteret family. They held extensive lands in Carteret as well, but these were lost by them after King John's loss of Normandy, so they decided to settle on the island. Between the 12th and 20th centuries, there were an estimated 245 fiefs in Jersey, though not all simultaneously.\nIn 1066, the Duke William the Conqueror defeated Harold Godwinson at Hastings to become the King of England; however, he continued to rule his French possessions, including Jersey, as a separate entity, as fealty was owed to the King of France. This initial association of Jersey with England did not last long, as William split his possessions between his sons: Robert Curthose became Duke of Normandy and William Rufus gained the English Crown. William Rufus' son Henry I recaptured Normandy for England in 1106. The island was then part of the English King's realm (though still part of Normandy and France). Around 1142, it is recorded that Jersey was under the control of the Count of Anjou, who administered Normandy for the Duke.23\nAccording to the Rolls of the Norman Exchequer, in 1180 Jersey was divided for administrative purposes into three ministeria: , and (possibly containing four parishes each). Gorroic is an old spelling for Gorey, containing St Martin, St Saviour, Grouville and St Clement; Groceio could derive from de Gruchy, and contains St John, Trinity, St Lawrence and St Helier; and Crapoudoit, likely referring to the stream of St Peter's Valley, contains the remainder of the parishes in the West. By Norman times, the parish boundaries were firmly fixed and remain largely unchanged since. It was likely set in place due to the tithe system under Charlemagne, where each property must contribute to the church, so each property would have had to be established within a parish.:15\nEstablishment of self-government.\nIt is said, in tradition, that the island's autonomy derives from the \"Constitutions of King John\", however this is disputed. Until King James II, successive English monarchs have then granted to Jersey by charter its certain privileges, likely to ensure the island's continued loyalty, accounting for its advantageous position at the boundary of the European continent. As John (and later Henry III) maintained his claim to the title as the rightful Duke of Normandy until 1259, the island's courts were originally established as Norman, not English territory (to use English law would de-legitimise the English Crown's claim to the ducal title), so are based upon traditional Norman laws and customs, such as the \"Coutumier de Normandie\". Legislative power was vested in 12 jurats, the twelve \"senior men\" of the island. Along with the Bailiff, they would form the Royal Court, which determined all civil and criminal causes (except treason).\nMost lords forfeited their insular land in favour of their French territory, but some remained, notably the de Carteret family of St Ouen. The old aristocracy gave way to a new one, with landowners drawn from royal officials, who soon came to think of themselves as islanders rather than Englishmen. This saw the firm establishment of the feudal system in Jersey, with fiefs headed by Seigneurs.:30 In the Treaty of Paris (1259), the King of France gave up claim to the Channel Islands. The claim was based upon his position as feudal overlord of the Duke of Normandy. The King of England gave up claim to mainland Normandy and therefore the Channel Islands were split from the rest of Normandy. The Channel Islands were never absorbed into the Kingdom of England and the island has had self-government since. In medieval times, the island was treated as a possession of the King by the English government, rather than part of the English state.\nThe administration of the island was handled by an insular government. The King appointed a Warden (later \"Capitain\" or \"Governor\", now the Lieutenant-Governor of Jersey), a position largely occupied with the defence of the island. From 1415 until the second half of the 15th century, the islands were governed by a Lord (or Lady).\nThe existing Norman customs and laws were allowed to continue and there was no attempt to introduce English law. The formerly split administrative system was replaced with a centralised legal system, of which the head was the King of England rather than the Duke of Normandy. The law was conducted through 12 jurats, constables () and a bailiff (). These titles have different meanings and duties to those in England. Any oppression by a bailiff or a warden was to be resolved locally or failing that, by appeal to the King who appointed commissioners to report on disputes. In the late 1270s, Jersey was given its own Bailiff and from the 1290s, the duties of Bailiff and Warden were separated. The (Sub-)Warden became responsible for taxation and defence, while the Bailiff became responsible for justice. While probably originally a temporary arrangement by Otto de Grandison, this became permanent and the foundation for Jersey's modern separation of Crown and justice. It also lessened the Warden's authority relative to the Bailiff, who had much more interaction with the community.\nThe role of the jurats when the King's court was mobile would have been preparatory work for the visit of the Justices in Eyre. It is unknown for how long the position of the jurats has existed, with some claiming the position dates to time immemorial. After the cessation of the visits of the Justices in Eyre (and with the frequent absence of the Warden), the Bailiff and jurats took on a much wider role, from jury to justice.:28\nIn 1341, in recognition of islanders' efforts during the war, King Edward III declared that Jerseymen should 'hold and retain all privileges, liberties, immunities and customs granted by our forebares'. This began the tradition of successive monarchs devolving powers over the island to Islanders, giving them certain privileges and protecting the separation between the Channel Islands and the rest of their royal realm.\nIn 1462, the occupying French Governor de Br\u00e9z\u00e9 issued ordinances outlining the role of the Bailiff and the Jurats.38 It may well be during this occupation that the island saw the establishment of the States. Comte Maulevrier, who had led the invasion of the island, ordered the holding of an Assize in the island. Maulevrier confirmed the place of existing institutions, however created the requirement for Jurats to be chosen by Bailiffs, Jurats, Rectors and Constables. The earliest extant Act of the States dates from 1524.\nIn 1541, the Privy Council, which had recently given a seat to Calais, intended to give two seats in Parliament to Jersey. Seymour, the Lieutenant-Governor of the Island, wrote to the Jurats, instructing them to send two Burgesses for the isle. However, no further steps seemed to have been taken since the letter did not arrive in front of the States Assembly until the day the elected persons were required to arrive in London.:70\nDivision of powers between Governor and Bailiff.\nSir John Peyton became the Governor in 1603 after the death of Queen Elizabeth I. Peyton struggled with the Bailiff over converting the island from the dominant Calvinist religion to Anglicanism. In 1615, Jean H\u00e9rault was appointed Bailiff by the King, having been promised the role by letters patent in 1611. Peyton disputed this appointment, claiming it was the Governor's jurisdiction to appoint the Bailiff. H\u00e9rault asserted it was the King's jurisdiction to directly appoint the Bailiff. An Order in Council (dated 9 August 1615) sided with H\u00e9rault, which H\u00e9rault took to claim the Bailiff was the real head of government and the Governor was simply a military officer. To back his claims, he also cited that in the Norman administrative tradition, the Bailiffs had \"no one above them except the Duke\".\nThis dispute led to one of the most major turning points in Jersey's constitutional history, as the division of powers between the Governor and Bailiff were clearly demarcated. Though the Privy Council did not agree with H\u00e9rault's extreme position on the precedence of the Bailiff, on 18 February 1617 it declared that the \"charge of military forces be wholly in the Governor, and the care of justice and civil affairs in the Bailiff.\" This secured for both the Bailiff and the States precedence over the Governor on justice and civil affairs, the constitutional precedent which limits the involvement of the Lieutenant-Governor in domestic affairs today.\nJersey Revolution: division of the legislature and judiciary.\nDuring the late 17th century, the Governors and Bailiffs were generally absent - the Governor Henry Lumley never visited the island at all during his time in office and after the death of Sir Edouard de Carteret, no bailiff was appointed for five years. The eventual successor Charles de Carteret faced large opposition, especially from his own tenants in St. Ouen. A group of jurats complained to the Privy Council that de Carteret was absent and not well accustomed to the law and culture of the island. Charles attempted to oppose this by blocking sittings of the Jurats in court, claiming they could not sit since they were related to the plaintiff or defendant (which they most often were since everyone in Jersey was somehow related to one another). By 1750, the Bailiffship had de facto become a hereditary position in the de Carteret family. Absences of the de Carterets and all other high-ranking posts left Charles Lempi\u00e8re, the Lieutenant Bailiff, in effective full control over the island. Lempi\u00e8re was a Parliamentarian, but by temperament was autocratic. His family had significant power with a number of high-ranking roles in the island and he issued ordinances and quashed protest through his court.:195 Democratic representation was not present in the island's political system, with only wealthier men able to vote for Conn\u00e9tables, with those men filling the roles with their relatives.\n\u00a0A revolt, known as the Corn Riots or the Jersey Revolution, occurred in 1769. They were centred around the balance of power between the island's parliament, the States, and the Royal Court, both of which had powers to create legislation. An anti-Seigneurial sentiment - opposition to the feudal economic system - also contributed to the popular revolt. The spark for the riots was a corn shortage, in part caused by corruption in the ruling classes, led by the Lieutenant Bailiff Charles Lempri\u00e8re, whose style of rule was authoritarian. On 28 September 1769, men from the northern parishes marched into town and rioted, including breaking into the Royal Court in a threatening manner. The States retreated to Elizabeth Castle and called on the Privy Council for help under false pretences. The Council sent five companies of Royal Scots, who discovered the islanders' grievances.\nThe protestors demands include reductions in price of wheat and the abolition of certain, or all, Seigneurial privileges. In reaction, the Crown issued the Code of 1771, which attempted to separate the island's judiciary and legislature. After the petitions of Le Geyt, the English authorities instructed that peace and reform should be brought to the island. Bentinck became Lieutenant Governor and introduced important reforms. The Royal Court was no longer a lawmaking body and all legislative power was vested in the States. With the fixing in 1771 of the \"Code des Lois\" it was established that the States had a legislative monopoly, and the lawmaking powers of the Royal Court were removed (\"see quote below\"). The \"Code\" of 1771 laid down for the first time in one place the extant laws of Jersey.:199\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"no Laws or Ordinances whatsoever, which may be made provisionally or in view of being afterwards asserted to by His Majesty in Council, shall be passed but by the whole Assembly of the States of [Jersey]\"\nParty politics: Magots and Charlots.\nThe late 18th century was the first time political parties in some form came into existence on the island. Jean Dumaresq was an early Liberal who called for democratic reforms (that the States should be democratically elected Deputies and should have vested in them executive power). His supporters were known as (\"maggots\", initially an insult from his opponents, which the reclaimed as their own term) and his opponents as the \"\" (supporters of the Lieutenant Baliff Charles Lempi\u00e8re). Dumaresq is quoted as saying \"we shall make these Seigneurs bite the dust\". In 1776, he was elected as Conn\u00e9table for St Peter.:200\nThe post-Napoleonic War period was a divisive period politically for the island. In 1821, there was an election for Jurat. The St Laurentine Laurelites (conservatives, the eventual name for the ') attacked the Inn in their village where Rose men (the progressive descendants of the ') were holding a meeting. They damaged the building and injured both the innkeeper and his wife. On election day in St Martin, the a number of Rose voters were attacked, after which most Rose men refrained from voting. Although the Rose candidate won overall, he faced a number of lawsuits over claims of voter fraud, so in the end the Laurel candidate George Bertram took office.:232\nAnglicisation.\nDuring the 19th century, the administration system, despite reform, still resembled a feudal system of governance. At the start of the century, Jersey had achieved a high degree of self-government through delegation of Crown powers to the States, though the Bailiff, Governor and Jurats were all still Crown appointees. During the century, Jersey's power structure shifted more and more from the Crown to the States, establishing Jersey as a near-independent state, however ultimate authority over the island shifted from the Crown to the British Parliament, aligning with the shift in the UK's politics towards a purely ceremonial monarchy. The Privy Council put pressure of the island to reform its institutions, in the belief these reforms should align the country with a more English model of government and law. In 1883, John Stuart Blackie recounted an Englishman's comment that only one thing was needed to make Jersey perfect, and that was \"a full participation in the benefits of English law\". However, the Lieutenant Governor at the time stated that the absence of English law was what had brought Jerseymen such prosperity.\nMany locals blamed this push for reform on the island's new immigrants, who were unaccustomed to the island's distinct political and legal systems (although a major part of the mainstream reformer movement was in fact made of Jerseymen). Many English who had moved to the island discovered an alien environment, with unfamiliar laws (in a foreign language they could not understand) and no recourse to access the local power to counter them. The reformers of English heritage mostly came from the middle classes, and sought to further their own rights, not necessarily those of the working class. These Englishmen formed a pressure group known as the Civil Assembly of St Helier. This group was effectively split into two, one organised around Abraham Le Cras' hard-code English reformism and the other, a larger looser corpus of English reformists. The former was never representative of a significant proportion of the English community. One thing both shared however was a belief that the English systems were far superior to the historic Norman-based structures.\nAbraham Le Cras was an outspoken new resident - though with Jersey heritage - opposed to Jersey's self-government. He not only thought Jersey should be integrated into England fully, but disputed the right of the States to even make its own laws. He is noted as saying, 'the States have no more power to make laws for Jersey than I have'. In 1840, he won a court case challenging the States' ability to naturalise people as citizens. The Privy Council determined that the long-standing precedent of the States doing so had been invalidated since Jersey had been ruled under civil law since 1771. In 1846, he persuaded the MP for Bath to push for a Parliamentary Committee to enquire into the law of Jersey, however HM Government instead promised a Royal Commission. The Commission advised the abolition of the Royal Court run by the Jurats and the replacement of it with three Crown-appointed judges and the introduction of a paid police force. Le Cras left the island to live in England in 1850.\nIn 1852, the island experienced somewhat of a constitutional crisis when the Privy Council issued three Orders in Council: establishing a police court, a petty debts court and a paid police force for St Helier. This sparked controversy locally, with claims that the move threatened Jersey's independence. Both parties united against the move and around 7000 islanders signing a petition. By 1854, the council had agreed to revoke the Orders, on the condition that the States passed most of the council's requirements. In 1856, further constitutional reform brought deputies into the States for the first time, with one deputy from each country parish and three from town.\nThe threats to Jersey's autonomy continued. In the 1860s, there was raised a threat of an intervention in the island's government by the British Parliament itself, in order to impose change on the island's structures.\nReforms of 1948.\nAfter the Occupation, many islanders called for the reform and modernisation of the States: a poll by the JEP showed that only 88 of the 1,784 surveyed thought Rectors should stay in the States, and a vast majority wanted the legislature and judiciary separated. The Jersey Democratic Movement campaigned for either the incorporation of the island as a county of England or at least the abolition of the States. The other political party to emerge during this period was the Progressive Party, consisting of some present States members, who opposed the JDM. In the 1945 Deputies' election, the Progressives won a landslide victory, giving a mandate for change. The franchise was extended to all British adults; previously voting rights in Jersey had only been accorded to men, and women over 30, according to property ownership. The largest reform was the 1948 States reform. Jurats were no longer States members, and were to be elected by an Electoral College. The reform also introduced a retirement age of 70 for Jurats. In all cases, the Bailiff would be the judge of the law, and the Jurats the \"judge of fact\". The Jurats' role in the States was taken on by 12 senators, four of whom would retire every three years. The Church also lost most of its representation in the States, with the role of Rector being abolished and the number of Deputies increased to 28. The first senatorial election was brief. Each Senator was elected for either nine, six or three years depending on where they came in the polling list. Philip Le Feuvre topped the poll and was elected for nine years. On 8 December 1945 in the Deputies' election, Ivy Forster of the Progressive Party became the first woman ever elected to the States. Other notable successful candidates included John Le Marquand Jr. (whose father had recently been returned as Senator) and Cyril Le Marquand.\nConstitution.\nJersey has an unwritten constitution arising from the Treaty of Paris (1259). This peculiar political position has often benefited the islanders. Until the 19th century, the island was generally exempt from the harsher parts of Westminster legislation, while being included in favourable policies, such as protectionist economic policies. Over time, there have been calls for reforms to Jersey's constitution, such as the 2000 Clothier report.\nJersey has never been part of the United Kingdom nor its predecessors; however it has been a dependency of the monarch of each of these states at their time of existence. The government in Westminster has played an important role in Jersey's lawmaking and political landscape. Since the island is linked with the monarch, not with the UK Parliament, the competency of Parliament to legislate for the island without the States' consent is disputed. The Crown retains residual responsibility for the \"good government\" of the island, and the UK Government has a \"non-interventionist policy\" for supervising the Bailiwick.\nInternational relations.\nThe 1973 Kilbrandon Report stated that \"In international law the United Kingdom Government is responsible for the Islands' international relations\" and \"also responsible for the defence of the Islands\".\nThe United Kingdom is responsible for Jersey's international relations as an aspect of the island's status as a Crown dependency. It is now normal practice for the UK to consult the Jersey government and seek their consent before entering into treaty obligations affecting the island.\nSince 2000, Jersey's \"external personality\" has developed, as recognised in the preamble to the States of Jersey Law 2005 which refers to \"an increasing need for Jersey to participate in matters of international affairs\". In 2007, the Chief Minister of Jersey and the UK government agreed an \"International Identity Framework\", setting out the modern relationship between the United Kingdom and Jersey. The United Kingdom now issues \"Letters of Entrustment\" to the Jersey government, which delegate power to Jersey to negotiate international agreements on its own behalf and sign treaties in Jersey's own name rather than through the United Kingdom. This development was \"strongly supported\" by the House of Commons Justice Committee in its March 2010 report on the Crown Dependencies. In January 2011 Senator Freddie Cohen was appointed as Assistant Chief Minister with responsibility for UK and International Relations (in effect, Jersey's first Foreign Minister). \nJersey was neither a Member State nor an Associate Member of European Union. It did, however, have a relationship with the EU governed by Protocol 3 to the UK's Treaty of Accession in 1972.\nIn relation to the Council of Europe, Jersey \u2013 as a territory the United Kingdom is responsible for in international law \u2013 has been bound by the European Convention on Human Rights since the UK acceded to the treaty in 1951. The Human Rights (Jersey) Law 2000 makes Convention rights part of Jersey law and is based closely on the United Kingdom's Human Rights Act 1998.\nDuring the 1980s, the question was raised of Jersey making an annual contribution towards the United Kingdom's costs of defence and international representation undertaken on behalf of Jersey. In 1987, the States of Jersey made an interim payment of \u00a38 million while the matter was discussed. The outcome of debates within the island was that the contribution should take the form of maintaining a Territorial Army unit in Jersey. The Jersey Field Squadron (Militia), attached to the Royal Monmouthshire Royal Engineers (Militia), deploys individuals on operations in support of British Forces.\nThe Crown.\nAs a Crown dependency, the head of state of Jersey is the British monarch and Jersey is a self-governing possession of the Crown. The present monarch, whose traditional title in the Channel Islands is the Duke of Normandy, is King Charles III. \n\"The Crown\" is defined by the Law Officers of the Crown as the \"Crown in right of Jersey\". The King's representative and adviser in the island is the Lieutenant Governor of Jersey, appointed for a five-year term. He is a point of contact between Jersey ministers and the United Kingdom government and carries out executive functions in relation to immigration control, deportation, naturalisation and the issue of passports. Since 2022, the incumbent Lieutenant Governor has been Vice Admiral Jeremy Kyd.\nThe Crown (not the government or parliament of Jersey) appoints the Lieutenant Governor, the Bailiff, Deputy Bailiff, Attorney General and Solicitor General. In practice, the process of appointment involves a panel in Jersey which selects a preferred candidate whose name is communicated to the UK Ministry of Justice for approval before a formal recommendation is made to the King.\nLegislature.\nThe parliamentary body responsible for adopting legislation and scrutinising the Council of Ministers is the States Assembly. 49 elected members (37 Deputies and 12 Conn\u00e9tables) sit in the unicameral assembly. There are also five non-elected, non-voting members appointed by the Crown (the Bailiff, the Lieutenant Governor, the Dean of Jersey, the Attorney General and the Solicitor General).\nElections for Deputies and Conn\u00e9tables (or \"constables\") occur at fixed four-yearly intervals, in May every fourth year.\nAt a local level, other posts vary in length from one to three years, and elections are held at a Parish Assembly on a majority basis. It has been some time since parties contested elections at this level, other than for the position of Conn\u00e9table, who uniquely has a role in both the national assembly and in local government.\nDecisions in the States are taken by majority vote of the elected members present and voting. The States of Jersey Law 2005 removed the Bailiff's casting vote and the Lieutenant Governor's power of veto. Although formally organised party politics plays no role in the States of Jersey assembly, members often vote together in two main blocs: a minority of members, holding broadly progressive views and critical of the Council of Ministers versus a majority of members, of conservative ideology, who support the Council of Ministers.\nScrutiny panels of backbench members of the assembly have been established to examine (i) economic affairs, (ii) environment, (iii) corporate services, (iv) education and home affairs and (v) health, social security and housing. The real utility of the panels is said to be \"that of independent critique which holds ministers to account and constructively engages with policy which is deficient\".\nAccording to constitutional convention United Kingdom legislation may be extended to Jersey by Order in Council at the request of the Island's government. Whether an Act of the United Kingdom Parliament may expressly apply to the Island as regards matters of self-government, or whether this historic power is now in abeyance, is a matter of legal debate. The States of Jersey Law 2005 established that no United Kingdom Act or Order in Council may apply to the Bailiwick without being referred to the States of Jersey.\nExecutive.\nPreviously, both executive and legislative powers were vested in a single body: the States of Jersey. A committee system managed government affairs and policy, with committees formed of States members. A report of a review committee chaired by Sir Cecil Clothier criticised this system of government, finding it incapable of developing high-level strategy, efficient policy coordination or effective political leadership.\nThe States of Jersey Law 2005 introduced a ministerial system of government. Executive powers are now vested in the Council of Ministers, formed of the Chief Minister and other ministers (all elected directly by the States). The council is the leading decision-making body of the wider Government of Jersey.\nThe Chief Minister is elected from among the elected members of the States. Ministers are then proposed both by the Chief Minister and any other elected member, the final decision being made by the States Assembly.\nThe overall direction of government as agreed by the Council of Ministers is published periodically as a \"strategic plan\", the current one[] being the \"Common Strategic Policy 2018 to 2022\". These plans are debated and approved by the States Assembly and translated into action by a series of business plans for each department.\nCabinet collective responsibility among members of the Council of Ministers is a feature of the 2015 \"Code of Conduct for Ministers\". However, ministers retain the right to present their own policy to the States in their capacity as a member of the assembly in domains not concerning Council policy.\nIn recent years, former Chief Executive Charlie Parker introduced a number of reforms to the government's administrative structure. Moving away from a system whereby each minister heads a single department, the One Government structure focuses on more efficient governmental organisation. As of 2022, the government departments are:\nPolitical parties.\nSince the 1950s, politics in Jersey has been dominated by independent representatives. Historically, the island had two parties: the conservative Roses (Charlots) and the progressive Laurels (Magots). Due to the 2022 electoral reform, Jersey may be moving towards a politics dominated by parties. As of March 2025, there are two political parties represented in the States:\nCriticism.\nJersey's political system has often been criticised over the centuries, both within and outside the island. The 'Jersey Way' is a term used in critiques to describe a political culture that is claimed to enforce conformity, ignore perversion of the course of justice and suppress political dissent. The Tax Justice Network states that the Jersey Way allows for the island's political system to be abused by financial services sector companies.\nThe Tax Justice Network criticises the political system for its absence of judicial independence (due to 'close relations between the legal and financial services' and 'the intimate relations between legal professionals who grew up together'); lack of second chamber in its parliament (for scrutiny purposes); no political parties; no formalised government and opposition and the lack of a wide range of independent news sources, or research capabilities.\nCriticism of the political system is no modern development. In the 19th century, Abraham Le Cras was an outspoken new resident of the island. A retired colonel, Le Cras was opposed to Jersey's historic self-government and represented a group of people who not only thought Jersey should be fully integrated into England, but disputed the right of the States even to make its own laws. He is noted as saying, 'The States have no more power to make laws for Jersey than I have'. In 1840 he won a court case challenging the States' power to naturalise people as citizens. The Privy Council determined that the long-standing precedent of the States doing so had been invalidated since Jersey had been ruled under civil law since 1771. In 1846, he persuaded the MP for Bath to push for a Parliamentary Committee to enquire into the law of Jersey; however HM Government instead promised a Royal Commission. The Commission advised the abolition of the Royal Court run by the Jurats and its replacement by three Crown-appointed judges, and the introduction of a paid police force. Le Cras left the island to live in England in 1850.\nLocal government.\nSaint Ouen \nSaint&lt;br&gt; Mary \nSt John \nTrinity \nSt &lt;/br&gt; Martin \nSt Peter \nSt &lt;/br&gt; Lawrence \nSt Helier \nSt &lt;/br&gt; Saviour \nGrouville \nSaint Brelade \nSt Clement \nJersey is divided into twelve administrative districts known as parishes. All have access to the sea, and they are mostly named after the saints to whom their ancient parish churches are dedicated.\nEach parish is further divided into \"vingtaines\" (or, in St. Ouen, \"cueillettes\"), divisions which are historic and nowadays mostly used for purposes of electoral constituency[] in municipal elections, which elect the members of the Parish municipality. Each parish has an Honorary Police force of elected, unpaid civilians who exercise police and prosecution powers.\nSeparation debate.\nThe separation issue came up in the House of Commons in a debate on Jersey's constitution in 1969. According to Sir Cyril Black, Member of Parliament for Wimbledon, Jersey was on the verge of declaring independence from the British Government after the Queen's speech stated HM Government would examine the relationships with the Channel Islands. Jersey opposed its inclusion in the Royal Commission on the Constitution and the complete lack of consultation surrounding it. The Home Secretary later stated that there was no intention to change the relationship.\nThe question of Jersey's independence has been discussed from time to time in the States Assembly. In 1999, a member of the government said that 'Independence is an option open to the Island if the circumstances should justify this' but the government 'does not believe independence is appropriate in the present circumstances and does not see the circumstances arising in the foreseeable future when it would be appropriate'. In 2000, Senator Paul Le Claire called for a referendum on independence, a proposal which failed to win any significant support.\nThe Policy and Resources Committee of the States of Jersey established the Constitutional Review Group in July 2005, chaired by Sir Philip Bailhache, with terms of reference 'to conduct a review and evaluation of the potential advantages and disadvantages for Jersey in seeking independence from the United Kingdom or other incremental change in the constitutional relationship, while retaining the Queen as Head of State'.\nProposals for Jersey independence have subsequently been discussed at an international conference held in Jersey, organised by the \"Jersey and Guernsey Law Review\". The former Bailiff, Sir Philip Bailhache has called for changes to the Channel Islands' relationship with the United Kingdom government, arguing that 'at the very least, we should be ready for independence if we are placed in a position where that course was the only sensible option'.\nIn October 2012, the Council of Ministers issued a \"Common policy for external relations\" that set out a number of principles for the conduct of external relations in accordance with existing undertakings and agreements. This document noted that Jersey \"is a self-governing, democratic country with the power of self-determination\" and \"that it is not Government policy to seek independence from the United Kingdom, but rather to ensure that Jersey is prepared if it were in the best interests of Islanders to do so\". On the basis of the established principles the Council of Ministers decided to \"ensure that Jersey is prepared for external change that may affect the Island's formal relationship with the United Kingdom and/or European Union\".\nConstitutional Review Group report.\nThe Group's \"Second Interim Report\" was presented to the States by the Council of Ministers in June 2008. The report made a number of recommendations about Jersey independence, including the benefits and costs of independence and the social and cultural consequences. The island would need to be recognised as a sovereign state on a country by country basis. The report concluded that 'Jersey is equipped to face the challenges of independence' but 'whether those steps should be taken is not within the remit of this paper'.\nAt present the island is protected by the British Armed Forces. Upon independence the island would need to develop its own capacity to entirely handle defensive and security affairs. It established that Jersey could seek membership of a defensive alliance (e.g. NATO); negotiate a defence agreement with a sovereign state (e.g. the UK) - San Marino, for example have a defence agreement with Italy that cost 700,000 USD in 2000/01 - or establish an independent defence force (in a similar manner to Antigua and Barbuda, which spends around \u00a32.5 million). Furthermore, it is unlikely that any major European power would allow the island to be invaded, but the island could not feasibly protect itself from a major external threat without securing defensive agreements.\nIndependence would require the establishment of a Foreign Affairs Department within the Government of Jersey, or other similar steps. At present, the island's international affairs are formally governed by the UK Government. The report recommended the island join 'essential' global organisations, such as the UN and IMF; the Commonwealth and the WTO. At the time, independence would have brought an end to Jersey's relationship with the EU, which was mediated through the UK's accession treaty protocol 3. The report suggests a minimum requirement of the establishment of three overseas missions: London, New York and Brussels (the Government has an office in London and shares an office in Brussels already), to provide contact with major organisations such as the Commonwealth, UN and EU, as well as the UK, US and EU, and also to allow use of them for tourism and trade-related purposes.\nConsideration would need to be given to the questions of the internal organisation of Jersey's constitution, as well as citizenship and passports. The report assumes the Queen would continue to be the Head of State, appointing a Governor-General on the advice of the British Government. The report recommended the need for a codified constitution, which should contain a basic human rights statement. The current States Assembly could be replaced by a States Parliament, which would need to replace the checks and balances provided by the Privy Council.\nPolitical pressure groups.\nJersey, as a polity predominated by independents has always had a number of pressure groups. Many ad-hoc lobby groups form in response to a single issue and then dissolve once the concerns have been dealt with. However, there are a number of pressure groups actively working to influence government decisions on a number of issues. For example, in 2012 the National Trust engaged in pressure campaign against development of the Plemont headland. The Trust was supported by the majority of the islands senior politicians, including the Chief Minister, but a proposition made in the States of Jersey for the States to compulsorily purchase the headland and sell it to the Trust was defeated in a vote on 13 December 2012. The outcome of the vote was 24 in favour of acquisition, 25 against, with one absent and one declaring an interest.\nInterest Groups.\nThe following groups are funded by their members.\nQuangos.\nThe following groups are, at least, partially funded by government. Appointments are made by the States Assembly.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15698", "revid": "38427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15698", "title": "Economy of Jersey", "text": "The economy of Jersey is a highly developed social market economy. It is largely driven by international financial services and legal services, which accounted for 39.5% of total GVA in 2019, a 4% increase on 2018. Jersey is considered to be an offshore financial centre. Jersey has the preconditions to be a microstate, but it is a self-governing Crown dependency of the UK. It is considered to be a corporate tax haven by many organisations.\nOther sectors include construction, retail, agriculture, tourism and telecommunications. Before the Second World War, Jersey's economy was dominated by agriculture, however after liberation, tourism to the island became popular. More recently, the finance industry recognised worth in operating in Jersey, which has now become the island's dominant industry.\nIn 2017, Jersey's GDP per capita was one of the highest in the world at $55,324. In 2019, the island's economy, as measured by GVA, grew by 2.1% in real terms to \u00a34.97 billion. In December 2020, there were 1,350 people actively seeking work.\nHistory.\nAgriculture.\nUntil the 16th century, the economy of Jersey was based on feudalism and open-field self-sustenance agriculture. The main crop, wheat, was exported and sold to Spanish merchants in St Malo.37\nEnclosure happened in Jersey around the end of the 16th century. Unlike in England, enclosure was done by the peasantry in order to make profit from producing cider, the production of which moved Jersey's economy from self-sufficiency to cash-crop agriculture.37 From then until the 19th century, cider was the largest agricultural export; in 1795, 20 percent of the island was orchard.37 In 1839 for example, of cider were exported from Jersey to England alone, but by 1870 exports from Jersey had slumped to . Beer had replaced cider as a fashionable drink in the main export markets, and even the home market had switched to beer as the population became more urban.\nEnclosure and the subsequent transition to cash-crop agriculture can be blamed for shortages in essential crops, particularly corn, which caused political instability in the island, such as the 1769 Corn Riots.40\nPotatoes overtook cider as the most important crop in Jersey in the 1840s. Small-scale cider production on farms for domestic consumption, particularly by seasonal workers from Brittany and mainland Normandy, was maintained, but by the mid-20th century production dwindled until only eight farms were producing cider for their own consumption in 1983. The number of orchards had been reduced to such a level that the destruction of trees in the Great Storm of 1987 demonstrated how close the Islands had come to losing many of its traditional cider apple varieties. A concerted effort was made to identify and preserve surviving varieties and new orchards were planted. As part of diversification, farmers have moved into commercial cider production, and the cider tradition is celebrated and marketed as a heritage experience.\nSince the 1800s a significant portion of the Jersey economy has been greenhouse agriculture raising fruits, vegetables and flowers under glass. In the twenty first century this has been a declining activity with many greenhouses now unused and some in derelict condition. There was a motion in the Jersey legislature in early 2022 to repurpose unused greenhouses as construction sites for housing. A compromise proposal was that half the unused greenhouses be used for other purposes. The measures failed to pass \nTextiles.\nThe textile industry became a popular export industry for islanders, particularly women. In fact, the trade became so popular that in 1608 the States had to ban knitting during harvest and vraicking season. This industry connected rural Jerseymen to the wider global economy.37\u20138 The knitting of woollen garments was a thriving industry for Jersey during the 17th and 18th centuries. The knitting industry died sometime after 1750.37\u20138\nShip building.\nJersey was the 4th largest ship building area in the 19th century British Isles. See History of Jersey.\nHistorical exchange rates.\nJersey pounds per US dollar - 0.55 (2005), 0.6981 (January 2002), 0.6944 (2001), 0.6596 (2000), 0.6180 (1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997); the Jersey pound is at par with the British pound.\nFiscal policy.\nJersey is fiscally independent from the UK. UK public money is not ordinarily spent in the island, and Jersey residents do not pay tax or national insurance contributions to HMRC. As the UK is responsible for Jersey's defence and international representation, the cost of Jersey to the British taxpayer could be seen at around \u00a355 million, though this is a notional cost; it is unlikely that, if Jersey were independent, that money would be saved on costs to the armed forces. The States make, upon agreement with Westminster, a contribution to the costs of its relationship in the form of a territorial army on the island.\nTax system.\nJersey has a 'simple and stable' tax system, which does not change much over time. This is reflected in States policies, which call for a 'low, broad, simple and fair' system. The country collects income tax on its ordinary residents, with allowances and exemptions available for both low-income and very high-income residents (the latter through the 2(1)(e) policy). Corporate income tax is charged through the zero-ten policy, through which most businesses do not pay any corporation tax. Jersey does not have inheritance, wealth, corporate or capital gains tax.\n are charged on road fuel, vehicles, alcohol and tobacco and are similar to UK excise duties.\nSocial protection.\nThe social protection system in Jersey is known as Social Security. In 2004, Jersey spent less than any EU country on social protection at 12.3 per cent of GDP, though the island's per capita GDP was higher than the European average. Social security contributions are funded by both employees and employers on monthly earnings.\nCriticism.\nJersey is considered a 'tax haven' by some sources (e.g. the Tax Justice Network), but this label is contested. Jersey has a long history of tax avoidance and smuggling due to its special constitutional status. The EU's tax haven blacklist does not include Jersey in the list dated February 2023, though has in the past and the list has been criticised for leaving out jurisdictions such as Jersey. The Government of Jersey and UK Government have argued that Jersey is a cooperative jurisdiction and the local finance industry rejects the tax haven label.\nGST and VAT avoidance.\nA value-added tax system is in place known as Goods and Services Tax (GST), which is set at 5 per cent. Some items are zero-rated - but not food - and imported products below \u00a360 are exempt.\nThe difference between the GST and UK/EU VAT systems previously led to VAT avoidance facilitated through the island. This included fulfilment by Play.com and Amazon, among other large retailers. Low-value consignment relief provided the mechanism for VAT-free imports from the Channel Islands to the UK. In April 2012, the EU closed this loophole, leading to the closure of many island businesses and the loss of a number of jobs on the island.\nSectors.\nFinancial and legal services.\nJersey-based financial organisations provide services to customers worldwide. In December 2020, it was reported that there were 13,510 jobs within this sector. The finance sector profits were about \u00a31.18 billion in 2015.\nJersey is one of the top worldwide offshore financial centers It has been criticised for its tax practices, with many calling the island a tax haven. It attracts deposits from customers outside of the island, seeking the advantages such places offer, like reduced tax burdens. In 2020, Tax Justice ranked Jersey as the 16th on the Financial Secrecy Index, below larger countries such as the UK, however still placing at the lower end of the 'extreme danger zone' for offshore secrecy'.\nHowever The International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the European Union (EU) have all endorsed Jersey as a top international finance centre. In 2017's OECD Rating, Jersey scored top marks from the OECD on tax transparency, receiving a \"fully compliant\" rating and as recently as 2019 The European Council of Finance Ministers (ECOFIN) have formally confirmed Jersey a Co-operative Jurisdiction. In addition, a MONEYVAL Assessment by the Council of Europe rated Jersey compliant or largely compliant in 48 of their 49 assessment areas, the highest score amongst all states https:// .\nIn the fourth quarter of 2020, the total value of banking deposits held in Jersey decreased from \u00a3137.8bn to \u00a3131.6bn while the net asset value of regulated funds under administration increased by \u00a312.6bn to \u00a3378.1bn. There were 33,626 live companies on Jersey's register.\nJersey shares The International Stock Exchange (TISE) with Guernsey, where it is based.\nConstruction.\nConstruction represented 7% of GVA during 2019. In June 2020 it was reported that 5,970 people were employed full-time in the construction and quarrying sector.\nSt Helier has a lot of ongoing construction projects. The reclamation of land opened in the 1980s new land for development in the town centre. This has led to development projects such as the Jersey International Finance Centre, Horizon and the new St Helier Waterfront project.\nThe GVA of the construction sector declined by 1% between 2018 and 2019.\nRetail and wholesale.\nAs of June 2020 there were 6,940 jobs within Jersey's wholesale and retail trades. Retail and wholesale declined by 1% between 2018 and 2019.\nJersey has a large range of local and national shops. SandpiperCI Limited operate a chain of stores in Jersey, their franchises include well-known names, such as Morrisons, Marks &amp; Spencer, Iceland, and Costa Coffee.\nA number of online retailers, and fulfillment houses operate from the Channel Islands, including Jersey, supplying a variety of low-value goods such as CDs, DVDs, video games, and gadgets. Residents of the EU were choosing to order goods from Jersey, so as to benefit from a tax relief known as Low-value consignment relief (LVCR). UK residents, in particular, were taking advantage of this situation.\nA local company, play.com grew substantially during the time that LVCR applied to Jersey. Notably, Amazon UK also took advantage of this by dispatching some low-value items from Jersey.\nIn April 2012 the UK Government made law changes to prevent the Channel Islands continued exploitation of LVCR, meaning that UK residents would have to pay the full VAT amount on items imported from the Channel Islands. Some goods are still sold and distributed from Jersey, despite these changes.\nAgriculture.\nIn 2017, 33,301 verg\u00e9es were dedicated to agriculture, with each holding having an average area of 78 verg\u00e9es. Since 2006, there has been a reduction in the number of smaller holding areas, as have the number of larger holdings (64 in 2006 to 53 in 2017).\nThe Rural Support Scheme was introduced in 2017 to replace the Single Area Payment. 75% of agricultural areas by surface area are subject to RSS.\nThere has been a reduction in the total number of agricultural workers since 2007.\nThe total value of all export crops has increased since 2013. In 2017, it is \u00a342.5 million. The primary exported crops are potatoes (\u00a331.6m), narcissus flowers (\u00a3891k), courgettes (\u00a3184k) and cauliflowers (\u00a322k). The number of Jersey Royal potatoes cultivated has increased by 18% between 2007 and 2017.\nThe total area dedicated to glasshouses from 2013 to 2017 has reduced from 275.8k m2 to 174.3k m2.\nThe Jersey breed of dairy cattle is known worldwide. In 2017, there were 4,842 cattle in Jersey. The gross sales value of the milk delivered to Jersey Dairy in 2017-18 was \u00a313.9 million. Milk products go to the UK and other EU countries.\nTourism and hospitality.\nHospitality (hotels, restaurants and bars) made up 4.2% of Jersey's GVA in 2019. It is estimated that the wider contribution of tourism in particular is 8.3% (2017). Tourism is important for Jersey's taxation, making \u00a312.5 million in GST (15% of the total). However, total spend is much higher, around \u00a3250 million. This creates 6,470 jobs.\nMost tourist attractions are operated by private companies and nonprofit organisations, including companies owned, or funded by the States of Jersey. Elizabeth Castle, for example, is controlled by Jersey Heritage. Some other attractions are owned by the National Trust for Jersey. One notable attraction is Jersey Zoo in Trinity, a wildlife park founded by conservationist Gerald Durrell.\nTransport, storage and communication.\nThis sector accounted for 3.5% of GVA during 2019. In December 2020, this sector had 1,950 private sector jobs in transport and storage and 1,810 private sector jobs in information and communications.\nMost of the telecoms infrastructure is owned by Jersey Telecom.\nIn December 2020, there were 154,300 vehicles registered in Jersey.\nIn 2008, most goods imported and exported were transported by Huelin-Renouf, Condor Logistics, and other smaller operators, via either Saint Helier harbour, or Jersey Airport.\nDuring the period 1984 to 1994, British Channel Island Ferries were responsible for much shipping to and from the United Kingdom.\nGenuine Jersey.\nGenuine Jersey is a brand icon found on products made locally within the island. The brand was launched in 2001 by local businessmen who wanted to differentiate their products from imported goods and is now particularly visible island-based brand that supports local businesses and promotes island products broadly to locals and visitors. Jersey holds an enviable positions amongst island jurisdictions for its internationally famous products such as Jersey milk and the Jersey Royal potato. The use of the word \"Jersey\" in the name of these products helps to connect place with product branding and to build the recognition of the island brand. The Genuine Jersey organisation has various links with the Government of Jersey and the organisation exists in a public-private sphere in Jersey's small island political and commercial landscape. In restaurants, Genuine Jersey dishes can have 20% non-local ingredients. Contemporary green politics allows the Genuine Jersey brand to align itself with environmental goals in the modern age of buying local.\nCost of living.\nJersey has a high cost of living, due to transport costs and a lack of competition. In January 2021, Numbeo, an online cost-of-living index, reported that Jersey was the \"world's 'most expensive place to live'.\"\nInflation.\nIn Jersey, inflation is based on the All Items Retail Prices Index (RPI). In March 2020, this stood at 182.1, where June 2000 is 100. The largest increases in RPI were in housing, household services, leisure services. Underlying inflation, as measured by the annual change in RPI(Y), increased by 2.3% over the twelve months to March 2020.\nHistorically, the highest RPI change was in September 2008 at 6.4% and the lowest was in September 2009 at -0.6%.\nSeasonal workers.\nThe workforce in Jersey tends to increase during the summer months, with around 3,500 more people employed in the summer of 2008 than in the winter of 2007. These seasonal workers are mostly employed in agriculture, hotels, restaurants and bars.\nInternational economic relationships.\nJersey has long been part of the UK's customs area. When the UK was part of the European Union, Jersey was part of the European Union Customs Union. In 2018, Jersey became part of a customs union with the United Kingdom. Therefore, there are no tariffs between the territories and a common external tariff on places outside the customs union. However Jersey retains the ability to impose specific prohibitions and restrictions at its border and retain autonomy in customs systems and fiscal matters.\nMost of Jersey's physical linkages are with southern Great Britain, rather than the geographically nearer northern France. Almost all freight capacity is UK-related, not EU-related. Despite this, the finance industry means Jersey has economic (particularly financial) linkages with countries all over the world, particularly with emerging markets. In 2014, Jersey had a global trade surplus of \u00a3600 million (18% of national output), but a trade deficit with the UK of \u00a3500 million.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15699", "revid": "1300786752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15699", "title": "Telecommunications in Jersey", "text": " \nThe services of communication in Jersey comprise Internet, telephone, broadcasting and postal services, which allow islanders to contact people and receive information.\nInternet.\nAs of 2018, three companies provide fixed-line services to the island -\nAs all services are based on JT's infrastructure, there is limited competition. Nevertheless, islanders enjoy average fixed broadband download speeds which outstrip the UK and other small countries. As of 2021, Jersey has the highest broadband speeds of any country in the world, with an average rate of 274.27\u00a0Mbit/s, compared with Liechtenstein, which only had speeds of 211.26\u00a0Mbit/s, and the global average of just 9.10\u00a0Mbit/s.\nJT has dominance over the broadband sector, with 68% broadband market share in 2015, however this is declining relative to the competition. In terms of value for money on high-speed internet services, Jersey broadband consumers pay lower prices than nations like Bermuda, but higher prices than in the UK or the Isle of Man, but for lower-speed services islanders pay far lower prices than other small islands (and less than UK consumers).\nInternet connectivity to the rest of the world is provided by undersea cables linked to Guernsey, the UK and France. In 2016, a ship \u2013 believed to be the King Arthur owned by Mediterranea di Navigazione \u2013 dragging its anchor on the seabed in the English Channel cut the three main internet cables to Jersey and Guersey. As a result, all communications traffic had to travel via cables to France.\nMobile telephones.\nJersey is part of the UK's National Telephone Numbering Plan, which means the island shares the UK's international dialling code +44.\n4G license operators in the island are obligated to provide a 2\u00a0Mbit/s download speed to 95% of the island population 90% of the time. In 2016, the island had 95% 4G coverage and higher average mobile data speeds than (7 major cities in) the UK.\nIn 2020, JT retains the majority mobile market share of 52%, compared with 24% for Airtel-Vodafone and 23% for Sure, the island's other mobile operators. In 2020, there were 124,262 mobile subscriptions, of which 2,845 were mobile only.\nMobile data prices are lower in Jersey than other similarly sized countries, such as Bermuda and Malta, but slightly higher than the major operators in the UK. In 2020, the following mobile usage statistics were recorded: 202.0 million mobile minutes, 48.3 million SMS messages and 9.56 million GB of data used.\nLandline telephones.\nJersey is part of the UK's National Telephone Numbering Plan, which means the island shares the UK's international dialling code +44. Landline telephone numbers have the area code 01534.\nFuture.\nThe Government of Jersey has a telecommunications development strategy called \"A telecoms strategy for Jersey\".\nTelephony.\nAddressing.\nJersey is incorporated into the UK National Telephone Numbering Plan, using the following area codes:\nFixed line.\nFixed PSTN lines in use; approx 57,700 (2009).\nMobile cellular.\nWith over 120 mobile phone masts, in 2012, spread across its area, the island has a phone mast density almost five times that of the United Kingdom as a whole but similar to any urban area.\nTelephony system and infrastructure.\nDomestic.\nJersey Telecom:\nMass media.\nRadio.\nDigital DAB+ broadcasts started in Jersey on 1 August 2021.\nRadio receiver adoption and usage.\nNot available\nTelevision.\nTelevision set adoption and usage.\nNot available\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15700", "revid": "10981247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15700", "title": "Transport in Jersey", "text": " \nTransport in Jersey is primarily through the motor vehicle. The island, which is the largest of the Channel Islands has 124,737 registered vehicles (2016). The island is committed to combatting climate change, having declared a climate emergency, and policy is focused on reducing dependence on the car. The island has a cycle network and bus service. The primary modes of transport for leaving the island are by air or sea.\nRoad transport.\nRoad transport is the primary form of both private and public transport in Jersey.\nHighways.\nVehicles in Jersey drive on the left side of the road. The island has a default speed limit of 40 miles per hour (64\u00a0km/h) with slower limits on certain stretches of road, such as 20/30\u00a0mph (32/48\u00a0km/h) in built up areas and 15\u00a0mph (24\u00a0km/h) on roads designated as \"green lanes\".\nThe island is home to longest dual carriageway in the Channel Islands, consisting of Victoria Avenue (A2), and the Esplanade/Route de la Liberation (A1). Roads in Jersey are often named in French or J\u00e8rriais, except in St Helier, where they are often named in English.\nPublic highways are state-owned and managed by public highways authorities. Main roads are maintained by the Government of Jersey and funded through general taxation. By-roads (\"chemins vinciaux\") are managed by the relevant parish through a Roads Committee. Roads Inspectors are elected to report on roads in their vingtaine.\nRoads in Jersey are classified using two systems. The first is the signposted system for classifying main roads, consisting of an \"A\", \"B\" and \"C\" system as used in Great Britain, Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man. These are often signed on directional signs, however some are inaccurate.\nThe second is a system used privately by the Government of Jersey to classify both main roads and by-roads. The system consists of Class 1, 2 and 3 roads (main roads) and Class 4 roads (by-roads). Class 1 roads include Victoria Avenue.\nA Visite du Branchage is an inspection of roads to ensure property owners have complied with the laws against vegetation encroaching on the highway.\nHistory.\nUntil the 19th century, Jersey's highway system comprised narrow and muddy tracks connecting homes and fields to the churches, mills and beaches. Around the turn of the 18th century, the number of roads are described as \"[holding] no Proportion with the Bigness [of the island]\". The sides of the road, unlike in England had \"great Bulwarks of Earth ... from 6 to 8, and sometimes 10 Foot high\". At the time there were three types of road: , which, including the banks, were 16 feet wide; , which were 12 feet wide; and , which served only carriages on horseback.\nIn the early 19th century, the military roads were constructed (on occasion at gunpoint in the face of opposition from landowners) by the governor, General George Don, to link coastal fortifications with St. Helier harbour. These had an unexpected effect on agriculture once peace restored reliable trade links. Farmers in previously isolated valleys were able to swiftly transport crops grown in the island's microclimate to waiting ships and then on to the markets of London and Paris ahead of the competition. In conjunction with the later introduction of steamships and the development of the French and British railway systems, Jersey's agriculture was no longer as isolated as before.\nDriving laws.\nDriving laws in Jersey are the United Kingdom Highway Code, supplemented by the Jersey Highway Code.\nVisitors wishing to drive must possess a Certificate of Insurance or an International Green Card, a valid Driving Licence or International Driving Permit (UK International Driving Permits are not valid). Photocopies are not acceptable. A nationality plate must be displayed on the back of visiting vehicles.\nIt is an offence to hold a mobile phone whilst driving a moving vehicle. It is not an offence to use a hands-free system. Where fitted, all passengers inside a vehicle must wear a seat belt at all times, regardless of whether they are sitting in the front or the rear.\nDrink-driving is illegal in Jersey. Police use breathalyser tests during spot checks and a person is guilty if there is over 35 microgrammes of alcohol per 100 ml breath.\nThe penalties for drinking and driving in Jersey are up to \u00a32,000 fine or six months in prison for the first offence plus unlimited disqualification of driving licence. It is an offence to drive whilst under the influence of drugs. Since July 2014 it has also been illegal to smoke in any vehicle carrying passengers under the age of 18.\nTraffic calming.\nOver the years, a number of traffic calming schemes have been introduced around the island to get motorists to slow down. In 2016, a report in the JEP outlined a number of traffic calming schemes that were under consideration around the island.\nCar sharing.\nJersey has a shared electric car operator, EVie, that provides islandwide self-service electric car hire.\nCycling.\nJersey has infrastructure dedicated to cyclists. Cycle infrastructure has been improving in the previous decade under the Sustainable Transport Policy.\nThe best developed cycle route is the route from St Helier to Corbi\u00e8re. The route consists of segregated cycle paths and shared pedestrian-cycle paths, including the St Aubin's Bay promenade and the Railway Walk. The connection from West Park to Havre des Pas was completed an upgraded after a ministerial decision in 2011. A branch of this route connects to St Peter's Village via Les Quennevais.\nThere is a segregated cycle-pedestrian path along St Peter's Valley, which connects pedestrians and cyclists from the green lane network in St Mary to roads near the St Aubin's Bay Promenade cycle route. It was opened in 2016.\nJersey has a network of signposted cycle routes. There are fifteen routes in total, such as route 1, which forms a loop around the island. Most of the routes are on quieter lanes and dedicated paths, however some of these routes are on busy main road with no dedicated infrastructure.\nThe Eastern Cycle Route network is a proposed network of cycle-safe routes in the eastern parishes of St Clement and Grouville. The first section from Gorey to La Ville-\u00e8s-Renauds in Grouville was opened in 2011.\nThere is a dedicated network of Green Lanes across the island, which have a 15\u00a0mph speed limit and where priority is afforded to cyclists.\nBuses.\nBuses started running on the island in the 1920s, and by the 1930s, competition from motor buses had rendered the railways unprofitable, with final closure coming in 1936 after a fire disaster (except for the later German reintroduction of rail during the military occupation).\nBuses are operated by CT Plus Jersey, a local subsidiary of Kelsian Group, which was acquired in 2022 following the collapse of HCT Group. The service is currently branded as LibertyBus. All service routes radiate from the Liberation Station in St Helier.\nParking.\nPublic parking in Jersey is controlled by time restrictions and payment.\nA single-yellow line along the side of the carriageway indicates a \"No waiting\" restriction. There are no double-yellow lines in Jersey. Parking on yellow lines is liable to a fine.\nSome on-street and off-street parking is paid parking. Payments operate using either Paycards or PayByPhone and is indicated with the Paycard Symbol. Paycards are a form of voucher payment. Paycards are purchased from various stores around the island and can be used by scratching the time of arrival on the relevant number of units.\nCertain car parks, such as the Waterfront, Sand Street and Ports of Jersey Car Parks use automatic number plate recognition or ticket technology with a pay upon exit system.\nSome parking is free to use, however, the parking is time-restricted and a Jersey parking disc must be displayed showing time of arrival.\nThere are four main residents\u2019 and business parking zones within St Helier.\nAir transport.\nThere is a single airport on the island, Jersey Airport, located in St. Peter. It has one runway and one terminal building and has direct flights throughout the year to many United Kingdom and International destinations, including nine daily flights to London.\nBefore the present airport opened in 1937, air transport was through seaplanes, which landed at West Park in St Helier. The first aeroplane to land in Jersey was the Sanchez Besa in August 1912. The first passenger flight was recorded as taking place 147 years earlier through air balloon.\nRail transport.\nHistorically, there were public passenger railway services on the island, provided by two railway companies:\nA third, freight-only, railway was opened in 1884.\nThe mostly coastal passenger lines operated out of St Helier and ran across the southern part of the island, reaching Gorey Harbour in the east and la Corbi\u00e8re in the west. There were two stations in St Helier: St Helier (Weighbridge) (JR) and St Helier (Snow Hill) (JER).\nRunning trains on Jersey economically was difficult due to the island's small size, steep inclines and hard granite rock, especially after motor buses started operating. Expanding the rail services was impracticable, whereas buses could operate more widely. Additionally, the St Helier to St Aubin portion of the Jersey Railway was costly to maintain, as it had been built on the edge of a beach, using exposed track beds and wooden viaducts to reduce initial construction costs.\nIn 1936, a fire destroyed much of St Aubin railway station, and also 16 carriages. The Jersey Railway was then closed, as the cost of replacing the destroyed assets was too high.\nAfter closure of the two railways, most of their infrastructure was removed and little evidence of them now remains. A small number of former station buildings are still standing, including St Helier Weighbridge, which is now in use as the Liberty Wharf shopping centre, and St Aubin station, which is used today as the Parish Hall of Saint Br\u00e9lade. Part of the former Jersey Railway line from St Aubin to Corbi\u00e8re has been converted into a rail trail for cyclists and walkers.\nDuring the German military occupation 1940\u20131945, light railways were re-established by the Germans for the purpose of supplying coastal fortifications. A one-metre gauge line was laid down following the route of the former Jersey Railway from Saint Helier to La Corbi\u00e8re, with a branch line connecting the stone quarry at Ronez in Saint John. A 60\u00a0cm line ran along the west coast, and another was laid out heading east from Saint Helier to Gorey. The first line was opened in July 1942, the ceremony being disrupted by passively resisting Jersey spectators. The German railway infrastructure was dismantled after the Liberation in 1945.\nTwo railways have operated at the Pallot Heritage Steam Museum: a standard gauge heritage steam railway, and a narrow gauge pleasure line operated by steam-outline diesel motive power. As of 2025[ [update]], these are not in operation.\nIn mid-2025, a company named Jersey Western Railway (JWR) proposed the creation of a new \"affordable, comfortable and sustainable\" railway service in Jersey, with a line from La Corbiere via St Aubin to St Helier, and a branch line to the airport. The \u00a3250m proposal generated controversy, with critics believing that a railway was unnecessary and the price tag too high.\nSea transport.\nHistory.\nAn important growth for St Helier in the early 19th century was the construction of the harbour. Previously, ships coming into the town had only a small jetty at the site now called the English Harbour and the French Harbour. The Chamber of Commerce urged the States to build a new harbour, but the States refused, so the Chamber took it into their own hands and repaired and upgraded the harbour in 1790. A new breakwater was constructed to shelter the jetty and harbours. In 1814, the merchants constructed the roads now known as Commercial Buildings and Le Quai des Marchands to connect the harbours to the town and in 1832 construction was finished on the Esplanade and its sea wall. A rapid expansion in shipping led the States in 1837 to order the construction of two new piers: the Victoria and Albert Piers.\nSeaports and harbours.\nSaint Helier Harbour is the island's main port, others include Gorey, Saint Aubin, La Rocque, and Bonne Nuit. It is distant from Granville, Manche, from Southampton, from Poole, and from St Malo.\nOn 20 August 2013, Huelin-Renouf, which had operated a \"lift-on lift-off\" container service for 80 years between the Port of Southampton and the Port of Jersey, ceased trading. Senator Alan Maclean, a Jersey politician had previously tried to save the 90-odd jobs furnished by the company to no avail. On 20 September, it was announced that Channel Island Lines would continue this service, and would purchase the MV \"Huelin Dispatch\" from Associated British Ports who in turn had purchased them from the receiver in the bankruptcy. The new operator was to be funded by Rockayne Limited, a closely held association of Jersey businesspeople. Channel Island Lines closed in 2020.\nOperations.\nDFDS Seaways operate scheduled freight and passenger services to Poole a coastal town and seaport on the south coast of Dorset, and Portsmouth both in England, as well as St Malo in France. A weekly inter-island sailing to Guernsey is running on a trial basis from June to August 2025.\nBefore spring 2025, services were previously operated by Condor Ferries, who became main operator for UK sailings for the island, following the closure of British Channel Island Ferries in 1994, and the privatisation of Sealink in 1984. \nBrittany Ferries operate a limited inter-island service to and from Guernsey.\nPassenger-only access to France is provided by ferry service, to either Barneville-Carteret, Granville or Dielette.\nhttps:// operates a daily passenger only service Guernsey\nExternal links.\nhttps://"}
{"id": "15701", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15701", "title": "Jersey/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "15704", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15704", "title": "Johnston Atoll", "text": "United States Minor Outlying Islands\nJohnston Atoll is an unincorporated territory of the United States, under the jurisdiction of the United States Air Force (USAF). The island is closed to public entry, and limited access for management needs is only granted by a letter of authorization from the USAF. A special use permit is also required from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) to access the island by boat or enter the waters surrounding the island, which are designated as a National Wildlife Refuge and part of the Pacific Islands Heritage Marine National Monument. The Johnston Atoll National Wildlife Refuge extends from the shore out to 12 nautical miles, continuing as part of the National Wildlife Refuge System out to 200 nautical miles. The Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument extends from the shore out to 200 nautical miles.\nThe isolated atoll has been under the control of the U.S. military since 1934. During that time, it was variously used as a naval refueling depot, an airbase, a testing site for nuclear and biological weapons, a secret missile base, and a site for the storage and disposal of chemical weapons and Agent Orange. Those activities left the area environmentally contaminated. The USAF completed remediating the contamination in 2004 and performs only periodic monitoring today.\nThe island is home to thriving communities of nesting seabirds and has significant marine biodiversity. USAF and USFWS teams conduct environmental monitoring and maintenance to protect the native wildlife. In the 21st century, one ecological problem was yellow crazy ants that were killing seabirds, but by the 2020s these were eradicated.\nThe atoll originally consisted of two islands, Johnston and Sand island surrounded partially by a coral reef. Over the 20th century, those two islands were expanded, and two new islands, North (Akau) and East (Hikina) were created mostly by coral dredging. A long airstrip was built on Johnston, and there are also various channels through the coral reef.\nGeography.\nJohnston Atoll is a atoll in the North Pacific Ocean, located about southwest of the island of Hawai\u02bbi, and is grouped as one of the United States Minor Outlying Islands. The atoll, which is located on a coral reef platform, has four islands. Johnston Island and Sand Island are both enlarged natural features, while \"Akau\" (North) and \"Hikina\" (East) are two artificial islands formed by coral dredging. By 1964, dredge and fill operations had increased the size of Johnston Island to from its original , increased the size of Sand Island from , and added the two new islands, North and East, of respectively.\nThe four islands compose a total land area of . Due to the atoll's tilt, much of the reef on the southeast portion has subsided. But even though it does not have an encircling reef crest, the reef crest on the northwest portion of the atoll does provide for a shallow lagoon, with depths ranging from .\nThe climate is tropical but generally dry. Northeast trade winds are consistent. There is little seasonal temperature variation. With elevation ranging from sea level to at Summit Peak, the islands contain some low-growing vegetation and palm trees on mostly flat terrain, and no natural freshwater resources.\nClimate.\nJohnston Atoll has a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"BSh\"; Trewartha: \"BSha\"). It is a dry atoll with just over of annual rainfall.\nWildlife.\nAbout 300 species of fish have been recorded from the reefs and inshore waters of the atoll. It is also visited by green turtles and Hawaiian monk seals. The possibility of humpback whales using the waters as a breeding ground has been suggested, albeit in small numbers and with irregular occurrences. Many other cetaceans possibly migrate through the area, including Cuvier's beaked whales.\nBirds.\nSeabird species recorded as breeding on the atoll include Bulwer's petrel, wedge-tailed shearwater, Christmas shearwater, white-tailed tropicbird, red-tailed tropicbird, brown booby, red-footed booby, masked booby, great frigatebird, spectacled tern, sooty tern, brown noddy, black noddy, and white tern. It is the world's largest colony of red-tailed tropicbirds, with 10,800 nests in 2020. It is visited by migratory shorebirds, including the Pacific golden plover, wandering tattler, bristle-thighed curlew, ruddy turnstone and sanderling. The island, with its surrounding marine waters, has been recognized as an Important Bird Area by BirdLife International for its seabird colonies.\nFlora.\nThe first list of plants cataloged on Johnston Atoll was published in \"Vascular Plants of Johnston and Wake Islands\" (1931), based on the Tanager Expedition (1923) collections. Three species were described: \"Lepturus repens\", \"Boerhavia diffusa\", and \"Tribulus cistoides\". In the 1940s, when the island was used for aviation activities for the war, \"Pluchea odorata\" was introduced from Honolulu.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe first Western record of the atoll was on September 2, 1796, when the Boston-based American brig \"Sally\" accidentally grounded on a shoal near the islands. The ship's captain, Joseph Pierpont, published his experience in several American newspapers the following year, accurately portraying Johnston and Sand Island along with part of the reef. Still, he did not name or lay claim to the area. The islands were not officially named until Captain Charles J. Johnston of the Royal Naval ship sighted them on December 14, 1807. The ship's journal recorded: \"on the 14th [December] made a new discovery, viz. two very low islands, in lat. 16\u00b0 52\u2032 N. long. 190\u00b0 26\u2032 E., having a dangerous reef to the east of them, and the whole not exceeding four miles in extent\".\nIn 1856, the United States enacted the Guano Islands Act, which allowed US citizens to take possession of uninhabited and unclaimed islands containing guano deposits. Under this act, William Parker and R. F. Ryan chartered the schooner \"Palestine\" specifically to find Johnston Atoll. They located guano on the atoll on March 19, 1858. They proceeded to claim the island as U.S. territory. That same year, S. C. Allen, sailing on the \"Kalama\" under a commission from King Kamehameha IV of Hawai\u02bbi, sailed to Johnston Atoll, removed the American flag, and claimed the atoll for the Kingdom of Hawaii (June 14\u201319, 1858). Allen named the atoll \"Kalama\" and the nearby smaller island \"Cornwallis.\"\nReturning on July 22, 1858, the captain of the \"Palestine\" again hoisted the American flag to re-assert US sovereignty over the island. On July 27, however, the \"derelict and abandoned\" atoll was declared part of the domain of Kamehameha IV. On its July visit, however, the \"Palestine\" left two crew members on the island to gather phosphate. Later that year, Kamehameha revoked the lease granted to Allen when he learned the atoll had been claimed previously by the United States.\nIn 1872, Parker's widow sued for title to the island based on her husband's development work there. The US Attorney General denied that claim because Parker had sold his share several years before.\nBy 1890, the atoll's guano deposits had been almost entirely depleted (mined out) by U.S. interests operating under the Guano Islands Act. In 1892, surveyed and mapped the island to determine its suitability as a telegraph cable station. (This investigation was dropped when it was decided to run the cable via Fanning Island). \nBy 1898, the United States had taken possession, and a US Territorial Government was established. On September 11, 1909, this office leased Johnston Atoll to a private citizen, Max Schlemmen of Honolulu, for agricultural purposes. The lease stipulated planting of coconut trees, and that \"lessee will not allow use of explosives . . in the water immediately adjacent . . for the purposes of killing or capturing fish . . lessee will not allow destruction or capturing of birds . . \" The lessee soon abandoned the project, however, and on August 9, 1918, the lease was reassigned to a Honolulu-based Japanese fishing company. A sampan carried a work party to the island; they built a wood shed on the SE coast of the larger island and ran a small tramline up the slope of the low hill to facilitate the removal of guano. Neither the quantity nor the quality of the guano was sufficient to cover the cost of gathering it, and the project was soon abandoned.\nNational Wildlife Refuge since 1926.\nThe Tanager Expedition was a joint expedition sponsored by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the Bishop Museum of Hawaii, which visited the atoll in 1923. The expedition to the atoll consisted of two teams accompanied by destroyer convoys, with the first departing Honolulu on July 7, 1923, aboard the , which conducted the first survey of Johnston Island in the 20th century. Aerial survey and mapping flights over Johnston were conducted with a Douglas DT-2 floatplane carried on her fantail, which was hoisted into the water for takeoff. July 10\u201322, 1923, the atoll was recorded in a pioneering aerial photography project. The left Honolulu on July 16 and joined up with the \"Whippoorwill\" to complete the survey and then traveled to Wake Island to complete surveys there. Tents were pitched on the southwest beach of fine white sand, and a thorough biological survey was made. Hundreds of sea birds of a dozen kinds were the principal inhabitants, together with lizards, insects, and hermit crabs. The reefs and shallow water abounded with fish and other marine life.\nOn June 29, 1926, by Executive Order , President Calvin Coolidge established Johnston Island Reservation as a federal bird refuge and placed it under the U.S. Department of Agriculture, as a \"refuge and breeding ground for native birds.\" Johnston Atoll was added to the United States National Wildlife Refuge system in 1926, and renamed the Johnston Island National Wildlife Refuge in 1940. The Johnston Atoll National Wildlife Refuge was established to protect the tropical ecosystem and the wildlife that it harbors. However, the Department of Agriculture had no ships, and the United States Navy was interested in the atoll for strategic reasons, so with Executive Order on December 29, 1934, President Franklin D. Roosevelt placed the islands under the \"control and jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Navy for administrative purposes\", but subject to use as a refuge and breeding ground for native birds, under the United States Department of the Interior.\nOn February 14, 1941, President Franklin Roosevelt issued Executive Order to create naval defense areas in the central Pacific territories. The proclamation established the \"Johnston Island Naval Defensive Sea Area\", encompassing the territorial waters between the extreme high-water marks and the three-mile marine boundaries surrounding the atoll. \"Johnston Island Naval Airspace Reservation\" was also established to restrict access to the airspace over the naval defense sea area. Only U.S. government ships and aircraft were permitted to enter the naval defense areas at Johnston unless authorized by the Secretary of the Navy.\nIn 1990, two full-time U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service personnel, a Refuge Manager and a biologist, were stationed on Johnston Atoll to handle increased biological, contaminant, and resource conflict activities.\nAfter the military mission on the island ended in 2004, the atoll was administered by the Pacific Remote Islands National Wildlife Refuge Complex. The outer islets and water rights were managed cooperatively by the Fish and Wildlife Service, with some of the actual Johnston Island land mass remaining under the control of the United States Air Force (USAF) for environmental remediation and the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) for plutonium cleanup purposes. However, on January 6, 2009, under the authority of section 2 of the Antiquities Act, the Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument was established by President George W. Bush to administer and protect Johnston Island along with six other Pacific islands. The national monument includes Johnston Atoll National Wildlife Refuge within its boundaries and contains of land and over of water area. The Administration of President Barack Obama in 2014 extended the protected area to encompass the entire Exclusive Economic Zone, by banning all commercial fishing activities. Under a 2017 review of all national monuments extended since 1996, then-Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke recommended permitting fishing outside the 12-mile limit.\nMilitary control 1934\u20132004.\nOn December 29, 1934, President Franklin D. Roosevelt with Executive Order transferred control of Johnston Atoll to the United States Navy under the 14th Naval District, Pearl Harbor, to establish an air station, and also to the United States Department of the Interior to administer the bird refuge. In 1948, the USAF assumed control of the atoll.\nDuring the Operation Hardtack nuclear test series from April 22\u00a0to August 19, 1958, the administration of Johnston Atoll was assigned to the Commander of Joint Task Force 7. After the tests were completed, the island reverted to the command of the US Air Force.\nFrom 1963 to 1970, the Navy's Joint Task force 8 and the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) held joint operational control of the island during high-altitude nuclear testing operations.\nIn 1970, operational control was handed back to the Air Force until July 1973, when Defense Special Weapons Agency was given host-management responsibility by the Secretary of Defense. Over the years, sequential descendant organizations have been the Defense Atomic Support Agency (DASA) from 1959 to 1971, the Defense Nuclear Agency (DNA) from 1971 to 1996, and the Defense Special Weapons Agency (DSWA) from 1996 to 1998. In 1998, Defense Special Weapons Agency and selected elements of the Office of Secretary of Defense were combined to form the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA). In 1999, host-management responsibility transferred from the Defense Threat Reduction Agency once again to the Air Force until the Air Force mission ended in 2004 and the base was closed.\nSand Island seaplane base.\nIn 1935, personnel from the US Navy's Patrol Wing Two carried out some minor construction to develop the atoll for seaplane operation. In 1936, the Navy began the first of many changes to enlarge the atoll's land area. They erected some buildings and a boat landing on Sand Island and blasted coral to clear a seaplane landing. Several seaplanes made flights from Hawaii to Johnston, such as that of a squadron of six aircraft in November 1935.\nIn November 1939, civilian contractors commenced further work on Sand Island to allow the operation of one squadron of patrol planes with tender support. Part of the lagoon was dredged, and the excavated material was used to make a parking area connected by a causeway to Sand Island. Three seaplane landings were cleared, one by and two cross-landings each by and dredged to a depth of . Sand Island had barracks built for 400 men, a mess hall, an underground hospital, a radio station, water tanks, and a steel control tower. In December 1943 an additional of parking was added to the seaplane base.\nOn May 26, 1942, a United States Navy Consolidated PBY-5 Catalina wrecked at Johnston Atoll. The Catalina pilot made a normal power landing and immediately applied the throttle for take-off. At about 50 knots, the plane swerved to the left and continued into a violent waterloop. The plane's hull was broken open, and the Catalina sank immediately.\nAfter the war, on March 27, 1949, a PBY-6A Catalina had to make a forced landing during a flight from Kwajalein to Johnston Island. The plane was damaged beyond repair, and the crew of 11 was rescued nine hours later by a Navy ship, which sank the plane using gunfire.\nIn 1958, a proposed support agreement for Navy Seaplane operations at Johnston Island was under discussion, though it was never completed because a requirement for the operation failed to materialize.\nAirfield.\nBy September 1941, construction of an airfield on Johnston Island commenced. A runway was built with two 400-man barracks, two mess halls, a cold-storage building, an underground hospital, a fresh-water plant, shop buildings, and fuel storage. The runway was complete by December 7, 1941, though in December 1943, the 99th Naval Construction Battalion arrived at the atoll and proceeded to lengthen the runway to . The runway was lengthened and improved as the island was enlarged.\nDuring World War II, Johnston Atoll was used as a refueling base for submarines and also as an aircraft refueling stop for American bombers transiting the Pacific Ocean, including the Boeing B-29 Enola Gay. By 1944, the atoll was one of the busiest air transport terminals in the Pacific. Air Transport Command aeromedical evacuation planes stopped at Johnston en route to Hawaii. Following V-J Day on August 14, 1945, Johnston Atoll saw the flow of men and aircraft coming from the mainland into the Pacific turn around. By 1947, over 1,300 B-29 and B-24 bombers had passed through the Marianas, Kwajalein, Johnston Island, and Oahu en route to Mather Field and civilian life.\nFollowing World War II, Johnston Atoll Airport was used commercially by Continental Air Micronesia, touching down between Honolulu and Majuro. When the aircraft landed, soldiers surrounded the aircraft, and passengers were not allowed to leave the aircraft. Aloha Airlines also made weekly scheduled flights to the island carrying civilian and military personnel. In the 1990s, there were flights almost daily. Some days saw up to three arrivals. Just before movement of the chemical munitions to Johnston Atoll, the Surgeon General, Public Health Service, reviewed the shipment and the Johnston Atoll storage plans. His recommendations caused the Secretary of Defense to issue instructions in December 1970 to suspend missile launches and all non-essential aircraft flights. As a result, Air Micronesia's service was immediately discontinued, and missile firings were terminated, except for two 1975 satellite launches deemed critical to the island's mission.\nThere were many times when the runway was needed for emergency landings for civil and military aircraft. When the runway was decommissioned, it could no longer be a potential emergency landing place when planning flight routes across the Pacific Ocean. As of 2003, the airfield at Johnston Atoll consisted of an unmaintained closed single asphalt/concrete runway 5/23, a parallel taxiway, and a large paved ramp along the southeast side of the runway.\nWorld War II 1941\u20131945.\n In February 1941, Johnston Atoll was designated a Naval Defensive Sea Area and Airspace Reservation. On the day the Japanese struck Pearl Harbor, December 7, 1941, was out of her home port of Pearl Harbor to make a simulated bombardment at Johnston Island. Japan's strike at Pearl Harbor occurred as the ship was unloading marines, civilians, and stores on the atoll. On December 15, 1941, the atoll was shelled outside the reef by a Japanese submarine, which had been part of the attack on Pearl Harbor eight days earlier. Several buildings, including the power station, were hit, but no personnel were injured. Additional Japanese shelling occurred on December 22 and 23, 1941. On all occasions, Johnston Atoll's coastal artillery returned fire, driving off the sub.\nIn July 1942, the civilian contractors at the atoll were replaced by 500 men from the 5th and 10th Naval Construction Battalions, who expanded the fuel storage and water production at the base and built additional facilities. The 5th Battalion departed in January 1943. In December 1943, the 99th Naval Construction Battalion arrived at the atoll. It proceeded to lengthen the runway to and add of parking to the seaplane base.\nCoast Guard mission 1957\u20131992.\nOn January 25, 1957, the Department of Treasury was granted a 5-year permit for the United States Coast Guard (USCG) to operate and maintain a Long Range Aid to Navigation (LORAN) transmitting station on Johnston Atoll. Two years later, in December 1959, the Secretary of Defense approved the Secretary of the Treasury's request to use Sand Island for U.S. Coast Guard LORAN A and C station sites. The USCG was granted permission to install a LORAN A and C station on Sand Island to be staffed by U.S. Coast Guard personnel through June 30, 1992. The permit for a LORAN station to operate on Johnston Island was terminated in 1962. On November 1, 1957, a new United States Coast Guard LORAN-A station was commissioned. By 1958, the Coast Guard LORAN Station at Johnston Island began transmitting on a 24-hour basis, thus establishing a new LORAN rate in the Central Pacific. The new rate between Johnston Island and French Frigate Shoals gave a higher order of accuracy for fixing positions in the steamship lanes from Oahu, Hawaii, to Midway Island. In the past, this was impossible in some areas along this important shipping route. The original U.S. Coast Guard LORAN-A Station on Johnston Island ceased operations on June 30, 1961, when the new station on nearby Sand Island began transmitting using a larger 180-foot antenna.\nThe LORAN-C station was disestablished on July 1, 1992, and all Coast Guard personnel, electronic equipment, and property departed that month. Buildings on Sand Island were transferred to other activities. LORAN whip antennas on Johnston and Sand Islands were removed, and the 625-foot LORAN tower and antenna were demolished on December 3, 1992. The LORAN A and C stations and buildings on Sand Island were then dismantled and removed.\nNational nuclear weapon test site 1958\u20131963.\nSuccesses.\nBetween 1958 and 1975, Johnston Atoll was used as an American national nuclear test site for atmospheric and extremely high-altitude nuclear explosions in outer space. In 1958, Johnston Atoll was the location of the two \"Hardtack I\" nuclear tests firings. One conducted August 1, 1958, was codenamed \"Hardtack Teak\", and one conducted August 12, 1958, was codenamed \"Orange.\" Both tests detonated 3.8-megaton hydrogen bombs launched to high altitudes by rockets from Johnston Atoll.\nJohnston Island was also used as the launch site of 124 sounding rockets going up as high as . These carried scientific instruments and telemetry equipment, either in support of the nuclear bomb tests or in experimental antisatellite technology.\nEight PGM-17 Thor missiles deployed by the U.S. Air Force (USAF) were launched from Johnston Island in 1962 as part of \"Operation Fishbowl,\" a part of \"Operation Dominic\" nuclear weapons tests in the Pacific. The first launch in \"Operation Fishbowl\" was a successful research and development launch with no warhead. In the end, \"Operation Fishbowl\" produced four successful high-altitude detonations: \"Starfish Prime,\" \"Checkmate,\" \"Bluegill Triple Prime,\" and \"Kingfish.\" In addition, it produced one atmospheric nuclear explosion, \"Tightrope.\"\nOn July 9, 1962, \"Starfish Prime\" had a 1.4-megaton explosion, using a W49 warhead at an altitude of about . It created a very brief fireball visible over a wide area, plus bright artificial auroras visible in Hawaii for several minutes. \"Starfish Prime\" also produced an electromagnetic pulse that disrupted some electric power and communication systems in Hawaii. It pumped enough radiation into the Van Allen belts to destroy or damage seven satellites in orbit.\nThe final Fishbowl launch that used a Thor missile carried the \"Kingfish\" 400-kiloton warhead up to its detonation altitude. Although it was officially one of the Operation Fishbowl tests, it is sometimes not listed among high-altitude nuclear tests because of its lower detonation altitude. \"Tightrope\" was the final test of Operation Fishbowl and detonated on November 3, 1962. It launched on a nuclear-armed Nike-Hercules missile and was detonated at a lower altitude than the other tests:\n\"At Johnston Island, there was an intense white flash. Even with high-density goggles, the burst was too bright to view, even for a few seconds. A distinct thermal pulse was felt on bare skin. A yellow-orange disc was formed, and transformed itself into a purple doughnut. A glowing purple cloud was faintly visible for a few minutes.\" The nuclear yield was reported in most official documents as \"less than 20 kilotons.\" One report by the U.S. government reported the yield of the \"Tightrope\" test as ten kilotons. Seven sounding rockets were launched from Johnston Island in support of the \"Tightrope\" test, and this was the final American nuclear atmospheric test.\nFailures.\nThe \"Fishbowl\" series included four failures, all deliberately disrupted by range safety officers when the missiles' systems failed during launch and were aborted. The second launch of the Fishbowl series, \"Bluegill\", carried an active warhead. Bluegill was \"lost\" by a defective range safety tracking radar and had to be destroyed 10 minutes after liftoff, even though it probably ascended successfully. The subsequent nuclear weapon launch failures from Johnston Atoll caused severe contamination to the island and surrounding areas with weapons-grade plutonium and americium that remains an issue to this day.\nThe failure of the \"Bluegill\" launch created in effect a dirty bomb but did not release the nuclear warhead's plutonium debris onto Johnston Atoll as the missile fell into the ocean south of the island and was not recovered. However, the \"Starfish\", \"Bluegill Prime\", and \"Bluegill Double Prime\" test launch failures in 1962 scattered radioactive debris over Johnston Island contaminating it, the lagoon, and Sand Island with plutonium for decades.\n\"Starfish\", a high altitude Thor launched nuclear test scheduled for June 20, 1962, was the first to contaminate the atoll. The rocket with the 1.45-megaton Starfish device (W49 warhead in the MK-4 re-entry vehicle) on its nose was launched that evening, but the Thor missile engine cut out only 59 seconds after launch. The range safety officer sent a destruct signal 65 seconds after launch, and the missile was destroyed at approximately altitude\u2014the warhead high explosive detonated in a 1-point safe fashion, destroying the warhead without producing nuclear yield. Large pieces of the plutonium-contaminated missile, including fragments of the warhead, booster rocket, engine, re-entry vehicle, and missile parts, fell back on Johnston Island. More wreckage, along with plutonium contamination, was found on nearby Sand Island.\n\"Bluegill Prime,\" the second attempt to launch the payload, which failed last time, was scheduled for 23:15 (local) on July 25, 1962. It, too, was a genuine disaster and caused the most severe plutonium contamination on the island. The Thor missile carried one pod, two re-entry vehicles, and the W50 nuclear warhead. The missile engine malfunctioned immediately after ignition, and the range safety officer fired the destruct system while the missile was still on the launch pad. The Johnston Island launch complex was demolished in the subsequent explosions and fire, which burned through the night. The launch emplacement and portions of the island were contaminated with radioactive plutonium spread by the blast, fire, and wind-blown smoke.\nAfterward, the Johnston Island launch complex was heavily damaged and contaminated with plutonium. Missile launches and nuclear testing halted until the radioactive debris was dumped, soils were recovered, and the launch emplacement rebuilt. Before tests could resume, three months of repairs, decontamination, and rebuilding of the LE1 and the backup pad LE2 were necessary. To continue with the testing program, U.S. troops were sent in to do a rapid cleanup. The troops scrubbed down the revetments and launch pad, carted away debris, and removed the top layer of coral around the contaminated launch pad. The plutonium-contaminated rubbish was dumped in the lagoon, polluting the surrounding marine environment. Over 550 drums of contaminated material were dumped in the ocean off Johnston from 1964 to 1965. At the time of the Bluegill Prime disaster, a bulldozer and grader scraped the top fill around the launch pad. It was then dumped into the lagoon to make a ramp so the rest of the debris could be loaded onto the landing craft to be dumped into the ocean. An estimated 10 percent of the plutonium from the test device was in the fill used to make the ramp. Then, the ramp was covered and placed into a landfill on the island during 1962 dredging to extend the island. The lagoon was again dredged in 1963\u20131964 and used to expand Johnston Island from , recontaminating additional portions of the island.\nOn October 15, 1962, the \"Bluegill Double Prime\" test also misfired. During the test, the rocket was destroyed at a height of 109,000 feet after it malfunctioned 90 seconds into the flight. U.S. Defense Department officials confirm that the rocket's destruction contributed to the radioactive pollution on the island.\nIn 1963, the U.S. Senate ratified the Limited Test Ban Treaty, which contained a provision known as \"Safeguard C\". Safeguard C was the basis for maintaining Johnston Atoll as a \"ready to test\" above-ground nuclear testing site should atmospheric nuclear testing ever be deemed necessary again. In 1993, Congress appropriated no funds for the Johnston Atoll \"Safeguard C\" mission, ending it.\nAnti-satellite mission 1962\u20131975.\nProgram 437 turned the PGM-17 Thor into an operational anti-satellite (ASAT) weapon system, a capability that was kept top secret even after it was deployed. The Program 437 mission was approved for development by U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara on November 20, 1962, and based at the atoll. Program 437 used modified Thor missiles that had been returned from deployment in Great Britain and was the second deployed U.S. operational nuclear anti-satellite operation. Eighteen more suborbital Thor launches took place from Johnston Island from 1964 to 1975 in support of Program 437. In 1965\u20131966, four Program 437 Thors were launched with 'Alternate Payloads' for satellite inspection. This was an elaboration of the system to allow visual verification of the target before destroying it. These flights may have been related to the late 1960s Program 922, a non-nuclear version of Thor with infrared homing and a high-explosive warhead. Thors were active near the two Johnston Island launch pads after 1964. However, partly because of the Vietnam War, in October 1970, the Department of Defense transferred Program 437 to standby status as an economic measure. The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks led to Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty that prohibited 'interference with national means of verification', which meant that ASATs were not allowed, by treaty, to attack Soviet spy satellites. Thors were removed from Johnston Atoll and were stored in mothballed war-reserve condition at Vandenberg Air Force Base from 1970 until the anti-satellite mission of Johnston Island facilities ceased on August 10, 1974. The program was officially discontinued on April 1, 1975, when any possibility of restoring the ASAT program was finally terminated. Eighteen Thor launches in support of the Program 437 Alternate Payload (AP) mission took place from Johnston Atoll's Launch emplacements.\nTwo Thor missiles were launched from the Island in late 1975, months after the \"officially discontinued\" date.\nBaker\u2013Nunn satellite tracking camera station.\nThe Space Detection and Tracking System or SPADATS was operated by North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) along with the U.S. Air Force Spacetrack system, The Navy Space Surveillance System and Canadian Forces Air Defense Command Satellite Tracking Unit. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory also operated a dozen 3.5 ton Baker-Nunn Camera systems (none at Johnston) for cataloging of artificial satellites. The U.S. Air Force had ten Baker-Nunn camera stations worldwide, mostly from 1960 to 1977, with a phase-out beginning in 1964.\nThe Baker-Nunn space camera station was constructed on Sand Island. It was functioning by 1965. USAF 18th Surveillance Squadron operated the Baker-Nunn camera at a station built along the causeway on Sand Island until 1975 when a contract to operate the four remaining Air Force stations was awarded to Bendix Field Engineering Corporation. In about 1977, the camera at Sand Island was moved to Daegu, South Korea. Baker-Nunn were rendered obsolete with the Initial Operational Capability of 3 GEODSS optical tracking sites at Daegu, Korea; Mount Haleakala, Maui and White Sands Missile Range. A fourth site was operational in 1985 at Diego Garcia, and a proposed fifth site in Portugal was canceled. The Daegu, Korea site was closed due to encroaching city lights. GEODSS tracked satellites at night, though the MIT Lincoln Laboratory test site, co-located with Site 1 at White Sands, did track asteroids in the daytime as proof of concept in the early 1980s.\nJohnston Island Recovery Operations Center.\nSatellite and Missile Observation System Project (SAMOS-E) or \"E-6\" was a relatively short-lived series of United States visual reconnaissance satellites in the early 1960s. SAMOS was also known by the unclassified terms Program 101 and Program 201. The Air Force program was used as a cover for the initial development of the Central Intelligence Agency's Key Hole (including Corona and Gambit) reconnaissance satellites systems. Imaging was performed with film cameras and television surveillance from polar low Earth orbits with film canisters returning via capsule and parachute with mid-air retrieval. SAMOS was first launched in 1960 but not operational until 1963, with all of the missions being launched from Vandenberg AFB.\nDuring the early months of the SAMOS program, it was essential not only to hide the Corona and GAMBIT technical efforts under a screen of SAMOS activity but also to make the orbital vehicle portions of the two systems resemble one another in outward appearance. Thus, some of the configuration details of SAMOS were decided less by engineering logic than by the need to camouflage GAMBIT. Hence, theoretically, a GAMBIT could be launched without alerting many people to its real nature.\nProblems relative to tracking networks, communications, and recovery were resolved with the decision in late February 1961 to use Johnston Island as the program's film capsule descent and recovery zone.\nOn July 10, 1961, work was initiated on four buildings of the Johnston Island Recovery Operations Center for the National Reconnaissance Office. Men from the Johnston Atoll facility would recover the parachuting film canister capsules with a radar-equipped JC-130 aircraft by capturing them in the air with a specialized recovery apparatus.\nThe recovery center was also responsible for collecting the radioactive scientific data pods dropped from missiles following launch and nuclear detonation.\nBiological warfare test site 1965\u20131968.\nThe atoll was subject to large-scale bioweapons testing over four years starting in 1965. The American strategic tests of bioweapons were as expensive and elaborate as the tests of the first hydrogen bombs at Eniwetok Atoll. They involved enough ships to have made the world's fifth-largest independent navy. One experiment involved several barges with hundreds of rhesus monkeys. It is estimated that one jet with bioweapon spray \"would probably be more efficient at causing human deaths than a ten-megaton hydrogen bomb.\"\nIn the lead-up to biological warfare testing in the Pacific under Project 112 and Project SHAD, a new virus was discovered during the Pacific Ocean Biological Survey Program by teams from the Smithsonian's Division of Birds aboard a United States Army tugboat involved in the program. Initially, the effort's name was the Pacific Ocean Ornithological Project; however, it was changed once someone noted the natural acronym \"POOP\". First isolated in 1964 the tick-borne virus was discovered in \"Ornithodoros capensis\" ticks, found in a nest of common noddy (\"Anous stolidus\") at Sand Island, Johnston Atoll. It was designated Johnston Atoll Virus and is related to influenza.\nIn February, March, and April 1965, Johnston Atoll was used to launch biological attacks against U.S. Army and Navy vessels south-west of Johnston island in vulnerability, defense, and decontamination tests conducted by the Deseret Test Center during Project SHAD under Project 112. Test DTC 64-4 (Deseret Test Center) was initially called \"RED BEVA\" (Biological EVAluation), though the name was later changed to \"Shady Grove\", likely for operational security reasons. The biological agents released during this test included \"Francisella tularensis\" (formerly called \"Pasteurella tularensis\") (Agent UL), the causative agent of tularemia; \"Coxiella burnetii\" (Agent OU), the causative agent of Q fever; and \"Bacillus globigii\" (Agent BG). During Project SHAD, \"Bacillus globigii\" was used to simulate biological warfare agents (such as anthrax), because it was then considered a contaminant with little health consequence to humans; however, it is now considered a human pathogen. Ships equipped with the E-2 multi-head disseminator and A-4C aircraft equipped with Aero 14B spray tanks released live pathogenic agents in nine aerial and four surface trials in phase B of the test series from February 12 to March 15, 1965, and in four aerial trials in phase D of the test series from March 22 to April 3, 1965.\nAccording to Project SHAD veteran Jack Alderson, who commanded the Army tugs, area three at Johnston Atoll was located at the most downwind part of the island and consisted of a collapsible Nissen hut for weapons preparation and some communications.\nChemical weapon storage 1971\u20132001.\nIn 1970, Congress redefined the island's military mission as the storage and destruction of chemical weapons. The United States Army leased on the atoll to store chemical weapons held in Okinawa, Japan. Johnston Atoll became a chemical weapons storage site in 1971, holding about 6.6 percent of the U.S. military chemical weapon arsenal. The chemical weapons were brought from Okinawa under Operation Red Hat with the re-deployment of the 267th Chemical Company. They consisted of rockets, mines, artillery projectiles, and bulk 1-ton containers filled with Sarin, Agent VX, vomiting agent, and blister agent such as mustard gas. Chemical weapons from West Germany and World War II era weapons from the Solomon Islands were also stored on the island after 1990. Chemical agents were stored in the high-security Red Hat Storage Area (RHSA) which included hardened igloos in the weapon storage area, the Red Hat building (#850), two Red Hat hazardous waste warehouses (#851 and #852), an open storage area, and security entrances and guard towers.\nSome of the other weapons stored at the site were shipped from U.S. stockpiles in West Germany in 1990. These shipments followed a 1986 agreement between the U.S. and West Germany to move the munitions. Merchant ships carrying the munitions left West Germany under Operation Golden Python and Operation Steel Box in October 1990 and arrived at Johnston Island November 6, 1990. Although the ships were unloaded within nine days, the unpacking and storing of munitions continued into 1991. The remainder of the chemical weapons was a small number of World War II era weapons shipped from the Solomon Islands.\nAgent Orange storage 1972\u20131977.\nAgent Orange was brought to Johnston Atoll from South Vietnam and Gulfport, Mississippi in 1972 under Operation Pacer IVY. It was stored on the northwest corner of the island known as the Herbicide Orange Storage site, dubbed the \"Agent Orange Yard\". The Agent Orange was eventually destroyed during Operation Pacer HO on the Dutch incineration ship MT \"Vulcanus\" in the Summer of 1977. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) reported that 1,800,000 gallons of Herbicide Orange were stored at Johnston Atoll and that an additional 480,000 gallons stored at Gulfport, Mississippi, was brought to Johnston Atoll for destruction. Leaking barrels during storage, and spills during re-drumming operations, contaminated both the storage area and the lagoon with herbicide residue and its toxic contaminant 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin.\nChemical weapon demilitarization mission 1990\u20132000.\nThe Army's Johnston Atoll Chemical Agent Disposal System (JACADS) was the first full-scale chemical weapons disposal facility. Built to incinerate chemical munitions on the island, planning started in 1981, construction began in 1985, and it was completed five years later. Following construction and facility characterization, JACADS began operational verification testing (OVT) in June 1990. From 1990 until 1993, the Army conducted four planned periods of Operational Verification Testing (OVT), required by Public Law 100\u2013456. OVT was completed in March 1993, demonstrating that the reverse assembly incineration technology was adequate and that JACADS operations met all environmental parameters. The transition to full-scale operations started in May 1993, but the facility did not begin full-scale operations until August 1993.\nAll of the chemical weapons once stored on Johnston Island were demilitarized, and the agents incinerated at JACADS, with the process completed in the year 2000. Later, the destruction of legacy hazardous waste material associated with chemical weapon storage and cleanup was completed. JACADS was demolished by 2003, and the island was stripped of its remaining infrastructure and environmentally remediated.\nClosure and remaining structures.\nIn 2003, structures and facilities, including those used in JACADS, were removed, and the runway was marked closed. The last flight out for official personnel was June 15, 2004. After this date, the base was completely deserted, with the only structures left standing being the Joint Operations Center (JOC) building at the east end of the runway, chemical bunkers in the weapon storage area, and at least one Quonset hut.\nBuilt in 1964, the JOC is a four-floor concrete and steel administration building for the island that has no windows and was built to withstand a category IV tropical cyclone as well as atmospheric nuclear tests. The building remains standing but was gutted entirely in 2004 during an asbestos abatement project. All doors of the JOC except one have been welded shut. The ground floor has a side building attached that serves as a facility for decontamination. It contains three long snaking corridors and 55 shower heads one could walk through during decontamination.\nRows of bunkers in the Red Hat Storage Area remain intact; however, an agreement was established between the U.S. Army and EPA Region IX on August 21, 2003, that the Munitions Demilitarization Building (MDB) at JACADS would be demolished and the bunkers in the RHSA used for disposal of construction rubble and debris. After placement of the debris inside the bunkers, they were secured, and the entries were blocked with a concrete block barrier (a.k.a. King Tut Block) to prevent access to the bunker interior.\nContamination and cleanup.\nOver the years, leaks of Agent Orange, as well as chemical weapon leaks in the weapon storage area, occurred where caustic chemicals such as sodium hydroxide were used to mitigate toxic agents during cleanup. Larger spills of nerve and mustard agents within the MCD at JACADS also took place. The EPA cited small releases of chemical weapon components from JACADS. Multiple studies of the Johnston Atoll environment and ecology have been conducted, and the atoll is likely the most studied island in the Pacific.\nStudies at the atoll on the effect of PCB contamination in reef damselfish (\"Abudefduf sordidus\") demonstrated that embryonic abnormalities could be used as a metric for comparing contaminated and uncontaminated areas. Some PCB contamination in the lagoon was traced to Coast Guard disposal practices of PCB-laden electrical transformers.\nIn 1962, plutonium pollution following three failed nuclear missile launches was heaviest near the destroyed launch emplacement, in the lagoon offshore of the launch pad, and near Sand Island. The contaminated launch site was stripped, and the debris gathered and buried in the island's 1962 expansion. A comprehensive radiological survey was completed in 1980 to record transuranic contamination from the 1962 THOR missile aborts. The Air Force also initiated research on methods to remove dioxin contamination from soil resulting from leakage of the stored herbicide Agent Orange. Since then, U.S. defense authorities have surveyed the island in a series of studies.\nContaminated structures were dismantled and isolated within the former Thor Launch Emplacement No. 1 (LE-1) as a start for the cleanup program. About 45,000 tons of soil contaminated with radioactive isotopes was collected and placed into a fenced area covering on the island's north. The area was known as the Radiological Control Area and heavily contaminated with highly radioactive Plutonium. The Pluto Yard is on the site of the LE1 where the 1962 missile explosion occurred, and also where a highly contaminated loading ramp was buried that was made for loading plutonium contaminated debris onto small boats that was dumped at sea. Remediation included a plutonium \"mining\" operation called the Johnston Atoll Plutonium Contaminated Soil Cleanup Project. The collected radioactive soil and other debris were buried in a landfill created within the former LE-1 area from June 2002 through November 11, 2002. Remediation at the Radiation Control Area included the construction of a 61-centimeter-thick cap of coral sealing the landfill. Permanent markers were placed at each corner of the landfill to identify the landfill area.\nAfter closing.\nThe atoll was placed up for auction via the U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) in 2005 before it was withdrawn. The stripped Johnston Island was briefly offered for sale with several deed restrictions in 2005 as a \"residence or vacation getaway,\" with potential usage for \"eco-tourism\" by the GSA's Office of Real Property Utilization and Disposal. The proposed sale included the unique postal zip code 96558, formerly assigned to the Armed Forces in the Pacific. The proposed sale did not include running water, electricity, or activation of the closed runway. The details of the offering were outlined on GSA's website and in a newsletter of the Center for Land Use Interpretation as unusual real estate listing # 6384, Johnston Island.\nOn August 22, 2006, Johnston Island was struck by Hurricane Ioke. The eastern eye-wall passed directly over the atoll, with winds exceeding . Twelve people were on the island when the hurricane struck, and part of a crew was sent to deliver a USAF contractor who sampled groundwater contamination levels. All 12 survived, and one wrote a first-hand account of taking shelter from the storm in the JOC building.\nOn December 9, 2007, the United States Coast Guard swept the runway at Johnston Island of debris and used the runway in the removal and rescue of an ill Taiwanese fisherman to Oahu, Hawaii. The fisherman was transferred from the Taiwanese fishing vessel \"Sheng Yi Tsai No. 166\" to the Coast Guard buoy tender \"Kukui\" on December 6, 2007. The fisherman was transported to the island, and then picked up by a Coast Guard HC-130 Hercules rescue plane from Kodiak, Alaska.\nSince the base was closed, the atoll has been visited by many vessels crossing the Pacific, as the deserted atoll has a strong lure due to the activities once performed there. Visitors have blogged about stopping there during a trip or have posted photos of their visits.\nIn 2010, a Fish and Wildlife survey team identified a swarm of \"Anoplolepis\" ants that had invaded the Johnston Atoll National Wildlife Refuge. The crazy ants threatened vital seabird colonies and needed eradication. The \"Crazy Ant Strike Team\" project was led by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, who achieved a 99% reduction in ant numbers by 2013. The team camped in a bunker previously used as a fallout shelter and office. Full eradication of the species from the atoll was achieved in 2021.\nIn 2025, it was announced as a planned location for the Air Force Research Laboratory to test delivering cargo by reusable rocket under the Air Force's Rocket Cargo program. The program's intent is to support the delivery of military cargo anywhere in the world within hours. The Air Force will build two landing pads supporting up to ten reentry vehicle landings per year over a four-year period. This testing phase is designed to demonstrate and evaluate the capabilities of the program.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJohnston Atoll has never had any indigenous inhabitants. However, during the late part of the 20th century, averages of about 300 American military personnel and 1,000 civilian contractors were present at any given time. Today, it is uninhabited except for a handful of workers with the Crazy Ant Strike Team project, who live on the island for six months at a time with little outside contact.\nThe primary means of transportation to this island was the airport, which had a paved military runway, or by ship via a pier and ship channel through the atoll's coral reef system. The islands were wired with 13 outgoing and 10 incoming commercial telephone lines, a 60-channel submarine cable, 22 DSN circuits by satellite, an Autodin with standard remote terminal, a digital telephone switch, the Military Affiliated Radio System (MARS station), a UHF/VHF air-ground radio, and a link to the Pacific Consolidated Telecommunications Network (PCTN) satellite. Amateur radio operators occasionally transmitted from the island, using the KH3 call-sign prefix. The United States Undersea Cable Corporation was awarded contracts to lay underwater cables in the Pacific. A cable called \"Wet Wash C\" was laid in 1966 between Makua, Hawaii, and the Johnston Island Air Force Base. surveyed the route and laid of cable and 45 repeaters. The Simplex Wire and Cable Company manufactured these cables, with the repeaters being supplied by Felten and Guilleaume. In 1993, a satellite communication ground station was added to augment the atoll's communications capability.\nJohnston Atoll's economic activity was limited to providing services to American military and contractor personnel on the island. The island was regularly resupplied by ship or barge, and all foodstuffs and manufactured goods were imported. The base had six 2.5-megawatt electrical generators using diesel engines. The runway was also available to commercial airlines for emergency landings (a fairly common event). It was a regular stop on Continental Micronesia airline's \"island hopper\" service for many years between Hawaii and the Marshall Islands.\nThere were no official license plates issued for use on Johnston Atoll. U.S. government vehicles were issued U.S. government license plates, and private vehicles retained the plates from which they were registered. According to reputable license plate collectors, some Johnston Atoll license plates were created as souvenirs and have even been sold online to collectors, but they were not officially issued.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15705", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15705", "title": "Johnston Atoll/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "15706", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15706", "title": "Geography of Johnston Atoll", "text": ""}
{"id": "15708", "revid": "16734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15708", "title": "Politics of Johnston Atoll", "text": ""}
{"id": "15709", "revid": "13040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15709", "title": "Economy of Johnston Atoll", "text": ""}
{"id": "15710", "revid": "10049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15710", "title": "Communications on Johnston Atoll", "text": ""}
{"id": "15711", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15711", "title": "Johnston Atoll/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "15712", "revid": "13040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15712", "title": "Military of Johnston Atoll", "text": ""}
{"id": "15715", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15715", "title": "Jordan/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "15716", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15716", "title": "Geography of Jordan", "text": " \nJordan is situated geographically in West Asia, south of Syria, west of Iraq, northwest of Saudi Arabia, east of Israel and the Palestinian territory of the West Bank. The area is also referred to as the Middle or Near East. Its territory covers about .\nBetween 1950 and the Six-Day War in 1967, although not widely recognized, Jordan claimed and administered an additional encompassing the West Bank; in 1988 and with continuing Israeli occupation, King Hussein relinquished Jordan's claim to the West Bank in favor of the Palestinians.\nJordan's only coastline at its southern extremity, where nearly of shoreline along the Gulf of Aqaba provides access to the Red Sea.\nArea and boundaries.\nArea:\n*total: \n**\"country rank in the world\": 110th\n*land: \n*water: \nArea comparative\n* Australia comparative: slightly more than larger than Tasmania\n* Canada comparative: approximately times the size of New Brunswick\n* United Kingdom comparative: approximately larger than Scotland\n* United States comparative: approximately the size of Maine\n* EU comparative: approximately the size of Portugal\nLand boundaries:\n*\"total:\" \n*\"border countries:\"\n**Iraq \n**Israel \n**Saudi Arabia \n**Syria \n**West Bank \nCoastline: \n*\"note:\"\n**Jordan also borders the Dead Sea, for \nMaritime claims:\n*\"territorial sea:\"\nElevation extremes:\n*lowest point: Dead Sea \n*highest point: Jabal Umm ad Dami \nBoundaries.\nExcept for small sections of the borders with Israel and Syria, Jordan's international boundaries do not follow well-defined natural features of the terrain. The country's boundaries were established by various international agreements and with the exception of the border with Israel, none was in dispute in early 1989.\nJordan's boundaries with Syria, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia do not have the special significance that the border with Israel does; these borders have not always hampered tribal nomads in their movements, yet for a few groups borders did separate them from traditional grazing areas and delimited by a series of agreements between the United Kingdom and the government of what eventually became Saudi Arabia) was first formally defined in the Hadda Agreement of 1925.\nIn 1965 Jordan and Saudi Arabia concluded an agreement that realigned and delimited the boundary. Jordan gained 19 kilometers of land on the Gulf of Aqaba and 6,000 square kilometers of territory in the interior, and 7,000 square kilometers of Jordanian-administered, landlocked territory was ceded to Saudi Arabia. The new boundary enabled Jordan to expand its port facilities and established a zone in which the two parties agreed to share petroleum revenues equally if oil were discovered. The agreement also protected the pasturage and watering rights of nomadic tribes inside the exchanged territories.\nTopography.\nThe country consists mainly of a plateau between and meters high, divided into ridges by valleys and gorges, and a few mountainous areas. West of the plateau, land descents form the East Bank of the Jordan Rift Valley. The valley is part of the north-south Great Rift Valley, and its successive depressions are Lake Tiberias (Sea of Galilee; its bottom is about ), Jordan Valley, the Dead Sea (its bottom is about ), Arabah, and the Gulf of Aqaba at the Red Sea. Jordan's western border follows the bottom of the rift. Although an earthquake-prone region, no severe shocks had been recorded for several centuries.\nBy far the greatest part of the East Bank is desert, displaying the land forms and other features associated with great aridity. Most of this land is part of the Syrian Desert and northern Arabian Desert. There are broad expanses of sand and dunes, particularly in the south and southeast, together with salt flats. Occasional jumbles of sandstone hills or low mountains support only meager and stunted vegetation that thrives for a short period after the scanty winter rains. These areas support little life and are the least populated regions of Jordan.\nThe drainage network is coarse and incised. In many areas the relief provides no eventual outlet to the sea, so that sedimentary deposits accumulate in basins where moisture evaporates or is absorbed in the ground. Toward the depression in the western part of the East Bank, the desert rises gradually into the Jordanian Highlands\u2014a steppe country of high, deeply cut limestone plateaus with an average elevation of about 900 meters. Occasional summits in this region reach 1,200 meters in the northern part and exceed 1,700 meters in the southern part; the highest peak is Jabal Ramm at 1,754 meters (though the highest peak in all of Jordan is Jabal Umm al Dami at 1854 meters. It is located in a remote part of southern Jordan). These highlands are an area of long-settled villages.\nThe western edge of this plateau country forms an escarpment along the eastern side of the Jordan River-Dead Sea depression and its continuation south of the Dead Sea. Most of the wadis that provide drainage from the plateau country into the depression carry water only during the short season of winter rains. Sharply incised with deep, canyon-like walls, whether flowing or dry the wadis can be formidable obstacles to travel.\nThe Jordan River is short, but from its mountain headwaters (approximately 160 kilometers north of the river's mouth at the Dead Sea) the riverbed drops from an elevation of about 3,000 meters above sea level to more than 400 meters below sea level. Before reaching Jordanian territory the river forms the Sea of Galilee, the surface of which is 212 meters below sea level. The Jordan River's principal tributary is the Yarmouk River. Near the junction of the two rivers, the Yarmouk forms the boundary between Israel on the northwest, Syria on the northeast, and Jordan on the south. The Zarqa River, the second main tributary of the Jordan River, flows and empties entirely within the East Bank.\nA 380-kilometer-long rift valley runs from the Yarmouk River in the north to Al Aqaba in the south. The northern part, from the Yarmouk River to the Dead Sea, is commonly known as the Jordan Valley. It is divided into eastern and western parts by the Jordan River. Bordered by a steep escarpment on both the eastern and the western side, the valley reaches a maximum width of twenty-two kilometers at some points. The valley is properly known as \"Al Ghawr\" or \"Al Ghor\" (the depression, or valley).\nThe Rift Valley on the southern side of the Dead Sea is known as the Southern \"Ghawr\" and the Wadi al Jayb (popularly known as the Wadi al Arabah). The Southern Ghawr runs from Wadi al Hammah, on the south side of the Dead Sea, to Ghawr Faya, about twenty-five kilometers south of the Dead Sea. Wadi al Jayb is 180 kilometers long, from the southern shore of the Dead Sea to Al Aqaba in the south. The valley floor varies in level. In the south, it reaches its lowest level at the Dead Sea (more than 400 meters below sea level), rising in the north to just above sea level. Evaporation from the sea is extreme due to year-round high temperatures. The water contains about 250\u00a0grams of dissolved salts per liter at the surface and reaches the saturation point at 110 meters.\nThe Dead Sea occupies the deepest depression on the land surface of the earth. The depth of the depression is accentuated by the surrounding mountains and highlands that rise to elevations of 800 to 1,200 meters above sea level. The sea's greatest depth is about 430 meters, and it thus reaches a point more than 825 meters below sea level. A drop in the level of the sea has caused the former Lisan Peninsula to become a land bridge dividing the sea into separate northern and southern basins.\nClimate.\nThe major characteristic of the climate is the contrast between a relatively rainy season from November to April and very dry weather for the rest of the year. With hot, dry, uniform summers and cool, variable winters during which practically all of the precipitation occurs, the country has a Mediterranean-style climate.\nIn general, the farther inland from the Mediterranean Sea a given part of the country lies, the greater are the seasonal contrasts in temperature and the less rainfall. Atmospheric pressures during the summer months are relatively uniform, whereas the winter months bring a succession of marked low pressure areas and accompanying cold fronts. These cyclonic disturbances generally move eastward from over the Mediterranean Sea several times a month and result in sporadic precipitation.\nMost of the East Bank receives less than of rain a year and may be classified as a dry desert or steppe region. Where the ground rises to form the highlands east of the Jordan Valley, precipitation increases to around in the south and or more in the north. The Jordan Valley, lying in the lee of high ground on the West Bank, forms a narrow climatic zone that annually receives up to of rain in the northern reaches; rain dwindles to less than at the head of the Dead Sea.\nThe country's long summer reaches a peak during August. January is usually the coolest month. The fairly wide ranges of temperature during a twenty-four-hour period are greatest during the summer months and have a tendency to increase with higher elevation and distance from the Mediterranean seacoast. Daytime temperatures during the summer months frequently exceed and average about . In contrast, the winter months\u2014November to April\u2014bring moderately cool and sometimes cold weather, averaging about . Except in the rift depression, frost is fairly common during the winter, it may take the form of snow at the higher elevations of the north western highlands. Usually it snows a couple of times a year in western Amman.\nFor a month or so before and after the summer dry season, hot, dry air from the desert, drawn by low pressure, produces strong winds from the south or southeast that sometimes reach gale force. Known in the Middle East by various names, including the khamsin, this dry, sirocco-style wind is usually accompanied by great dust clouds. Its onset is heralded by a hazy sky, a falling barometer and a drop in relative humidity to about 10 percent. Within a few hours there may be a to rise in temperature. These windstorms ordinarily last a day or so, cause much discomfort, and destroy crops by desiccating them.\nThe shamal, another wind of some significance, comes from the north or northwest, generally at intervals between June and September. Remarkably steady during daytime hours but becoming a breeze at night, the shamal may blow for as long as nine days out of ten and then repeat the process. It originates as a dry continental mass of polar air that is warmed as it passes over the Eurasian landmass. The dryness allows intense heating of the Earth's surface by the sun, resulting in high daytime temperatures that moderate after sunset.\nResources and land use.\nNatural resources: phosphates, potash, oil shale\nLand use:\n* arable land: 2.41%\n* permanent crops: 0.97%\n* other: 96.62% (2012)\nIrrigated land:\n* (2004)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n* (2011)\nFreshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):\n*total: /yr (31%/4%/65%)\n*per capita: /yr (2005)\nEnvironmental concerns.\nDroughts; occasional minor earthquakes in areas close to the Jordan Rift Valley\nEnvironment \u2013 current issues:\nlimited natural fresh water resources and water stress; deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification\nEnvironment \u2013 international agreements:\n\"party to:\"\nBiodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands"}
{"id": "15717", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15717", "title": "Demographics of Jordan", "text": " \nJordan has a population of more than 11.1 million inhabitants as of 2023. Jordanians () are the citizens of Jordan. Approximately 98% of Jordanians are Arabs, many of whom are of Palestinian origin. The remaining 2% belong to ethnic minorities, including Circassians, Chechens, Assyrians, Armenians and Kurds. In early 2016 about 30% of the population were non-citizens, a figure including refugees, and legal and illegal immigrants. Jordan's annual population growth rate stands at 3.05% as of 2023, with an average birth rate of 2.8. There were 1,977,534 households in Jordan in 2015, with an average of 4.8 persons per household.\nThe official language is Arabic, while English is the second most widely spoken language by Jordanians. It is also widely used in commerce and government. In 2016, about 84% of Jordan's population live in urban towns and cities. Many Jordanians and people of Jordanian descent live across the world, mainly in the Gulf Cooperation Council Countries, United States, Canada and Turkey.\nIn 2016, Jordan was named as the largest refugee hosting country per capita in the world, followed by Turkey, Pakistan and Lebanon. Jordan hosts refugees mainly from Palestine, Syria, and Iraq, as well as smaller communities from other nations. There are also hundreds of thousands of workers from Egypt, Indonesia and South Asia, who work as domestic and construction workers.\nDefinition.\nThe territory of Jordan can be defined by the history of its creation following events after the end of World War I, the League of Nations and redrawing of the borders of the Eastern Mediterranean littoral. The ensuing decisions, most notably the Sykes\u2013Picot Agreement, which created the Mandatory Palestine. In September 1922, Transjordan was formally identified as a subdivision of the Mandate Palestine after the League of Nations approved the British Transjordan memorandum which stated that the Mandate east of the Jordan River would be excluded from all the provisions dealing with Jewish settlement west of the Jordan River.\nPopulation size and structure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\n11,200,320 \nRefugees.\nJordan is a home to 2,175,491 registered Palestinian refugees. Out of those 2,175,491 refugees, 634,182 have not been given Jordanian citizenship. Jordan also hosts around 1.4 million Syrian refugees who fled to the country due to the Syrian Civil War since 2011. About 31,163 Yemenis and 22,700 Libyan refugees live in Jordan as of January 2015. There are thousands of Lebanese refugees who came to Jordan when civil strife and war and the 2006 war broke out in their native country. Up to 1 million Iraqis came to Jordan following the Iraq War in 2003. In 2015, their number was 130,911. About 2,500 Iraqi Mandaean refugees have been resettled in Jordan.\nAge structure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Structure of the population (Census 01.X.2004) (Excluding data for former Jordanian territories under Israeli control since June 1967. Excluding foreigners, including registered Palestinian refugees.) \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Structure of the population (31.12.2013) (Estimates) (Excluding data for former Jordanian territories under Israeli control since June 1967. Excluding foreigners, including registered Palestinian refugees.) \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 30.XI.2015) (Excluding data for former Jordanian territories under Israeli control since June 1967.):\nVital statistics.\nRegistered births and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nFertility Rate (The Demographic Health Survey) \nFertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and CBR (Crude Birth Rate):\nFertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) by nationality\nAs of 2023, the total fertility rate was between 2.9-3.1 in the northern governorates of Irbid, Ajloun, Jarash, Mafraq, and Zarqa; and between 1.9-2.4 in all other governorates.\nLife expectancy.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nEthnic and religious groups.\nArab.\nArab Jordanians are either descended from families and clans who were living in the cities and towns in Transjordan prior to Jordanian independence in 1946, most notably in the governorates of Jerash, Ajlun, Balqa, Irbid, Madaba, Al Karak, Aqaba, Amman and some other towns in the country, or from the Palestinian families who settled in Jordan in different times in the 20th century, mostly during and after the wars of 1948 and 1967. Many Christians are natives especially in towns such as Fuhies, Madaba, Al Karak, Ajlun, or have Bedouin origins, and a significant number came in 1948 and 1967 mainly from Jerusalem, Jaffa, Lydda, Bethlehem, and other Palestinian cities.\nDruze.\nThe Druze people are believed to constitute about 0.5% of the total population of Jordan, around 32,000 people. The Druze, who refer to themselves as al-Muwahhideen, or \"believers in one God,\" are concentrated in the rural, mountainous areas west and north of Amman. Even though the faith originally developed out of Ismaili Islam, most Druze do not identify as Muslims, and they do not accept the five pillars of Islam.\nBedouin Arabs.\nThe other group of Jordanians is descended from Bedouins, of which less than 1% live a nomadic lifestyle. Bedouin settlements are concentrated in the south and east of the country.\nAfro-Jordanians.\nAn unknown but considerable number of Jordanians are of African descent.\nArmenians.\nThere were an estimated 5,000 Armenians living within the country in 2009. An estimated 4,500 of these are members of the Armenian Apostolic Church, and predominantly speak the Western dialect of the Armenian language. This population makes up the majority of non-Arab Christians in the country.\nAssyrians.\nThere is an Assyrian refugee population in Jordan. Many Assyrians have arrived in Jordan as refugees since the invasion of Iraq, making up a large part of the Iraqi refugees.\nTurks.\nThere are people of Turkish ancestry living in Jordan. These people have had a thriving presence in Jordan since the rule of the Ottoman Empire. Today, there is a minority of about 60,000 people in the country who are the descendants of the Ottoman-Turkish immigrants. As of 2009, there are also 8,262 Turkish citizens who are recent migrants to Jordan.\nCircassians.\nBy the end of the 19th century, the Ottoman Authorities directed the Circassian immigrants to settle in Jordan. The Circassians are Sunni Muslims and are estimated to number 100,000 to 170,000 people.\nChechens.\nThere are about 10,000 Chechens estimated to reside in Jordan.\nDoms.\nThere and 70,000 Dom people in Jordan. \nGenetics.\nBahri et al. (2011) observed that the Jordanians have a genetic profile that is Arabian Semitic, despite the succession of several civilizations in Jordan. They have a common origin in Mesopotamia and are not too genetically dissimilar from the peoples of the United Arab Emirates and North Africa, who respectively have a common origin in Arabia and North Africa.\nZanetti et al. (2014) discovered significant genetic differentiation between general Jordanians and Bedouin Arabs. General Jordanians were more similar to other Middle Eastern populations whilst Bedouin Arabs were more similar to North Africans. However, the Bedouin Arabs played a significant role in the \"peopling\" of Jordan, both in the past and present.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHealth and education.\nJordan prides itself on its health services, some of the best in the region. Qualified medics, favourable investment climate and Jordan's stability have contributed to the success of this sector.\nJordan has a very advanced education system. The school education system comprises 2 years of pre-school education, 10 years of compulsory basic education, and two years of secondary academic or vocational education, after which the students sit for the General Certificate of Secondary Education Exam (Tawjihi). Scholars may attend either private or public schools.\nAccess to higher education is open to holders of the General Secondary Education Certificate, who can then choose between private Community Colleges, public Community Colleges or universities (public and private). The credit-hour system, which entitles students to select courses according to a study plan, is implemented at universities. The number of public universities has reached (10), besides (17) universities that are private, and (51) community colleges. Numbers of universities accompanied by significant increase in number of students enrolled to study in these universities, where the number of enrolled students in both public and private universities is estimated at nearly (236) thousand; (28) thousand out of the total are from Arab or foreign nationalities.\nEndnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15718", "revid": "50651733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15718", "title": "Politics of Jordan", "text": " \nThe politics of Jordan take place in a framework of a parliamentary monarchy, whereby the Prime Minister of Jordan is head of government, and of a multi-party system. Jordan is a constitutional monarchy based on the constitution promulgated on January 8, 1952. The king exercises his power through the government he appoints which is responsible before the Parliament. In contrast to most parliamentary monarchies, the monarchy of Jordan is not ceremonial, with the King having significant influence over the affairs of the country.\nKing Abdullah II of Jordan has been sovereign since the death of his father, King Hussein, in 1999. Jafar Hassan has been prime minister since 15 September 2024.\nExecutive branch.\nThe Constitution of Jordan vests executive authority in the king and in his cabinet. The king signs and executes or vetoes all laws. The king may also suspend or dissolve parliament, and shorten or lengthen the term of session. A veto by the king may be overridden by a two-thirds vote of both houses of parliament at his discretion, most recently in November 2009. The king appoints and may dismiss all judges by decree, approves amendments to the constitution after passing by both parliaments, declares war and acts as the supreme leader of the armed forces. Cabinet decisions, court judgments, and the national currency are issued in his name. The Cabinet, led by a prime minister, was formerly appointed by the king, but following the 2011 Jordanian protests, King Abdullah agreed to a prime minister selected by and responsible to the Chamber of Deputies on matters of general policy, including the composition of cabinet. A two-thirds vote of \"no confidence\" by the Chamber can force the cabinet to resign.\nLegislative branch.\nLegislative power rests in the bicameral National Assembly. The National Assembly (\"Majlis al-Umma\") has two chambers. The Chamber of Deputies (\"Majlis al-Nuwaab\") has 138 members, elected for a four-year term in single-seat constituencies with 15 seats reserved for women by a special electoral college, nine for Christians and three for Chechens/Circassians. While the Chamber of Deputies is elected by the people, its main legislative abilities are limited to approving, rejecting, or amending legislation with little power to initiate laws. The Assembly of Senators (\"Majlis al-Aayan\") has 65 members appointed by the King for a four-year term. The Assembly of Senators is responsible to the Chamber of Deputies and can be removed by a \"vote of no confidence\".\nPolitical factions or blocs in the Jordanian parliament change with each parliamentary election and typically involve one of the following affiliations; a democratic Marxist/Socialist faction, a mainstream liberal faction, a moderate-pragmatic faction, a mainstream conservative faction, and an extreme conservative faction (such as the Islamic Action Front).\nThe Jordanian Chamber of Deputies is known for brawls between its members, including acts of violence and the use of weapons. In September 2013 Representative Talal al-Sharif tried to shoot one of his colleagues with an assault rifle while at the parliamentary premises.\nJudicial branch.\nThe judiciary is completely independent from the other two branches of the government. The constitution provides for three categories of courts\u2014civil (in this case meaning \"regular\"), religious, and special. Regular courts consist of both civil and criminal varieties at the first level\u2014First Instance or Conciliation Courts, second level\u2014Appelette or Appeals Courts, and the Cassation Court which is the highest judicial authority in the kingdom. There are two types of religious courts: Sharia courts which enforce the provisions of Islamic law and civil status, and tribunals of other religious communities officially recognized in Jordan.\nPolitical conditions.\nKing Hussein ruled Jordan from 1953 to 1999, surviving a number of challenges to his rule, drawing on the loyalty of his military, and serving as a symbol of unity and stability for both the Jordanians and Palestinian communities in Jordan. King Hussein ended martial law in 1989 and ended suspension on political parties that was initiated following the loss of the West Bank to Israel and in order to preserve the status quo in Jordan. In 1989 and 1993, Jordan held free and fair parliamentary elections. Controversial changes in the election law led Islamist parties to boycott the 1997, 2011 and 2013 elections.\nKing Abdullah II succeeded his father Hussein following the latter's death in February 1999. Abdullah moved quickly to reaffirm Jordan's peace treaty with Israel and its relations with the United States. Abdullah, during the first year in power, refocused the government's agenda on economic reform.\nJordan's continuing structural economic difficulties, burgeoning population, and more open political environment led to the emergence of a variety of political parties. Moving toward greater independence, Jordan's parliament has investigated corruption charges against several regime figures and has become the major forum in which differing political views, including those of political Islamists, are expressed.\nOn February 1, 2011, it was announced that King Abdullah had dismissed his government. This has been interpreted as a pre-emptive move in the context of the Tunisian Jasmine Revolution and unfolding events in nearby Egypt.\nDecentralization.\nKing Abdullah II and the Jordanian Government began the process of decentralization, with the Madaba governorate as the pilot project, on the regional level dividing the nation into three regions: North, Central, and South. The Greater Amman Municipality will be excluded from the plan but it will set up a similar decentralization process. Each region will have an elected council that will handle the political, social, legal, and economic affairs of its area. This decentralization process is part of Jordan's Democratization Program.\nCorruption.\nJordan ranked 47th out of 180 nations in the Corruption Perceptions Index. The Constitution of Jordan states that no member of Parliament can have any financial or business dealings with the government and no member of the royal family can be in the government. However, corruption remains a problem in Jordan despite progress. The Anti-Corruption Commission examines corruption cases and then referred to the judiciary for legal action. Corruption in Jordan takes the form of nepotism, favoritism, and bribery.\n2018 Protests.\nThe 2018 Jordanian protests started as a general strike organized by more than 30 trade unions on 30 May 2018 after the government of Hani Mulki submitted a new tax law to Parliament. The bill followed IMF-backed measures to tackle Jordan's growing public debt.\nThe day following the strike on 31 May, the government raised fuel and electricity prices responding to an increase in international oil prices, which led to more public discontent. On 1 June King Abdullah intervened and ordered the freeze of the price hikes.\nThe protests continued for four days until Mulki submitted his resignation to the King on 4 June, and Omar Razzaz, his education minister, became prime minister. Protests only ceased after Razzaz announced his intention of withdrawing the new tax bill.\nAdministrative divisions.\nAdministratively, Jordan is divided into twelve governorates (\"muhafazat\", singular\u2014\"muhafazah\"), each headed by a governor appointed by the king. They are the sole authorities for all government departments and development projects in their respective areas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational organization participation.\nABEDA, ACC, AFESD, AL, AMF, CAEU, CCC, CTBTO, EBRD, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW, OSCE (partner), PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNMOP, UNMOT, UNOMIG, UNRWA, UNTAET, UN Tourism, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, WTrO\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15719", "revid": "41902039", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15719", "title": "Economy of Jordan", "text": "The economy of Jordan is classified by the World Food Programme as an upper-middle income economy, as well as being poor in resources with limited land for agriculture. Jordan's GDP per capita rose by 351% in the 1970s, declined 30% in the 1980s, and rose 36% in the 1990s. After King Abdullah II's accession to the throne in 1999, liberal economic policies were introduced. Jordan's economy had been growing at an annual rate of 8% between 1999 and 2008. However, growth slowed to 2% after the Arab Spring in 2011. The substantial increase of the population, coupled with slowed economic growth and rising public debt, led to a worsening of poverty and unemployment in the country. As of 2023, Jordan has a GDP of US$50.85 billion, ranking it 89th worldwide.\nJordan has free trade agreements with the United States, Canada, Singapore, Malaysia, the European Union, Tunisia, Algeria, Libya, Turkey and Syria. More free trade agreements were planned with Iraq, the Palestinian Authority, the GCC, Lebanon, and Pakistan. Jordan is a member of the Greater Arab Free Trade Agreement, the Euro-Mediterranean free trade area, the Agadir Agreement, and also enjoys advanced status with the EU.\nJordan's economic resource base centers on phosphates, potash, and their fertilizer derivatives; tourism; overseas remittances; and foreign aid. These are its principal sources of hard currency earnings. Lacking coal reserves, hydroelectric power, large tracts of forest or commercially viable oil deposits, Jordan relies on natural gas for 93% of its domestic energy needs. Jordan used to depend on Iraq for oil until the American-led 2003 invasion of Iraq. Jordan also has a plethora of industrial zones producing goods in the textile, aerospace, defense, ICT, pharmaceutical, and cosmetic sectors. Jordan is an emerging knowledge economy.\nThe main obstacles to Jordan's economy are scarce water supplies, complete reliance on oil imports for energy, and regional instability. Just over 10% of its land is arable and the water supply is limited. Rainfall is low and highly variable, and much of Jordan's available ground water is not renewable.\nJordan's total foreign debt in 2011 was $19 billion, representing 60% of its GDP. In 2016, the debt reached $35.1 billion representing 93.4% of its GDP. This was attributed to regional instability, causing a decrease in tourist activity and foreign investments along with increased military expenditure. Other factors were attacks on the Egyptian pipeline supplying the Kingdom with gas, the collapse of trade with Iraq and Syria; expenses from hosting Syrian refugees and accumulated interest from loans. According to the World Bank, Syrian refugees cost Jordan more than $2.5 billion a year, amounting to 6% of the GDP and 25% of the government's annual revenue. Wage growth declined due to competition for jobs between refugees and Jordan citizens. The downturn that began in 2011 continued until 2018. The country's top five contributing sectors to GDP, government services, finance, manufacturing, transport, and tourism and hospitality were badly impacted by the Syrian civil war. Foreign aid covered only a small part of these costs, 63% of the total costs were covered by Jordan. An austerity programme was adopted by the government to reduce Jordan's debt-to-GDP ratio to 77% by 2021. The programme succeeded in preventing the debt from rising above 95% of the GDP in 2018. The yearly growth rate of the economy was 2% from 2016 to 2019, compared to 6.4% from 2000 to 2009.\nOn 15 May 2025 Jordan and the UAE activated their Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA), marking a significant step in strengthening bilateral economic ties. Signed in 2023 under the leadership of King Abdullah II and President Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed, the agreement aims to boost trade, reduce tariffs, and enhance investment across key sectors such as industry, renewable energy, and tourism. It establishes frameworks for cooperation, including a joint investment council, and targets increasing non-oil trade to over $8 billion by 2032. As the UAE's first CEPA with an Arab country, the deal underscores a shared commitment to regional integration, SME empowerment, and long-term economic partnership.\nCurrency.\nThe Central Bank of Jordan commenced operations in 1964 and is the sole issuer of Jordanian currency, the Jordanian dinar, which is pegged to the US dollar. The following chart of the trend of gross domestic product of Jordan at market prices by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Jordanian dinars.\nFor purchasing power parity comparisons, the Jordanian dinar is exchanged per US dollar at 0.710.\nJordan's population is 6,342,948 and mean wages were $4.19 per man-hour in 2009.\nEconomic overview.\nJordan is classified by the UN as an \"Upper-middle-income country.\" According to the Heritage Foundation's Index of Economic Freedom, Jordan has the fourth freest economy in the Middle East and North Africa, behind only Israel, Bahrain and Qatar, and the 32nd freest in the world. Jordan ranked as having the 35th best infrastructure in the world, according to the World Economic Forum's Index of Economic Competitiveness. The Kingdom scored higher than many of its peers in the Persian Gulf and Europe like Kuwait, Israel and Ireland. The 2010 AOF Index of Globalization ranked Jordan as the most globalized country in the Middle East and North Africa region. Jordan's banking sector is classified as \"highly developed\" by the IMF along with the GCC economies and Lebanon.\nThe official currency in Jordan is the Jordanian dinar and divides into 100 qirsh (also called piastres) or 1000 fils. Since 23 October 1995, the dinar has been officially pegged to the IMF's special drawing rights (SDRs). In practice, it is fixed at 1 US$ = 0.709 dinar, which translates to approximately 1 dinar = 1.41044 dollars. The Central Bank buys US dollars at 0.708 dinar, and sell US dollars at 0.7125 dinar, Exchangers buys US dollars at 0.708 and sell US dollars at 0.709.\nIn 2011, the Jordanian market was considered one of the most developed Arab markets outside the Persian Gulf. Jordan ranked 18th on the 2012 Global Retail Development Index which lists the 30 most attractive retail markets in the world. Jordan was ranked as the 19th most expensive country in the world to live in 2010 and the most expensive Arab country to live in.\nJordan has been a member of the World Trade Organization since 2000. In the 2009 Global Enabling Trade Report, Jordan ranked 4th in the Arab World behind the UAE, Bahrain, and Qatar. The free trade agreement with the United States that went into effect in December 2001 phased out duties on nearly all goods and services by 2010.\nUnemployment.\nJordan has high unemployment rates, 11.9% in the fourth quarter of 2010 but some estimate it to be as high as a quarter of the working-age population. Unemployment reached 25% in 2021, the highest level in more than 25 years, 6% points more than in 2019, and more than double the amount in 2011. Unemployment is a major issue, particularly for young people, women, and those with a university degree, with rates of unemployment exceeding 45%, 30%, and 30%, respectively.\nRemittances to Jordan.\nThe flows of remittance to Jordan experienced rapid growth, particularly in the late 1970s and 1980s, when Jordan started exporting high skilled labour to the Persian Gulf States. The money that migrants send home, remittances, is an important source of external funding for many developing countries, including Jordan. With about US$3000 million in remittances in 2010, Jordan was in 10th place among developing countries according to World Bank data. Jordan has ranked constantly among the top 20 remittances-recipient countries over the last decade. In addition, the Arab Monetary Fund (AMF) statistics in 2010 indicate that Jordan was the third biggest recipient of remittances among Arab countries after Egypt and Lebanon. The host countries that have absorbed most of the Jordanian expatriates are Saudi Arabia and the United Arab of Emirates (UAE), where the available recorded number of the Jordanian expatriates, working abroad, indicates that about 90% of these migrants are working in Persian Gulf countries.\nThe proportion of skilled workers in Jordan is among the highest in the region. Many of the world's major software and hardware IT companies are present in Jordan. The presence of such firms underlines Jordan's attractiveness as a stable base with high-calibre human resources from which to serve the wider region. According to a report published in January 2012 by the founder of venture capital firm Finaventures, Rachid Sefraoui, Amman is one of the top 10 best cities in the world to launch a tech start-up.\nAn estimated 13.3% of citizens live under the poverty line. Since the mid-1970s, migrants' remittances are Jordan's most important source of foreign exchange, and a decisive factor in the country's economic development and the rising standard of living of the population.\nAgriculture in Jordan constituted almost 40% of GNP in the early 1950s; on the eve of the June 1967 War, it was 17%. By the mid-1980s, agriculture's share of GNP in Jordan was only about 6%.\nJordan hosts SOFEX, the world's fastest growing and region's only special operations and homeland security exhibition and conference. Jordan is a regional and international provider of advanced military goods and services. The KADDB Industrial Park, specialized in defense manufacturing, was opened in September 2009 in Mafraq. By 2015, the park is expected to provide around 15,000 job opportunities whereas the investment volume is expected to reach JD500 million. A report by Strategic Foresight Group has calculated the opportunity cost of conflict for the Middle East from 1991 to 2010 at $12 trillion. Jordan's share in this is almost $84 billion.\nJordan has a 138% mobile phone penetration rate and a 63% internet penetration rate. 41.6% of all mobile phones in Jordan are smartphones, compared with 40% in the United States and 26% in the United Kingdom. 97% of Jordanian households own at least one television set while 90% have satellite reception. Furthermore, 61% of Jordanian households own at least one personal computer or laptop.\nAccording to an investment survey, Jordan ranked as the 9th best outsourcing destination worldwide. Amman is one of the top 10 cities in the world to launch a tech start-up in 2012 and is becoming referred to as the \"Silicon Valley of the Middle East\".\nJordan has hosted the World Economic Forum on the Middle East and North Africa six times and plans to hold it again at the Dead Sea for the seventh time in 2013. Amman also hosts the Mercedes Benz Fashion Week semiannually and is the only city in the region to hold such a prestigious event that is usually held by the likes of New York, Paris, and Milan.\nStandard of living.\nJordan is one of the most liberal countries in the Middle East allowing a debate to consider introducing a secular government. In the 2010 Human Development Index, Jordan was placed in the \"high human development\" bracket and came 7th among Arab countries, after the Persian Gulf states and Lebanon. The 2010 Quality of Life Index prepared by \"International Living\" magazine ranked Jordan second in the MENA with 55.0 points after Israel.\nDecades of political stability and security and strict law enforcement make Jordan one of the top 10 countries worldwide in security. In the 2010 Newsweek \"World's Best Countries\" list, Jordan ranked 53rd worldwide, and 3rd among Arab countries after Kuwait and the UAE. Jordan is also among the top ten countries whose citizens feel safest walking the streets at night.\nAs of 2011, 63% of working Jordanians are insured with the Social Security Corporation, as well as 120,000 foreigners, with plans to include the rest of Jordanian workers both inside and outside the kingdom as well as students, housewives, business owners, and the unemployed. Only 1.6% of Jordanians make less than $2 a day, one of the lowest in the developing world according to the Human Poverty Index.\nIn the 2010 Gallup Global Wellbeing Survey, 30% of Jordanians described their financial situation as \"thriving\", surpassed most of the Arab countries with the exception of Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia. In 2008, the Jordanian government launched the \"Decent Housing for a Decent Living\" project aimed at building 120,000 affordable housing units within the next 5 years, plus an additional 100,000 housing units if the need arises.\nMain indicators.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132024.\nIndustries.\nAgriculture, forestry, and fishing.\nDespite increases in production, the agriculture sector's share of the economy has declined steadily to just 2.4% of gross domestic product by 2004. About 4% of Jordan's labor force worked in the agricultural sector in 2002. The most profitable segment of Jordan's agriculture is fruit and vegetable production (including tomatoes, cucumbers, citrus fruit, and bananas) in the Jordan Valley. The rest of crop production, especially cereal production, remains volatile because of the lack of consistent rainfall. Fishing and forestry are negligible in terms of the overall domestic economy. The fishing industry is evenly divided between live capture and aquaculture; the live weight catch totaled just over 1,000 metric tons in 2002. The forestry industry is even smaller in economic terms; approximately 240,000 total cubic meters of roundwood were removed in 2002, the vast majority for fuelwood.\nRecent developments.\nSince gaining independence, Jordan's agricultural sector has experienced significant growth, with the added value of its production reaching JD1.691 billion and registering a 9% growth rate. Vegetable production has increased by 91%, and fruit tree produce has risen by 141%, expanding to meet both local and international demand. Jordanian agricultural products now reach 112 countries, with exports rising by 441% to JD1.5 billion. Livestock numbers have grown by 54%, totaling 3.8 million animals, and the value of animal products has increased by 279% to JD1.305 billion. Employment in the sector has grown by 38%, now encompassing 261,000 workers. The Agricultural Credit Corporation's capital has expanded by 213% to JD100 million, providing JD55 million in annual loans to 11,000 farmers. These developments underscore the sector's role in enhancing food security, economic integration, and job creation in rural areas.\nMining and minerals.\nPotash and phosphates are among the country's main economic exports. In 2003 approximately 2 million tons of potash salt production translated into US$192 million in export earnings, making it the second most lucrative exported good. Potash production totaled 1.9 million tons in 2004 and 1.8 million tons in 2005. In 2004 approximately 6.75 million tons of phosphate rock production generated US$135 million in export earnings, placing it fourth on Jordan's principal export list. With production totaling 6.4 million tons in 2005, Jordan was the world's third largest producer of raw phosphates. In addition to these two major minerals, smaller quantities of unrefined salt, copper ore, gypsum, manganese ore, and the mineral precursors to the production of ceramics (glass sand, clays, and feldspar) are also mined. As of June 2025, Jordan's Ministry of Industry announced that Jordan has enough wheat to meet local needs for the next ten months, and enough barley for the next eight months.\nIndustry and manufacturing.\nThe industrial sector, which includes mining, manufacturing, construction, and power, accounted for approximately 26% of gross domestic product in 2004 (including manufacturing 16.2%; construction 4.6%; and mining 3.1%). More than 21% of the country's labor force was reported to be employed in this sector in 2002. The main industrial products are potash, phosphates, pharmaceuticals, cement, clothes, and fertilizers. The most promising segment of this sector is construction. In the past several years, demand has increased rapidly for housing and offices of foreign enterprises based in Jordan to better access the Iraqi market. The manufacturing sector has grown as well (to nearly 20% of GDP by 2005), in large part as a result of the United States\u2013Jordan Free Trade Agreement (ratified in 2001 by the U.S. Senate); the agreement has led to the establishment of approximately 13 qualifying industrial zones throughout the country. The zones, which provide duty-free access to the U.S. market, produce mostly light industrial products, especially ready-made garments. By 2004 the zones accounted for nearly US$1.1 billion in exports, according to the Jordanian government.\nJordan's free trade agreement with the US \u2013 the first in the Arab world \u2013 has already made the US one of Jordan's most significant markets. By 2010, it would have barrier-free export access in almost all sectors. A number of trade agreements with countries in the Middle Eastern and North African regions and beyond should also reap increasing benefits, not in the least the Agadir Agreement, which is seen as a precursor to a free trade agreement with the EU. Jordan also recently signed a free trade agreement with Canada. Furthermore, Jordan's plethora of industrial zones offering tax incentives, low utility costs and improved infrastructure links are helping incubate new developments. The relatively high skills level is also a key factor in promoting investment and stimulating the economy, particularly in value-added sectors. Despite the fact that Jordan has few natural resources it does benefit from abundant reserves of potash and phosphates, which are widely used in the production of fertilisers. Exports by these industries are expected to have a combined worth of $1bn in 2008. Other important industries include pharmaceuticals, which exported around $435m in 2006 and $260m in the first half of 2008 alone, as well as textiles, which were worth $1.19bn in 2007. Although the value of Jordan's industrial sector is high, the kingdom faces a number of challenges. Because the country is dependent on importing raw materials, it is vulnerable to price volatility. Shortages in water and power also make consistent development difficult. Despite these challenges, Jordan's economic openness and long-standing fertiliser and pharmaceutical industries should continue to provide a solid source of foreign currency.\nJordan has a plethora of industrial zones and special economic zones aimed at increasing exports and making Jordan an industrial giant. The Mafraq SEZ is focused on industry and logistics hoping to become the regional logistics hub with air, road, and rail links to neighboring countries and eventually Europe and the Persian Gulf. The Ma'an SEZ is primarily industrial focusing on satisfying domestic demand and reducing reliance on imports. With a national rail system under construction, Jordan expects trade to grow significantly and Jordan will mostly become the trade hub of the Levant and even the Middle East region as a whole due to its geography and natural resources.\nTelecoms and IT.\nTelecommunications is a billion-dollar industry with estimates showing that core markets of fixed-line, mobile and data service generate annual revenue of around JD836.5m ($1.18bn) per year, which is equivalent to 13.5% of GDP. Jordan's IT sector is the most developed and competitive in the region due to the 2001 telecom liberalization. Market share of the mobile sector, the most competitive telecoms market, is currently fairly evenly divided between the three operators, with Zain, owned by MTC Kuwait, maintaining the largest share (39%), followed by France Telecom's brand Orange (36%) and Umniah (25%), which is 96% owned by Bahrain's Batelco. End of year figures for 2007 show that the market trend is towards greater parity, with Zain's share falling in the space of a year from 47% in 2006 and the other two operators picking up subscribers. The increased competition has led to pricing that is more favourable to consumers. Mobile penetration is currently around 80%.\nAmbitious subsequent national strategies were formulated already since Y 2000 as a private sector initiative directly led by his majesty the king of Jordan. Information technology association in Jordan (int@j) was established to kick off a private sector process that would focus on preparing Jordan for the new economy through IT and shall reflect the national objectives towards automation and modernization in co-operation with the ministry of information technology in Jordan the (MOICT). The latest strategy will take the sector through to 2011, aims to bring Jordan to precise objectives. The ICT sector currently accounts for over a 14% (indirect) of the kingdom's GDP. This figure includes foreign investment and total domestic revenue from the sector. Employment growth in the sector was progressive and reached up to 60.000 (indirect) by 2008. The government is working to address employment issues and education related to sector by developing ICT training and opportunities to increase the overall penetration of ICT in Jordanian society. The policy outlines a number of objectives for the country to reach within the next three years, including almost doubling the size of the sector to $3bn, and pushing internet user penetration up to 50%.\nThe early founder of Int@j and its first chairman of the board is Karim Kawar and early activists who drove the national strategic objectives and helped formulate an action plan through the developing pillars were Marwan Juma Jordan's minister of ICT, Doha Abdelkhaleq on labour and education. Humam Mufti on advocacy and Nashat Masri on Capital and finance amongst others.\nSuch an infrastructure made Jordan a suitable location for IT startups that operate in the fields of web development, mobile application development, online services, and investment in IT businesses.\nThe IT industry in Jordan in the year 2000 and beyond got a very big boost after the Gulf War of 1991. This boost came from a large influx of immigrants from the Gulf countries to Jordan, mostly from Jordanian expatriates from Kuwait, totaling few hundred thousands. This large wave impacted Jordan in many ways, and one of them was on its IT industry.\nEnergy.\nEnergy remains perhaps the biggest challenge for continued growth for Jordan's economy. Spurred by the surge in the price of oil to more than $145 a barrel at its peak, the Jordanian government has responded with an ambitious plan for the sector. The country's lack of domestic resources is being addressed via a $14bn investment programme in the sector. The programme aims to reduce reliance on imported products from the current level of 96%, with renewables meeting 10% of energy demand by 2020 and nuclear energy meeting 60% of energy needs by 2035. The government also announced in 2007 that it would scale back subsidies in several areas, including energy, where there have historically been regressive subsidies for fuel and electricity. In another new step, the government is opening up the sector to competition, and intends to offer all the planned new energy projects to international tender.\nUnlike most of its neighbors, Jordan has no significant petroleum resources of its own and is heavily dependent on oil imports to fulfill its domestic energy needs. In 2002 proved oil reserves totaled only . Jordan produced only in 2004 but consumed an estimated . According to U.S. government figures, oil imports had reached about in 2004. The Iraq invasion of 2003 disrupted Jordan's primary oil supply route from its eastern neighbor, which under Saddam Hussein had provided the kingdom with highly discounted crude oil via overland truck routes. Since late 2003, an alternative supply route by tanker through the Al Aqabah port has been established; Saudi Arabia is now Jordan's primary source of imported oil; Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) are secondary sources. Although not so heavily discounted as Iraqi crude oil, supplies from Saudi Arabia and the UAE are subsidized to some extent.\nIn the face of continued high oil costs, interest has increased in the possibility of exploiting Jordan's vast oil shale resources, which are estimated to total approximately 40\u00a0billion tons, 4\u00a0billion tons of which are believed to be recoverable. Jordan's oil shale resources could produce of oil, enabling production of about . The oil shale in Jordan has the fourth largest in the world which currently, there are several companies who are negotiating with the Jordanian government about exploiting the oil shale like Royal Dutch Shell, Petrobras and Eesti Energia.\nNatural gas is increasingly being used to fulfill the country's domestic energy needs, especially with regard to electricity generation. Jordan was estimated to have only modest natural gas reserves (about 6\u00a0billion cubic meters in 2002), but new estimates suggest a much higher total. In 2003 the country produced and consumed an estimated 390\u00a0million cubic meters of natural gas. The primary source is located in the eastern portion of the country at the Risha gas field. Until the early 2010s, the country imported the bulk of its natural gas via the Arab Gas Pipeline that stretches from the Al Arish terminal in Egypt underwater to Al Aqabah and then to northern Jordan, where it links to two major power stations. This Egypt\u2013Jordan pipeline supplied Jordan with approximately 1\u00a0billion cubic meters of natural gas per year. Gas supplies from Egypt were halted in 2013 due to insurgent activities in the Sinai and domestic gas shortages in Egypt. In light of this, a liquified natural gas terminal was built in the Port of Aqaba to facilitate gas imports. In 2017, a low-capacity gas pipeline from Israel was completed which supplies the Arab Potash factories near the Dead Sea. As of 2018, a large capacity pipeline from Israel is under construction in northern Jordan which is expected to begin operating by 2020 and will supply the kingdom with 3 BCM of gas per year, thereby satisfying most of Jordan's natural gas consumption needs.\nThe state-owned National Electric Power Company (NEPCO) produces most of Jordan's electricity (94%). Since mid-2000, privatization efforts have been undertaken to increase independent power generation facilities; a Belgian firm was set to begin operations at a new power plant near Amman with an estimated capacity of 450 megawatts. Power plants at Az Zarqa (400 megawatts) and Al Aqabah (650\u00a0MW) are Jordan's other primary electricity providers. As a whole, the country consumed nearly 8 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity in 2003 while producing only 7.5\u00a0billion kWh of electricity. Electricity production in 2004 rose to 8.7\u00a0billion kWh, but production must continue to increase in order to meet demand, which the government estimates would continue to grow by about 5% per year. About 99% of the population is reported to have access to electricity.\nTransport.\nThe transportation sector on average contributes some 10% to Jordan's GDP, with transportation and communications accounting for $2.14bn in 2007. Well aware of the sector's importance to the country's service and industry-oriented economy, in 2008 the government formulated a new national transport strategy with the aim to improve, modernise and further privatise the sector. With no imminent solution to the ongoing security crisis in Iraq in sight, prospects for the Jordanian transport sector as a whole look bright. The country will arguably remain one of the major transit points for both goods and people destined for Iraq, while the number of tourists visiting Jordan is set to continue to increase. The main events to follow in the near future are the relocation of Aqaba's main port, a national railway system, and the construction of a new terminal at QAIA. Volatility in fuel prices is almost certainly going to have negative effects on operational costs and as such may hamper the sector's average annual growth of around 6%. However, uncertain fuel prices also offer a great deal of incentive to boost private investments in alternative modes of transport such as public buses and improved trains.\nOn late June 2025 it was reported about Jordan's Transport Minister inspection of new bus routes from Irbid and Jerash to Amman. the trial was held with GPS and scheduled stops. Full service will start in July and August, with routes to Salt and Karak coming later. This is part of a five-year plan to improve public transport across the country.\nMedia and advertising.\nAlthough the state remains a major influence, Jordan's media sector has seen significant privatisation and liberalisation efforts in recent years. Based on official rack rates, research firm Ipsos estimated that the advertisement sector spent some $280m towards publicity in Jordan's media, 80% of which was spent on newspapers, followed by TV, radio and magazines. The biggest event of 2007 was the cancelled launch of ATV, the kingdom's first private broadcaster. As a result, the state-owned Jordan TV (JTV) remains the country's sole broadcaster. In recent years, Jordan has also seen a spectacular rise in the number of blogs, websites and news portals as sources of news information. The increasing diversification of Jordan's media is a good sign and should boost advertising revenues and private initiatives.\nRecording growth of 30%, 2007 turned out to be yet another outstanding year for Jordan's advertising industry. Following nearly a decade of double-digit growth, however, most publicity specialists expect to see a relative slowdown in 2008. Unlike 2007, no major campaigns were planned for the first part of 2008. Additionally, the Jordanian advertising had some catching up to do with the rest of the region in terms of average expenditure per capita. As the sector matures, it is only normal for growth figures to gradually decrease. Since 2000 total ad spend increased from $77m to $280m in 2007, an increase of 260%. The Jordanian telecoms sector was the biggest ad spender in 2007, accounting for around 20% of the market, followed by the banking and finance sector (12%), services industry (11%), real estate (8%) and the automotive sector (5%). In the next year, particularly if there is a downturn, it would become increasingly important for the sector to develop good vocational training and to begin to take advantage of new media markets.\nServices.\nServices accounted for more than 70% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2004. The sector employed nearly 75% of the labor force in 2002.\nJordan's banking system consists of 25 commercial banks, three Islamic banks, and nine foreign banks, with total assets of Jordanian dinar, JOD 57 billion (or EUR69.6 billion). Between 2010 and 2020, the sector's total assets climbed by 5% on average, led by a 7% increase in lending.\nThe banking sector is widely regarded as advanced in both regional and international terms. In 2007, total profits of the 15 listed banks rose 14.89% to JD640m ($909m). Jordan's strong growth of 6% in 2007 was reflected in a 20.57% expansion in net credit to JD17.9bn ($25.4bn) by the end of the year. The most improvement was in trade, construction and industry. Many banks suffered from the sharp correction in the Amman Stock Market in 2006, encouraging them to focus on core banking business in 2007, and this was reflected in a 16.65% rise in net interest and commission income to JD1.32bn ($1.87bn). The stock market also picked up in 2007 and total portfolio income losses decreased. Although Jordan's banking sector is small by global standards, it has attracted strong interest from regional investors in Lebanon and the GCC. New regulations introduced by the CBJ, in addition to political stability, have helped to create a favourable investment environment. Its conservative policies helped Jordan avoid the 2008 financial crisis, Jordanian banks was one of the only countries that posted a profit in 2009.\nBanking sector profitability was momentarily impacted (in 2020) by the COVID-19-induced economic downturn, but it already recovered to pre-COVID-19 levels in 2021. The Jordanian banking sector's non-performing loan (NPL) ratio remained at 5.5% during the COVID-19 pandemic. According to a survey conducted in 2021, the pandemic's impact on credit supply in Jordan has been quite limited, with two-thirds of the banks surveyed indicating a constant or growing availability of loans. 50% of banks also reported an increase to loan supply for SMEs. For corporates, the increase was 25%.\n90% of Banks believed that the pandemic will also affect the digitization of internal processes. 81% believed that banks' daily operations will be impacted and 90% believed that banks' online offerings will be improved.\nContributing an estimated JD477.5m ($678.05m), or 4.25% of Jordan's GDP, according to figures from the Central Bank, the construction sector performed strongly in 2007. The Great Amman Municipality (GAM) completed its master plan for the capital, which is expected to grow from 700\u00a0km2 today to 1700\u00a0km2 by 2025. Amman is changing from a predominantly horizontal to a largely vertical city due to various clusters of high-rises. Significant developments outside Amman include the rapid residential build-up of Zarqa, the transformation of Aqaba into a commercial and tourist centre, and the construction of a series of high-end hotels and tourist resorts along the Dead Sea. A new airport terminal, Amman ring road and a light rail between the capital and Zarqa are being constructed.\nDespite recording a relative slowdown compared to the expansion of recent years, Jordan's construction and real estate market continued to grow in 2007. Trading totaled JD5.6bn ($8bn), up from JD5.2bn ($7.4bn) in 2006, according to Jordan's Land and Survey Department. Although the years of astounding growth\u2014some 75% in 2004 and 48% in 2005\u2014seem to have passed, the future looks bright for real estate, as demand continues to outstrip supply, while Jordan remains a very attractive investment destination for foreign businesses, second-home buyers and Jordanians working abroad. With Jordan's continuing sharp population growth, as well as its strategic location at the heart of the Middle East, the kingdom's main market drivers indicate a bright future for years to come. Although a number of class-A office space developments are currently under construction, it would take a few years to close the gap between demand and supply. The Amman retail market may become more saturated in the short term. Consequently, developers may turn to other cities to build supermarkets and malls.\nJordan's insurance market, with 29 companies operating in a country of just 5.7 million people, is saturated, despite regulatory encouragements for mergers and acquisitions. In terms of market share based on premiums, motor coverage accounts for 42.4%, medical insurance 18.6%, fire and property damage 17%, life 9.8%, marine and transport 7.9% and other insurance the remaining 4.3%. The insurance sector made up 2.52% of GDP in 2006, up from 2.43% in 2005. Current plans call for increasing the sector's GDP contribution to 7% in the short term and 10% in the long term. The sector holds great potential but remains underdeveloped. Region-wide price increases and a lack of consumer understanding of products are two major challenges. In addition, cultural considerations, including religion, make improving market penetration difficult. The cost of living has also risen, and the IMF forecasts that the inflation rate would reach 9% in 2008. Salaries have remained unchanged, however, leaving consumers with less disposable income. Other than mandatory motor coverage, insurance products are considered a luxury by average Jordanians, who must often prioritise spending. There would likely only be a few changes to the market in the coming year. Members of the sector would like to see greater coordination among the regulators and those working for the kingdom's legal system in order to improve insurance laws.\nTourism.\nThe state of the tourism sector is widely regarded as below potential, especially given the country's rich history, ancient ruins, Mediterranean climate, and diverse geography. Despite personal appeals by the king and an increasingly sophisticated marketing campaign, the industry is still adversely affected by the political instability of the region. More than 5 million visitors entered Jordan in 2004, generating US$1.3 billion in earnings. Earnings from tourism rose to US$1.4 billion in 2005. The fact that the bulk of Jordan's tourist trade emanates from elsewhere in the Middle East should contribute to the industry's growth potential in the years ahead, as Jordan is relatively stable, open, and safe in comparison to many of its neighbors. The tourism sector remains an important element of the Jordanian economy, directly employing some 30,000 Jordanians and contributing 10% to the kingdom's GDP. Despite a decline in Arab and Gulf visitors, 2007 marked a year of steady growth for the tourism sector. Revenues jumped 13% to nearly $2.11bn during the first 11 months, up from $1.86bn for the same period in 2006. The sector is overseen by the government's National Tourism Strategy (NTS), which was established in 2004 to take the industry through 2010. NTS aimed to double tourism revenues during the period and to increase tourism-related jobs to 91,719. The first goal has already been met but the second one might be more of a challenge: between 2004 and 2007 the total number of people employed in the sector rose from 23,544 to 35,484. This is impressive growth, but less than half the 90,000-or-more goal. NTS hopes to place Jordan as a boutique destination for high-end tourists. The strategy identifies seven priorities or niche markets: cultural heritage (archaeology); religion; ecotourism; health and wellness; adventure; meetings, incentives, conventions and exhibitions (MICE); and cruises. The Jordan Tourism Board's (JTB) marketing budget has increased in the past year from JD6m ($8.52m) to JD11.5m ($16.3m). These are positive times for tourism in Jordan, with steady growth and major projects in the pipeline. The sector has to make improvements in infrastructure and marketing, but overall the industry has been improving for the past several years.\nJordan's real GDP fell by 1.6% in 2020, with a dramatic reduction in tourism\u2014a crucial economic sector\u2014being one of the primary transmission routes of the crisis. Tourism provides for about 40% of Jordan's export receipts and 10\u201315% of GDP, with 3.8 million international tourists every year. The sector's GDP share fell to 3% in 2020, and the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to be slow.\nExternal trade.\nSince 1995, economic growth has been low. Real GDP has grown at only about 1.5% annually, while the official unemployment has hovered at 14% (unofficial estimates are double this number). The budget deficit and public debt have remained high and continue to widen, yet during this period inflation has remained low due mainly to stable monetary policy and the continued peg to the United States Dollar. Exports of manufactured goods have risen at an annual rate of 9%. Monetary stability has been reinforced, even when tensions were renewed in the region during 1998, and during the illness and ultimate death of King Hussein in 1999.\nExpectations of increased trade and tourism as a consequence of Jordan's peace treaty with Israel have been disappointing. Security-related restrictions to trade with the West Bank and the Gaza Strip have led to a substantial decline in Jordan's exports there. Following his ascension, King Abdullah improved relations with Arabic states of the Persian Gulf and Syria, but this brought few real economic benefits. Most recently the Jordanians have focused on WTO membership and a Free Trade Agreement with the U.S. as means to encourage export-led growth.\nInvestment.\nThe stock market capitalisation of listed companies in Jordan was valued at $37.639 billion in 2005 by the World Bank.\nSalaries.\nAccording to the 2015 Middle East and North Africa Salary Survey conducted by Bayt.com, Respondents from GCC (49%) seem somewhat happier with the raise they received in 2014, as compared to respondents from Levant (42%):\nAqaba Special Economic Zone.\nThe population of Aqaba is only 100,000 people and is set to double over the next 10 years. The town benefits from some natural advantages. Located at the southern tip of the country, between Saudi Arabia and Israel on the shores of the Red Sea, the city is close to the Suez Canal, with easy access to key trade centres in both the Middle East and Africa. Aqaba is also the kingdom's only deep-water port town, taking up most of Jordan's scant of coastline. The Aqaba Special Economic Zone (ASEZ) has been responsible for most of this development since it opened in 2001.\nIt covers 375\u00a0km2 and offers tax and tariff incentives, as well as full repatriation rights and more flexible operating regulations. There is a 5% flat tax on most economic activities, no tariffs on imported goods, no currency restrictions and no property taxes for corporate land. Additionally \u2013 and somewhat controversially, given Jordan's past issues with unemployment \u2013 companies based in ASEZ are allowed to employ up to 70% foreign workers in their operations. Jordan's investment profile has been growing nationally, but according to the Jordan Investment Board (JIB), the ASEZ has exceeded investment targets by 33%. By 2006 it had already brought in around $8bn in investment, some $2bn more than the original target of $6bn by 2020. ASEZ expects to attract a further $12bn spread across a number of sectors, including tourism, finance and industry. The Development Law of 2008 set in place a universal framework for special development areas based on the Aqaba model.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
