{"id": "16873", "revid": "44415278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16873", "title": "Kimono", "text": "Traditional Japanese garment\nThe is a traditional Japanese garment and the national dress of Japan. The kimono is a wrapped-front garment with square sleeves and a rectangular body, and is worn left side wrapped over right, unless the wearer is deceased. The kimono is traditionally worn with a broad sash, called an , and is commonly worn with accessories such as z\u014dri sandals and socks.\nKimonos have a set method of construction and are typically made from a long, narrow bolt of cloth known as a , though Western-style fabric bolts are also sometimes used. There are different types of kimono for men, women, and children, varying based on the occasion, the season, the wearer's age, and \u2013 less commonly in the modern day \u2013 the wearer's marital status. Despite the kimono's reputation as a formal and difficult-to-wear garment, there are types of kimono suitable for both formal and informal occasions. The way a person wears their kimono is known as .\nThe history of the kimono can be tracked back to the Heian period (794\u20131185), when Japan's nobility embraced a distinctive style of clothing. Formerly the most common Japanese garment, the kimono has fallen out of favour and is rarely worn as everyday dress now. They are most often seen at summer festivals, where people frequently wear the , the most informal type of kimono. More formal types are worn to funerals, weddings, graduations, and other formal events. Geisha and are required to wear a kimono as part of their profession, and (sumo wrestlers) must wear kimonos at all times in public. Despite the small number of people who wear it regularly and its reputation as a complicated garment, the kimono has experienced revivals in previous decades, and is still worn today as fashionable clothing in Japan.\nHistory.\nBrief history.\nBefore the Kofun period, reliable sources are scarce, so judgments are mainly based on the shapes of excavated artifacts such as haniwa. From these, we can already see garments of the kosode type, such as tsutsusode and tari-eri, as well as clothing considered to be prototypes of hakama.\nThe Nara period is considered a time when the upper classes were strongly influenced by China's Tang dynasty, and many garments show the influence of Tang Hanfu. In addition, under the clothing regulations of the court, formal dress, court dress, and uniforms were prescribed. Meanwhile, the commoner classes wore simple and practical clothing, continuing to use ancient styles of upper garments and hakama even after this period.\n&lt;gallery mode=packed heights=thumb&gt;\nFile:Takamat1.jpg \nIn the early Heian period, the missions to Tang China were abolished and the Tang dynasty fell; from the mid to late Heian period onward, the so-called \u201cnational style culture\u201d flourished. Among the upper classes, new garments such as the j\u016bnihitoe and sokutai were created. These often consisted of wearing hakama on the lower body and layering multiple garments on the upper body in luxurious fashion. Within this aristocratic class, the kosode was worn simply as an undergarment for the upper body. On the other hand, among the common classes in the Heian and Kamakura periods, the kosode was everyday wear, combined with hakama or worn in a simplified upper garment-and-hakama style. Among the commoners, kosode were further simplified, often worn alone with only a waist sash. This is called kosode no kinagashi (wearing a kosode flowing). During this time, sleeves changed from cylindrical (tsutsusode) to narrow-cuffed (tsumesode). Examples include some women in the late Heian scroll painting Ban Dainagon Ekotoba and the women farming rice in \u014cyamadera Engi. For the working classes, hakama could be a hindrance. Nevertheless, the kosode eventually became the foundation of the modern kimono.\nFrom the latter half of the Kamakura period and into the Muromachi period, the weakening of the court nobility reached its peak. Moreover, as the samurai originally a military class close to commoners rose into the upper classes, the formerly extravagant upper garments disappeared. The kosode, which had been worn as the innermost garment, came to the forefront, merging with the kosode of the common people. Thus, in the Muromachi period, the simplest kosode, the prototype of the modern kimono, was born. The combination of kosode and hakama, called kosode-bakama, was treated as semi-formal attire in this period, later becoming formal wear. For example, the modern men's formal attire haori-hakama consists of kosode and hakama with a haori coat over them. Eventually, even the upper classes dispensed with hakama, and the kosode worn flowing (kinagashi) became common informal wear regardless of class.\nEntering the Edo period, with the peace of the time, women's kosode became more ornate, with greater variety of patterns and changes in shape according to demand. Sleeve length increased, and the obi grew longer and wider. To prevent the garment from loosening, the obijime cord originally used in Kabuki was adopted, leading to the modern furisode. During the Genroku era, kosode featured large sleeve pouches and flashy, innovative designs, while the hem was often worn long and trailing, with more relaxed dressing. Through these developments, the kosode evolved into what we recognize today as the modern kimono.\nYamato period to Nara period (300\u2013794).\nThe first instances of kimono-like garments in Japan were traditional Chinese clothing introduced to Japan via Chinese envoys in the Kofun period (300\u2013538 CE; the first part of the Yamato period), through immigration between the two countries and envoys to the Tang dynasty court leading to Chinese styles of dress, appearance, and culture becoming extremely popular in Japanese court society. The Imperial Japanese court quickly adopted Chinese styles of dress and clothing, with evidence of the oldest samples of tie-dyed fabric stored at the Sh\u014ds\u014din Temple being of Chinese origin, due to the limitations of Japan's ability to produce the fabrics at the time. As early as the 4th century CE, images of priestess-queens and tribal chiefs in Japan depicted figures wearing clothing similar to that of Han dynasty China.\nIn 718 CE, the \"Yoro\" clothing code was instituted, which stipulated that all robes had to be overlapped at the front with a left-to-right closure, following typical Chinese fashions. This convention of wear is still followed today, with a right-to-left closure worn only by the deceased.\nClothing used by the upper classes was significantly simpler to don and wear than dress from the following Heian period. Sleeves, while narrow, were long enough to cover the fingers, since status was associated with covering more of the body.\nHeian period to Azuchi\u2013Momoyama period (794\u20131600).\nDuring the Heian period (794\u20131193 CE), Japan stopped sending envoys to the Chinese dynastic courts. This prevented Chinese-imported goods\u2014including clothing\u2014from entering the Imperial Palace. This also prevented dissemination to the upper classes, who were the main arbiters of traditional Japanese culture at the time, and the only people allowed to wear such clothing. The ensuing cultural vacuum facilitated the development of a Japanese culture independent from Chinese fashions. Elements previously lifted from the Tang Dynastic courts developed independently into what is known literally as \"national culture\" or . The term is used to refer to Heian-period Japanese culture, particularly that of the upper classes.\nWomen's clothing in the imperial palace became increasingly stylised in the formal , with some elements being abandoned by both male and female courtiers, such as the round-necked and tube-sleeved jacket worn by both genders in the early 7th century. Others, such as the wrapped front robes also worn by men and women, were kept. Some elements, such as the skirt worn by women, continued to in a reduced capacity, worn only to formal occasions; the grew too narrow to wrap all the way around and became a trapezoidal pleated train. Hakama (trousers) became longer than the legs and also trailed behind the wearer.\nDuring the later Heian period, various clothing edicts reduced the number of layers a woman could wear, leading to the (lit.\u2009'small sleeve') garment\u2014previously considered underwear\u2014becoming outerwear by the time of the Muromachi period (1336\u20131573 CE). Originally worn with , the began to be held closed with a small belt known as an instead. The resembled a modern kimono, though at this time the sleeves were sewn shut at the back and were smaller in width (shoulder seam to cuff) than the body of the garment. During the Sengoku period (1467\u20131615) and the Azuchi\u2013Momoyama period (1568\u20131600), the decoration of the developed further, with bolder designs and flashy colours becoming popular. By this time, separate lower-body garments, such as the and , were almost never worn, allowing full-length patterns to be seen.\n&lt;gallery mode=packed heights=thumb&gt;\nFile:Genji emaki TAKEKAWA.jpg \nAmong the aristocratic class, which had been influenced by continental clothing, the abolition of the Kent\u014dshi missions to Tang China in the early Heian period, along with the subsequent development of national style culture, led to a gradual departure from Chinese models. New garments such as the j\u016bnihitoe and sokutai were created, forming what is known as Heian period clothing. Some of these garments, particularly those of the aristocracy, are still worn today in Imperial ceremonies.\nThe clothing of commoners in the early and middle Heian periods is not well understood, but depictions appear in the Ban Dainagon Ekotoba, believed to have been produced in the late Heian period. Many men are shown wearing suikan, with hakama reaching below the knees. Women are shown wearing wide-sleeved garments or kosode in a flowing style, and some are depicted with a waist cloth wrapped around the body.\nKamakura and Muromachi periods.\nThe suikan worn by commoners became the basis for the creation of the hitatare. In the Kamakura period, the hitatare became the formal ceremonial attire of the samurai class. Entering the Muromachi period, the hitatare became the first-rank formal attire of the warrior class.\nThe d\u014dmon (daimon) and su\u014d appeared during this time.\nWomen's clothing also became increasingly simplified. The mo gradually shortened, transforming into hakama, and eventually disappeared. After this, women wore a waist wrap or a y\u016bmaki over a kosode. The uchikake, a long kosode draped over another kosode, was also developed.\nEdo period (1603\u20131867).\nDuring the Edo period (1603\u20131867 CE), both Japan's culture and economy developed significantly. A particular factor in the development of the Edo period was the early Genroku period (1688\u20131704 CE), wherein \"Genroku culture\" \u2013 luxurious displays of wealth and increased patronage of the arts \u2013 led to the further development of many art forms, including those of clothing. Genroku culture was led by the growing and increasingly-powerful merchant classes (), whose clothing was representative of their increasing economic power and rivalled the aristocracy and samurai classes, shown by their brightly coloured kimono that utilised expensive production techniques, such as hand-painted dyework. , a damask fabric, also became the preferred material for kimono at this time, replacing the previously popular plain-weave silk, which had been used to create .\nIn the Edo period, clothing was further simplified, and the kamishimo, consisting of a kataginu (shoulder garment) and hakama, was used. The kosode became extremely popular as part of commoner culture. With the rise of theater such as kabuki, and the depiction of actors\u2019 clothing in nishiki-e and ukiyo-e, the dress of commoners grew even more dazzling and extravagant. In response, the Tokugawa shogunate attempted to regulate clothing repeatedly through sumptuary laws based on Confucian values. However, the passion of the common people for clothing did not subside. Influenced also by the aesthetics of tea ceremony, they came to prefer garments that appeared plain but were in fact very costly.\nThe tying of sashes and the development of decorative cords advanced, and the custom of tying the obi at the back became established.\nIn the late Ming dynasty, the Chinese scholar Zhu Shunshui fled to Japan. At the request of Tokugawa Mitsukuni, he illustrated and taught the forms of court dress, kakuobi, field clothing, Taoist robes, Ming-style caps, gauze hats, and futou headgear. Tokugawa Mitsukuni called himself \u201ca disciple of Zhu Shunshui.\u201d In the works \u201cReigi Ruiten Zue\u201d and \u201cDainihonshi \u2013 Raku-gaku-shi,\u201d Mitsukuni researched in detail the clothing systems of the Nara period, as well as the attire of the Tenshi (Emperor), Empress, Imperial Princes, and military officials, compiling them into a codified system of ceremonial dress that continues to influence modern Japan.\nIn Kyoto, Nishijin weaving learned advanced techniques such as kinran (gold brocade), nishiki (brocade), kara-ori, donsu (damask), monsha, chirimen (crepe), and embroidery from Ming dynasty weavers who settled at Osaka port. The kara-ori of Nishijin was significantly improved. The Nomoto family of Nishijin wove five-colored threads imitating Shu brocade, producing floral, avian, and other elaborate designs, while Jigakush\u014dgy\u014d developed a refined form of kara-ori. Kyoto's Nishijin weaving remains the center of kara-ori production to this day.\nIn response to the increasing material wealth of the merchant classes, the Tokugawa shogunate issued sumptuary laws on kimono for the lower classes, prohibiting the use of purple or red fabric, gold embroidery, and the use of intricately dyed patterns. As a result, a school of aesthetic thought known as \"Iki\" developed. They valued and prioritised the display of wealth through an almost mundane appearance, and the concept of kimono design and wear continues to this day as a major influence.\nFrom this point onwards, the basic shape of both men's and women's kimonos remained largely unchanged. The sleeves of the began to grow in length, especially amongst unmarried women, and the became much longer and wider, with various styles of knots coming into fashion, alongside stiffer weaves of material to support them.\nIn the Edo period, the kimono market was divided into craftspeople, who made the and accessories, , or wholesalers, and retailers.129\nLate Edo period.\nDue to the policy of national isolation, silk was no longer imported from abroad, so most of the silk used in Japan became domestically produced. Although some commoners in the Edo period wore relatively inexpensive crepe silk, the Tenmei famine from around 1783 to 1788 led the shogunate, in 1785, to prohibit commoners from wearing silk products. Commoners instead wore clothing made of cotton or hemp. Peddlers selling fabric scraps often visited the downtown areas, and commoners would carefully repair and reuse their garments with the purchased scraps. The inr\u014d, originally a men's accessory worn with kimono, became increasingly valued for its aesthetic qualities in the late Edo period and began to be collected as art objects.\nWomen's clothing, influenced by the fashion for long sleeves (tamoto), developed into the furisode, which became a bridal garment.\nIn 1864, on the occasion of the Kinmon incident, the Edo shogunate raised troops to subjugate the Ch\u014dsh\u016b Domain, and it was decided that their military uniform would be made in the Western style. A merchant from Kodenmacho, Morita Jihee, took on the production of 2,000 uniforms. Although it required trial and error, he succeeded in making them. This is said to be the first recorded instance of mass production of Western clothing in Japan.\nModern period.\nMeiji period (1868\u20131912).\n&lt;gallery mode=packed heights=thumb&gt;\nFile:Ootuki family 1874.jpg \nIn 1869, the social class system was abolished, and with them, class-specific sumptuary laws.113 Kimonos with formerly-restricted elements, such as red and purple colours, became popular,147 particularly with the advent of synthetic dyes such as mauvine.\nFollowing the opening of Japan's borders in the early Meiji period to Western trade, new materials and techniques \u2013 such as wool and the use of synthetic dyestuffs \u2013 became popular, with casual wool kimonos being relatively common in pre-1960s Japan; the use of safflower dye () for silk linings fabrics (known as ; literally, \"red silk\") was also common in pre-1960s Japan, making kimonos from this era easily identifiable.\nDuring the Meiji period, the opening of Japan to Western trade after the enclosure of the Edo period led to a drive towards Western dress as a sign of modernity. In 1871, Western clothing was adopted by both policemen and mailmen. After an edict by Emperor Meiji in the same year, the court, courtiers and bureaucrats moved to wearing Western clothing within their job roles, with the adoption of Western clothing by men in Japan happening at a much greater pace than by women. Following the trend of other positions, 1872 saw railway workers transitioning to Western clothing. It was not until 1877 until an edict similar to the one given by Emperor Meiji, was put in place by Empress Haruko for women. Initiatives such as the promoted Western dress as everyday clothing.\nTaish\u014d period (1912\u20131926).\nWestern clothing quickly became standard issue as army uniform for men and school uniform for boys, and between 1920 and 1930, the sailor outfit replaced the kimono and undivided as school uniform for girls.140 However, kimono still remained popular as an item of everyday fashion; following the Great Kant\u014d Earthquake of 1923, cheap, informal and ready-to-wear kimono, woven from raw and waste silk threads unsuitable for other uses, became highly popular, following the loss of many people's possessions. By 1930, ready-to-wear kimono had become highly popular for their bright, seasonally changing designs, many of which took inspiration from the Art Deco movement. kimonos were usually dyed using the ikat () technique of dyeing, where either warp or both warp and weft threads (known as ) were dyed using a stencil pattern before weaving.\nIt was during the Taish\u014d period that the modern formalisation of kimono and kimono types began to emerge. The Meiji period had seen the slow introduction of kimono types that mediated between the informal and the most formal, a trend that continued throughout the Taish\u014d period, as social occasions and opportunities for leisure increased under the abolition of class distinctions. As Western clothing increased in popularity for men as everyday clothing, the kimono industry further established its own traditions of formal and informal dress for women; this saw the invention of the , divisions of (short-sleeved) kimono for women, and .133-134 The bridal kimono trousseau (), an uncommon practice of the upper classes in the Edo period, also became common throughout the middle classes;67, 76 traditions of kimono bridalwear for marriage ceremonies were also codified in this time, which resembled the bridalwear of samurai-class women.82, 93, 146 Standards of at this time began to slowly graduate to a more formalised, neatened appearance, with a flat, uniform and a smooth, uncreased , which also resembled the \"proper\" of upper-class women. However, standards were still relatively informal, and would not become formalised until after World War II.\nSh\u014dwa period (1926\u20131989).\nWhile kimonos were no longer common wear for men, they remained everyday wear for Japanese women until World War II (1940\u20131945).17 Though the Taish\u014d period had seen a number of invented traditions, standards of (dressing) were still not as formalised in this time, with creases, uneven and crooked still deemed acceptable.44-45\nDuring the war, kimono factories shut down, and the government encouraged people to wear (also romanised as ) \u2013 trousers constructed from old kimono \u2013 instead.131 Fibres such as rayon became widespread during WWII, being inexpensive to produce and cheap to buy, and typically featured printed designs. Cloth rationing persisted until 1951, so most kimonos were made at home from repurposed fabrics.131\nIn the second half of the 20th century, the Japanese economy boomed,36 and silk became cheaper, making it possible for the average family to afford silk kimono.76 The kimono retail industry had developed an elaborate codification of rules for kimono-wearing, with types of kimono, levels of formality, and rules on seasonality, which intensified after the war; there had previously been rules about kimono-wearing, but these were not rigidly codified and varied by region and class.36 Formalisation sought perfection, with no creases or unevenness in the kimono, and an increasingly tubular figure was promoted as the ideal for women in kimono.44-45 The kimono-retail industry promoted a sharp distinction between Japanese and Western clothes;54 for instance, wearing Western shoes with Japanese clothing (while common in the Taish\u014d period) was codified as improper;16 these rules on proper dressing are often described in Japanese using the English phrase \"Time, Place, and Occasion\" (TPO). As neither Japanese men or women commonly wore kimono, having grown up under wartime auspices, commercial schools were set up to teach women how to don kimono.44 Men in this period rarely wore kimono, and menswear thus escaped most of the formalisation.36, 133).\nKimonos were promoted as essential for ceremonial occasions;76, 135 for instance, the expensive worn by young women for was deemed a necessity.60 Bridal trousseaus containing tens of kimono of every possible subtype were promoted as \"de rigueur\", and parents felt obliged to provide76 kimono trousseaus that cost up to 10 million yen (~\u00a370,000),262 which were displayed and inspected publicly as part of the wedding, including being transported in transparent trucks.81\nBy the 1970s, formal kimonos formed the vast majority of kimono sales.132 Kimono retailers, due to the pricing structure of brand new kimono, had developed a relative monopoly on not only prices but a perception of kimono knowledge, allowing them to dictate prices and promote more formal (and expensive) purchases, as selling a single formal kimono could support the seller comfortably for three months. The kimono industry peaked in 1975, with total sales of 2.8 trillion yen (~\u00a318 billion). The sale of informal brand new kimono was largely neglected.135, 136\nHeisei period (1989\u20132019).\nThe economic collapse of the 1990s bankrupted much of the kimono industry129 and ended a number of expensive practices.98 The rules for how to wear kimonos lost their previous hold over the industry,36 and formerly-expensive traditions such as bridal kimono trousseaus generally disappeared, and when still given, were much less extensive.98 It was during this time that it became acceptable and even preferred for women to wear Western dress to ceremonial occasions like weddings and funerals. Many women had dozens or even hundreds of kimonos, mostly unworn, in their homes; a secondhand kimono, even if unworn, would sell for about 500 yen (less than \u00a33.50;98 about US$5), a few per cent of the bought-new price. In the 1990s and early 2000s, many secondhand kimono shops opened as a result of this.98\nIn the early years of the 21st century, the cheaper and simpler became popular with young people.37 Around 2010, men began wearing kimonos again in situations other than their own wedding,36, 159 and kimonos were again promoted and worn as everyday dress by a small minority.\nReiwa period (2019\u2013present).\nToday, the majority of people in Japan wear Western clothing as everyday attire, and are most likely to wear kimonos either to formal occasions such as wedding ceremonies and funerals, or to summer events, where the standard kimono is the easy-to-wear, single-layer cotton .\nIn 2019, the mayor of Kyoto announced that his staff were working to register \"Kimono Culture\" on UNESCO's intangible cultural heritage list.\nIn 2020, the Victoria and Albert museum staged an exhibition called \"Kimono: Kyoto to Catwalk\", a \"collection of around 300 garments, accessories, paintings, prints, photographs and film clips\" relating to the history of the Kimono from the 17th century to the present. The final instalment of the exhibition's four-year international tour was at the V&amp;A Dundee in 2024.\nTextiles.\nBoth kimono and are made from a wide variety of fibre types, including hemp, linen, silk, Japanese cr\u00eape (known as ), and figured damask weaves (). Fabrics are typically \u2013 for both and kimono \u2013 woven as (bolts of narrow width), save for certain types of (such as the ), woven to double-width. Formal kimonos are almost always made from silk, with thicker, heavier, stiff or matte fabrics generally being considered informal.\nModern kimonos are widely available in fabrics considered easier to care for, such as polyester. Kimono linings are typically silk or imitation silk, and often match the top fabric in fibre type, though the lining of some casual silk kimono may be cotton, wool or linen.\nKimono motifs.\nKimono fabrics are often decorated, sometimes by hand, before construction. Customarily, kimono with woven patterns are considered more informal, though for , the reverse is true, with featuring dyed patterns being less formal than with woven patterns. Though kimono fabrics with woven patterns are typically not especially heavy and can be lightweight, fabrics with woven patterns are often very heavy, with many formal being made from thickly-woven brocade. Traditionally, woven kimonos are paired with that are decorated with dyed patterns, and vice versa. However, for all but the most formal kimono, this is more of a general suggestion than a strict rule. Formal kimonos are typically decorated with dyed patterns, commonly found along the hemline. These patterns may feature embroidery in parts, couched gold and silver thread, and/or gold and silver foil. The layout of motifs can denote a kimono's age, with patterns that mirror along the vertical back seam () being typical for kimono made before the 1930s.\nMany kimono motifs are seasonal, and denote the season in which the kimono can be worn; however, some motifs have no season and can be worn all-year round. Others, such as the combination of pine, plum and bamboo \u2013 a grouping referred to as the Three Friends of Winter \u2013 are auspicious, and thus worn to formal occasions for the entire year. Motifs seen on are commonly seasonal motifs worn out of season, either to denote the spring just passed or the desire for cooler autumn or winter temperatures. Colour also contributes to the seasonality of the kimono, with some seasons \u2013 such as autumn \u2013 generally favouring warmer, darker colours over lighter, cooler ones.\nA number of different guides on seasonal kimono motifs exist, with some guides \u2013 such as those for tea ceremony in particular \u2013 being especially stringent on their reflection of the seasons. Motifs typically represent the flora, fauna, landscape or culture of Japan; one such example is cherry blossoms, a famously seasonal motif worn in spring until just before the actual cherry blossoms begin to bloom, it being considered unlucky to try and 'compete' with the cherries. Motifs are typically worn a few weeks before the official 'start' of any given season, as it is considered fashionable to anticipate the coming season.\nThough men's kimonos historically displayed just as much decoration and variety as women's, in the modern era, the principal distinction of men's kimonos in terms of seasonality and occasion is the fabric. The typical men's kimono is a subdued, dark colour; black, dark blues, greens and browns are common. Fabrics are usually matte, in contrast to the occasional satin weaves of some women's kimonos. Some men's kimonos have a subtle pattern, and textured fabrics are more common in informal men's kimono. Informal men's styles may also feature slightly brighter colours, such as lighter purples, greens and blues. Sumo wrestlers have occasionally been known to wear quite bright colours, such as fuchsia, in their kimonos, which they are required to wear when appearing in public.\nTerms.\nThe fabrics that kimonos are made from are classified in two categories within Japan. is the term used to indicate silk kimono fabrics, composed of the characters , referring to the State of Wu in ancient China where silk weaving technology developed, and .115\nThe term is used to refer to kimonos in general within Japan, particularly within the context of the kimono industry, as traditional kimono shops are called either or \u2013 with the additional character of meaning 'shop'.\nCotton and hemp fabrics are referred to generally as , meaning \"thick materials\", with both cotton and hemp yarns being considerably thicker than silk yarns used for weaving. Cotton kimonos are specifically referred to in the context of materials as , \"cotton clothes\", whereas hemp kimonos are known as , \"hemp clothes\", in Japanese, with the character for hemp \u2013 \u2013 also being used widely for hemp, linen and ramie kimono fabrics.\nMerchants' terms.\nUntil the end of the Edo period, the tailoring of both and fabrics was separated, with silk kimonos handled at shops known as , and kimonos of other fibres sold at shops known as . Stores that handled all types of fabric were known as , though after the Meiji period, stores only retailing kimonos became less profitable in the face of cheaper everyday Western clothing, and eventually went out of business, leaving only stores to sell kimonos \u2013 leading to kimono shops becoming known only as today.\nReuse.\nKimonos can readily be resized, or unpicked back into (bolt) lengths.131, 147\nOutside of being re-woven into new fabrics, worn-out kimono have historically been recycled in a variety of ways, depending on the type of kimono and its original use.131 When the cloth is worn out, it may be used as fabric for smaller items or to create (patchwork) kimonos (which were also sometimes made for the sake of fashion). The fact that the pattern pieces of a kimono consist of rectangles, and not complex shapes, make reuse in garments or other items easier. are used to hold cloth together and decorate it. The cloth used for patchwork clothing must all be of similar weight, drape, and handle.\nFormal kimonos, made of expensive and thin silk fabrics, would have been re-sewn into children's kimonos when they became unusable for adults, as they were typically unsuitable for practical clothing; kimonos were shortened, with the taken off and the collar re-sewn to create , or were simply cut at the waist to create a side-tying jacket. After marriage or a certain age, young women would shorten the sleeves of their kimonos; the excess fabric would be used as a (wrapping cloth), could be used to lengthen the kimono at the waist, or could be used to create a patchwork undergarment known as a . Kimono that were in better condition could be re-used as an under-kimono, or to create a false underlayer known as a .\nChildren also traditionally wore , kimono made of a fancier material in the and upper back.\nConstruction.\nKimonos are traditionally made from a single bolt of fabric known as a , which is roughly long and wide for women, and long and wide for men. The entire bolt is used to make one kimono, and some men's are woven to be long enough to create a matching jacket and as well. Kimono linings are made from bolts of the same width.\nSome custom bolts of fabric are produced for especially tall or heavy people, such as sumo wrestlers, who must have kimono custom-made by either joining multiple bolts, weaving custom-width fabric, or using non-standard size fabric. For children, in the early 1900s, shorter lengths were used, and sometimes the body of the kimono was made only a single cloth width wide (). Tucks were also used to take in the garment; an outwards-facing pleat at each shoulder () and a kolpos-like overfold at the hip (), so that the child appeared to be wearing a sleeveless vest of the same fabric over their garment. These sewn tucks were let out as the child grew, and are mostly only seen today on the kimono of apprentice geisha in Kyoto, as apprentices previously began their training at a young age, requiring tucks to be let out as they grew. In the present day, apprentices begin their training in their late teenage years, and the tucks are retained merely as an anachronism.\nThough adult women also retained a 'tuck' at the hip, this was a leftover from the trailing length of most women's kimono, which had previously been either held up by hand when walking or tied up loosely with a ; though kimonos were not worn as trailing towards the end of the 19th century, the excess length of most women's kimono remained, with the hip fold formalised and neatened into the of the modern day.\nKimonos have a set method of construction, which allows the entire garment to be taken apart, cleaned and resewn easily. As the seam allowance on nearly every panel features two selvedges that will not fray, the woven edges of the fabric bolt are retained when the kimono is sewn, leading to large and often uneven seam allowances; unlike Western clothing, the seam allowances are not trimmed down, allowing for a kimono to be resewn to different measurements without the fabric fraying at the seams. This was also used to prolong the life of the garment by reversing the sleeves (hiding the worn cuff hem in the shoulder seam) or the back panels (swapping the high-stress center seam and the low-stress sides), like the European custom of side-to-middling or end-to-middling bedsheets.\nHistorically, kimonos were taken apart entirely to be washed \u2013 a process known as . Once cleaned, the fabric would be resewn by hand; this process, though necessary in previous centuries, is uncommon in modern-day Japan, as it is relatively expensive.\nDespite the expense of hand-sewing, however, some modern kimonos, including silk kimono and all formal styles, are still hand-sewn entirely; even machine-sewn kimonos require some degree of hand-sewing, particularly in finishing the collar, the hem, and the lining, if present. Hand-sewn kimonos are usually sewn with a single running stitch roughly to long, with stitches growing shorter around the collar area for strength. Kimono seams, instead of being pressed entirely flat, are pressed to have a 'lip' of roughly (known as the ) pressed over each seam. This disguises the stitches, as hand-sewn kimonos are not tightly sewn, rendering the stitches visible if pressed entirely flat.\nParts of Kimono.\nThe kimono is a symmetrical flat structure, with the back panel in the center, left and right back panels, front panels, and Okumi attached symmetrically.\nA single-layer garment made only from outer fabric or without lining is called Hitoe (unlined).\nA garment with lining, or made by sewing together two layers of cloth back-to-back, is called Awase (lined).\nBody Panels (Migoro).\nMigoro refers to the main body of the garment, covering the front and back torso, excluding sleeves and collar.\nWhen overlapping the front panels, the one on top is called Uwamae (upper front) and the one underneath is Shitamae (lower front).\nOkumi.\nOkumi is a half-width panel of fabric attached to the front panel to make closing the garment easier.\nThe combined width of front panel, back panel, and Okumi is called Mihaba (body width).\nSleeves (Sode).\nSleeves cover the arms. In kimono, long sleeves give an elegant impression, while short sleeves are preferred as practical everyday wear.\nGarments with unsewn sleeve openings are called \u014csode (large sleeves), while those with small sewn sleeve openings are called Kosode (small sleeves). Historically, kosode were worn as underwear by the upper class, but as fabrics and decoration improved, by the Muromachi period they became established as outerwear.\nSleeves come in various styles, such as Furisode, Nagatsode, Tamotosode, Tsutsusode, Genroksode, Kakusode, Tomesode, Funebokosode, and modified Tsutsusode.\n Also called \u014csode (large sleeve). Wide sleeve opening.\n Small sleeve opening, or a garment with small sleeve openings.\n Sleeves that do not cover the area near the wrist.\n Cylindrical sleeves with little space between arm and fabric. Western clothing also calls such sleeves \u201cTsutsusode.\u201d Most modern kimono do not have them, but they are found in work clothes and casual kimono.\n Sleeve length is 30\u201340 cm for children, 42\u201345 cm for adults, with a large rounded contour at the Tamoto (pouch). The curve varies by age, about 8\u201315 cm. Named after the Genroku period when this kosode style began.\n Square sleeves without rounded corners.\n\n A garment with only body panels, no sleeves.\n In English, \u201cKimono Sleeves\u201d refers to a style of Western clothing sleeves. Literally \u201ckimono sleeve,\u201d but it does not mean Japanese kimono sleeves; it refers to sleeves cut as one piece with the body panel.\nCollar (Eri).\nKimono collars (Eri) are divided into three types by width: Hiro-eri, Bachi-eri, and B\u014d-eri.\nHiro-eri \u2013 A collar made double-width, folded in half during dressing to adjust.\nBachi-eri \u2013 Sewn folded in half, widening toward the collar end, resembling a shamisen plectrum (bachi).\nB\u014d-eri \u2013 Like Bachi-eri, it is folded when tailored, but its width remains the same from center to tip.\nToday, general kimono are often made with Hiro-eri, while yukata are often made with Bachi-eri.\nSeparate from these, a collar cover attached over the collar to protect it from dirt is called Tomo-eri.\nTerms.\nA number of terms are used to refer to the different parts of a kimono. Those that are lined are known as kimonos, whereas unlined styles are known as kimonos; partially lined kimonos \u2013 with lining only at the sleeve cuff, the back of the sleeve, the lower chest portion of the and the entirety of the \u2013 are known as kimonos. Some fully lined kimonos do not have a separate lower and upper lining, and are instead lined with solid panels on the , the and the .\nThese terms name parts of a kimono:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Glossary/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEvolution of kimono construction.\nThough the basic shape of the kimono has not changed in centuries, proportions have, historically, varied in different eras of Japanese history. Beginning in the later Heian period, the \u2013 an unlined robe worn as underwear \u2013 became the predominant outerwear garment for both men and women, known as the . Court-appropriate dress continued to resemble the previous eras.\nBy the beginning of the Kamakura period, the was an ankle-length garment for both men and women, and had small, rounded sleeves that were sewn to the body of the garment. The was a relatively thin belt tied somewhat low on the waist, usually in a plain bow, and was known as a . During this time period, the fashion of wearing a draped around the shoulders, over the head, or as the outermost garment stripped off the shoulders and held in place by the , led to the rise of the \u2013 a heavily decorated over-kimono, stemming from the verb , worn unbelted over the top of the \u2013 becoming popular as formal dress for the upper classes.\nIn the following centuries, the mostly retained its small, narrow and round-sleeved nature, with the length of women's sleeves gradually increasing over time and eventually becoming mostly detached from the body of the garment below the shoulders. The collar on both men's and women's retained its relatively long and wide proportions, and the front panel kept its long, shallow angle towards the hem. During the Edo period, the had developed roughly modern kimono proportions, though variety existed until roughly the mid- to later years of the era. Men's sleeves continued to be sewn shut to the body of the kimono down most of their length, with no more than a few inches unattached at the bottom, unlike the women's style of very deep sleeves mostly detached from the body of the kimono. Men's sleeves were also less deep than women's kimono sleeves so that they did not get tied under the narrow around the hips, whereas on a woman's kimono, the long, unattached bottom of the sleeve could hang over the wider without getting in the way. Sleeves for both men and women grew in proportion to be of roughly equal width to the body panels, and the collar for both men's and women's kimono became shorter and narrower.\nIn the present day, both men's and women's kimono retain some historical features \u2013 for instance, women's kimono trailed along the floor throughout certain eras, and when the wearer went outside, the excess length would be tucked and tied underneath the in a hip fold known as the . The is now used for fine length adjustments, and takes up of excess length. A hand-sewn tuck across the back under the is used for coarse adjustments, and made deliberately weak so that the stitches will tear before the cloth does under tension. Men's kimono, on the other hand, are cut to the length of the wearer's body and tied with a narrow belt at the hips, with no extra fabric in the kimono's length for an overfold at the hip.\nFormal women's kimono retain the wider collar of previous eras (made from a full -width instead of a half width), though it is always folded in half lengthwise before wearing \u2013 a style known as .\nWomen's kimonos are still worn trailing in some situations, such as onstage, in historical dramas, and by geisha and . In these instances, the kimono worn is constructed differently to a regular women's kimono: the collar is set back further into the neck, the sleeves are sewn to the body unevenly (further down the front than the back), and the body is elongated. This style of kimono is referred to as a or . Though the length of the kimono, collar style and sleeve construction differs for this type of kimono, in all other types of women's kimono, the construction is generally the same; the collar is set back only slightly into the nape of the neck, the sleeves are attached evenly only at the shoulder (not all the way down the sleeve length) and the kimono's length from shoulder to hem is ideally the entire height of the woman wearing it, to allow for the creation of the .\nSleeve length.\nThe sleeve length (dropping down from the arm towards the floor when held outstretched) varies in kimono.\nCost.\nBoth men's and women's brand-new kimono can range in expense (in 2023) from around \u00a51000 (~US$7) to \u00a5150,000 (~US$1050)\nThe high expense of some hand-crafted brand-new kimonos reflects the traditional industry, where the most skilled artisans practice specific, expensive and time-consuming techniques, known to and mastered only by a few. These techniques, such as hand-plied fabrics and hand-tied dotwork dyeing, may take over a year to finish. Kimono artisans may be made Living National Treasures in recognition of their work, with the pieces they produce being considered culturally important.\nEven kimonos that have not been hand-crafted will constitute a relatively high expense when bought new, as even for one outfit, a number of accessories of the right formality and appearance must be bought. Not all brand-new kimono originate from artisans, and mass-production of kimono \u2013 mainly of casual or semi-formal kimono \u2013 does exist, with mass-produced pieces being mostly cheaper than those purchased through a (kimono shop).\nThough artisan-made kimonos are some of the most accomplished works of textile art on the market, many pieces are not bought solely for appreciation of the craft. Unwritten social obligations to wear kimono to certain events \u2013 weddings, funerals \u2013 often leads consumers to purchase artisan pieces for reasons other than personal choice, fashion sense or love of kimono:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe high cost of most brand-new kimonos reflects in part the pricing techniques within the industry. Most brand-new kimonos are purchased through , where kimonos are sold as fabric rolls only, the price of which is often left to the shop's discretion. The shop will charge a fee separate to the cost of the fabric for it to be sewn to the customer's measurements, and fees for washing the fabric or weatherproofing it may be added as another separate cost. If the customer is unfamiliar with wearing kimono, they may hire a service to help dress them; the end cost of a new kimono, therefore, remains uncertain until the kimono itself has been finished and worn.\n are also regarded as notorious for high pressure sales practices seen as unscrupulous such as kakoikomi (\u56f2\u3044\u8fbc\u307f \u201cenclosure\u201d):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Many [Japanese kimono consumers] feared a tactic known as : being surrounded by staff and essentially pressured into purchasing an expensive kimono [...] Shops are also renowned for lying about the origins of their products and who made them [...] [My kimono dressing () teacher] gave me careful instructions before we entered the []: 'do not touch anything. And even if you don't buy a kimono today, you have to buy something, no matter how small it is.'115\u2013117\nIn contrast, kimonos bought by hobbyists are likely to be less expensive, purchased from second-hand stores with no such sales practices or obligation to buy. Hobbyists may also buy cheaper synthetic kimono (marketed as 'washable') brand-new. Some enthusiasts also make their own kimono; this may be due to difficulty finding kimono of the right size, or simply for personal choice and fashion.\nSecond-hand items are seen as highly affordable; costs can be as little as \u00a5100 (about US$0.90) at thrift stores within Japan, and certain historic kimono production areas around the country \u2013 such as the Nishijin district of Kyoto \u2013 are well known for their second-hand kimono markets. Kimono themselves do not go out of fashion, making even vintage or antique pieces viable for wear, depending on condition.\nHowever, even second-hand women's are likely to remain somewhat pricey; a used, well-kept and high-quality second-hand can cost upwards of US$300, as they are often intricately woven, or decorated with embroidery, goldwork and may be hand-painted. Men's , in contrast, retail much cheaper, as they are narrower, shorter, and have either very little or no decoration, though high-end men's can still retail at a high cost equal to that of a high-end women's .\nTypes of kimono.\nSeveral different types of kimono exist. These varieties are primarily based on formality and gender, with more women's varieties of kimono existing than men's.\nThe modern kimono canon was roughly formalised after WWII, following fabric shortages, a generation unfamiliar with wearing kimono in everyday life, and the postwar revival of kimono sales by , traditional kimono shops. In previous centuries, types of kimono were not as distinct, with factors such as age and social class playing a much larger role in determining kimono types than they do presently. Beginning in the Meiji period, and following the Meiji Restoration and the abolition of class distinctions, kimono varieties began to change as Japanese society did, with new varieties being invented for new social situations.\nKimono are classified not only by form (such as Nagagi or Haori) but also by formality (Furisode, Tomesode, H\u014dmongi, Tsukesage, Komon, etc.), weaving structure (Sha, Ro, etc.), use of thread (Tsumugi, Chijimi, etc.), fiber material (silk, hemp, cotton, synthetic fibers, etc.), and dyeing method (pre-dyed, post-dyed), among other factors.\nAccording to The Encyclopedia of Clothing compiled by the Japan Society of Home Economics, kimono are classified according to TPO (time, place, occasion) of wearing into formal wear, semi-formal wear, informal formal wear, and everyday wear.\nIn addition, there are items worn only for limited occasions or situations, such as Happi coats worn at festivals, Yukata or Dotera worn at inns, etc. Kimono attire varies depending on the occasion or situation in which it is worn. While there are regional differences in types of kimono for each occasion, the following shows general examples.\nFormality.\nKimonos range in variation from extremely formal to very casual. For women, the formality is determined mostly by pattern placement, decoration style, fabric choice and colour. For men, whose kimonos are generally monochromatic, formality is determined typically by fabric choice and colour. For both men and women, the accessories and worn with the kimono also determine formality.\nThe formality levels of different types of kimono are a relatively modern invention, having been developed between late Meiji- to post-war Japan, following the abolition of Edo period sumptuary clothing laws in 1868. These laws changed constantly, as did the strictness with which they were enforced, and were designed to keep the nouveau riche merchant classes from dressing above their station, and appearing better-dressed than monetarily-poor but status-rich samurai class.\nFor women's formal wear, Kurotomesode, Irotomesode, Furisode, etc. are worn, and in the case of Tomesode, a Haori jacket may also be worn.\nThe Tomesode is black or colored with patterns only from the waist down to the hem, and is also called \u201cSuso-moy\u014d\u201d (hem pattern). Originally it was worn in double layers, but today many are made with Hiyoku tailoring, where the collar and sleeve openings are double-layered to look like two kimono worn together.\nAfter the war, with the development of mass media, the rules for formal wear began to be standardized nationwide and were rationalized.\n The formal wear for unmarried women (the highest formal wear). Black-based ones are called Kuro-furisode, others are Iro-furisode. Hon-furisode are characterized by thick hem facing (Suso-fuki) and sleeve opening facing (Sodeguchi-fuki), and a long length so the hem trails. In the case of \u014c-furisode, cotton padding is inserted in the facing. The lining fabric added to hems and sleeve openings is called Suso-mawashi (Hakkake), and in \u014c-furisode the same dyed fabric as the outer fabric is used, called \u201cTomo-hakkake.\u201d\n The formal wear for married women (the highest formal wear). Kimono with patterns only from the waist down are called \u201cEdo-tsuma-moy\u014d,\u201d and nowadays Kurotomesode are often called \u201cEdo-tsuma.\u201d The highest rank is dyed-and-removed five crests. For highest formal wear, a white half-collar is used. A high-ranking Fukuro-obi is often worn as the belt.\n Tomesode with a base color other than black are called Irotomesode, and may be worn not only by married women. Irotomesode can have five, three, or one crest; those with five crests are considered equal in formality to Kurotomesode. At court functions, since black is considered a \u201cmourning color,\u201d Kurotomesode are not worn; therefore, for investitures and other occasions at the Imperial Court, Irotomesode are considered formal.\n Semi-formal women's kimono with \u201cEba-moy\u014d\u201d (continuous design). Eba-moy\u014d refers to patterns matched during temporary sewing to form an overall design like a single painting.\n A type of semi-formal kimono for women. It has upward-facing patterns from the hem arranged on the front and back panels with the shoulder seam and sleeve seam as peaks. Since it requires fewer processes than H\u014dmongi, it is considered lower in formality.\n Plain-dyed kimono (except black) with crests are regarded as semi-formal wear.\nFormal Wear for Men.\nThe highest formal wear is a black Habutae kimono with five dyed-and-removed crests, worn with a Haori jacket and striped Hakama (such as Sendaihira). A Kaku-obi belt is used. Tabi socks are made of Calico or broadcloth, and Z\u014dri sandals are tatami-mat soles with fabric thongs, usually white.\nColours and patterns.\nUnder feudal sumptuary laws, colours were restricted by class; for instance, indigo-dyed clothing was allowed for all classes, and was commonly seen in hand-dyed cotton, linen or hemp fabrics, but other dyes, such as reds and purples, were forbidden to those below a certain class. Sometimes, for some classes, designs were restricted to below the belt, to the bottoms of the sleeves (for ) or to along the hem (); sometimes they were banned altogether, and were transferred to the collar of the underkimono, or the inside of the hem, where only the faintest glimpse would be intermittently visible. This type of subtle ostentation became an aesthetic known as , and outlasted the sumptuary laws. Modern-day rules of formality, however, still echo clothing distinctions typically employed by the uppermost samurai classes.\nAspects of men's kimono still follow this extreme of . Bright, elaborate decoration is used on the lining of the (jacket), and on men's (underkimono), which is not worn as an outer layer outside the home, and so only shows at the neck and inside the sleeves. Women's were once bright and boldly-patterned (and were often kimono too damaged to use as an outer layer, repurposed), but are now typically muted pastel shades. The outside of men's garments tended towards subtle patterns and colours even after the sumptuary laws lifted, with blues and blacks predominating, but designers later came to use browns, greens, purples, and other colours in increasingly bold patterns.\nOlder people generally wear more subtle patterns, and younger people brighter, bolder ones.\nFabric type.\nKimono vary widely in fabric type, and are not all made of silk. Certain types of fabric, such as wool, cotton, linen and hemp, are always considered informal, and so are not seen on more formal varieties of kimono. Certain varieties of silk, such as , are considered informal, having once been woven only by silk farmers out of unusable cocoons for their own use; other, more modern varieties, such as , were designed to be used as casual, cheap daywear, and are machine-spun and -woven using brightly patterned yarns. Some varieties of cr\u00eape are on the lowest end of formal, with their rougher texture considered unsuitable for formal use; other varieties, such as smooth cr\u00eape, are used for all varieties of formal kimono. The most formal kimonos are only ever made of smooth, fine silks, such as glossy silk fabrics like habutai.\nSome fabrics are also worn only at certain times of year; , for instance, is a plain-weave fabric with leno weave stripes only worn in high summer (July and August), but is used for all types of kimono and for other garments, such as under-kimono and . Some fabrics \u2013 such as certain types of cr\u00eape \u2013 are never seen in certain varieties of kimono, and some fabrics such as (heavy satin) silk are barely ever seen in modern kimono or altogether, having been more popular in previous eras than in the present-day.\nDespite their informal nature, many types of traditional, informal kimono fabrics are highly prized for their craftsmanship. Varieties of , , and fabrics woven from \"Musa basjoo\" are valued for their traditional production, and regularly command high prices.\nLined and unlined kimono.\nIn the summer months (from June until October in the most stringent kimono guides, such as those for tea ceremony), kimonos are unlined (); for the rest of the year, they are lined (). This applies to all types of kimono, with a few caveats: the very informal is always unlined, and thus only worn in summer; the most formal kimono, in contrast, are unlikely to be worn unlined in summer, as many people simply do not have more than one formal kimono to wear, and do not wear formal kimono often enough to warrant the purchase of a new, unlined kimono, just for summer wear. also change fabric type in the summer months.\nWithin the two realms of lined and unlined, further distinctions exist for different months. Lined kimonos are either made from transparent or gauze fabrics () or opaque fabrics, with kimono transitioning towards gauze fabrics at the height of summer and away from them as autumn begins. In one kimono guide for tea ceremony, at the start of the unlined season in June, fabrics such as (a type of silk cr\u00eape noted as a more \"wrinkle-resistant\" form of ) and (a thicker type of with twisted silk threads) are recommended for wear. Following the beginning of the rainy season in some time in July, fabrics switch over to gauzier varieties, and highly prized hemp fabrics such as are worn. Continuing into August, hemp, and continue to be worn; in September, they are still worn, but fabrics such as , worn in June, become suitable again, and opaque fabrics become preferred over sheer, though sheer may still be worn if the weather is hot.\nIn the same kimono guide, the first lined kimonos are worn in October, and the transition away from plainer opaque fabrics to richer silks such as is immediate. The richness of fabrics increases going into November and December, with figured silks featuring woven patterns appropriate. Coming into January, cr\u00eape fabrics with a rougher texture become appropriate, with fabrics such as worn in February. Figured silks continue to be worn until June, when the unlined season begins again. In Japan, this process of changing clothes is referred to as \"koromogae\".\nCrests.\nFormality is also determined by the number and type of or (crests). Five crests () are the most formal, three crests () are mid-formality, and one crest () is the least formal, used for occasions such as tea ceremony. Kimono (and other garments, like ) with are called (\"-carrying\"). The type of crest adds formality as well. A \"full sun\" () crest, where the design is outlined and filled in with white, is the most formal type. A \"mid-shadow\" () crest is mid-formality, with only the outline of the crest visible in white. A \"shadow\" () crest is the least formal, with the outline of the crest relatively faint. Shadow crests may be embroidered onto the kimono, and full-embroidery crests, called , are also seen.\nChoice of accessories.\nFormality can also be determined by the type and colour of accessories. For women, this may be the weave of and the style of . For men, adding a (a traditional jacket) makes an outfit more formal, and adding both and (traditional trousers) is more formal still. The material, colour, and pattern of these overgarments also varies in formality. Longer are also more formal.\nSleeve length and construction.\nBoth men's and women's kimonos feature sleeves considered relatively short, with men's sleeves shorter than women's. Though lengths can vary by a few centimetres, these lengths are informally standardised.\nMen's kimono sleeves are only ever one length, and women's sleeves are limited to a short length suitable for almost all types of kimono, or a longer length used for only one type of formal young women's kimono. In the modern day, the two lengths of women's sleeve worn on kimonos are length, which almost reaches the floor, and a shorter length, used for every other variety of women's kimono.\nBefore WWII, the length of women's kimono sleeves varied, with sleeves gradually shortening as a woman got older. During WWII, due to shortage of fabric, the 'short' length of women's kimono sleeves became standardised, and post-WWII, the realm of long kimono sleeves was narrowly curtailed to the realm of only \u2013 formal young women's and girl's kimono, where previously longer sleeves were seen on other varieties of dress, both formal and informal. Pre-WWII women's kimonos are recognisable for their longer sleeves, which, though not length, are longer than most women's kimono sleeves today.\nYoung women are not limited to wearing only , and outside of formal occasions that warrant it, can wear all other types of women's kimono which feature shorter sleeves.\nGeneral types.\n(\u8966\u88a2).\nThe , also called the (\u9577\u8966\u88a2), is an under-kimono worn by both men and women. resemble a kimono in construction, with a few key differences: the sleeves are typically open along the entire cuff side, with only a few stitches sewing both sides together placed where a normal kimono sleeve cuff would end; the sleeve has no curve sewn into the outer edge, instead being square; the is typically a little shorter than the length of a kimono when worn, and features no extra length to be bloused into an for women's kimono; the front either does not have any overlapping panels () or features only thin ones, with the collar set at a lower angle than that of a regular kimono. are considered an essential piece of kimono underwear, and are worn with all types of kimono except for .\n are typically made of lightweight materials, often silk. Women's and can either be patterned or entirely plain, and modern women's are frequently white in colour.\nMen's are often dyed in dark colours, and can be made of the same material as the outer kimono, as some kimono fabric bolts () are woven with enough length to accommodate this. Men's are frequently more decorative than women's, often featuring a dyed pictorial scene in the upper back, such as a scene from \"The Tale of Genji\".\nIn the late 19th and early 20th century, women's transitioned from being mostly red with bold white motifs to being white or light pastel colours. The dye technique previously used to achieve this, , fell out of fashion and knowledge and was rediscovered in 2010.\n(\u808c\u8966\u88a2).\n are a type of kimono undergarment traditionally worn underneath the . are even further removed from resembling a kimono in construction than the ; the comes in two pieces (a wrap-front top and a skirt), features no collar, and either has tube sleeves or is sleeveless.\nUnlike the , the is not considered an essential piece of kimono underwear, and a t-shirt and shorts are frequently substituted in its place.\n(\u6d74\u8863).\n are casual cotton summer kimonos worn by both men and women. were originally very simple indigo and white cotton kimono, little more than a bathrobe worn either within the house, or for a short walk locally; were worn by guests at inns, with the design of the displaying the inn a person was staying at. From roughly the mid-1980s onwards, they began to be produced in a wider variety of colours and designs, responding to demand for a more casual kimono that could be worn to a summer festival, and have since become more formal than their previous status as bathrobes, with high-end, less colourful sometimes standing in place of .\nIn the present day, many are brightly coloured, featuring large motifs from a variety of different seasons. For women, they are worn with either a (half-width ) or a (a soft, sash-like ), and are often accessorised with colourful hair accessories. For men, are worn with either an informal or a . Children generally wear a with .\n are always unlined, and it is possible for women to wear a casual with a high-end, more subdued , often with a underneath. A high-end men's could be dressed up in the same way.\nA is traditionally worn as a single layer or over a (an underkimono worn underneath the , featuring a simplified construction). may be worn over the top of a t-shirt and shorts. This distinguishes from a more-formal kimono, where a (also described as a , an underkimono resembling) is worn underneath, showing a second layer of collar at the neckline. However, some modern are worn with collared cotton featuring a collar of linen, cotton or , for occasions such as informal eating-out.\n(\u7d2c).\n are casual silk kimono worn by both men and women. kimono traditionally referred to kimono woven in plain weave with silk noil, short-staple silk fibre, though now include various types of casual silk kimono whereby the pattern is produced by weave as opposed to surface dying. Tsumugi kimonos are often dyed with Kasuri patterns.\n(\u5c0f\u7d0b).\n are informal women's kimono. They were the type most often worn as everyday womenswear in pre-war Japan. Though informal, with smaller, denser patterns are considered a shade more formal than with larger, bolder patterns.\n mostly have no (crests), and the sleeves are fairly short. They are made with a repeating designs, though the repeat length may be quite long. Designs can be made with any method; woven patterns, prints, stencilled patterns in alternating orientations, freehand painting () or tie-dye patterns (). Traditionally the direction of the fabric was alternated in adjacent panels (necessary due to the lack of shoulder seam), so patterns were generally reversible. If the pattern is the same way up on each panel, the is more formal, approaching -level formality.\nWoven geometric patterns (such as stripes) have no season, but others show images representing the season in general. Woven non-geometric patterns () are common. Small, dense patterns are often used; this is practical, as fine-scale patterns hides stains.\n are made with informal materials such as (slubbed silk), cotton, linen, ramie, and hemp. In the modern day, synthetic blends and synthetics are often used; rayon () and polyester are common.\nNow that kimonos are not typically worn as informal clothing, are not worn as often as formal kimono, though they have a wider range of suitable use. are the most formal type of ; they may have one to three crests, with a small, fine pattern that appears to be a solid colour from a distance, and so resembles the more formal .\n(\u6c5f\u6238\u5c0f\u7d0b).\n are a type of worn by women characterised by an extremely small repeating pattern, usually done in white on a coloured background. The dyeing technique is sometimes said to originate in the late Heian period (circa mid-12th century), with a motif called , which shows tiny stylised cherry blossoms on a background of white dots. In the Edo period (1603\u20131867), the samurai classes used them for formal wear, with specific patterns becoming associated with specific families. Towards the end of the Edo period, in the early 1800s, commoners began to wear them. are of a similar formality to , and with one can be worn as low-formality visiting wear; because of this, they are always made of silk, unlike regular .\n(\u8272\u7121\u5730).\n are monochromatic, undecorated women's kimonos mainly worn to tea ceremonies, as the monochrome appearance is considered to be unobtrusive to the ceremony itself. Despite being monochromatic, may feature a woven design; suitable for autumn are often made of damask silk. Some with incredibly fine patterns are considered suitable for tea ceremony, as from a distance they are visually similar to . may occasionally have one , though likely no more than this, and are always made of silk. accessories such as are never worn with if the purpose of wear is a tea ceremony; instead, flat and untextured silks are chosen for accessories.\n(\u4ed8\u3051\u4e0b\u3052).\n are low-ranking women's formalwear, and are a step below , though the two sometimes appear similar or indistinguishable. The motifs on a are placed similarly to those of a \u2013 across the back-right shoulder and back-right sleeve, the front-left shoulder and the front-left sleeve, and across the hem, higher at the left than the right \u2013 but, unlike , do not typically cross over the seams of each kimono panel, though some confusingly do. In older examples, the motifs may instead be placed symmetrically along the hem, with the skirt patterns mirrored down the centre-back seam.\nSimilarities between and often lead to confusion, with some indistinguishable from ; often, are only distinguishable from by the size of the motifs used, with smaller, less fluid motifs generally considered to be , and larger, more fluid motifs considered to be .\n can have between one and three , and can be worn to parties, but not ceremonies or highly formal events.\n(\u8a2a\u554f\u7740).\n are women's formal kimonos with the same pattern placement as a , but with patterns generally matching across the seams. They are always made of silk, and are considered more formal than the .\n are first roughly sewn up, and the design is sketched onto the fabric, before the garment is taken apart to be dyed again. The 's close relative, the , has its patterns dyed on the bolt before sewing up. This method of production can usually distinguish the two, as the motifs on a are likely to cross fluidly over seams in a way a generally will not. However, the two can prove near-indistinguishable at times.\n may be worn by both married and unmarried women; often friends of the bride will wear to weddings (except relatives) and receptions. They may be worn to formal parties.\n(\u8272\u7559\u8896).\n are formal women's kimono that feature a design along the hem on a coloured background. They are slightly less formal than , which have roughly the same pattern placement on a black background. , though worn to formal events, may be chosen when a would make the wearer appear to be overdressed for the situation. The pattern placement for is roughly identical to , though patterns seen along the and may drift slightly into the back hem itself. with five are of the same formality as any . may be made of figured silk such as .\n(\u8272\u7d0b\u4ed8).\n are formal men's kimonos. feature formal crests along the shoulders on a colour background, which, apart from the cut of the sleeve, appears the same as an from the waist up, and thus cannot be distinguished in pattern when worn under the . Because formalwear for men requires , men do not wear formal kimono that have elaborate patterns on the hem, as these would be hidden.\n(\u9ed2\u7559\u8896).\n are formal women's kimonos, featuring a black background and a design along the hem. They are the most formal women's kimono, and are worn to formal events such as weddings and wedding parties. The design is only present along the hem; the further up the body this design reaches, the younger the wearer is considered to be, though for a very young woman an may be chosen instead, being considered somewhat more mature. The design is either symmetrically placed on the and portions of the kimono, or asymmetrically placed along the entirety of the hem, with the design being larger and higher-placed at the left side than the right. Vintage kimono are more likely to have the former pattern placement than the latter, though this is not a hard rule.\n are always made of silk, and may have a \u2013 a false lining layer \u2013 attached, occasionally with a slightly padded hem. A usually has between 3 and 5 crests; a of any number of crests outranks an with less than five. , though formalwear, are not allowed at the royal court, as black is the colour of mourning, despite the colour designs decorating the kimono itself; outside of the royal court, this distinction for does not exist. are never made of flashy silks such as , but are instead likely to be a matte fabric with little texture.\n typically feature , small white decorative prickstitches along the collar.\n(\u9ed2\u7d0b\u4ed8).\n (\"black -decorated\") are the most formal men's kimono, which, apart from the cut of the sleeve, look exactly the same from the waist up as a , and thus cannot be distinguished in pattern when worn under the required for men's formal dress.\nOccasion-specific types.\n(\u55aa\u670d).\n are a category of kimono and accessories suitable for mourning, worn by both men and women. kimono, and accessories are characterised by their plain, solid black appearance. kimonos are plain black silk with five , worn with white undergarments and white . Men wear a kimono of the same kind, with a subdued and a black-and-white or black-and-grey striped , worn with black or white z\u014dri.\nA completely black mourning ensemble for women \u2013 a plain black , black and black \u2013 is usually reserved for those closest to the deceased. Those further away will wear kimono in dark and subdued colours, rather than a plain black kimono with a reduced number of crests. In time periods when kimonos were worn more often, those closest to the deceased would slowly begin dressing in coloured kimono over a period of weeks after the death, with the being the last thing to be changed over to colour.\n(\u6253\u3061\u639b\u3051).\n are highly formal women's over-kimonos, worn only by brides or onstage. The name comes from the Japanese verb , \"to drape upon\", originating in roughly the 16th century from a fashion amongst the ruling classes of the time to wear kimono (then called , lit.\u2009'small sleeve') unbelted over the shoulders of one's other garments;34 the progressed into being an over-kimono worn by samurai women before being adopted some time in the 20th century as bridal wear.\n are designed to be worn over the top of a complete kimono outfit with , and thus are not designed to be worn belted. Unlike their 16th century counterparts, modern generally could not double as a regular kimono, as they often feature heavy, highly-formal decoration and may be padded throughout, if not solely on the hem. They are designed to trail along the floor, and the heavily padded hem helps to achieve this.\nBridal are typically red or white, and often decorated heavily with auspicious motifs. Because they are not designed to be worn with an , the designs cover the entirety of the back.\n(\u767d\u7121\u57a2).\n are pure-white wedding kimonos worn by brides for a traditional Japanese Shinto wedding ceremony. Comparable to an and sometimes described as a white , the is worn for the part of the wedding ceremony, symbolising the purity of the bride coming into the marriage. The bride may later change into a red after the ceremony to symbolise good luck.\nA will form part of a bridal ensemble with matching or coordinating accessories, such as a bridal (bridal wig), a set of matching (usually mock-tortoiseshell), and a fan tucked into the kimono. Due to the expensive nature of traditional bridal clothing, few are likely to buy brand-new ; it is not unusual to rent kimono for special occasions, and Shinto shrines are known to keep and rent out for traditional weddings. Those who do possess already are likely to have inherited them from close family members.\n(\u88fe\u5f15\u304d/\u5f15\u304d\u305a\u308a).\n (lit.\u2009'trailing skirt') (also known as ) are women's kimonos with a specialised construction that allows them to be worn trailing, with a deep-set and widely spaced collar. are extremely long kimono worn by geisha, , actors in kabuki and people performing traditional Japanese dance. A can be up to long, and are generally no shorter than from shoulder to hem; this is to allow the kimono to trail along the floor.\n are sewn differently to normal kimonos due to the way they are worn. The collar on a is sewn further and deeper back into the nape of the neck, so that it can be pulled down much lower without causing the front of the kimono to ride up. The sleeves are set unevenly onto the body, shorter at the back than at the front, so that the underarm does not show when the collar is pulled down.\n are tied differently when they are put on \u2013 whereas regular kimonos are tied with a visible , and the side seams are kept straight, are pulled up somewhat diagonally, to emphasise the hips and ensure the kimono trails nicely on the floor. A small is tied, larger at the back than the front, but it wrapped against the body with a (lit.\u2009'red silk') wrap, which is then covered by the , rendering the invisible.\nAside from their specialised construction, can resemble many other types of women's kimono in their decoration, fabric type, colour and sleeve length. The worn by geisha and their apprentices are formal kimono worn to engagements, and so are always made of fine silk, resembling kimono of formality and above in their pattern placement and background colour.\nThe worn by kabuki actors varies by role, and so can appear as the humble clothing of an Edo-period merchant's daughter, as well as the fine silk clothing of a samurai woman. These costumes may be made of polyester, as well as silk, informal silk fabrics, cotton, linen or hemp. Pattern placement, colour and design varies by role, with many roles having costume designs preserved from previous centuries.\nThe worn by people performing traditional Japanese dance typically feature a bold design in block colours, as their clothing must stand out from the stage. Performers performing in a group wear kimono identical to one another, with the bold designs creating visual unity between performers.\nRelated garments and accessories.\nThough the kimono is the national dress of Japan, it has never been the sole item of clothing worn throughout Japan; even before the introduction of Western dress, many different styles of dress were worn, such as the of the Ainu people and the of the Ryukyuan people. Though similar to the kimono, these garments are distinguishable by their separate cultural heritage, and are not considered to be simply 'variations' of the kimono as the clothing worn by the working class is considered to be.\nSome related garments still worn today were the contemporary clothing of previous time periods, and have survived in an official and/or ceremonial capacity, worn only on certain occasions by certain people. Accessories that can be worn with the kimono vary by occasion and use. Some are ceremonial, or worn only for special occasions, whereas others are part of dressing in the kimono and are used in a more practical sense.\nBoth geisha and wear variations on common accessories that are not found in everyday dress. As an extension of this, many practitioners of Japanese traditional dance wear similar kimonos and accessories to geisha and .\nFor certain traditional holidays and occasions some specific types of kimono accessories are worn. For instance, , also known as , are worn by girls for , alongside brightly coloured . are also worn by young women on (Coming of Age Day).\nLayering.\nPre-WW2, kimonos were commonly worn layered, with three being the standard number of layers worn on top of the undergarments. The layered kimono underneath were known as , and were often a patchwork of older or unwearable kimono taken apart for their fabric. Specifically designed matching sets of formal layered kimonos were known as , and generally featured the same design presented on different background colours, such as white (innermost), red (middle layer) and black (outermost). The innermost layers, known as , typically featured the plainest decorative techniques, such as dyework only, and the successive outer layers would feature techniques such as embroidery and couched gold thread, with the outermost layer \u2013 known as the \u2013 displaying the most extensive decoration. These matching sets would be designed and created together, commonly as part of a bride's outfit for a wedding. Extant intact sets of kimonos are difficult to find, particularly in good condition, with the innermost kimono typically damaged and in poor condition.\nIn modern Japan, at least one layer is typically worn next to the skin when wearing kimono. Traditionally, this would be the or , a tube-sleeved, wrapped-front garment considered to be underwear, though in the modern day, regular underwear is sometimes worn instead, and a traditional is not considered strictly necessary. A is typically made of something more washable than silk, such as cotton, hemp, linen or some synthetic fibres.\nFor all forms of kimono except the (excluding high-quality dressed up as ), a , often known and referred to as a , is worn over the top of any underwear. The resembles a kimono made of a lighter, thinner fabric, not uncommonly constructed without an panel at the front, and often with a collar cover known as a sewn over its collar. The , visible at the neckline when worn underneath a kimono, is designed to be replaced and washed when needed.\nIn modern-day Japan, layered kimonos are generally only seen on the stage, whether for classical dances or in kabuki. A false second layer called a may be attached instead of an entirely separate kimono to achieve this look; the resembles the lower half of a kimono's lining which, and is sewn to the kimono horizontally along the back. A may have a false collar attached to it, or a matching false collar sewn to the kimono separately, creating the illusion of layering at the neckline; separate false sleeve cuffs may also be sewn into the kimono to create this effect.\nKimonos featuring can be seen in some kabuki performances such as , where the kimono is worn with the flipped back slightly underneath the to expose the design on the . The can be seen on some bridal kimonos.\nCare.\nIn the past, a kimono would often be entirely taken apart for washing, and then re-sewn for wearing. This traditional washing method involves two steps: taking the kimono apart and washing each piece () and then stretching each piece of a kimono onto a board to dry after they have been washed and starched (). Because the stitches must be taken out for washing, traditional kimono need to be hand sewn. The process of traditionally washing kimono is very expensive and difficult and is one of the causes of the declining popularity of kimono. Modern fabrics and cleaning methods have been developed that eliminate this need, although the traditional washing of kimono is still practised, especially for high-end garments.\nNew, custom-made kimono are generally delivered to a customer with long, loose basting stitches placed around the outside edges. These stitches are called (not to be confused with , the small white prickstitching seen along the collar of ). They are sometimes replaced for storage. They help to prevent bunching, folding and wrinkling, and keep the kimono's layers in alignment.\nLike many other traditional Japanese garments, there are specific ways to fold kimono. These methods help to preserve the garment and to keep it from creasing when stored. Kimonos are often stored wrapped in acid-free paper envelopes known as .\nKimono need to be aired out at least seasonally and before and after each time they are worn. Many people prefer to have their kimono dry cleaned. Although this can be extremely expensive, it is generally less expensive than the traditional method of taking a kimono apart to clean it. This may, however, be impossible for certain fabrics or dyes.\n, kimono production regions.\nKimonos are produced in different regions all over Japan. Locations known for making kimonos are often called . Many of these regional variations still exist today and are recognised as , famous products of their place of origin.\nOutside Japan.\nKimonos are worn by Japanese Americans, and by other members of the Japanese diaspora overseas, such as Japanese in the Philippines. Kimonos are worn to Shinto ceremonies by Japanese Brazilians in Curitiba, Paran\u00e1.\nKimonos are collected in the same way as Japanese hobbyists by some non-Japanese, and may be worn to events such as Kimono de Jack gatherings.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16876", "revid": "38004052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16876", "title": "Kingston upon Thames", "text": "Town in south-west London, England\nKingston upon Thames, colloquially known as Kingston, is a town in the Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames, south-west London, England. It is situated on the River Thames, south-west of Charing Cross. It is an ancient market town, notable as the place where some Saxon kings were crowned.\nHistorically in the county of Surrey, the ancient parish of Kingston covered both the town itself and a large surrounding area. The town was an ancient borough, having been formally incorporated in 1441, with a long history prior to that as a royal manor. From 1836 until 1965 the town formed the Municipal Borough of Kingston-upon-Thames. From 1893 to 2020 Kingston was the seat of Surrey County Council. The town became part of Greater London in 1965, when the modern borough was also created as one of the 32 London boroughs.\nKingston is identified as a metropolitan centre in the London Plan and is one of the biggest retail centres in the UK, receiving 18 million visitors a year. It is also home to Kingston University.\nThe Kingston upon Thames post town corresponds to the KT1 and KT2 postcodes. The wider borough also includes the post towns of New Malden, Surbiton, Chessington, parts of Worcester Park and peripheral parts of several other post towns based outside the borough. The Kingston upon Thames post town roughly corresponds to the six wards of Canbury Gardens, Coombe Hill, Kingston Gate, Kingston Town, Norbiton and Tudor, which had a combined population of 54,925 at the 2021 census, while the borough overall counted 168,063.\nToponymy.\nKingston was called \"Cyninges tun\" in 838 AD, \"Chingestune\" in 1086, \"Kingeston\" in 1164, \"Kyngeston super Tamisiam\" in 1321 and \"Kingestowne upon Thames\" in 1589. The name means 'the king's manor or estate' from the Old English words \"cyning\" and \"tun\". It belonged to the king in Saxon times and was the earliest royal borough.\nThere was historically some variation between authorities as to whether Kingston was 'on' or 'upon' Thames, and whether the name should be hyphenated or not. The Post Office initially adopted 'Kingston-on-Thames', the Ordnance Survey used 'Kingston upon Thames', and the old borough council preferred the hyphenated 'Kingston-upon-Thames'. As late as 1959 the borough council was petitioning the other bodies to standardise the name as 'Kingston-upon-Thames'. The London Borough created in 1965 used the form 'Kingston upon Thames' without hyphens, since when that form has been used by the council, Ordnance Survey, and as the post town.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe first surviving record of Kingston is from AD 838 as the site of a meeting between King Egbert of Wessex and Ceolnoth, Archbishop of Canterbury. Kingston lay on the boundary between the ancient kingdoms of Wessex and Mercia, until in the early tenth century when King \u00c6thelstan united both to create the kingdom of England. According to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", two tenth-century kings were consecrated in Kingston: \u00c6thelstan (925), and \u00c6thelred the Unready (978). There are certain other kings who are said to have been crowned there, but for whom the evidence (including the writings of Florence of Worcester and Ralph de Diceto) is less substantial: Edward the Elder (902), Edmund I (939), Eadred (946), Eadwig (956), Edgar the Peaceful (c.\u2009960) and Edward the Martyr (975). It was later thought that the coronations were conducted in the Chapel of St Mary, which collapsed in 1730. Tradition dating to the 18th century holds that a large stone recovered from the ruins played a part in the coronations. It was initially used as a mounting block, but in 1850 it was moved to a more dignified place in the market before finally being moved to its current location in the grounds of the Guildhall.\nFrom Medieval times Shrovetide Football was played annually at Kingston upon Thames and in surrounding towns including Richmond and Twickenham. The windows of the houses and shops were boarded up and from 12 noon the inhabitants would kick several balls around the town before retiring to the public houses. The last game was played in 1866, by which time the urban development of the town meant it caused too much damage and the custom was outlawed.\nLocal government.\nKingston upon Thames formed an ancient parish in the Kingston hundred of Surrey. The parish of Kingston upon Thames covered a large area including numerous chapelries and townships which subsequently became separate parishes, including Hook, Kew, New Malden, Petersham, Richmond, Surbiton, Thames Ditton and East Molesey.\nKingston was a royal manor. It was granted various charters allowing it the right to hold markets and fairs, with the oldest surviving charter being from King John in 1208. A subsequent charter in 1441 formally incorporated the town as a borough.\nThe borough covered a much smaller area than the ancient parish, although as new parishes were split off the borough and parish eventually became identical in 1894. The borough was reformed to become a municipal borough in 1836 under the Municipal Corporations Act 1835, becoming the Municipal Borough of Kingston-upon-Thames. It had been long been known as a royal borough through custom; its right to the title was formally confirmed by George V in 1927. Kingston upon Thames was the seat of Surrey County Council from 1893, when it moved from Newington to a new headquarters at County Hall. The county council remained based at County Hall until 2020, despite Kingston having been removed from its administrative area in 1965.\nIn 1965, Greater London was created and the old municipal borough was abolished. Its former area was merged with that of the Municipal Borough of Surbiton and the Municipal Borough of Malden and Coombe, to form the London Borough of Kingston upon Thames. At the request of Kingston upon Thames London Borough Council another royal charter was granted by Queen Elizabeth II entitling it to continue using the title \"Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames\" for the new borough.\nUrban development.\nKingston was built at the first crossing point of the Thames upstream from London Bridge and a bridge still exists at the same site. It was this 'great bridge' that gave it its early importance in the 13th century. Kingston was occupied by the Romans, and later it was either a royal residence or a royal demesne. There is a record of a council held there in 838, at which Egbert of Wessex, King of Wessex, and his son Ethelwulf of Wessex were present. In the Domesday Book it was held by William the Conqueror. Its domesday assets were: a church, five mills, four fisheries worth 10s, 27 ploughs, of meadow, woodland worth six hogs. It rendered \u00a331 10s (\u00a331.50).\nIn 1730, the chapel containing the royal effigies collapsed, burying the sexton, who was digging a grave, the sexton's daughter and another person. The daughter survived this accident and was her father's successor as sexton. Kingston sent members to early Parliaments, until a petition by the inhabitants prayed to be relieved from the burden. Another chapel, the collegiate chapel of St Mary Magdalene, The Lovekyn Chapel, still exists. It was founded in 1309 by a former mayor of London, Edward Lovekyn. It is the only private chantry chapel to survive the Reformation.\nWith the coming of the railway in the 1830s, there was much building development to the south of the town. Much of this became the new town of Surbiton, but the Surbiton Park estate, built in the grounds of Surbiton Place in the 1850s, remained part of Kingston during the period of the Municipal Borough of Kingston-upon-Thames.\nA permanent military presence was established in the borough with the completion of The Barracks in 1875.\nEconomic development.\nKingston evolved as a market town from the Saxon period, with goods transported on the Thames and over land via the crossing point.\nRights to hold markets were amongst the liberties granted by the royal charter of 1208 and the market formally established in 1242. A horse fair was held at a site on the downstream side of the river north of the bridge and a market extended from there to around the church by the 17th century and further south towards the course of the Hogsmill River. Goods traded included oats, wheat, rye, malt, apples and other fruit, flowers, wool, leather and cheese. Cattle, meat and fish were also traded. The regular Saturday market was supplemented by a Wednesday market in 1662. In addition to markets, regular fairs were held. Local industries included pottery, brick making, tanning, leather-working, fishing, milling, brewing and boat-building.\nThe presence of fabric and wood-working craft skills associated with boat-building was a factor in the choice of Kingston as the site chosen by Tommy Sopwith to expand production of early aircraft from Sopwith Aviation's origins at Brooklands. Well known aviation personalities Sydney Camm, Harry Hawker and Tommy Sopwith were responsible for much of Kingston's achievements in aviation. For much of the 20th century, Kingston was a major military aircraft manufacturing centre specialising in fighter aircraft \u2013 first with Sopwith Aviation, H G Hawker Engineering, later Hawker Aircraft, Hawker Siddeley and eventually British Aerospace. The renowned Sopwith Camel, Hawker Fury, Hurricane, Hunter and Harrier jump jet were all designed and built in the town and examples of all of these aircraft can be seen today at the nearby Brooklands Museum in Weybridge. British Aerospace finally closed its Lower Ham Road factory in 1992; part of the site was subsequently redeveloped for housing but the riverside part houses a community centre and sports complex.\nRecent developments.\nFollowing the construction of the Kingston Relief Road (commonly known as the \"Kingston one-way system\") in 1989, major shopping streets in the town centre and the historic Market Place were pedestrianised. Two major commercial developments were also built in Kingston town centre - with John Lewis Kingston department store opening in 1990 and the Bentall Centre shopping centre opening in 1992. In the early 2000s, the Charter Quay development south of Kingston Bridge completed the riverside walk, as well as adding bars, restaurants and the Rose Theatre, which opened in 2008 with Sir Peter Hall as the director. In 2001, the old Kingston bus garage and bus station, closed the previous year, was demolished and the site redeveloped as the Rotunda complex, with an Odeon Cinema, restaurants and tenpin bowling.\nGovernance.\nKingston straddles two Parliamentary constituencies: the area north of the railway line is part of Richmond Park, which is represented by Sarah Olney of the Liberal Democrats, and the area south of the railway line (including the ancient town centre) is part of Kingston and Surbiton which is represented by Ed Davey of the Liberal Democrats.\nKingston is part of the Kingston Gate and Kingston Town wards for elections to Kingston upon Thames London Borough Council.\nNotable locations.\nCentral Kingston is a busy, largely pedestrian and predominantly retail centre, with a small number of commercial offices and civic buildings.\nThe shopping centre includes a shopping mall, \"The Bentall Centre\", containing the Bentalls department store and large branches of chain stores found in many British high streets. There is a large branch of the John Lewis department store group, with a Waitrose supermarket in the basement. A smaller 1960s shopping centre called Eden Walk exists nearby. The Rotunda, in a former Bentalls furniture depository building (a local landmark), includes a bowling alley, fitness centre, a 15-screen Odeon multiplex cinema and a few restaurants.\nThe ancient market is still held daily in the Market Place, including such produce as fish, jewellery, exotic foods, local foods and flowers.\nKingston's civic buildings include Kingston Museum, public library, modern Crown Court, smaller County Court and the Guildhall. The Guildhall is located by the part-culverted mouth of the Hogsmill River, and houses Kingston Council and magistrates' court. A short distance away is the County Hall Building which houses the main offices of Surrey County Council. From 1893 to 1965, before Kingston became one of the 32 London boroughs of Greater London, it was the county town of Surrey following the period of 1791\u20131893 when Newington had this role. Guildford has officially reclaimed this ancient, now ceremonial title as Kingston is no longer administered by Surrey.\nKingston's main open space is the River Thames, with its lively frontage of bars and restaurants. Downstream there is a walk through Canbury Gardens towards Teddington Lock. Upstream there is a promenade crossing the Hogsmill river and reaching almost to Surbiton. Eagle Brewery Wharf is a council-owned public space located on the riverside. Across Kingston Bridge is a tree lined river bank fronting the expanse of Hampton Court Park.\nEconomy.\nKingston has many pubs and restaurants and several public houses in the centre have become restaurants or bars. The more traditional pubs tend to be in the northern part of the town (Canbury) and include The Canbury Arms, Park Tavern, The Wych Elm and Willoughby Arms. Further south are found the Druid's Head, the Spring Grove, The Cricketers, The Albion Tavern, The Duke of Buckingham, and several small local pubs around Fairfield. The Druid's Head is notable as one of the first taverns to make syllabub, the famous dessert, in the 18th century. There are several Chinese, Indian, Thai and Italian restaurants.\nThe local newspapers are the weekly \"Surrey Comet\", which celebrated its 150th year in 2004, and the \"Kingston Guardian\".\nIn 2010 retail footprint research, Kingston ranked 25th in terms of retail expenditure in the UK at \u00a3810\u00a0million, equal to Covent Garden and just ahead of Southampton. This puts it as generating the fifth highest level of retail sales in Greater London, passing Croydon, with just four West End alternatives ahead. In 2005, Kingston was 24th with \u00a3864\u00a0million, and 3rd in London. In a 2015 study by CACI, Kingston was ranked 28th in the UK in the Hot 100 Retail Locations - and the second highest in Greater London after Croydon. In 2018, Kingston was ranked joint 5th in the UK by Knight Frank in the \"High Street Investment Ranking\", only bettered by Cambridge, Bath, Chichester and Reading.\nIn 2013 Kingston became the location for a local currency scheme, designed to boost and strengthen the local economy in Kingston,\n as part of the Transition towns initiative. The Kingston pound began as a digital currency, and from 2018 existed in paper format, with denominations of K\u00a31;K\u00a35;K\u00a310;and K\u00a320 designed by graphic design students from Kingston University. These were taken out of circulation in 2021, but have been sold to many collectors all over the world. The Kingston Pound is a 'tagged' sterling that can be exchanged either way on a 1 for 1 basis without any penalty.\nAs of 2011, Kingston upon Thames has the fourth highest retail turnover for comparison goods in Greater London, \u00a3432 million annually, only bettered by the West End, Shepherd's Bush and Stratford. As of 2012, Kingston has of total town centre floorspace, the 3rd highest in London.\nCulture.\nA notable dramatic arts venue is the Rose Theatre, opened on 16 January 2008 and seating about 900 people. The audience are arranged around the semi-circular stage. All Saints Church is host to classical choral and music concerts mostly on Saturdays and houses a Frobenius organ. There are a number of choral societies including the Kingston Orpheus Choir and the Kingston Choral Society, an amateur symphony orchestra the Kingston Philharmonia, and the Kingston and District Chamber Music Society. A number of annual festivals are organised by the Council and Kingston Arts Council including Kingston Readers' Festival, Think-in-Kingston and the Festival of the Voice. Kingston University runs the Stanley Picker Gallery and Kingston Museum has a changing gallery on the first floor. A regular singing group at the Rose Theatre caters to schools and families.\nJohn Galsworthy the author was born on Kingston Hill and Jacqueline Wilson grew up, and went to school in Kingston and still lives there today. Both are commemorated at Kingston University \u2013 Galsworthy in the newest building and Wilson in the main hall. Also commemorated at the university is photographer Eadweard Muybridge who was born at Kingston and changed the spelling of his first name in reference to the name of the Saxon king on the Coronation Stone. He was a pioneer in the photography of the moving image. R. C. Sherriff the playwright is also associated with Kingston, writing his first play to support Kingston Rowing Club. An earlier writer born in Kingston was John Cleland.\nKingston has been covered in literature, film and television. It is where the comic Victorian novel \"Three Men in a Boat\" by Jerome K. Jerome begins; cannons aimed against the Martians in H. G. Wells' \"The War of the Worlds\" are positioned on Kingston Hill; in \"The Rainbow\" by D. H. Lawrence the youngest Brangwen dreams of a job in Kingston upon Thames in a long, lyrical passage; Mr. Knightly in \"Emma\" by Jane Austen regularly visits Kingston, although the narrative never follows him there.\nFine art is also a prominent feature in the history of Kingston. Both John Hoyland and Jeremy Moon worked from permanent studios in Kingston and many artists and designers have studied at the university including Fiona Banner, John Bratby, David Nash and Jasper Morrison.\nEarly in his music career, the guitarist and singer-songwriter Eric Clapton spent time busking in Kingston upon Thames, having grown up and studied in the area. Rock band Cardiacs were formed in the town.\nRecently, a scene from \"Mujhse Dosti Karoge\", a Bollywood film starring Hrithik Roshan as the leading actor, was filmed by the toppled telephone boxes sculpture in Old London Road.\nThe 1974 Doctor Who story \"Invasion of the Dinosaurs\" used several locations in the town for filming. The 2008 series of \"Primeval\", shown on ITV1 in January, featured almost an entire episode filmed inside the Bentall Centre and John Lewis department stores. Kingston featured in \"Primeval\" again in May 2009 with several scenes shot in and around the Market Place. Nipper, the famous \"His Master's Voice\" dog, is buried in the town under Lloyds Bank. His owners lived nearby in Fife Road.\nKingston Green Fair was held annually from 1987 to 2008 in Canbury Gardens, next to the river, on the Spring Bank Holiday. The word \"Green\" in the title refers to the ethos of the fair as promoting sustainable development. For instance no meat or other products derived from dead animals were allowed to be sold, and no electricity was permitted on the site unless generated by wind, sun, or bicycle power.\nPublic art.\nOne of the more unusual sights in Kingston is \"Out of Order\" by David Mach, a sculpture in the form of twelve disused red telephone boxes that have been tipped up to lean against one another in an arrangement resembling dominoes. The work was commissioned in 1988 as part of the landscaping for the new Relief Road, and was described by its creator as \"anti-minimalist\".\nTransport.\nRail.\nKingston is principally served by Kingston railway station, which opened in 1863.\nThe station is in London fare zone 6 and is served by South Western Railway trains from London Waterloo. Trains to Waterloo link Kingston directly to destinations such as Wimbledon, Clapham Junction and Vauxhall. Eastbound trains travel to Shepperton via Teddington, Hampton and Sunbury. Eastbound trains also travel on the Kingston loop line towards Teddington, Strawberry Hill, Twickenham and Richmond, after which trains continue towards Waterloo. From Waterloo, trains to Kingston are advertised towards \"Shepperton\" and \"Strawberry Hill\".\nA nearby station in Norbiton (in fare zone 5) is on the same lines.\nNearby Surbiton station \u2013 originally named Kingston when it opened in 1838 \u2013 is on the South West Main Line in London fare zone 6. Surbiton is also served by South Western Railway trains from Waterloo. Southbound services link Surbiton to destinations in Surrey and Hampshire, such as Hampton Court, Guildford, Woking and Basingstoke. The station building at Surbiton was built in 1937, designed in an Art Deco style by James Robb Scott. It has been Grade II listed since 1983.\nBus.\nKingston is served by two bus stations, Cromwell Road and Fairfield, and a large number of bus stops, with destinations across Greater London and Surrey including links directly to Heathrow Airport.\nRoad.\nThe Kingston Bypass passes to the south and east of Kingston. The bypass carries the A3, which links the area to Merton, Wandsworth, Clapham and the City of London to the north. To the south, the A3 runs to Portsmouth via Guildford and Petersfield.\nA portion of the bypass carries the A309 to Thames Ditton, Hampton Court and the A308.\nThere are several radial routes including:\nKingston Relief Road.\nIn the 1960s, planners proposed a partially elevated ring road encircling the town centre, to alleviate congestion on major shopping streets and traffic heading towards Kingston Bridge. After objections from local residents, an interim one-way system was implemented in July 1963. Following this, the Kingston Relief Road was constructed in Kingston town centre in the late 1980s. Commonly known as the \"Kingston one-way system\", the road encircles the town centre, allowing for major shopping streets such as Clarence Street to be pedestrianised. On the western side of the town centre, the road passes underneath John Lewis Kingston before crossing the River Thames via Kingston Bridge. As part of the project, two bus stations were constructed, cycle lanes installed and several artworks commissioned including \"Out of Order\" by David Mach and \"River Celebration\" by Carole Hodgson.\nRiver.\nKingston Town End and Kingston Turks piers are situated in Kingston. Turk Launches operates a Summer-only river tour between Hampton Court and Richmond St Helena.\nCycling.\nThere is a network of cycle lanes throughout Kingston linking the area to destinations throughout south-west London and England.\nKey routes include:\nEducation.\nKingston is the location of Kingston University and Kingston College. Primary schools in the town include Latchmere School, Fernhill School, St Luke's School, King Athelstan School and St Agatha's Catholic Primary School. Secondary schools in the town include The Kingston Academy, Tiffin School, Tiffin Girls' School and Kingston Grammar School, all of which have large catchment areas across Greater London and Surrey.\nThe growth and development of Kingston Polytechnic, and its transformation into Kingston University in 1992, has made Kingston a university town.\nReligious sites.\nThe 12th-century All Saints Church serves the Church of England parish of Kingston which lies ecclesiastically in the Diocese of Southwark, although there has been a church in Kingston since at least 838. The suffragan or Area Bishop of Kingston is the Rt Rev Dr Richard Cheetham. Other Anglican churches in Kingston, of more recent date, are St John the Evangelist and St Luke.\nKingston lies in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Southwark, and there is a Roman Catholic Church dedicated to Saint Agatha.\nKingston is also the home of the Kingston Surbiton &amp; District Synagogue. It also has a Quaker meeting house, a Mosque and a Sikh Gurdwara.\nLady Booth Road, formerly Fairfield Road, is named to commemorate the former location of the Salvation Army citadel.\nSport.\nKingston is the home of four association football clubs, Chelsea F.C. Women who play at the Kingsmeadow Stadium, Corinthian-Casuals and Kingstonian who play in Tolworth, and Chessington &amp; Hook United who play in Chessington. Chelsea F.C. Women play in the FA Women's Super League, whereas Kingstonian, Corinthian-Casuals and Chessington &amp; Hook United are non-league clubs.\nKingston Athletic Club and Polytechnic Harriers are based at the neighbouring Kingsmeadow athletics stadium. This stadium has a 400m track which is floodlit, a gym and 5-a-side football facilities. Kingston Rugby Club is based on the outskirts of the town, and Kingston Rowing Club (founded in 1858) is based in Canbury Gardens on the River Thames. The Club holds two large timed race events (HEADs) in the Spring and Autumn. Kingston Regatta takes place on the river just above the bridge over a weekend in early July.\nThe town has a large leisure centre next to Fairfield named the Kingfisher Centre, which contains an indoor swimming pool and gymnasium. Sport in Kingston is promoted and encouraged by Sport Kingston, an organisation funded by the Royal Borough of Kingston.\nKingston Wildcats School of Basketball is a community basketball development club that practices and plays its home fixtures at Chessington School, competing in the Surrey League and Basketball England National League.\nOld Kingstonaian Hockey Club, Old Cranleighan Hockey Club, Surbiton Hockey Club and Teddington Hockey Club are local field hockey clubs that compete in the Women's England Hockey League, the Men's England Hockey League and the London Hockey League.\nLondon 2012 Summer Olympics.\nPrior to the opening of the games, Kingston hosted the 2012 Summer Olympics torch relay on two occasions with the flame travelling through the borough on 24 July 2012 and aboard the \"Gloriana\" in a cauldron on 27 July 2012 en route to the Olympic Stadium for the opening ceremony. The borough was the setting for four cycling events during the Olympics, the men's road race, women's road race, men's road time trial and women's road time trial.\nFollowing the games, the London\u2013Surrey Classic professional road bicycle race ran through the town from 2013 to 2018, using a similar course to the Olympic road race. Following the COVID-19 pandemic, the race will not return to Kingston, with the RideLondon festival using the roads of Essex instead.\nGeography.\nKingston is south-east of Twickenham, north-east of Walton-on-Thames, and north-west of Sutton.\nTown twinning.\nKingston upon Thames has been twinned with Oldenburg in Germany since 2010. It also has been historically twinned with Delft in the Netherlands.\nSince 2016, Kingston upon Thames has been twinned with Jaffna in Sri Lanka.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16880", "revid": "47810754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16880", "title": "Karnataka", "text": "State in southern India\nKarnataka is a state in the southwestern region of India. It was formed as Mysore State on 1 November 1956, with the passage of the States Reorganisation Act, and renamed \"Karnataka\" in 1973. The state is bordered by the Lakshadweep Sea to the west, Goa to the northwest, Maharashtra to the north, Telangana to the northeast, Andhra Pradesh to the east, Tamil Nadu to the southeast, and Kerala to the southwest. With 61,130,704 inhabitants at the 2011 census, Karnataka is the eighth-largest state by population, comprising 31 districts. With 15,257,000 residents, the state capital Bengaluru is the largest city of Karnataka.\nThe economy of Karnataka is among the most productive in the country with a gross state domestic product (GSDP) of () and a per capita GSDP of for the financial year 2023\u201324. The state experienced a GSDP growth of 10.2% for the same fiscal year. After Bengaluru Urban, Dakshina Kannada, Hubli\u2013Dharwad, and Belagavi districts contribute the highest revenue to the state respectively. The capital of the state, Bengaluru, is known as the Silicon Valley of India, for its immense contributions to the country's information technology sector. A total of 1,973 companies in the state were found to have been involved in the IT sector as of 2007.\nKarnataka is the only southern state to have land borders with all of the other four southern Indian sister states. The state covers an area of , or 5.83 per cent of the total geographical area of India. It is the sixth-largest Indian state by area. Kannada, one of the classical languages of India, is the most widely spoken and official language of the state. Other minority languages spoken include Urdu, Konkani, Marathi, Tulu, Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, Kodava and Beary. Karnataka also contains some of the only villages in India where Sanskrit is primarily spoken.\nThough several etymologies have been suggested for the name Karnataka, the generally accepted one is that \"Karnataka\" is derived from the Kannada words \"karu\" and \"n\u0101du\", meaning \"elevated land\". \"Karu Nadu\" may also be read as \"karu\", meaning \"black\" and \"nadu\", meaning \"region\", as a reference to the black cotton soil found in the Bayalu Seeme region of the state. The British used the word Carnatic, sometimes \"Karnatak\", to describe both sides of peninsular India, south of the Krishna. With an antiquity that dates to the Paleolithic, Karnataka has been home to some of the most powerful empires of ancient and medieval India. The philosophers and musical bards patronised by these empires launched socio-religious and literary movements which have endured to the present day. Karnataka has contributed significantly to both forms of Indian classical music, the Carnatic and Hindustani traditions.\nHistory.\nKarnataka's pre-history goes back to a Paleolithic hand-axe culture evidenced by discoveries of, among other things, hand axes and cleavers in the region. Evidence of Neolithic and megalithic cultures have also been found in the state. Gold discovered in Harappa was found to be imported from mines in Karnataka, prompting scholars to hypothesise about contacts between ancient Karnataka and the Indus Valley Civilisation c.\u20093300 BCE.\nPrior to the third century BCE, most of Karnataka formed part of the Mauryan Empire of Emperor Ashoka. Four centuries of Satavahana rule followed, allowing them to control large areas of Karnataka. The decline of Satavahana power led to the rise of the earliest native kingdoms, the Kadambas and the Western Gangas, marking the region's emergence as an independent political entity. The Kadamba Dynasty, founded by Mayurasharma, had its capital at Banavasi; the Western Ganga Dynasty was formed with Talakad as its capital.\nThese were also the first kingdoms to use Kannada in administration, as evidenced by the Halmidi inscription and a fifth-century copper coin discovered at Banavasi. These dynasties were followed by imperial Kannada empires such as the Badami Chalukyas, the Rashtrakuta Empire and the Western Chalukya Empire, which ruled over large parts of the Deccan and had their capitals in what is now Karnataka. The Western Chalukyas patronised a unique style of architecture and Kannada literature which became a precursor to the Hoysala art of the 12th century. Parts of modern-day Southern Karnataka (Gangavadi) were occupied by the Chola Empire at the turn of the 11th century. The Cholas and the Hoysalas fought over the region in the early 12th century before it eventually came under Hoysala rule.\nAt the turn of the first millennium, the Hoysalas gained power in the region. Literature flourished during this time, which led to the emergence of distinctive Kannada literary metres, and the construction of temples and sculptures adhering to the Vesara style of architecture. The expansion of the Hoysala Empire brought minor parts of modern Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu under its rule. In the early 14th century, Harihara and Bukka Raya established the Vijayanagara empire with its capital, \"Hosapattana\" (later named Vijayanagara), on the banks of the Tungabhadra River in the modern Bellary district. Under the rule of Krishnadevaraya, a distinct form of literature and architecture evolved. The empire rose as a bulwark against Muslim advances into South India, which it completely controlled for over two centuries. In 1537, Kempe Gowda I, a chieftain of the Vijayanagara Empire, widely held as the founder of modern Bengaluru, built a fort and established the area around it as Bengaluru Pete.\nIn 1565, Karnataka and the rest of South India experienced a major geopolitical shift when the Vijayanagara empire fell to a confederation of Islamic sultanates in the Battle of Talikota. The Bijapur Sultanate, which had risen after the demise of the Bahmani Sultanate of Bidar, soon took control of much of the Deccan; it was defeated by the Mughals in the late 17th century. The Bahmani and Bijapur rulers encouraged Urdu and Persian literature and Indo-Saracenic architecture, the Gol Gumbaz being one of the high points of this style. During the sixteenth century, Konkani Hindus migrated to Karnataka, mostly from Salcette, Goa, while during the seventeenth and eighteenth century, Goan Catholics migrated to North Canara and South Canara, especially from Bardes, Goa, as a result of food shortages, epidemics and heavy taxation imposed by the Portuguese.\nIn the period that followed, parts of northern Karnataka were ruled by the Nizam of Hyderabad, the Maratha Empire, the British, and other powers. In the south, the Mysore Kingdom, a former vassal of the Vijayanagara Empire, was briefly independent. With the death of Krishnaraja Wodeyar II, Haidar Ali, the commander-in-chief of the Mysore army, gained control of the region. After his death, the kingdom was inherited by his son Tipu Sultan. To contain European expansion in South India, Hyder Ali and later Tipu Sultan fought four significant Anglo-Mysore Wars, the last of which resulted in Tippu Sultan's death and the incorporation of Mysore into British India in 1799. Mysore was restored to the Wodeyars, and the Kingdom of Mysore became a princely state outside but in a subsidiary alliance with British India.\nAs the \"doctrine of lapse\" gave way to dissent and resistance from princely states across the country, Kittur Chennamma, Queen of Kittur, her military leader Sangolli Rayanna, and others, spearheaded rebellions in part of what is now Karnataka in 1830, nearly three decades before the Indian Rebellion of 1857. However, Kitturu was taken over by the British East India Company even before the doctrine was officially articulated by Lord Dalhousie in 1848. Other uprisings followed, such as the ones at Supa, Bagalkot, Shorapur, Nargund and Dandeli. These rebellions\u2014which coincided with the Indian Rebellion of 1857\u2014were led by Mundargi Bhimarao, Bhaskar Rao Bhave, the Halagali Bedas, Raja Venkatappa Nayaka and others. By the late 19th century, the independence movement had gained momentum; Karnad Sadashiva Rao, Aluru Venkata Raya, S. Nijalingappa, Kengal Hanumanthaiah, Nittoor Srinivasa Rau and others carried on the struggle into the early 20th century.\nAfter the independence of British India, the Maharaja, Jayachamarajendra Wodeyar, signed an instrument of accession to accede his state to the new India. In 1950, Mysore became an Indian state of the same name; the former Maharaja served as its \"Rajpramukh\" (head of state) until 1975. Following the long-standing demand of the Ekikarana Movement, Kodagu- and Kannada-speaking regions from the adjoining states of Madras, Hyderabad and Bombay were incorporated into the Mysore state, under the States Reorganisation Act of 1956. The thus expanded state was renamed Karnataka, seventeen years later, on 1 November 1973. In the early 1900s through the post-independence era, industrial visionaries such as Sir Mokshagundam Visvesvarayya, played an important role in the development of Karnataka's strong manufacturing and industrial base.\nGeography.\nThe state has three principal geographical zones:\nThe bulk of the state is in the Bayaluseeme region, the northern part of which is the second-largest arid region in India. The highest point in Karnataka is the Mullayanagiri hills in Chikmagalur district which has an altitude of . The two main river systems of the state are the Krishna and its tributaries, the Bhima, Ghataprabha, Vedavathi, Malaprabha and Tungabhadra in North Karnataka, and the Kaveri and its tributaries, the Hemavati, Shimsha, Arkavati, Lakshmana Thirtha and Kabini, in South Karnataka. Most of these rivers flow out of Karnataka eastward, reaching the sea at the Bay of Bengal. Other prominent rivers such as the Sharavati in Shimoga and Netravati in Dakshina Kannada flow westward to the Lakshadweep Sea. A large number of dams and reservoirs are constructed across these rivers which richly add to the irrigation and hydroelectricity power generation capacities of the state.\nKarnataka consists of four main types of geological formations \u2013 the \"Archean complex\" made up of Dharwad schists and granitic gneisses, the \"Proterozoic\" non-fossiliferous sedimentary formations of the Kaladgi and Bhima series, the \"Deccan trappean and intertrappean deposits\" and the tertiary and recent laterites and alluvial deposits. Laterite cappings that are found in many districts over the Deccan Traps were formed after the cessation of volcanic activity in the early tertiary period. Eleven groups of soil orders are found in Karnataka, viz. Entisols, Inceptisols, Mollisols, Spodosols, Alfisols, Ultisols, Oxisols, Aridisols, Vertisols, Andisols and Histosols. Depending on the agricultural capability of the soil, the soil types are divided into six types, \"viz.\" red, lateritic, black, alluvio-colluvial, forest and coastal soils.\nAbout of Karnataka (i.e. 16% of the state's geographic area) is covered by forests. The forests are classified as reserved, protected, unclosed, village and private forests. The percentage of forested area is slightly less than the all-India average of about 23%, and significantly less than the 33% prescribed in the National Forest Policy.\nClimate.\nKarnataka experiences four seasons. The winter in January and February is followed by summer between March and May, the monsoon season between June and September and the post-monsoon season from October till December. Meteorologically, Karnataka is divided into three zones\u00a0\u2013 coastal, north interior and south interior. Of these, the coastal zone receives the heaviest rainfall with an average rainfall of about per annum, far in excess of the state average of . Amagaon in Khanapura taluka of Belgaum district received of rainfall in 2010. In 2014 Kokalli in Sirsi taluka of Uttara Kannada district received of rainfall. Agumbe in Thirthahalli taluka and Hulikal of Hosanagara taluka in Shimoga district were the rainiest cities in Karnataka, situated in one of the wettest regions in the world.\nThe state is projected to warm about by 2030. The monsoon is set to provide less rainfall. Agriculture in Karnataka is mostly rainfed as opposed to irrigated, making it highly vulnerable to expected changes in the monsoon. The highest recorded temperature was in Raichuru district. The lowest recorded temperature was at Bidar district.\nFlora and fauna.\nKarnataka is home to a variety of wildlife. It has a recorded forest area of which constitutes 12.3% of the total geographical area of the state. These forests support 25% of the Indian elephant and 10% of the tiger population of India. Many regions of Karnataka are as yet unexplored, so new species of flora and fauna are found periodically. The Western Ghats, a biodiversity hotspot, includes the western region of Karnataka. Bandipur and Nagarhole National Parks were included in the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve in 1986, a UNESCO designation. The Indian roller and the Indian elephant are recognised as the state bird and animal while sandalwood and the lotus are recognised as the state tree and flower respectively. Karnataka has five national parks: Anshi, Bandipur, Bannerghatta, Kudremukh and Nagarhole. It also has 27 wildlife sanctuaries of which seven are bird sanctuaries.\nWild animals in Karnataka include the Indian elephant, tiger, leopard, gaur, sambar deer, chital, Indian muntjac, bonnet macaque, slender loris, Asian palm civet, small Indian civet, sloth bear, dhole, striped hyena, Bengal fox and golden jackal. Some of the birds present include the great hornbill, Malabar pied hornbill, Ceylon frogmouth, herons, ducks, kites, eagles, falcons, quails, partridges, lapwings, sandpipers, pigeons, doves, parakeets, cuckoos, owls, nightjars, swifts, kingfishers, bee-eaters and munias. Some species of trees are \"Calophyllum tomentosum\", \"Calophyllum apetalum\", \"Garcinia cambogia\", \"Garcinia morella\", \"Alstonia scholaris\", \"Flacourtia montana\", \"Artocarpus hirsutus\", \"Artocarpus lacucha\", \"Cinnamomum zeylanicum\", \"Grewia tiliifolia\", \"Santalum album\", \"Shorea talura\", \"Emblica officinalis\", \"Vitex altissima\" and \"Wrightia tinctoria\". Wildlife in Karnataka is threatened by poaching, habitat destruction, human-wildlife conflict and pollution.\nSub-divisions.\nThere are 31 districts in Karnataka. Each district (zila) is administered by a Deputy Commissioner (also known as the \"District Collector\"), who is typically an officer of the Indian Administrative Service (IAS). The districts are further divided into revenue sub-divisions, which are administered by assistant commissioners. These sub-divisions are further divided into taluks (or talukas), which are administered by Tahsildars. Taluks comprise hoblis (clusters of adjoining villages), which include revenue villages.\nKarnataka has around 6,022 Gram Panchayats, 226 Taluk Panchayats, and 31 Zilla Panchayats in rural areas.\nIn urban areas, there are 318 urban local bodies, including 1 BBMP, 13 Municipal Corporations, 60 City Municipal Councils, 126 Town Municipal Councils, 114 Town Panchayats and 4 notified area committees.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2011 census of India, the total population of Karnataka was 61,095,297 of which 30,966,657 (50.7%) were male and 30,128,640 (49.3%) were female, or 1000 males for every 973 females. This represents a 15.60% increase over the population in 2001. The population density was 319 per km2 and 38.67% of the people lived in urban areas. The literacy rate was 75.36% with 82.47% of males and 68.08% of females being literate.\nIn 2007 the state had a birth rate of 2.2%, a death rate of 0.7%, an infant mortality rate of 5.5% and a maternal mortality rate of 0.2%. The total fertility rate was 2.2.\nKarnataka's private sector speciality health care competes with the best in the world. Karnataka has also established a modicum of public health services having a better record of health care and child care than most other states of India. In spite of these advances, some parts of the state still suffer from the lack of primary health care.\nKarnataka ranked tenth in the Fiscal Health Index (FHI) 2025, with a score of 40.8.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdi Shankara (788\u2013820 CE) chose Sringeri in Karnataka to establish the first of his four \"mathas\" (monastery). Madhvacharya (1238\u20131317) was the chief proponent of Tattvavada (philosophy of reality), popularly known as Dvaita or Dualistic school of Hindu philosophy\u00a0\u2013 one of the three most influential Vedanta philosophies. Madhvacharya was one of the important philosophers during the Bhakti movement. He was a pioneer in many ways, going against standard conventions and norms. According to tradition, Madhvacharya is believed to be the third incarnation of Vayu (Mukhyaprana), after Hanuman and Bhima. The Haridasa devotional movement is considered one of the turning points in the cultural history of India. Over a span of nearly six centuries, several saints and mystics helped shape the culture, philosophy, and art of South India and Karnataka in particular by exerting considerable spiritual influence over the masses and kingdoms that ruled South India.\nThis movement was ushered in by the Haridasas (literally \"servants of Hari\") and took shape in the 13th century \u2013 14th century CE, period, prior to and during the early rule of the Vijayanagara empire. The main objective of this movement was to propagate the Dvaita philosophy of Madhvacharya (Madhva Siddhanta) to the masses through a literary medium known as Dasa Sahitya. Purandara dasa is widely recognised as the \"Pithamaha\" of Carnatic Music for his immense contribution. Ramanuja, the leading expounder of \"Vishishtadvaita\", spent many years in Melkote. He came to Karnataka in 1098 CE and lived here until 1122 CE. He first lived in Tondanur and then moved to Melkote where the Cheluvanarayana Swamy Temple and a well-organised \"matha\" were built. He was patronised by the Hoysala king, Vishnuvardhana.\nIn the twelfth century, Lingayatism emerged in northern Karnataka as a protest against the rigidity of the prevailing social and caste system. Leading figures of this movement were Basava, Akka Mahadevi and Allama Prabhu, who established the Anubhava Mantapa which was the centre of all religious and philosophical thoughts and discussions pertaining to Lingayats. These three social reformers did so by the literary means of \"Vachana Sahitya\" which is very famous for its simple, straight forward and easily understandable Kannada language. Lingayatism preached women equality by letting women wear \"Ishtalinga\" i.e. Symbol of god around their neck. Basava shunned the sharp hierarchical divisions that existed and sought to remove all distinctions between the hierarchically superior master class and the subordinate, servile class. He also supported inter-caste marriages and Kaay Ta tTatva of Basavanna. This was the basis of the Lingayat faith which today counts millions among its followers.\nThe Jain philosophy and literature have contributed immensely to the religious and cultural landscape of Karnataka.\nIslam, which had an early presence on the west coast of India as early as the tenth century, gained a foothold in Karnataka with the rise of the Bahamani and Bijapur sultanates that ruled parts of Karnataka. Christianity reached Karnataka in the sixteenth century with the arrival of the Portuguese and St. Francis Xavier in 1545.\nBuddhism was popular in Karnataka during the first millennium in places such as Gulbarga and Banavasi. A chance discovery of edicts and several Mauryan relics at Sannati in Kalaburagi district in 1986 has proven that the Krishna River basin was once home to both Mahayana and Hinayana Buddhism. There are Tibetan refugee camps in Karnataka.\nFestivals.\nMysore Dasara is celebrated as the \"Nada habba\" (state festival) and this is marked by major festivities at Mysore. Bengaluru Karaga, celebrated in the heart of Bengaluru, is the second most important festival celebrated in Karnataka. \"Ugadi\" (Kannada New Year), Makara Sankranti (the harvest festival), Ganesh Chaturthi, Gowri Habba, Ram Navami, Nagapanchami, Basava Jayanthi, Deepavali, and Balipadyami are the other major festivals of Karnataka.\nLanguage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nKannada is the official language of the state of Karnataka, as the native language of 66.46% of its population as of 2011 and is one of the classical languages of India. Urdu is the second largest language, spoken by 10.83% of the population, and is the language of Muslims outside the coastal region. Telugu (5.84%) is a major language in areas bordering Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka as well as Bengaluru, while Tamil (3.45%) is a major language of Bengaluru and in the Kolar district. Marathi (3.29%) is concentrated in areas of Uttara Kannada, Belgaum and Bidar districts bordering Maharashtra. Lambadi is spoken by the Lambadis scattered throughout North Karnataka, while Hindi is spoken in Bengaluru. Tulu (2.61%), Konkani (1.29%), and Malayalam (1.27%) are all found in linguistically diverse Coastal Karnataka, where a number of mixed and distinct dialects such as Are Bhashe, Beary Bhashe, and Nawayathi are found. Kodava Takk is the language of Kodagu.\nKannada played a crucial role in the creation of Karnataka: linguistic demographics played a major role in defining the new state in 1956. Tulu, Konkani and Kodava are other minor native languages that share a long history in the state. Urdu is spoken widely by the Muslim population. Less widely spoken languages include Beary bashe and certain languages such as Sankethi. Some of the regional languages in Karnataka are Tulu, Kodava, Konkani and Beary.\nKannada features a rich and ancient body of literature including religious and secular genre, covering topics as diverse as Jainism (such as \"Puranas\"), Lingayatism (such as Vachanas), Vaishnavism (such as \"Haridasa Sahitya\") and modern literature. Evidence from edicts during the time of Ashoka (reigned 274\u2013232 BCE) suggest that Buddhist literature influenced the Kannada script and its literature. The Halmidi inscription, the earliest attested full-length inscription in the Kannada language and script, dates from 450 CE, while the earliest available literary work, the \"Kavirajamarga\", has been dated to 850 CE. References made in the \"Kavirajamarga\", however, prove that Kannada literature flourished in the native composition metres such as \"Chattana\", \"Beddande\" and \"Melvadu\" during earlier centuries. The classic refers to several earlier greats (\"purvacharyar\") of Kannada poetry and prose. Kuvempu, the renowned Kannada poet and writer who wrote Jaya Bharata Jananiya Tanujate, the state anthem of Karnataka was the first recipient of the Karnataka Ratna, the highest civilian award bestowed by the Government of Karnataka. Contemporary Kannada literature has received considerable acknowledgement in the arena of Indian literature, with eight Kannada writers winning India's highest literary honour, the Jnanpith award.\nTulu is the majority language in the coastal district of Dakshina Kannada and is the second most spoken in the Udupi district. This region is also known as Tulu Nadu. \"Tulu Mahabharato\", written by Arunabja in the Tigalari script, is the oldest surviving Tulu text. Tigalari script was used by Brahmins to write Sanskrit language. The use of the Kannada script for writing Tulu and non-availability of print in Tigalari script contributed to the marginalisation of Tigalari script. In Karnataka Konkani is mostly spoken in the Uttara Kannada and Dakshina Kannada districts and in parts of Udupi, Konkani use the Devanagari Script (which is official)/Kannada script (Optional) for writing as identified by government of Karnataka.\nThe Kodavas who mainly reside in the Kodagu district, speak Kodava Takk. Kodagu was a separate State with its own Chief Minister and Council of Ministers till 1956. Two regional variations of the language exist, the northern \"Mendale Takka\" and the southern \"Kiggaati Takka\". Kodava Takk has its own script, \"Karnataka Kodava Sahitya Academy\" has accepted I. M. Muthanna's script which was developed in 1970 as the official script of Kodava Thakk. English is the medium of education in many schools and widely used for business communication in most private companies. All of the state's languages are patronised and promoted by governmental and quasi-governmental bodies. The \"Kannada Sahitya Parishat\" and the \"Kannada Sahitya Akademi\" are responsible for the promotion of Kannada while the \"Karnataka Konkani Sahitya Akademi\", the \"Tulu Sahitya Akademi\" and the \"Kodava Sahitya Akademi\" promote their respective languages.\nGovernment and administration.\nKarnataka has a parliamentary system of government with two democratically elected houses, the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council. The Legislative Assembly consists of 224 members who are elected for five-year terms. The Legislative Council is a permanent body of 75 members with one-third (25 members) retiring every two years.\nThe government of Karnataka is headed by the Chief Minister who is chosen by the ruling party members of the Legislative Assembly. The Chief Minister, along with the council of ministers, executes the legislative agenda and exercises most of the executive powers. However, the constitutional and formal head of the state is the Governor who is appointed for a five-year term by the President of India on the advice of the Union government. The people of Karnataka also elect 28 members to the \"Lok Sabha\", the lower house of the Indian Parliament. The members of the state Legislative Assembly elect 12 members to the \"Rajya Sabha\", the upper house of the Indian Parliament.For administrative purposes, Karnataka has been divided into four revenue divisions, 49 sub-divisions, 31 districts, 175 \"taluks\" and 745 \"hoblies\" / revenue circles. The administration in each district is headed by a Deputy Commissioner who belongs to the Indian Administrative Service and is assisted by a number of officers belonging to Karnataka state services. The Superintendent of Police, an officer belonging to the Indian Police Service and assisted by the officers of the Karnataka Police Service, is entrusted with the responsibility of maintaining law and order and related issues in each district. The Deputy Conservator of Forests, an officer belonging to the Indian Forest Service, is entrusted with the responsibility of managing forests, environment and wildlife of the district, he will be assisted by the officers belonging to Karnataka Forest Service and officers belonging to Karnataka Forest Subordinate Service. Sectoral development in the districts is looked after by the district head of each development department such as Public Works Department, Health, Education, Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, etc. The judiciary in the state consists of the Karnataka High Court (\"Attara Kacheri\") in Bengaluru, Hubli\u2013Dharwad, and Kalaburagi, district and session courts in each district and lower courts and judges at the \"taluk\" level.\nPolitics in Karnataka has been dominated by three political parties, the Indian National Congress, the Janata Dal (Secular) and the Bharatiya Janata Party. Politicians from Karnataka have played prominent roles in federal government of India with some of them having held the high positions of Prime Minister and Vice-President. Border disputes involving Karnataka's claim on the Kasaragod and Solapur districts and Maharashtra's claim on Belagavi are ongoing since the states reorganisation. The official has a \"Ganda Berunda\" in the centre. Surmounting this are four lions facing the four directions, taken from the Lion Capital of Ashoka at Sarnath. The emblem also carries two \"Sharabhas\" with the head of an elephant and the body of a lion.\nEconomy.\nKarnataka had an estimated GSDP (Gross State Domestic Product) of about US$115.86\u00a0billion in the 2014\u201315 fiscal year. The state registered a GSDP growth rate of 7% for the year 2014\u20132015. Karnataka's contribution to India's GDP in the year 2014\u201315 was 7.54%. With GDP growth of 17.59% and per capita GDP growth of 16.04%, Karnataka is on the 6th position among all states and union territories. In an employment survey conducted for the year 2013\u20132014, the unemployment rate in Karnataka was 1.8% compared to the national rate of 4.9%. In 2011\u20132012, Karnataka had an estimated poverty ratio of 20.91% compared to the national ratio of 21.92%. In 2024, Karnataka had a multi-dimensional poverty rate of 5.67%, compared to the all India average of 11.28%.\nNearly 56% of the workforce in Karnataka is engaged in agriculture and related activities. A total of 12.31\u00a0million hectares of land, or 64.6% of the state's total area, is cultivated. Much of the agricultural output is dependent on the southwest monsoon as only 26.5% of the sown area is irrigated.\nAccording to most recent data, Karnataka is considered the third richest state in India.\nKarnataka is the manufacturing hub for some of the largest public sector industries in India, including Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, National Aerospace Laboratories, Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Bharat Earth Movers Limited and HMT (formerly Hindustan Machine Tools), which are based in Bengaluru. Many of India's premier science and technology research centres, such as Indian Space Research Organisation, Central Power Research Institute, Bharat Electronics Limited and the Central Food Technological Research Institute, are also headquartered in Karnataka. Mangalore Refinery and Petrochemicals Limited is an oil refinery, located in Mangalore.\nThe state has also begun to invest heavily in solar power centered on the Pavagada Solar Park. As of December 2017, the state has installed an estimated 2.2 gigawatts of block solar panelling and in January 2018 announced a tender to generate a further 1.2 gigawatts in the coming years: Karnataka Renewable Energy Development suggests that this will be based on 24 separate systems (or 'blocks') generating 50 megawatts each.\nSince the 1980s, Karnataka has emerged as the pan-Indian leader in the field of IT (information technology). In 2007, there were nearly 2,000 firms operating in Karnataka. Many of them, including two of India's biggest software firms, Infosys and Wipro, are also headquartered in the state. Exports from these firms exceeded () in 2006\u201307, accounting for nearly 38% of all IT exports from India. The Nandi Hills area in the outskirts of Devanahalli is the site of the upcoming $22\u00a0billion, 50\u00a0km2 BIAL IT Investment Region, one of the largest infrastructure projects in the history of Karnataka. All this has earned the state capital, Bengaluru, the sobriquet \"Silicon Valley of India\".\nKarnataka also leads the nation in biotechnology. It is home to India's largest biocluster, with 60% of the country's biotechnology firms being based here. The state has 18,000 hectares of land under flower cultivation, an upcoming industry which supplies flowers and ornamental plants worldwide.\nSeven of India's banks, Canara Bank, Syndicate Bank, Corporation Bank, Vijaya Bank, Karnataka Bank, ING Vysya Bank and the State Bank of Mysore originated in this state. The coastal districts of Udupi and Dakshina Kannada have a branch for every 500 persons\u2014the best distribution of banks in India. In March 2002, Karnataka had 4767 branches of different banks with each branch serving 11,000 persons, which is lower than the national average of 16,000.\nA majority of the silk industry in India is headquartered in Karnataka, much of it in Doddaballapura in Bengaluru Rural district and the state government intends to invest million () in a \"Silk City\" at Muddenahalli in Chikkaballapura district.\nKarnataka also produces silver. The silver production of the state in 2018\u201319 was 214\u00a0kg whereas in 2019\u201320 it was 187\u00a0kg and in 2020\u201321 the silver production was 120\u00a0kg.\nKarnataka has the only village in the country which produces authentic Indian national flags according to manufacturing process and specifications for the flag are laid out by the Bureau of Indian Standards at Hubli.\nTransport.\nAir transport in Karnataka, as in the rest of the country, is still a fledgling but fast expanding sector. Karnataka has airports at Bengaluru, Mangalore, Belgaum, Hubli, Hampi, Bellary, Gulbarga, and Mysore with international operations from Bengaluru and Mangalore airports. Shimoga and Bijapur airports are being built under the UDAN Scheme.\nKarnataka has a railway network with a total length of approximately . Until the creation of the South-Western Railway Zone headquartered at Hubli in 2003, the railway network in the state was in the Southern Railway zone, South-Central Railway Zone and Western Railway zone. Several parts of the state now come under the South Western Railway zone with 3 Railway Divisions at Bengaluru, Mysore, Hubli, with the remainder under the Southern Railway zone and Konkan Railway Zone, which is considered one of India's biggest railway projects of the century due to the difficult terrain. Bengaluru and other cities in the state are well-connected with intrastate and inter-state destinations.\nKarnataka has 11 ports, including the New Mangalore Port, a major port and ten minor ports, of which three were operational in 2012. The New Mangalore port was incorporated as the ninth major port in India on 4 May 1974. This port handled 32.04\u00a0million tonnes of traffic in the fiscal year 2006\u201307 with 17.92\u00a0million tonnes of imports and 14.12\u00a0million tonnes of exports. The port also handled 1015 vessels including 18 cruise vessels during the year 2006\u201307. Foreigners can enter Mangalore through the New Mangalore Port with the help of Electronic visa (e-visa). Cruise ships from Europe, North America and UAE arrive at New Mangalore Port to visit the tourist places across Coastal Karnataka. The port of Mangalore is among the 4 major ports of India that receive over 25 international cruise ships every year.\nThe total lengths of National Highways and State Highways in Karnataka are , respectively.\nThe state transport corporations, transports an average of 2.2\u00a0million passengers daily and employs about 25,000 people. The Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC) and The Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC) headquartered in Bengaluru, The Kalyana Karnataka Road Transport Corporation (KKRTC) headquartered in Gulbarga, and The North Western Karnataka Road Transport Corporation (NWKRTC) headquartered in Hubli are the 4 state-owned transport corporations.\nCulture.\nThe diverse linguistic and religious ethnicities that are native to Karnataka, combined with their long histories, have contributed immensely to the varied cultural heritage of the state. Apart from Kannadigas, Karnataka is home to Tuluvas, Kodavas and Konkanis. Minor populations of Tibetan Buddhists and tribes like the Soligas, Yeravas, Todas and Siddhis also live in Karnataka. The traditional folk arts cover the entire gamut of music, dance, drama, storytelling by itinerant troupes, etc. \"Yakshagana\" of Tulu Nadu, Uttara Kannada, and Malnad regions Karnataka, a classical dance drama, is one of the major theatrical forms of Karnataka. Contemporary theatre culture in Karnataka remains vibrant with organisations like \"Ninasam\", \"Ranga Shankara\", \"Rangayana\" and \"Prabhat Kalavidaru\" continuing to build on the foundations laid by Gubbi Veeranna, T. P. Kailasam, B. V. Karanth, K V Subbanna, Prasanna and others. \"Veeragase\", \"Kamsale\", \"Kolata\" and \"Dollu Kunitha\" are popular dance forms. The Mysore style of \"Bharatanatya\", nurtured and popularised by the likes of the legendary Jatti Tayamma, continues to hold sway in Karnataka, and Bengaluru also enjoys an eminent place as one of the foremost centres of \"Bharatanatya\".\nKarnataka also has a special place in the world of Indian classical music, with both Karnataka (Carnatic) and Hindustani styles finding place in the state, and Karnataka has produced a number of stalwarts in both styles. The Haridasa movement of the sixteenth century contributed significantly to the development of Karnataka (Carnatic) music as a performing art form. Purandara Dasa, one of the most revered Haridasas, is known as the \"Karnataka Sangeeta Pitamaha\" ('Father of Karnataka a.k.a. Carnatic music'). Celebrated Hindustani musicians like Gangubai Hangal, Mallikarjun Mansur, Bhimsen Joshi, Basavaraja Rajaguru, Sawai Gandharva and several others hail from Karnataka, and some of them have been recipients of the Kalidas Samman, Padma Bhushan and Padma Vibhushan awards. Noted Carnatic musicians include Violin T. Chowdiah, Veena Sheshanna, Mysore Vasudevachar, Doreswamy Iyengar and Thitte Krishna Iyengar.\n\"Gamaka\" is another classical music genre based on Carnatic music that is practised in Karnataka. \"Kannada Bhavageete\" is a genre of popular music that draws inspiration from the expressionist poetry of modern poets. The Mysore school of painting has produced painters like Sundarayya, Tanjavur Kondayya, B. Venkatappa and Keshavayya. \"Chitrakala Parishat\" is an organisation in Karnataka dedicated to promoting painting, mainly in the Mysore painting style.\n\"Saree\" is the traditional dress of women in Karnataka. Women in Kodagu have a distinct style of wearing the \"saree\", different from the rest of Karnataka. \"Dhoti\", known as \"Panche\" in Karnataka, is the traditional attire of men. Shirt, Trousers and \"Salwar kameez\" are widely worn in Urban areas. \"Mysore Peta\" is the traditional headgear of southern Karnataka, while the \"pagadi\" or \"pataga\" (similar to the Rajasthani turban) is preferred in the northern areas of the state.\nRice and \"Ragi\" form the staple food in South Karnataka, whereas \"Jolada rotti\", Sorghum is staple to North Karnataka. \"Bisi bele bath\", \"Jolada rotti\", \"Ragi mudde\", \"Uppittu\", \"Benne Dose\", \"Masala Dose\" and \"Maddur Vade\" are some of the popular food items in Karnataka. Among sweets, \"Mysore Pak\", \"Karadantu\" of Gokak and \"Amingad\", \"Belgaavi Kunda\" and \"Dharwad pedha\" are popular. Apart from this, coastal Karnataka and Kodagu have distinctive cuisines of their own. Udupi cuisine of coastal Karnataka is popular all over India.\nEducation.\nAs per the 2011 census, Karnataka had a literacy rate of 75.60%, with 82.85% of males and 68.13% of females in the state being literate.\nThe Indian Institute of Science and Manipal Academy of Higher Education were ranked within the top 10 universities of India by NIRF 2020. The state is home to some of the premier educational and research institutions of India such as the Indian Institute of Management \u2013 Bengaluru, the Indian Institute of Technology \u2013 Dharwad the National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences \u2013 Bengaluru, the National Institute of Technology Karnataka \u2013 Surathkal and the National Law School of India University \u2013 Bengaluru.\nIn March 2006, Karnataka had 54,529 primary schools with 252,875 teachers and 8.495\u00a0million students, and 9498 secondary schools with 92,287 teachers and 1.384\u00a0million students. There are three kinds of schools in the state, viz., government-run, private aided (financial aid is provided by the government) and private unaided (no financial aid is provided). The primary languages of instruction in most schools are Kannada and English.\nThe syllabus taught in the schools is either of KSEEB (SSLC) and Pre-University Course (PUC) of the State Syllabus, the CBSE of the Central Syllabus, CISCE, IGCSE, IB, NIOS, etc., are all defined by the Department of Public Instruction of the Government of Karnataka. The state has two Sainik Schools \u2013 Kodagu Sainik School in Kodagu and Bijapur Sainik School in Bijapur.\nTo maximise attendance in schools, the Karnataka Government has launched a mid-day meal scheme in government and aided schools in which free lunch is provided to the students.\nStatewide board examinations are conducted at the end of secondary education. Students who qualify are allowed to pursue a two-year pre-university course, after which they become eligible to pursue under-graduate degrees.\nThere are 481-degree colleges affiliated with one of the universities in the state, viz. Bengaluru University, Rani Channamma University, Belagavi, Gulbarga University, Karnatak University, Kuvempu University, Mangalore University and Mysore University. In 1998, the engineering colleges in the state were brought under the newly formed Visvesvaraya Technological University headquartered in Belgaum, whereas the medical colleges are run under the jurisdiction of the Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences headquartered in Bengaluru. Some of these baccalaureate colleges are accredited with the status of a deemed university. There are 186 engineering, 39 medical and 41 dental colleges in the state. Udupi, Sringeri, Gokarna and Melkote are well-known places of Sanskrit and Vedic learning. In 2015 the Central Government decided to establish the first Indian Institute of Technology in Karnataka at Dharwad. Tulu and Konkani languages are taught as an optional subject in the twin districts of Dakshina Kannada and Udupi.\nChrist University, Jain University, CMR University, Dayananda Sagar University, PES University and REVA University are notable private universities in Karnataka.\nOn 9 February 2022, Karnataka shut its schools for three days after the regional administration-backed schools imposed a hijab ban, leading to widespread protests and violence. Other universities in the state began enforcing prohibitions after Hindu students, supported by right-wing Hindu groups, argued that if hijabs were allowed in classrooms, they should wear saffron shawls. On 5 February 2022, the Karnataka state government advised colleges to guarantee that \"clothes which disturb equality, integrity, and public law and order should not be worn\" in apparent support of schools' ability to enforce a ban.\nMedia.\nThe era of Kannada newspapers started in the year 1843 when Hermann M\u00f6gling, a missionary from Basel Mission, published the first Kannada newspaper called \"Mangaluru Samachara\" in Mangalore. The first Kannada periodical, \"Mysuru Vrittanta Bodhini\" was started by Bhashyam Bhashyacharya in Mysore. Shortly after Indian independence in 1948, K. N. Guruswamy founded \"The Printers (Mysuru) Private Limited\" and began publishing two newspapers, \"Deccan Herald\" and \"Prajavani\". Presently \"The Times of India\" and \"Vijaya Karnataka\" are the largest-selling English and Kannada newspapers respectively. A vast number of weekly, biweekly and monthly magazines are under publication in both Kannada and English. \"https://, https://, https://, https://, https://\" are some popular dailies published from Karnataka.\nDoordarshan is the broadcaster of the Government of India and its channel DD Chandana is dedicated to Kannada. Prominent Kannada channels include Colors Kannada, Zee Kannada, Star Suvarna and Udaya TV.\nKarnataka occupies a special place in the history of Indian radio. In 1935, \"Aakashvani\", the first private radio station in India, was started by Prof. M.V. Gopalaswamy in Mysore. The popular radio station was taken over by the local municipality and later by All India Radio (AIR) and moved to Bengaluru in 1955. Later in 1957, AIR adopted the original name of the radio station, \"Aakashavani\" as its own. Some of the popular programs aired by AIR Bengaluru included \"Nisarga Sampada\" and \"Sasya Sanjeevini\" which were programs that taught science through songs, plays, and stories. These two programs became so popular that they were translated and broadcast in 18 different languages and the entire series was recorded on cassettes by the Government of Karnataka and distributed to thousands of schools across the state. Karnataka has witnessed a growth in FM radio channels, mainly in the cities of Bengaluru, Mangalore and Mysore, which has become hugely popular.\nSports.\nKarnataka's smallest district, Kodagu, is a major contributor to Indian field hockey, producing numerous players who have represented India at the international level. The annual Kodava Hockey Festival is the largest hockey tournament in the world. Bengaluru has hosted a WTA tennis event and, in 1997, it hosted the fourth National Games of India. The Sports Authority of India, the premier sports institute in the country, and the Nike Tennis Academy are also situated in Bengaluru. Karnataka has been referred to as the cradle of Indian swimming because of its high standards in comparison to other states.\nOne of the most popular sports in Karnataka is cricket. The state cricket team has won the Ranji Trophy seven times, second only to Mumbai in terms of success. Chinnaswamy Stadium in Bengaluru regularly hosts international Cricket matches and is also the home of the National Cricket Academy, which was opened in 2000 to nurture potential international players. Many cricketers have represented India and in one international match held in the 1990s; players from Karnataka composed the majority of the national team. The Royal Challengers Bengaluru, an Indian Premier League franchise, the Bengaluru Football Club, an Indian Super League franchise, the Bengaluru Yodhas, a Pro Wrestling League franchise, the Bengaluru Blasters, a Premier Badminton League franchise and the Bengaluru Bulls, a Pro Kabaddi League franchise are based in Bengaluru. The Karnataka Premier League is an inter-regional Twenty20 cricket tournament played in the state for eight seasons till 2019. After 2019, it was replaced by Maharaja Trophy KSCA T20 tournament.\nNotable sportsmen from Karnataka include B.S. Chandrasekhar, Roger Binny, E. A. S. Prasanna, Anil Kumble, Javagal Srinath, Rahul Dravid, Venkatesh Prasad, Robin Uthappa, Vinay Kumar, Gundappa Vishwanath, Syed Kirmani, Stuart Binny, K. L. Rahul, Mayank Agarwal, Manish Pandey, Karun Nair, Ashwini Ponnappa, Mahesh Bhupathi, Rohan Bopanna, Prakash Padukone who won the All England Badminton Championships in 1980 and Pankaj Advani who has won three world titles in cue sports by the age of 20 including the amateur World Snooker Championship in 2003 and the World Billiards Championship in 2005.\nBijapur district has produced some of the best-known road cyclists in the national circuit. Premalata Sureban was part of the Indian contingent at the Perlis Open '99 in Malaysia. In recognition of the talent of cyclists in the district, the state government laid down a cycling track at the B.R. Ambedkar Stadium at a cost of million ().\nTourism.\nBy virtue of its varied geography and long history, Karnataka hosts numerous spots of interest for tourists. There is an array of ancient sculptured temples, modern cities, scenic hill ranges, forests and beaches. Karnataka has been ranked as the fourth most popular destination for tourism among the states of India. Karnataka has the second highest number of nationally protected monuments in India, second only to Uttar Pradesh, in addition to 752 monuments protected by the State Directorate of Archaeology and Museums. Another 25,000 monuments are yet to receive protection.\nThe districts of the Western Ghats and the southern districts of the state have popular eco-tourism locations including Kudremukh, Madikeri and Agumbe. Karnataka has 25 wildlife sanctuaries and five national parks. Popular among them are Bandipura National Park, Bannerghatta National Park and Nagarhole National Park. The ruins of the Vijayanagara Empire at Hampi and the monuments of Pattadakal are on the list of UNESCO's World Heritage Sites. The cave temples at Badami and the rock-cut temples at Aihole representing the Badami Chalukyan style of architecture are also popular tourist destinations. The Hoysala temples at Beluru and Halebidu, which were built with Chloritic schist (soapstone) are proposed UNESCO World Heritage sites. The Gol Gumbaz and Ibrahim Rauza are famous examples of the Deccan Sultanate style of architecture. The monolith of Gomateshwara Bahubali at Shravanabelagola is the tallest sculpted monolith in the world, attracting tens of thousands of pilgrims during the Mahamastakabhisheka festival.\nThe waterfalls of Karnataka and Kudremukh are considered by some to be among the \"1001 Natural Wonders of the World\". Jog Falls is India's tallest single-tiered waterfall with Gokak Falls, Unchalli Falls, Magod Falls, Abbey Falls and Shivanasamudra Falls among other popular waterfalls.\nSeveral popular beaches dot the coastline, including Murudeshwara, Gokarna, Malpe and Karwar. In addition, Karnataka is home to several places of religious importance. Several Hindu temples including the famous Udupi Sri Krishna Matha, the Marikamba Temple at Sirsi, the Kollur Mookambika Temple, the Sri Manjunatha Temple at Dharmasthala, Kukke Subramanya Temple, Janardhana and Mahakali Temple at Ambalpadi, Sharadamba Temple at Shringeri attract pilgrims from all over India. Most of the holy sites of Lingayatism, like Kudalasangama and Basavana Bagewadi, are found in northern parts of the state. Shravanabelagola, Mudabidri and Karkala are famous for Jain history and monuments. Jainism had a stronghold in Karnataka in the early medieval period with Shravanabelagola as its most important centre. The Shettihalli Rosary Church near Shettihalli, an example of French colonial Gothic architecture, is a rare example of a Christian ruin, is a popular tourist site.\nKarnataka has become a center of health care tourism and has the highest number of approved health systems and alternative therapies in India. Along with some ISO certified government-owned hospitals, private institutions which provide international-quality services, Hospitals in Karnataka treat around 8,000 health tourists every year.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16881", "revid": "1612380", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16881", "title": "Kashrut", "text": "Jewish dietary laws\n' (also ' or , ) is a set of dietary laws dealing with the foods that Jewish people are permitted to eat and how those foods must be prepared according to Jewish religious law. Food that may be consumed is deemed kosher ( in English, ), from the Ashkenazi pronunciation of the term that in Sephardi or Modern Hebrew is pronounced \"kash\u00e9r\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05db\u05b8\u05bc\u05e9\u05b5\u05c1\u05e8\u200e), meaning \"fit\" (in this context: \"fit for consumption\"). Food that may not be consumed, however, is deemed treif ( in English, ), also spelled treyf (). In case of objects the opposite of kosher is pas\u00fal ( in English, Yiddish: \u05e4\u05b8\u05bc\u05e1\u05d5\u05bc\u05dc).\nAlthough the details of the laws of are numerous and complex, they rest on a few basic principles:\nCategorizations.\nEvery food that is considered kosher is also categorized as follows:\nWhile any produce that grows from the earth, such as fruits, grains, vegetables, and mushrooms, is always permissible, laws regarding the status of certain agricultural produce, especially that grown in the Land of Israel such as tithes and produce of the Sabbatical year, impact their permissibility for consumption.\nMost of the basic laws of are derived from the Torah's books of Leviticus and Deuteronomy. Their details and practical application, however, are set down in the Oral Torah, (eventually codified in the Mishnah and Talmud), and elaborated on in the later rabbinical literature. Although the Torah does not state the rationale for most laws, some suggest that they are only tests of obedience, while others have suggested philosophical, practical, and hygienic reasons.\nOver the past century, many certification agencies have started to certify products, manufacturers, and restaurants as kosher, usually authorizing the use of a proprietary symbol or certificate, called a , to be displayed by the food establishment or on the product, which indicates that they are in compliance with the kosher laws. This labeling is also used by some non-Jewish people, examples of which include those whose religions (including Islam) expect adherence to a similar set of dietary laws, people with allergies to dairy foods, and vegans, who use the various kosher designations to determine whether a food contains meat or dairy-derived ingredients.\nThe laws of Kashrut are a major area covered in traditional rabbinic ordination; see and . And numerous scholarly and popular works exist on these topics, covering both practice and theory.\nExplanations.\nPhilosophical.\nJewish philosophy divides the 613 commandments (or ) into three groups\u2014laws that have a rational explanation and would probably be enacted by most orderly societies (), laws that are understood after being explained, but would not be legislated without the Torah's command (), and laws that do not have a rational explanation ().\nSome Jewish scholars say that should be categorized as laws for which there is no particular explanation since the human mind is not always capable of understanding divine intentions. In this line of thinking, the dietary laws were given as a demonstration of God's authority, and man must obey without asking why. Although Maimonides concurs that all the statutes of the Torah are decrees, he is of the view that whenever possible, one should seek out reasons for the Torah's commandments.\nSome theologians have said that the laws of are symbolic in character: kosher animals represent virtues, while non-kosher animals represent vices. The 1st-century BCE Letter of Aristeas argues that the laws \"have been given [...] to awake pious thoughts and to form the character\". This view reappears in the work of the 19th-century Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch.\nThe Torah prohibits \"cooking the kid (goat, sheep, calf) in its mother's milk\". While the Torah does not provide a reason, it has been suggested that the practice was perceived as cruel and insensitive.\nHasidic Judaism believes that everyday life is imbued with channels connecting with Divinity, the activation of which it sees as helping the Divine Presence to be drawn into the physical world; Hasidism argues that the food laws are related to the way such channels, termed 'sparks of holiness', interact with various animals. These 'sparks of holiness' are released whenever a Jew manipulates any object for a 'holy reason', (which includes eating); however, not all animal products are capable of releasing their 'sparks of holiness'. The Hasidic argument is that animals are imbued with signs that reveal the release of these sparks, and the signs are expressed in the biblical categorization of ritually 'clean' and ritually 'unclean'.\nMedical.\nAlthough the reason for is that it is a decree from the Torah, there have been attempts to provide scientific support for the view that Jewish food laws have an incidental health benefit. One of the earliest is that of Maimonides in \"The Guide for the Perplexed\" (c.\u20091190).\nIn 1953, David Macht, an Orthodox Jew and proponent of the theory of biblical scientific foresight, conducted toxicity experiments on many kinds of animals and fish. His experiment involved lupin seedlings being supplied with extracts from the meat of various animals; Macht reported that in 100% of cases, extracts from ritually 'unclean' meat inhibited the seedling's growth more than that from ritually 'clean' meats.\nAt the same time, these explanations are controversial. Scholar Lester L. Grabbe, writing in the \"Oxford Bible Commentary\" on Leviticus, says \"[a]n explanation now almost universally rejected is that the laws in this section have hygiene as their basis. Although some of the laws of ritual purity roughly correspond to modern ideas of physical cleanliness, many of them have little to do with hygiene. For example, there is no evidence that the 'unclean' animals are intrinsically bad to eat or to be avoided in a Mediterranean climate, as is sometimes asserted.\"\nRules.\nProhibited foods.\nThe laws of can be classified according to the origin of the prohibition (Biblical or rabbinical) and whether the prohibition concerns the food itself or a mixture of foods.\nBiblically prohibited foods include:\nBiblically prohibited mixtures include:\nRabbinically prohibited foods include:\nPermitted and forbidden animals.\nOnly meat from particular species is permissible. Mammals that both chew their cud (ruminate) and have cloven hooves can be kosher. Animals with one characteristic but not the other (the camel, the hyrax, and the hare because they have no cloven hooves, and the pig because it does not ruminate) are specifically excluded.\nIn 2008, a rabbinical ruling determined that giraffes and their milk are eligible to be considered kosher. The giraffe has both split hooves and chews its cud, characteristics of animals considered kosher. Findings from 2008 show that giraffe milk curdles, meeting kosher standards. Although kosher, the giraffe is not slaughtered today because the process would be very costly. Giraffes are difficult to restrain, and their use for food could cause the species to become endangered.\nNon-kosher birds are listed outright in the Torah, but the exact zoological references are disputed and some references refer to families of birds (24 are mentioned). The Mishnah refers to four signs provided by the sages. First, a (predatory bird) is not kosher. Additionally, kosher birds possess three physical characteristics: an extra toe in the back (which does not join the other toes in supporting the leg), a (crop), and a (gizzard) with a peelable lumen. However, individual Jews are barred from merely applying these regulations alone; an established tradition () is necessary to allow birds to be consumed, even if it can be substantiated that they meet all four criteria. The only exception to this is the turkey. There was a time when certain authorities considered the signs sufficient, so Jews started eating this bird without a because it possesses all the signs () in Hebrew.\nFish must have fins and scales to be kosher. Shellfish and other non-fish water fauna are not kosher. (See kosher species of fish) Insects are not kosher, except for certain species of kosher locust. Any animal that eats other animals, whether they kill their food or eat carrion, is generally not kosher, as well as any animal that has been partially eaten by other animals.\nSeparation of meat and milk.\nMeat and milk (or derivatives) may not be mixed in the sense that meat and dairy products are not served at the same meal, served or cooked in the same utensils, or stored together.\nObservant Jews have separate sets of dishes, and sometimes different kitchens, for meat and milk, and wait anywhere between one and six hours after eating meat before consuming milk products. The and (literally \"milky\" and \"meaty\") utensils and dishes are the commonly referred-to Yiddish delineations between dairy and meat ones, respectively.\nAccording to the Shulchan Aruch, a six-hour waiting period is recommended between consuming meat and dairy. During this time, it is generally advised to abstain from brushing and rinsing the mouth.\nShelomo Dov Goitein writes, \"the dichotomy of the kitchen into a meat and a milk section, so basic in an observant Jewish household, is [...] never mentioned in the Geniza.\" Goitein believed that in the early Middle Ages Jewish families kept only one set of cutlery and cooking ware. According to David C. Kraemer, the practice of keeping separate sets of dishes developed only in the late 14th and 15th centuries. It is possible observant Jews before then waited overnight for the meat or dairy gravy absorbed in a pot's walls to become insignificant () before using the pot for the other foodstuff (meat or dairy).\nKosher slaughter.\nMammals and fowl must be slaughtered by a trained individual (a ) using a special method of slaughter, . slaughter severs the jugular vein, carotid artery, esophagus, and trachea in a single continuous cutting movement with an unserrated, sharp knife. Failure to meet any of these criteria renders the meat of the animal non-kosher.\nThe body of the slaughtered animal must be checked after slaughter to confirm that the animal had no medical condition or defect that would have caused it to die of its own accord within a year, which would make the meat unsuitable.\nThese conditions () include 70 different categories of injuries, diseases, and abnormalities whose presence renders the animal non-kosher.\nIt is forbidden to consume certain parts of the animal, such as certain fats () and the sciatic nerves from the legs, the process of excision being done by experts before the meat is sold.\nAs much blood as possible must be removed through the process; this is usually done through soaking and salting the meat, but the liver, as it is rich in blood, is grilled over an open flame.\nFish (and kosher locusts, for those who follow the traditions permitting them) must be killed before being eaten, but no particular method has been specified in Jewish law. Legal aspects of ritual slaughter are governed not only by Jewish law but civil law as well.\nSome believe that this ensures the animal dies instantly without unnecessary suffering, but many animal rights activists view the process as cruel, claiming that the animal may not lose consciousness immediately, and activists have called for it to be banned.\nPreparation of meats.\nWhen an animal is ritually slaughtered () the raw meat is traditionally cut, salted, and rinsed, prior to cooking. Salting of raw meat draws out the blood that lodges on the inner surface of the meat. The salting is done with coarse grain salt, commonly referred to as kosher salt, after which the meat is laid over a grating or colander to allow for drainage, remaining so for the duration of time that it takes to walk one biblical mile (approximately 18\u201324 minutes). Afterwards, the residue of salt is rinsed away with water, and the meat cooked.\nMeat that is roasted requires no prior salting, as fire causes a natural purging of blood.\n (\"Taz\"), a 17th-century commentary on the \"Shulchan Arukh\", ruled that the pieces of meat can be \"very thick\" when salting. The Yemenite Jewish practice, however, follows Saadiah Gaon, who required that the meat not be larger than half a \"rotal\" (i.e. roughly ) when salting. This allows the effects of the salt to penetrate.\nSome Orthodox Jewish communities require the additional stricture of submersing raw meat in boiling water prior to cooking it, a practice known as (), \"blanching.\" This was believed to constrict the blood lodged within the meat, to prevent it from oozing out when the meat was eaten. The raw meat is left in the pot of boiling water for as long as it takes for the meat to whiten on its outer layer.\nIf someone wanted to use the water for soup after making in the same pot, they could simply scoop out the film, froth and scum that surface in the boiling water.\n is not required when roasting meat over a fire, as the fire constricts the blood.\nKosher utensils.\nUtensils used for non-kosher foods become non-kosher, and make even otherwise kosher food prepared with them non-kosher.\nSome such utensils, depending on the material they are made from, can be made suitable for preparing kosher food again by immersion in boiling water or by the application of a blowtorch.\nFood prepared in a manner that violates the (Sabbath) may not be eaten; although in certain instances it is permitted after the is over.\nPassover laws.\nPassover has stricter dietary rules, the most important of which is the prohibition on eating leavened bread or derivatives of this, which are known as . This prohibition is derived from Exodus 12:15.\nUtensils used in preparing and serving are also forbidden on Passover unless they have been ritually cleansed ().\nObservant Jews often keep separate sets of meat and dairy utensils for Passover use only. In addition, some groups follow various eating restrictions on Passover that go beyond the rules of , such as not eating , or garlic.\nProduce of the Land of Israel.\nBiblical rules also control the use of agriculture produce, for example, with respect to their tithing, or when it is permitted to eat them or to harvest them, and what must be done to make them suitable for human consumption.\nFor produce grown in the Land of Israel a modified version of the biblical tithes must be applied, including , , , and (untithed produce is called ); the fruit of the first three years of a tree's growth or replanting are forbidden for eating or any other use as ; produce grown in the Land of Israel on the seventh year obtains , and unless managed carefully is forbidden as a violation of the (Sabbatical Year).\nSome rules of are subject to different rabbinical opinions. For example, many hold that the rule against eating (new grain) before the 16th of the month Nisan does not apply outside the Land of Israel.\nVegetables.\nAlthough plants and minerals are nearly always kosher, vegetarian restaurants and producers of vegetarian foods are required to obtain a , certifying that a rabbinical organization has approved their products as being kosher, because the usually certifies that certain vegetables have been checked for insect infestation and steps have been taken to ensure that cooked food meets the requirements of . Vegetables such as spinach and cauliflower must be checked for insect infestation. The proper procedure for inspecting and cleaning varies by species, growing conditions, and views of individual rabbis.\nPareve foods.\nA pareve food is one which is neither meat nor dairy. Fish fall into this category, as well as any food that is not animal-derived. Eggs are also considered pareve despite being an animal product.\nSome processes convert a meat- or dairy-derived product into a pareve one. For example, rennet is sometimes made from stomach linings, yet is acceptable for making kosher cheese. Gelatins derived from kosher animal sources (which were ritually slaughtered) are also pareve. Other gelatin-like products from non-animal sources such as agar agar and carrageenan are pareve by nature. Fish gelatin, like all kosher fish products, is pareve.\nJewish law generally requires that bread be kept pareve (i.e., not kneaded with meat or dairy products nor made on meat or dairy equipment).\n has procedures by which equipment can be cleaned of its previous non-kosher or meat/dairy use, but those may be inadequate for vegetarians, those with allergies, or adherents to other religious laws.\nFor example, dairy manufacturing equipment can be cleaned well enough that the rabbis grant pareve status to products manufactured with it but someone with a strong allergic sensitivity to dairy products might still react to the dairy residue. This is why some products that are legitimately pareve carry \"milk\" warnings.\nCannabis.\nFor cannabis grown in Israel, the plants must observe , but this does not apply to cannabis from elsewhere. At least one brand of cannabis edibles is certified to follow the laws of .\nTobacco.\nAlthough it is not a food product, some tobacco receives a year-long kosher for Passover certification. This year-long certification means that the tobacco is certified also for Passover where different restrictions may be in place. Tobacco may, for example, come into contact with some grains that are strictly forbidden during Passover and the certification is a guarantee that it is free from this type of contamination.\nIn Israel, this certification is given by a private rabbinic group Beit Yosef, but the Chief Rabbinate has objected to granting of any certification by rabbis because of health risks from tobacco.\nGenetically modified foods.\nWith the advent of genetic engineering, scholars in both academia and Judaic faith have differing viewpoints on whether these new strains of foods are to be considered kosher or not. The first genetically modified animal approved by the FDA for human consumption is the AquAdvantage salmon and, while salmon is normally an acceptably kosher food, this modified organism has a gene from a non-kosher organism.\nIn 2015, the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards of the Rabbinical Assembly released a document regarding genetically modified organisms, stating that modification of gene sequences via the introduction of foreign DNA in order to convey a specific capability in the new organism is allowable, that entirely new species should not be intentionally created, and that the health implications of genetically modified foods must be considered on an individual basis.\nSome put forth that this intermixing of species is against the teachings of the Talmud and thus against Jewish Law and non-kosher. Others argue that the one in sixty parts law of is of significance, and that the foreign gene accounts for less than 1/60 of the animal and thus the modified salmon is kosher.\nSupervision and marketing.\n\"Hashgacha\".\nCertain foods must be prepared in whole or in part by Jews. This includes grape wine, certain cooked foods (\"bishul akum\"), cheese (\"g'vinat akum\"), and according to some also butter (\"chem'at akum\"), dairy products (Hebrew: \u05d7\u05dc\u05d1 \u05d9\u05e9\u05e8\u05d0\u05dc chalav Yisrael \"milk of Israel\"), and bread (Pas Yisroel).\nProduct labeling standards.\nAlthough reading the label of food products can identify obviously non-kosher ingredients, some countries allow manufacturers to omit identification of certain ingredients. Such \"hidden\" ingredients may include lubricants and flavorings, among other additives; in some cases, for instance, the use of \"natural\" flavorings, these ingredients are more likely to be derived from non-kosher substances. Furthermore, certain products, such as fish, have a high rate of mislabeling, which may result in a non-kosher fish being sold in a package labeled as a species of kosher fish.\nProducers of foods and food additives can contact Jewish religious authorities to have their products certified as \"kosher\": this involves a visit to the manufacturing facilities by an individual rabbi or a committee from a rabbinic organization, who will inspect the production methods and contents and, if everything is sufficiently \"kosher\" a certificate would be issued.\nManufacturers sometimes identify the products that have received such certification by adding particular graphical symbols to the label. These symbols are known in Judaism as \"hechsherim\". Due to differences in \"kashrut\" standards held by different organizations, the \"hechsheirim\" of certain Jewish authorities may at times be considered invalid by other Jewish authorities. The certification marks of the various rabbis and organisations are too numerous to list, but one of the most commonly used in the United States of America is that of the Union of Orthodox Congregations, who use a \"U\" inside a circle (\"O-U\"), symbolising the initials of \"Orthodox Union\". In Britain, commonly used symbols are the \"KLBD\" logo of the London Beth Din and the \"MK\" logo of the Manchester Beth Din. A single \"K\" is sometimes used as a symbol for \"kosher\", but since many countries do not allow letters to be trademarked (the method by which other symbols are protected from misuse), it only indicates that the company producing the product claims that it is kosher.\nMany of the certification symbols are accompanied by additional letters or words to indicate the category of the product, according to Jewish law; the categorization may conflict with legal classifications, especially in the case of food that Jewish law regards as \"dairy\", but legal classification does not.\nIn many cases constant supervision is required because, for various reasons such as changes in manufacturing processes, products that once were kosher may cease to be so. For example, a kosher lubricating oil may be replaced by one containing tallow, which many rabbinic authorities view as non-kosher. Such changes are often coordinated with the supervising rabbi or supervising organization to ensure that new packaging does not suggest any \"hechsher\" or \"kashrut\". In some cases, however, existing stocks of pre-printed labels with the \"hechsher\" may continue to be used on the non-kosher product. An active grapevine among the Jewish community discusses which products are questionable, as well as products which have become kosher but whose labels have yet to carry the \"hechsher\". Some newspapers and periodicals also discuss \"kashrut\" products.\nProducts labeled kosher-style are non-kosher products that have characteristics of kosher foods, such as all-beef hot dogs, or are flavored or prepared in a manner consistent with Ashkenazi practices, like dill pickles. The designation usually refers to delicatessen items.\nHistory of kosher supervision and marketing.\nFood producers often look to expand their markets or marketing potential, and offering kosher food has become a way to do that. The uniqueness of kosher food was advertised as early as 1849. In 1911 Procter &amp; Gamble became the first company to advertise one of their products, Crisco, as kosher. Over the next two decades, companies such as Lender's Bagels, Maxwell House, Manischewitz, and Empire evolved and gave the kosher market more shelf-space. In the 1960s, Hebrew National hotdogs launched a \"we answer to a higher authority\" campaign to appeal to Jews and non-Jews alike. From that point on, \"kosher\" became a symbol for both quality and value. The kosher market quickly expanded, and with it more opportunities for kosher products. Menachem Lubinsky, founder of the Kosherfest trade fair, estimates as many as 14 million kosher consumers and $40 billion in sales of kosher products in the U.S.\nIn 2014 the Israeli Defense Forces decided to allow female kosher supervisors to work in its kitchens on military bases, and the first women kosher inspectors were certified in Israel.\nLegal usage.\nAdvertising standards laws in many jurisdictions prohibit the use of the phrase \"kosher\" in a product's labeling unless the producer can show that the product conforms to Jewish dietary laws; however, different jurisdictions often define the legal qualifications for conforming to Jewish dietary laws differently. For example, in some places the law may require that a rabbi certify the \"kashrut\" nature, in others the rules of \"kosher\" are fully defined in law, and in others still it is sufficient that the manufacturer only believes that the product complies with Jewish dietary regulations. In several cases, laws restricting the use of the term \"kosher\" have later been determined to be illegal religious interference.\nCosts.\nIn the United States, the cost of certification for mass-produced items is typically minuscule and is usually more than offset by the advantages of being certified. In 1975 \"The New York Times\" estimated the cost per item for obtaining kosher certification at 6.5 millionths of a cent ($0.000000065) per item for a General Foods frozen-food item. According to a 2005 report by Burns &amp; McDonnell, most U.S. national certifying agencies are non-profit, only charging for supervision and on-site work, for which the on-site supervisor \"typically makes less per visit than an auto mechanic does per hour\". However, re-engineering an existing manufacturing process can be costly. Certification usually leads to increased revenues by opening up additional markets to Jews who keep kosher, Muslims who keep halal, Seventh-day Adventists who keep the main laws of Kosher Diet, vegetarians, vegans and the lactose-intolerant who wish to avoid dairy products (products that are reliably certified as \"pareve\" meet this criterion). The Orthodox Union, one of the largest \"kashrut\" organizations in the United States, claims that \"when positioned next to a competing non-kosher brand, a kosher product will do better by 20%\".\nIn some European Jewish communities, kosher supervision of meat includes a \"tax\" used to fund Jewish education in the community, which makes kosher meat more expensive than the cost of supervision alone would imply.\nSociety and culture.\nAdherence.\nMany Jews partially observe \"kashrut,\" by abstaining from pork or shellfish or by not drinking milk with meat dishes. Some keep kosher at home but eat in non-kosher restaurants. In 2012, one analysis of the specialty food market in North America estimated that only 15% of kosher consumers were Jewish. Kosher meat is regularly consumed by Muslims when \"halal\" is not available. Muslims, Hindus, and people with allergies to dairy foods often consider the \"kosher-pareve\" designation as an assurance that a food contains no animal-derived ingredients, including milk and all of its derivatives. However, since \"kosher-pareve\" foods may contain honey, eggs, or fish, vegans cannot rely on the certification.\nAbout a sixth of American Jews or 0.3% of the American population fully keep kosher, and many more of them do not strictly follow all of the rules but still abstain from some prohibited foods, especially pork. The Seventh-day Adventist Church, a Christian denomination, preaches a health message which expects adherence to the kosher dietary laws.\nSurveys conducted in 2013 and 2020 found that 22% of American Jews by religion claimed to keep kosher in their homes. Pork consumption in particular seems to be a bigger taboo than other non-Kosher eating practices among Jews, with 41% claiming to at least abstain from eating pork. American Jews are generally less strict about Kosher laws when compared to Israeli Jews. Nearly three times as many Israeli Jews reported that they commit to keeping kosher in their homes and 84% do not eat pork.\nDifferentiations in practice.\n\"Kosher style\" allows for variation in adherence to kashrut, reflecting different practices within the Jewish community. For some, kosher style implies abstinence from non-kosher animals, like pork and shellfish, and the avoidance of mixing meat and dairy in meals. These individuals may consume meat from animals that are kosher but not necessarily slaughtered according to kashrut standards.\nThe notion of \"kosher style\" serves individuals and communities navigating between strict religious observance and cultural identification with Jewish culinary traditions. Hasia Diner, a professor of American Jewish history at New York University, suggests that \"kosher-style\" represents a balancing act between tradition and assimilation, providing a sense of Jewish identity through food without strict adherence to kashrut.\nThis flexible practice emerged in the 1920s amongst Jews assimilating into American society, who sought connection to their heritage without fully observing dietary laws. The term is broad and encompasses foods that could be kosher, like chicken noodle soup or pareve meals (neither meat nor dairy), even if they don't meet halakhic standards. Diner points out the term is \"oxymoronic,\" creating an illusion of kashrut where the true emphasis is on a style of cuisine rather than compliance with religious dietary laws.\nOver time, the meaning of \"kosher style\" has evolved and expanded, reflecting changes within Jewish communities and broader society. In contemporary practice, \"kosher style\" is often encountered at social events and gatherings, where meals might exclude certain non-kosher items but not adhere strictly to kashrut. The exact definition may vary between communities and individuals, reflecting diverse interpretations and practices related to Jewish dietary laws. The term also relates to products marketed as \"kosher style,\" prompting some regions to establish legislation to clarify labeling and prevent consumer misunderstanding. For instance, kosher-style pickles might be produced without kosher certification or supervision but are associated with Jewish culinary tradition.\nLinguistics.\nEtymology.\nIn Ancient Hebrew the word \"kosher\" () means \"be advantageous\", \"proper\", \"suitable\", or \"succeed\", according to the Brown\u2013Driver\u2013Briggs Hebrew and English Lexicon. In Modern Hebrew it generally refers to \"kashrut\" but it can also sometimes mean \"proper\". For example, the Babylonian Talmud uses \"kosher\" in the sense of \"virtuous\" when referring to Darius I as a \"kosher king\"; Darius, a Persian king (reigned 522\u2013486 BCE), fostered the building of the Second Temple. In colloquial English, \"kosher\" often means \"legitimate\", \"acceptable\", \"permissible\", \"genuine\", or \"authentic\". The word \"kosher\" can also form part of some common product names.\nKosher salt.\nSometimes \"kosher\" is used as an abbreviation of \"koshering\", meaning the process for making something \"kosher\"; for example, \"kosher salt\" is a form of salt with irregularly shaped crystals, making it particularly suitable for preparing meat according to the rules of \"kashrut\", because the increased surface area of the crystals absorbs blood more effectively. In this case the type of salt refers to kosher style salt. Salt may also be kosher certified salt, or both. Certified kosher salt follows \"kashrut\" guidelines. Sometimes the term \"coarse kosher salt\" is used to designate salt that is both kosher style and kosher certified. The term \"fine kosher salt\" is sometimes used for salt that is certified kosher but not kosher style.\nPickles.\n\"Kosher\" can occur as a synonym for \"Jewish tradition\"; for example, a \"kosher dill\" pickle is simply a pickle made in the traditional manner of Jewish New York City pickle-makers, using a generous addition of garlic to the brine, and is not necessarily compliant with the traditional Jewish food laws.\nStrictness degrees.\n\"Mehadrin\".\n\"Mehadrin\" is a term most commonly used with the meaning of enhanced or stricter kashrut rules. Its etymology is still debated, but its initial halachic use related specifically to lighting candles on Hanukkah. Later it became widely used in regard to dietary laws, and ended up loosely covering almost every aspect of Jewish observance (see mehadrin bus lines).\n\"Badatz\".\n\"Badatz\"\u00a0is the Hebrew acronym of\u00a0\"Beth Din Tsedek\" and is used as a name for organisations which supervise the production of kosher foods. They typically only certify \"mehadrin\"-level products, but are not the only agencies specialised in applying enhanced \"mehadrin\" rules, since there are non-badatz agencies also doing so.\nSuriname.\nA treef (Surinamese Dutch, derived from Sranan Tongo \"trefu\") is a food taboo.\nIn Suriname certain groups of people have long adhered to belief in treef, especially among people of African descent. The consumption of certain foods is prohibited, in the belief that it could cause major diseases, particularly leprosy. These prohibitions can vary individually, but it is inextricably related to conditions in the family. A treef is inherited from the father's side, but it can be revealed in a dream, often by a woman. In addition, a woman must take into account special food taboos during pregnancy. There is great importance attached to the treef; if a child observes the treef of his father, and yet experiences a skin condition, this is seen as a strong indication that the child was begotten by the woman with another man. Finally treef also be acquired later in life by wearing certain charms that compel you to abstain from certain foods.\nThe word is derived from Hebrew, due to influence of Sephardi Jews who came to Suriname in the 17th century. This is also the source of Sranan \"kaseri\" 'ritually clean, kosher'.\nOther uses.\nAlthough the term \"kosher\" relates mainly to food, it sometimes occurs in other contexts. Some Orthodox retailers sell kosher cell phones\u2014stripped-down devices with limited features.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16882", "revid": "50914205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16882", "title": "KLM", "text": "Flag carrier of the Netherlands\nKLM Royal Dutch Airlines, or simply KLM (an abbreviation for their official name Koninklijke Luchtvaart Maatschappij N.V. , lit.\u2009'Royal Aviation Company'), is the flag carrier of the Netherlands. KLM\u2019s headquarters are located in Amstelveen, with its hub at nearby Amsterdam Airport Schiphol. It is a subsidiary of the Air France\u2013KLM group and a member of the SkyTeam airline alliance. Founded in 1919, KLM is the oldest operating airline still using its original name, having gone through significant changes in its ownership and legal structure over its history, including a period of majority government ownership. The company had a fleet of 110 aircraft (excluding subsidiaries) and 35,488 employees as of 2021. KLM operates scheduled passenger and cargo services to 145 destinations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nIn 1919, a young aviator lieutenant named Albert Plesman sponsored the ELTA aviation exhibition in Amsterdam. Attendance at the exhibition was over half a million, and after it closed, several Dutch commercial interests intended to establish a Dutch airline, which Plesman was nominated to head. In September 1919, Queen Wilhelmina awarded the yet-to-be-founded KLM its \"Royal\" (\"Koninklijke\") predicate. On 7 October 1919, eight Dutch businessmen, including Frits Fentener van Vlissingen, founded KLM as one of the first commercial airline companies. Plesman became its first administrator and director.\nThe first KLM flight took place on 17 May 1920. KNLM's first pilot, Jerry Shaw, flew from Croydon Airport, London, to Amsterdam. The flight was flown using a leased Aircraft Transport and Travel de Havilland DH-16, registration G-EALU, which was carrying two British journalists and some newspapers. In 1920, KLM carried 440 passengers and 22 tons of freight. In April 1921, after a winter hiatus, KLM resumed its services using Fokker F.II and Fokker F.III aircraft. In 1921, KLM started scheduled services.\nKLM's first experimental intercontinental flight took off on 1 October 1924. The final destination was Batavia, Dutch East Indies on Java, now Jakarta, Indonesia, into what would become Halim Perdanakusuma International Airport. The flight used a Fokker F.VII with registration H-NACC and was piloted by Jan Thomassen \u00e0 Thuessink van der Hoop. In 1927, Baltimore millionaire Van Lear Black, who had heard about the 1924 flight, chartered H-NADP to do the same flight, which departed June 15 and went successfully (16 days), and flew back to much rejoicing. This inspired KLM to make a second test flight, which left on 1 October, returning successfully with much experience gained. In September 1929, regular scheduled services between Amsterdam and Batavia commenced. Until the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, this was the world's longest-distance scheduled service by airplane. By 1926, it was offering flights to Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Brussels, Paris, London, Bremen, Copenhagen, and Malm\u00f6, using primarily Fokker F.II and Fokker F.III aircraft.\nIn 1930, KLM carried 15,143 passengers. The Douglas DC-2 was introduced on the Batavia service in 1934. The first experimental transatlantic KLM flight was between Amsterdam and Cura\u00e7ao in December 1934 using the Fokker F.XVIII \"Snip\".\nIn July 1935 the KLM had three major international passenger flight crashes in one week. The \"Kwikstaart\" crashed in Amsterdam on 14 July, the \"Maraboe\" in Bushir and on 20 July and the \u201cGaai\u201d crashed in San Giacomo. The week of 14 to 20 July 1935 is known as the \"black week\". In these three crashes KLM lost three airplanes and lost crew in two crashes. With an earlierer crash in April of the \"Leeuwerik\", KLM had lost in 1935 around 15% of its pilots. As a result there was a shortage of crew members and airplanes. The Amsterdam\u2014Milan flight service was as a result taken over by Deutsche Lufthansa.\nThe first of the airline's Douglas DC-3 aircraft were delivered in 1936; these replaced the DC-2s on the service via Batavia to Sydney. KLM was the first airline to serve Manchester's new Ringway airport, starting in June 1938. KLM was the only civilian airline to receive the Douglas DC-5; the airline used two of them in the West Indies and sold two to the East Indies government, and is thus the only airline to have operated all Douglas 'DC' models other than the DC-1.\nSecond World War.\nThe outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 restricted KLM's operations, with flights over France and Germany prohibited, and many of its aircraft painted in overall orange to limit the potential for confusion with military aircraft. European routes were limited to services to Scandinavia, Belgium and the UK, with flights to Lisbon (bypassing both British and French airspace) starting in April 1940.\nWhen Germany invaded the Netherlands on 10 May 1940, several KLM aircraft\u2014mostly DC-3s and a few DC-2s\u2014were en route to or from the Far East, or were operating services in Europe. Five DC-3s and one DC-2 were taken to Britain. During the war, these aircraft and crew members flew scheduled passenger flights between Bristol and Lisbon under BOAC flight numbers and registration.\nOn 3 March 1942, Douglas DC-3 PH-ALP \"\"Pelikaan\", then registered as PK-AFV, was shot down over Western Australia by Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service Mitsubishi A6M Zeros during the attack on Broome while carrying a package of diamonds. The DC-3 crash landed at Carnot Bay, 80 kilometers from Broome. \"Pelikaan\" was subsequently strafed by the Zeros that had shot it down, killing three passengers and the flight engineer. Diamonds worth an estimated 150,000\u2013300,000 Australian pounds were stolen from the wreckage of the aircraft, and nobody has been convicted of the crime.\nDouglas DC-3 PH-ALI \"Ibis\"\", then registered as G-AGBB, was attacked by the Luftwaffe on 15 November 1942, 19 April 1943, and finally shot down on 1 June 1943 as BOAC Flight 777, killing all passengers and crew.\nSome KLM aircraft and their crews ended up in the Australia-Dutch East Indies region, where they helped transport refugees from Japanese aggression in that area.\nAlthough operations paused in Europe, KLM continued to fly and expand in the Caribbean.\nPost-World War II.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rail freight/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSource: ICAO Digest of Statistics for 1947\u201355, IATA World Air Transport Statistics 1960\u20131995\nAfter the end of the Second World War in August 1945, KLM immediately started to rebuild its network. Since the Dutch East Indies were in a state of revolt, Plesman prioritised re-establishing KLM's route to Batavia. This service was reinstated by the end of 1945. Domestic and European flights resumed in September 1945, initially with a fleet of Douglas DC-3s and Douglas DC-4s. On 21 May 1946, KLM was the first continental European airline to start scheduled transatlantic flights between Amsterdam and New York City using Douglas DC-4 aircraft. By 1948, KLM had reconstructed its network and services to Africa, North and South America, and the Caribbean resumed.\nLong-range, pressurized Lockheed Constellations and Douglas DC-6s joined KLM's fleet in the late 1940s; the Convair 240 short-range pressurized twin-engine airliner began European flights for the company in late 1948.\nDuring the immediate post-war period, the Dutch government expressed interest in gaining a majority stake in KLM, thus partially nationalizing it. Plesman wanted KLM to remain a private company under private control; he allowed the Dutch government to acquire a minority stake in the airline. In 1950, KLM carried 356,069 passengers. The expansion of the network continued in the 1950s with the addition of several destinations in western North America. KLM's fleet expanded with the addition of new versions of the Lockheed Constellation and Lockheed Electra, of which KLM was the first European airline to fly.\nOn 31 December 1953, the founder and president of KLM, Albert Plesman, died at the age of 64. He was succeeded as president by Fons Aler. After Plesman's death, the company and other airlines entered a difficult economic period. The conversion to jet aircraft placed a further financial burden on KLM. The Netherlands government increased its ownership of the company to two-thirds, thus partly nationalizing it. The board of directors remained under the control of private shareholders.\nOn 25 July 1957, the airline introduced its flight simulator for the Douglas DC-7C \u2013 the last KLM aircraft with piston engines \u2013 which opened the transpolar route from Amsterdam via Anchorage to Tokyo on 1 November 1958. Each crew flying the transpolar route over the Arctic was equipped with a winter survival kit, including a 7.62\u00a0mm selective-fire AR-10 carbine for use against polar bears, in the event the plane was forced down onto the polar ice. The four-engine turboprop Vickers Viscount 800 was introduced on European routes in 1957. Beginning in September 1959, KLM introduced the four-engine turboprop Lockheed L-188 Electra onto some of its European and Middle Eastern routes.\n1960s\u20131970s: Jet age.\nIn March 1960, the airline introduced the first Douglas DC-8 jet into its fleet. In 1961, KLM reported its first year of losses. In 1961, the airline's president Fons Aler was succeeded by Ernst van der Beugel. However, This leadership change did not lead to a reversal of KLM's financial difficulties. Van der Beugel resigned as president in 1963 for health reasons. Horatius Albarda was appointed to succeed Ernst van der Beugel as president of KLM in 1963. Albarda initiated a reorganization of the company, which led to the reduction of staff and air services. In 1965, Albarda died in an air crash and was succeeded as president by Dr. Gerrit van der Wal. Van der Wal forged an agreement with the Dutch government that KLM would be once again run as a private company. By 1966, the stake of the Dutch government in KLM was reduced to a minority stake of 49.5%. In 1966, KLM introduced the Douglas DC-9 on European and Middle East routes.\nThe new terminal buildings at Amsterdam Airport Schiphol opened in April 1967, and in 1968 the stretched Douglas DC-8-63 (\"Super DC-8\") entered service. With 244 seats, the Super DC-8 was the largest airliner in scheduled passenger service at the time, although its size was surpassed by that of the Boeing 747 first flown in 1969. On 6 March 1967, KLM ordered the 747 as its first Boeing aircraft, which marked the beginning of its use of widebody aircraft and an improved relationship between the airline and Boeing since the 1939 crash of a Boeing 307 Stratoliner carrying KLM representatives on a demonstration flight. To negotiate for lower unit prices and form a maintenance pool for its 747 fleet, KLM formed the KSS maintenance consortium in 1969 with Scandinavian Airlines and Swissair. Despite showing initial interest in the prototype 747-100 variant, KLM instead acquired the higher-gross-weight 747-200B powered by Pratt &amp; Whitney JT9D engines, becoming the first airline to put the type into service on 14 February 1971. In March 1971, KLM opened its current headquarters in Amstelveen. In 1972, it purchased the first of several McDonnell Douglas DC-10 aircraft\u2014McDonnell Douglas's response to the 747.\nIn 1973, Sergio Orlandini was appointed to succeed Gerrit van der Wal as president of KLM. At the time, KLM, as well as other airlines, had to deal with overcapacity. Orlandini proposed to convert KLM 747s to \"combis\" that could carry a combination of passengers and freight in a mixed configuration on the main deck of the aircraft. In November 1975, the first of these seven Boeing 747-200BM Combi aircraft were added to the KLM fleet. The airline previously operated DC-8 passenger and freight combi aircraft as well and later operated Boeing 747-400 combi aircraft.\nThe 1973 oil crisis, which caused difficult economic conditions, led KLM to seek government assistance in arranging debt refinancing. The airline issued additional shares of stock to the government in return for its money. In the late 1970s, the government's stake had again increased to a majority of 78%, effectively re-nationalizing it. The company management remained under the control of private stakeholders.\n1980s\u20131990s: International expansion.\nIn 1980, KLM carried 9,715,069 passengers. In 1983, it reached an agreement with Boeing to upgrade ten of its Boeing 747-200 aircraft (Three 747-200Bs and seven 747-200Ms) with the stretched-upper-deck modification. The work started in 1984 at the Boeing factory in Everett, Washington, and finished in 1986. The converted aircraft were called Boeing 747-200SUD or 747-300, which the airline operated in addition to three newly built Boeing 747-300s manufactured from the ground up. In 1983, KLM took delivery of the first of ten Airbus A310 passenger jets. Sergio Orlandini retired in 1987 and was succeeded as president of KLM by Jan de Soet. In 1986, the Dutch government's shareholding in KLM was reduced to 54.8 percent. It was expected that this share would be further reduced during the decade. The Boeing 747-400 was introduced into KLM's fleet in June 1989.\nWith the liberalization of the European market, KLM started developing its hub at Amsterdam Airport Schiphol by feeding its network with traffic from affiliated airlines. As part of its development of a worldwide network, KLM acquired a 20% stake in Northwest Airlines in July 1989. In 1990, KLM carried 16,000,000 passengers. KLM president Jan de Soet retired at the end of 1990 and was succeeded in 1991 by Pieter Bouw. In December 1991, KLM was the first European airline to introduce a frequent flyer loyalty program, which was called \"Flying Dutchman\".\nJoint venture with Northwest Airlines.\nIn January 1993 the United States Department of Transportation granted KLM and Northwest Airlines anti-trust immunity, which allowed them to intensify their partnership. As of September 1993, the airlines operated their flights between the United States and Europe as part of a joint venture. In March 1994, KLM and Northwest Airlines introduced World Business Class on intercontinental routes. KLM's stake in Northwest Airlines was increased to 25% in 1994.\nKLM introduced the Boeing 767-300ER in July 1995. In January 1996, KLM acquired a 26% share in Kenya Airways, the flag-carrier airline of Kenya. In 1997, Pieter Bouw resigned as president of KLM and was succeeded by Leo van Wijk. In August 1998, KLM repurchased all regular shares from the Dutch government to make KLM a private company. On 1 November 1999, KLM founded AirCares, a communication and fundraising platform supporting worthy causes and focusing on underprivileged children.\nKLM renewed its intercontinental fleets by replacing the Boeing 767s, Boeing 747-300s, and eventually, the McDonnell Douglas MD-11s with Boeing 777-200ERs and Airbus A330-200s. Some 747s were withdrawn from service first. The MD-11s remained in service until October 2014. The first Boeing 777 was received on 25 October 2003, while the first Airbus A330-200 was introduced on 25 August 2005.\n2000s: Air France-KLM merger.\nOn 30 September 2003 Air France and KLM agreed to a merger plan in which Air France and KLM would become subsidiaries of a holding company called Air France-KLM. Both airlines would retain their own brands; both Charles de Gaulle Airport and Amsterdam Airport Schiphol would become key hubs. In February 2004 the European Commission and United States Department of Justice approved the proposed merger of the airlines. In April 2004 an exchange offer in which KLM shareholders exchanged their KLM shares for Air France shares took place. Since 5 May 2004 Air France-KLM has been listed on the Euronext exchanges in Paris, Amsterdam and New York. In September 2004, the merger was completed by creation of the Air France-KLM holding company. The merger resulted in the world's largest airline group and should have led to an estimated annual cost-saving of between \u20ac400 million and \u20ac500 million.\nIt did not appear that KLM's longstanding joint venture with Northwest Airlines\u2014which merged with Delta Air Lines in 2008\u2014was affected by the merger with Air France. KLM and Northwest joined the SkyTeam alliance in September 2004. Also in 2004, senior management came under fire for providing itself with controversial bonuses after the merger with Air France, while 4,500 jobs were lost at KLM. After external pressure, management gave up on these bonuses.\nIn March 2007 KLM started to use the Amadeus CRS reservation system, along with partner Kenya Airways. After 10 years as president of the airline, Leo van Wijk resigned from his position and was succeeded by Peter Hartman.\n2010s.\nBeginning in September 2010, KLM integrated the passenger division of Martinair into KLM, transferring all personnel and routes. By November 2011, Martinair consisted of only the cargo and maintenance division. In March 2011, KLM and InselAir reached an agreement for cooperation on InselAir destinations, thus expanding its passenger services. Beginning 27 March 2011, KLM passengers could fly to all InselAir destinations through InselAir's hubs in Cura\u00e7ao and Sint Maarten. This cooperation was extended to a code share agreement in 2012. In early 2018, the cooperation with Inselair was terminated, including any interlining agreements, after Inselair found itself in financial difficulties which forced the airline to sell off part of its fleet and cancel some of its routes.\nOn 20 February 2013, KLM announced that Peter Hartman would resign as president and CEO of KLM on 1 July 2013. He was succeeded by Camiel Eurlings. Hartman remained employed by the company until he retired on 1 January 2014. On 15 October 2014, KLM announced that Eurlings, in joint consultation with the supervisory board, had decided to immediately resign as president and CEO. As of this date, he was succeeded by Pieter Elbers. KLM received the award for \"Best Airline Staff Service\" in Europe at the World Airline Awards 2013. This award represents the rating for an airline's performance across both airport staff and cabin staff combined. It is the second consecutive year that KLM won this award; in 2012 it was awarded this title as well. On 19 June 2012, KLM made the first transatlantic flight fueled partly by sustainable biofuels to Rio de Janeiro. This was the longest distance any aircraft had flown on biofuels.\nIn 2019, KLM celebrated its centennial, as it was founded in 1919. Since it is the oldest airline still operating under its original name, it was the first airline to achieve this feat.\n2020s.\nBeing heavily affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, KLM cut at least 6,000 jobs in total. It also said that the decision of the government to have all the passengers and crew COVID-19 tested before flying will have an impact on its flights. On 16 December 2021, Air France-KLM announced an order for 100 Airbus A320neos to be divided between Transavia and KLM. In July 2022, KLM was forced to cut their summer schedule due to disruption at airports across Europe.\nCorporate affairs and identity.\nBusiness trends.\nKey business and operating results of KLM are shown below (as at year ending 31 December):\nManagement.\nAs of July 2022[ [update]], KLM's corporate leader is its president and chief executive officer (CEO) Marjan Rintel, who succeeded Pieter Elbers. The president and CEO is part of the larger Executive Committee, which manages KLM and consists of the statutory managing directors and executive vice-presidents of KLM's business units that are represented in the Executive Committee. The supervision and management of KLM are structured following the \"two-tier model\"; the Board of Managing Directors is supervised by a separate and independent Supervisory Board. The Supervisory Board also supervises the general performance of KLM. The Board of Managing Directors is formed by the four Managing Directors, including the CEO. Nine Supervisory Directors compose the Supervisory Board.\nHead office.\nKLM's head office is located in Amstelveen, on a site near Schiphol Airport. The airline's current headquarters was built between 1968 and 1970. Before the opening of the new headquarters, the airline's head office was on the property of Schiphol Airport in Haarlemmermeer.\nSubsidiaries.\nCompanies in which KLM has a stake include:\nFormer subsidiaries.\nSubsidiaries, associates, and joint ventures of KLM in the past include:\nKLM also worked closely with ALM Antillean Airlines in the Caribbean to provide air service for the Dutch-controlled islands in the region with KLM aircraft such as the Douglas DC-8 and McDonnell Douglas DC-9-30 being operated by KLM flight crews on behalf of ALM.\nKLM Asia.\nKLM Asia () is a wholly owned subsidiary registered in Taiwan. The subsidiary was established in 1995 to allow KLM to continue operating flights to Taipei without compromising the mainline KLM's traffic rights for destinations in the People's Republic of China. Aircraft operated by the subsidiary retain their Dutch registration and the basic KLM livery but receive several modifications: the flags of both the Netherlands and European Union are removed while the Dutch Crown logo is replaced with the KLM Asia wordmark.\nThe fleet of aircraft operated by the subsidiary consists of seven Boeing 777-200ER and two Boeing 777-300ER aircraft as of March 2020. As of 2012, KLM used the \"KLM Asia\" brand to fly to Taipei and the aircraft had to fly over China. Previously KLM used Boeing 747s for its services to Taiwan. In 2012, it started operating the revised Amsterdam-Taipei-Manila route with Boeing 777-200ER aircraft.\nKLM Asia aircraft are also occasionally used in services to other destinations, including China, in the wider KLM network.\nBranding.\nDirk Roosenburg designed the KLM logo at its establishment in 1919; he intertwined the letters K, L, and M, and gave them wings and a crown. The crown was depicted to denote KLM's royal status, which was granted at KLM's establishment. The logo became known as the \"vinklogo\" in reference to the common chaffinch. The KLM logo was largely redesigned in 1961 by F.H.K. Henrion. The crown, redesigned using a line, four blue circles and a cross, was retained. In 1991, the logo was further revised by Chris Ludlow of Henrion, Ludlow &amp; Schmidt. In addition to its main logo, KLM displays its alliance status in its branding, including \"Worldwide Reliability\" with Northwest Airlines (1993\u20132002) and the SkyTeam alliance (2004\u2013present).\nLivery and uniforms.\nKLM has utilized several major liveries since its founding, with numerous variations on each. Initially, many aircraft featured a bare-metal fuselage with a stripe above the windows bearing the phrase \"The Flying Dutchman\". The rudder was divided into three segments and painted to match the Dutch flag. Later aircraft types sometimes bore a white upper fuselage, and additional detail striping and titling. In the mid-1950s, the livery was changed to feature a split cheatline in two shades of blue on a white upper fuselage and angled blue stripes on the vertical stabilizer. The tail stripes were later enlarged and made horizontal, and the then-new crown logo was placed in a white circle. The final major variation of this livery saw the vertical stabilizer painted completely white with the crown logo in the center. All versions of this livery had small \"KLM Royal Dutch Airlines\" titles, first in red, and later in blue.\nSince 1971, the KLM livery has primarily featured a bright blue fuselage, with variations on the striping and details. Originally a wide, dark blue cheatline covered the windows and was separated from the light grey lower fuselage by a thin white stripe. The KLM logo was placed centrally on the white tail and the front of the fuselage. In December 2002, KLM introduced an updated livery in which the white strip was removed and the dark-blue cheatline was significantly narrowed. The bright blue colour was retained and now covers most of the fuselage. The KLM logo was placed more centrally on the fuselage while its position on the tail and the tail design remained the same. In 2014, KLM modified its livery with a swooping cheatline that wraps around the entire forward fuselage. The livery was first introduced on Embraer 190s.\nIn April 2010, KLM introduced new uniforms for its female cabin attendants, ground attendants and pilots at KLM and KLM Cityhopper. The new uniform was designed by Dutch couturier Mart Visser. It retains the KLM blue colour that was introduced in 1971 and adds a touch of orange\u2014the national colour of the Netherlands.\nIn August 2024, KLM introduced a brand new livery on its first Airbus A321neo with the blue section now fully covers the nose dome and the SkyTeam logo together with the Air France-KLM Group logo moved from the nose section to the tail section. The logo and the font has also been changed slightly for a more modernized feel.\nMarketing slogans.\nKLM has used several slogans for marketing throughout its operational history:\nSocial media.\nKLM has an extensive presence on social media platforms and also runs a blog. Customers can make inquiries through these channels. The airline also uses these networks to inform customers of KLM news, marketing campaigns and promotions.\nThe airline's use of social media platforms to reach customers peaked when the Icelandic volcano Eyjafjallaj\u00f6kull erupted in April 2010, causing widespread disruption to air traffic. Customers used the social networks to contact the airline, which used them to provide information about the situation. Following the increased use of social media, KLM created a centralized, public social media website named the Social Media Hub in October 2010.\nKLM has developed several services based on these social platforms, including:\nIn June 2013, KLM launched its own 3D strategy game \"Aviation Empire\" for iOS and Android platforms. The game allows users to experience airline management. Players manage KLM from its establishment until the present; they can invest in a fleet, build a network with international destinations and develop airports. The game combines the digital world with the real world by enabling the unlocking of airports by GPS check-ins.\nPhilanthropy.\nKLM started KLM AirCares, a program that aids underprivileged children in developing countries to which KLM flies, in 1999. The airline collects money and airmiles from passengers. In 2012, new applications for support from the program were suspended because it needed an overhaul.\nDestinations.\nKLM and its partners serve 163 destinations in 70 countries on five continents from their hub at Amsterdam Airport Schiphol. Codeshare agreements bring the total amount of destinations available via KLM to 826.\nIn November 2024, KLM announced additional three new routes from Amsterdam; San Diego, Georgetown and Hyderabad which will commence in May, June and September respectively. The route to San Diego and Hyderabad will be direct flights connecting the two cities, while the flights to Georgetown will have a brief stopover in Sint Maarten.\nCodeshare agreements.\nKLM has codeshare agreements with the following airlines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInterline agreements.\nKLM has Interline agreements with the following airlines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFleet.\nFleet strategy.\nKLM's first of eight Boeing 787-10 aircraft was delivered on 28 June 2019; it featured centennial markings.\nOn 19 June 2013, KLM ordered seven Airbus A350-900s. In June 2019, Air France-KLM announced that KLM will not take up any of the group's ordered A350s, because of fleet rationalization purposes.\nCEO Ben Smith announced at Air France's Investor Day (5 November 2019) in Paris that \"in the near future\", KLM will only use the 777 and 787 as their long-haul fleet, retiring their thirteen A330's.\nIn December 2021, Air France-KLM ordered 100 Airbus A320neo family aircraft to replace KLM and Transavia's Boeing 737 Next Generation.\nOn 25 September 2023, Air France-KLM announced that they had signed an agreement with Airbus for a total of 50 Airbus A350-900 and A350-1000 aircraft, with an option for 40 more. The type is set to serve intercontinental flights from 2026, replacing its fleet of Boeing 777-200ERs, Airbus A330-200s and Airbus A330-300s.\nSpecial liveries.\nKLM has several aircraft painted in special liveries; they include:\nCabin.\nKLM has three cabin classes for international long-haul routes; World Business Class, Premium Comfort and Economy. Part of the Economy cabin has a higher seat pitch and is sold as Economy Comfort. Personal screens with audio-video on-demand, satellite telephone, SMS, and e-mail services are available in all cabins on all long-haul aircraft. European short-haul and medium-haul flights have Economy seats in the rear cabin, and Economy Comfort and Europe Business in the forward cabin.\nWorld Business Class.\nWorld Business Class is KLM's long-haul business class product. Seats in the older World Business Class are wide and have a pitch. Seats can be reclined into a 170-degree angled flat bed with a length of . Seats are equipped with a personal entertainment system with audio and video on demand in the armrest, privacy canopy, massage function and laptop power ports. World Business Class seating is in a 2\u20132\u20132 abreast arrangement on all Airbus A330s.\nIn March 2013, KLM introduced a new World Business Class seat to the long-haul fleet. Dutch designer Hella Jongerius designed the new cabin. The diamond-type seat is manufactured by B/E Aerospace and is currently installed on all Airbus A330s and Boeing 777s. The seats were also refurbished on former KLM Boeing 747-400s between 2013 and 2014. The new seats are fully flat and offer -high definition personal entertainment systems. When fully flat, the bed is about long. The cabin features a cradle-to-cradle carpet made from old uniforms woven in an intricate pattern, which is combined with new pillows and curtains with a similar design.\nA completely new design of Business Class seats was introduced with the launch of KLM's Boeing 787; this aircraft's business class seats are based on the Zodiac Cirrus platform used by Air France. The new seats lie fully flat, with a 1-2-1 layout so every passenger has direct aisle access, a large side-storage area and HD video screen.\nThe tableware and cutlery for business class in-flight service was designed by Marcel Wanders. Dutch fashion stylists Viktor &amp; Rolf designed amenity kits for World Business Class passengers. A new design will be introduced each year and the color of the kits will change every six months. The kit contains socks, an eye mask, a toothbrush, toothpaste, earplugs and Viktor &amp; Rolf lip balm.\nIn 2022, KLM announced they would retrofit Boeing 777 aircraft in their fleet (notably, the 777-300 and 777-200) with seats in a 1-2-1 reverse herringbone configuration while installing Premium Comfort seats. These new seats will feature a \"door\" for extra privacy.\nEurope Business Class.\nEurope Business Class is KLM's and KLM Cityhopper's short-haul business-class. Europe Business Class seats are wide and have an average pitch of . Middle seats in rows of three are blocked to increase passengers' personal space. Europe Business Class seats feature extra legroom and recline further than regular Economy Class seats. In-seat power is available on all Boeing 737 aircraft's. Europe Business Class has no personal entertainment. Seating is arranged 3\u20133 abreast with the middle seat blocked on the Boeing 737 aircraft, and a 2\u20132 abreast arrangement on the Embraer E-Jet family and Embraer E-Jet E2 aircraft.\nPremium Economy.\nIn 2022, KLM announced they would retrofit their long-haul fleet to include Premium Comfort. Premium Comfort will be a new cabin in front of Economy Comfort, with between 21 and 28 new seats featuring a 13\" touch screen, a movable leg- and footrest, 7.8 inches recline (20\u00a0cm) and up to 6.7 inches (17\u00a0cm) more pitch than Economy seats. Passengers in Premium Comfort can also enjoy improved food and beverage service, as well as SkyPriority benefits.\nEconomy Comfort.\nEconomy Comfort is part of the economy class cabin offered on all KLM and KLM Cityhopper flights and provides passengers with more legroom and recline. Economy Comfort seats on long-haul flights have more pitch than Economy Class, a pitch and recline up to ; double the recline of Economy. Economy Comfort seats on short-haul flights have more pitch, totaling , and can recline up to (40%) further. Except for the increased pitch and recline, seating and service in Economy Comfort is the same as in Economy Class. Economy Comfort is located in the front of the Economy Class; passengers can exit the aircraft before Economy passengers.\nEconomy Comfort seats can be reserved by Economy Class passengers. The service is free for passengers with a full-fare ticket, for Flying Blue Platinum members and Delta Air Lines SkyMiles Platinum or Diamond members. Discounts apply for Flying Blue Silver or Gold members, SkyTeam Elite Plus members and Delta SkyMiles members.\nEconomy Class.\nThe Economy Class seats on long-haul flights have a pitch and are wide. All seats are equipped with adjustable winged headrests, a PTV with AVOD, and a personal handset satellite telephone that can be used with a credit card. Economy Class seats in Airbus A330-300 aircraft are also equipped with in-seat power. The Economy Class seats on short-haul flights have a pitch and are wide. The Economy Class seats on short-haul flights do not feature any personal entertainment. The long-haul Economy Class seating is in a 3\u20134\u20133 abreast arrangement on the Boeing 747-400, Boeing 777-300ER aircraft and on Boeing 777-200ER aircraft, a 3-3-3 abreast arrangement on the Boeing 787-9 aircraft, and a 2\u20134\u20132 abreast arrangement on the Airbus A330 aircraft. The short-haul Economy Class seating is in a 3\u20133 abreast arrangement on the Boeing 737 aircraft and a 2\u20132 abreast arrangement on the Embraer 175 and 190 aircraft, and the seats on these aircraft are wide.\nServices.\nIn-flight entertainment.\nKLM's in-flight entertainment system is available in all classes on all widebody aircraft; it provides all passengers with Audio/Video on Demand (AVOD). The system includes interactive entertainment including movies, television programs, music, games, and language courses. About 80 movies including recent releases, classics and world cinema are available in several languages. The selection is changed every month. The in-flight entertainment system can be used to send SMS text messages and emails to the ground. Panasonic's 3000i system is installed on all Boeing 747-400, Boeing 777-200ER, and on most of the Airbus A330-200 aircraft. All Airbus A330-300 and Boeing 777-300ER aircraft, and some Airbus A330-200 aircraft are fitted with the Panasonic eX2 in-flight entertainment system.\nKLM provides a selection of international newspapers to its passengers on long-haul flights; on short-haul flights, they are offered only to Europe Business Class passengers. A selection of international magazines is available for World Business Class passengers on long-haul flights. All passengers are provided with KLM's in-flight magazine, the \"Holland Herald.\" On board flights to China, South Korea and Japan, the airline offers in-flight magazines \"EuroSky\" (China and Japan), in either Chinese or Japanese, and \"Wings of Europe\" (South Korea) in Korean. On 29 May 2013, KLM and Air France launched a pilot scheme to test in-flight WiFi internet access. Each airline equipped one Boeing 777-300ER in its fleet with WiFi, which passengers can use with their WiFi-enabled devices. Wireless service was available after the aircraft reached in altitude.\nCatering.\nWorld Business Class passengers are served a three-course meal. Each year KLM partners with a leading Dutch chef to develop the dishes that are served on board. Passengers in Europe Business Class are served either a cold meal, a hot main course, or a three-course meal depending on the duration of the flight. All chicken served in World and Europe Business Class meets the standards of the Dutch Beter Leven Keurmerk (Better Life Quality Mark). KLM partnered with Dutch designer Marcel Wanders to design the tableware of World and European Business Class.\nEconomy Class passengers on long-haul flights are served a hot meal and a snack, and a second hot meal or breakfast, depending on the duration of the flight. On short-haul flights, passengers are served sandwiches or a choice of sweet or savoury snack, depending on the duration and time of the day. If the flight is at least two hours long, \"stroopwafel\" cookies are served before the descent. Most alcoholic beverages are free-of-charge for all passengers. After a successful trial period, KLM introduced \u00e0 la carte meals in Economy Class on 14 September 2011; Dutch, Japanese, Italian, cold delicacies, and Indonesian meals are offered.\nSpecial meals, including children's, vegetarian, medical, and religious meals, can be requested in each class up to 24 or 36 hours before departure. On flights to India, China, South Korea, and Japan, KLM offers authentic Asian meals in all classes. Meals served on KLM flights departing from Amsterdam are provided by KLM Catering Services.\nIn September 2016, KLM launched the world's first in-flight draft beer under the partnership with Heineken. The new service made its premiere aboard a flight to Cura\u00e7ao in the airline's World Business Class cabin.\nDelft Blue houses.\nSince the 1950s, KLM has presented its World Business Class passengers with a Delft blue miniature traditional Dutch house. These miniatures are reproductions of real Dutch houses and are filled with Dutch genever. Initially the houses were filled with Bols liqueur, which in 1986 was changed to Bols young genever.\nIn 1952, KLM started to give the houses to its First Class passengers. With the elimination of First Class in 1993, the houses were handed out to all Business Class passengers. The impetus for these houses was a rule aimed at curtailing a previously widespread practise of offering incentives to passengers by limiting the value of gifts given by airlines to US$0.75. KLM did not bill the Delft Blue houses as a gift but as a last drink free of charge, which was served in the house.\nEvery year, a new house is presented on 7 October, the anniversary of KLM's founding in 1919. The number on the last-presented house thus represents the number of years KLM has been in operation. Special edition houses\u2014the Royal Palace of Amsterdam and the 17th century Cheese Weighing House \"De Waag\" in Gouda\u2014are offered to special guests, such as VIPs and honeymoon couples.\nGround services.\nKLM offers various check-in methods to its passengers, who can check in for their flights at self-service check-in kiosks at the airport, via the Internet, or a mobile telephone or tablet. At destinations where these facilities are not available, check-in is by an airline representative at the counter. Electronic boarding passes can be received on a mobile device while boarding passes can be printed at airport kiosks.\nSince 4 July 2008 KLM, in cooperation with Amsterdam Airport Schiphol, has been offering self-service baggage drop-off to its passengers. The project started with a trial that included one drop-off point. The number of these points has gradually increased; as of 2012[ [update]] there are 12 of them. KLM passengers can now drop off their bags themselves. Before they are allowed to do that they are being checked by a KLM employee.\nIn November 2012, KLM started a pilot scheme at Amsterdam Airport Schiphol to test self-service boarding. Passengers boarded the aircraft without any interference of a gate agent by scanning their boarding passes, which opened a gate. KLM partner airline Air France ran the same pilot at its hub at Paris-Charles de Gaulle Airport. The pilot ran until March 2013, which was followed by an evaluation.\nKLM is the first airline to offer self-service transfer kiosks on its European and intercontinental routes for passengers connecting through Amsterdam Airport Schiphol. The kiosks enable connecting passengers to view flight details of connecting flights, to change seat assignments or upgrade to a more comfortable seat. When a passenger misses a connecting flight, details about alternative flights can be viewed on the kiosk and a new boarding pass can be printed. Passengers who are entitled to coupons for a beverage, meal, the use of a telephone, or a travel discount can have these printed at the kiosk.\nFlying Blue.\nAir France-KLM's frequent flyer program, Flying Blue, awards miles based on the distance travelled, ticket fare and class of service. As well as KLM and Air France, other airlines that adopted the Flying Blue programme include Transavia, Aircalin, and TAROM. Membership in the program is free. When flying, members earn Experience Points (XP) and Award Miles.\nExperience Points are used to determine membership level and remain valid until the end of the qualification period, which lasts for 1 year from counting from the member's first flight. XP can be earned with KLM, Air France, Transavia, Aircalin, TAROM, and other SkyTeam partners. The Flying Blue programme is divided into four tiers: Explorer, Silver (SkyTeam Elite), Gold (SkyTeam Elite Plus) and Platinum (SkyTeam Elite Plus). The membership tier depends on the number of Experience Points earned and is recalculated each qualification period. Flying Blue privileges are additive by membership tier; higher tiers include all benefits listed for prior tiers. There is an additional fifth tier, Platinum for Life, which can be obtained after 10 consecutive years of Platinum membership. After the Platinum for Life status is obtained, re-qualification is not required.\nAward Miles can be exchanged for rewards and expire after 24 months without flying. Award Miles can be earned on flights with SkyTeam member airlines as well as on other Flying Blue partners including Air Corsica, Air Mauritius, airBaltic, Aircalin, Bangkok Airways, Chalair Aviation, China Southern Airlines, Copa Airlines, Gol Transportes A\u00e9reos, Japan Airlines, Malaysia Airlines, Qantas, Transavia, Twin Jet, WestJet and Winair. Award Miles are redeemable for free tickets, upgrades to a more expensive seating class, extra baggage allowance, wifi on board, and lounge access. They can also be donated to various charities, or can be spent in the Flying Blue Store.\nIn June 2022, Brim Financial announced it will launch an Air France-KLM co-branded credit card in Canada.\nSustainability.\nIn 2022, parent company Air France-KLM published a report of emission reduction targets for 2030 that were approved by the Science Based Targets initiative to be in line with the Paris Agreement. This includes offering options for consumers to contribute to sustainability programs offered by the airline. On their website, KLM detail many sustainability initiatives, including use of sustainable aviation fuels, reforestation programs, and reducing the weight of on board items to save fuel. \nA report by the Breda University of Applied Sciences stated that the measures set by KLM in the 2022 report will not achieve the targets set out. In 2024, it was ruled that 15 of 19 claims submitted by KLM, including being on their way to \"a more sustainable future\" were based on vague and general statements, and overexaggerated the potential effects of the measures put in place. These were deemed misleading and therefore unlawful, and has been described by activists as Greenwashing.\nMeanwhile, Air France-KLM have been heavily involved in lobbying against European climate policy, and have actively opposed measures such as a kerosine tax and a flight cap at Schiphol Airport.\nSustainable Aviation Fuels.\nThe main measure mentioned by KLM in its emissions reduction programme is the addition of Sustainable Aviation Fuels (SAF) to jet fuel. KLM offers customers the option to pay extra to contribute to the SAF programme, stating that the fuel will be added to the system at Schipol. The report by Breda University stated that KLM's target for SAF share by 2030 was not realistic given the scarcity of the fuel and the expected global availability.\nCompensation through reforestation.\nKLM offers customers the opportunity to offset their flight emissions by contributing to reforestation programs. They initially used the slogan \u201cBe a hero, fly CO2 zero\u201d to promote this. However in 2022, the Dutch agency RCC (Advertising Code Committee) indicated to KLM that this claim was not sufficiently substantiated and that it was wrong to state that it was possible to fly CO2 neutral.\nAccidents and incidents.\nTenerife airport disaster.\nThe Tenerife disaster, which occurred on 27 March 1977, remains the accident with the highest number of airliner passenger fatalities, as well as the most recent fatal and notable incident involving a KLM aircraft. 583 people died when a KLM Boeing 747-200B attempted to take off without clearance and collided with a taxiing Pan Am Boeing 747-100 at Los Rodeos Airport on the Canary Island of Tenerife, Spain. No one on the KLM 747 survived (14 crew, 234 passengers were killed) while 61 of the 396 passengers and crew on the Pan Am aircraft survived. Pilot error from the KLM aircraft was the primary cause. Owing to a communication misunderstanding, the KLM captain thought he had clearance for takeoff. Another cause was dense fog, meaning the KLM flight crew was unable to see the Pan Am aircraft on the runway until immediately before the collision. The accident had a lasting influence on the industry, particularly in the area of communication. An increased emphasis was placed on using standardized phraseology in air traffic control (ATC) communication by both controllers and pilots alike, thereby reducing the chance for misunderstandings. As part of these changes, the word \"takeoff\" was removed from general usage, and is only spoken by ATC when clearing an aircraft to take off.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16883", "revid": "11346867", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16883", "title": "Kansas City Royals", "text": "Major League Baseball franchise in Kansas City\nThe Kansas City Royals are an American professional baseball team based in Kansas City, Missouri. The Royals compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the American League (AL) Central Division. The team was founded as an expansion franchise in 1969, and have made four World Series trips, winning in 1985 and 2015, and losing in 1980 and 2014.\nThe name \"Royals\" pays homage to the American Royal, a livestock show, horse show, rodeo, and championship barbecue competition held annually in Kansas City since 1899, as well as the identical names of two former Negro league baseball teams that played in the first half of the 20th century (one was a semi-pro team based in Kansas City in the 1910s and 1920s that toured the Midwest and the other was a California Winter League team based in Los Angeles in the 1940s that was managed by Chet Brewer and included Satchel Paige and Jackie Robinson on its roster). The Los Angeles team had personnel connections to the Monarchs but could not use the Monarchs name. The name also fits into something of a theme for other professional sports franchises in the city, including the Kansas City Chiefs of the NFL, the former Kansas City Kings of the NBA, and the former Kansas City Monarchs of the Negro National League.\nIn 1968, the team held a name-the-team contest that received more than 17,000 entries. Sanford Porte, a bridge engineer from the suburb of Overland Park, Kansas, was named the winner for his \u201cRoyals\u201d entry. His reason had nothing to do with royalty. \u201cKansas City\u2019s new baseball team should be called the Royals because of Missouri\u2019s billion-dollar livestock income, Kansas City\u2019s position as the nation\u2019s leading stocker and feeder market and the nationally known American Royal parade and pageant,\u201d Porte wrote. The team's board voted 6\u20131 on the name, with the only opposition coming from team owner Ewing Kauffman, who eventually changed his vote and said the name had grown on him.\nEntering the American League in 1969 along with the Seattle Pilots, the club was founded by Kansas City businessman Ewing Kauffman. The franchise was established following the actions of Stuart Symington, then-U.S. Senator from Missouri, who demanded a new franchise for the city after the Athletics (Kansas City's previous major league team that played from 1955 to 1967) moved to Oakland, California, in 1968. Since April 10, 1973, the Royals have played at Kauffman Stadium, formerly known as Royals Stadium.\nThe new team quickly became a powerhouse, appearing in the playoffs seven times from 1976 to 1985, winning one World Series championship and another AL pennant, led by stars such as Amos Otis, Hal McRae, John Mayberry, George Brett, Frank White, Willie Wilson, and Bret Saberhagen. The team remained competitive throughout the early 1990s, but then had only one winning season (2003) from 1995 to 2012. For 28 consecutive seasons (1986\u20132013), the Royals did not qualify to play in the MLB postseason, one of the longest postseason droughts during baseball's current wild-card era. The team broke this streak in 2014 by securing the franchise's first wild card berth and advancing to the 2014 World Series, where they lost to the San Francisco Giants in seven games. The Royals, led by players like Salvador Perez, Alex Gordon, Johnny Cueto, Danny Duffy, Eric Hosmer, Mike Moustakas, Lorenzo Cain, and an elite group of bullpen pitchers, followed this up by winning the team's first AL Central division title in 2015 and defeating the New York Mets in five games in the 2015 World Series to win their second World Series championship.\nFrom 1969 to 2025, the Royals have an all time win\u2013loss record of 4,2990\u20134,703\u20132 (). Entering the 2023 season, the team is valued at US$1.2 billion, placing them 27th out of MLB's 30 teams. Since 2019, the team has been owned by majority owner John Sherman, amongst many other Kansas City business owners and entrepreneurs.\nFranchise history.\nBaseball returns to Kansas City.\nWhen the Kansas City Athletics moved to Oakland after the 1967 season, Kansas City was left without major league baseball or, for the first time since 1883, professional baseball at all. The team was led by Charlie Finley, who explored many elaborate relocation plans and essentially shunned Kansas City before the team even relocated. An enraged Senator Stuart Symington of Missouri threatened to introduce legislation removing baseball's antitrust exemption unless Kansas City was granted a team in the next round of expansion. Major League Baseball complied with a hasty round of expansion at the 1967 winter meetings. Kansas City was awarded one of four teams to begin play in 1971. However, Symington was not satisfied with having Kansas City wait three years for baseball to return, and pressured MLB to allow the new teams to start play in 1969. Symington's intervention may have contributed to the financial collapse of the Royals' companion expansion team, the Seattle Pilots, who had to begin play in 1969 before they were ready (the league required new franchises to enter in pairs to preserve symmetry for scheduling purposes).\nPharmaceutical executive Ewing Kauffman won the bidding for the new Kansas City team. He conducted a contest to determine the best and most appropriate name for the new franchise. Sanford Porte from Overland Park, Kansas submitted the name Royals, in recognition of Missouri's billion-dollar livestock industry. His suggestion was that the American Royal best exemplified Kansas City through its pageantry and parade, so the new team should be named the Royals. The name was selected out of 17,000 submissions and the Royals Board voted 6\u20131 to adopt the name. The one dissenting vote was Kauffman's. He eventually changed his mind after the name grew on him. (Some sources say it was in honor of the Kansas City Monarchs, a Negro leagues team.) The team's logo, a crown atop a shield with the letters \"KC\" inside the shield, was created by Shannon Manning, an artist at Hallmark Cards, based in Kansas City.\n1969\u20131979: Taking off.\nThe Royals began play in 1969 in Kansas City, Missouri. In their inaugural game, on April 8, 1969, the Royals defeated the Minnesota Twins 4\u20133 in 12 innings. The Royals went 69\u201393 in their first season, highlighted by Lou Piniella, who won the AL Rookie of the Year Award.\nThe team was quickly built through a number of trades engineered by its first General Manager, Cedric Tallis, who picked up center fielder Amos Otis, who became the team's first star, first baseman John Mayberry, who provided power, second baseman Cookie Rojas, shortstop Fred Patek, and designated hitter Hal McRae. The Royals also invested in a strong farm system and developed future star pitchers Paul Splittorff, Dennis Leonard, and Steve Busby, infielders George Brett and Frank White, and outfielder Al Cowens. Under these young players, the Royals built a core set up for future success.\nIn 1971, the Royals had their first winning season, with manager Bob Lemon leading them to a second-place finish. In 1973, under manager Jack McKeon, the Royals adopted their iconic \"powder blue\" road uniforms and moved from Municipal Stadium to the brand-new Royals Stadium (now known as Kauffman Stadium).\nThe 1973 All-Star Game was hosted at Royals Stadium, with Otis and Mayberry in the AL starting lineup. The event was previously held at Municipal Stadium in 1960, when the Athletics were based in Kansas City.\nManager Whitey Herzog replaced McKeon in 1975, and the Royals quickly became the dominant franchise in the American League's Western Division. After a second-place, 91 win season, they won three straight division championships from 1976 to 1978, including the franchise's only 100-win season in 1977. However, the Royals lost to the New York Yankees in three straight American League Championship Series encounters.\n1980\u20131984: From pennant to Pine Tar Incident.\nAfter the Royals finished in second place in 1979, Herzog was fired and replaced by Jim Frey. Under Frey and a legendary .390 season from George Brett, the Royals rebounded in 1980 and advanced to the ALCS, where they again faced the Yankees. The Royals vanquished the Yankees in a three-game sweep punctuated by Brett's home run off of Yankees' star relief pitcher Goose Gossage. After reaching their first World Series, the Royals fell to the Philadelphia Phillies in six games. Game 6 was also significant because it remains the most-watched game in World Series history with a television audience of 54.9 million viewers.\nIn July 1983, while the Royals were headed for a second-place finish behind the Chicago White Sox another chapter in the team's rivalry with the New York Yankees occurred. In what has come to be known as \"the Pine Tar Incident\", umpires discovered illegal placement of pine tar (more than 18\u00a0inches up the handle) on third baseman George Brett's bat after he had hit a two-run home run off Gossage that put the Royals up 5\u20134 in the top of the 9th. After Yankee Manager Billy Martin came out of the dugout to talk to home plate umpire Tim McClelland, McClelland and the other umpires mulled over the bat (measuring it over home plate, touching it, etc.). McClelland then pointed to Brett in the dugout and gave the \"out\" sign, disallowing the home run. Enraged, Brett stormed out of the dugout toward McClelland and Martin, and McClelland ejected Brett. The homer was later reinstated by AL President Lee MacPhail, and the Royals won the game after it was resumed several weeks later.\nThe 1983 season was also notable for some transitional changes in the Royals organization. First, owner Ewing Kauffman sold 49% of his interest to Memphis developer Avron Fogelman. Second, John Schuerholz was named general manager. Schuerholz soon bolstered the farm system with pitchers Bud Black, Danny Jackson, Mark Gubicza, David Cone, and Bret Saberhagen, as well as hitters such as Kevin Seitzer.\nThanks to the sudden and surprising maturation (specifically, in pitching) of most of the aforementioned players, the Royals won their fifth division championship in 1984, relying on Brett's bat and the young pitching staff of Saberhagen, Gubicza, Charlie Leibrandt, Black and Jackson. The Royals were then swept by the Detroit Tigers in the American League Championship Series. The Tigers went on to win the World Series.\n1985: \"The I-70 Series\".\nIn the 1985 regular season the Royals topped the Western Division for the sixth time in ten years, led by Bret Saberhagen's Cy Young Award-winning performance and George Brett's self-described best \"all around year.\" Throughout the ensuing playoffs, the Royals incurred both a 2-0 and a 3\u20131 series deficit in both rounds of the playoffs, but always managed to claw their way back into the series. In game three of the American League Championship Series, with KC down 2 games to 0, George Brett homered twice and doubled off the fence in right field to put Kansas City back into the series. With the Royals down three games to one in the American League Championship Series against the Toronto Blue Jays, the Royals eventually rallied to win the series 4\u20133, highlighted by a go-ahead 3-run triple from Jim Sundberg against Blue Jay's ace Dave Stieb in Game 7.\n1985 World Series.\nIn the 1985 World Series (nicknamed the \"I-70 Series\" because the two teams are both located in the state of Missouri and connected by Interstate 70) against the cross-state St. Louis Cardinals, the Royals again fell behind, three games to one. After Danny Jackson pitched the Royals to a 6\u20131 win in game five, the Cardinals and Royals headed back to Kansas City for game six. Facing elimination, the Royals trailed 1\u20130 in the bottom of the 9th inning, when Jorge Orta led off, hitting a bouncing ground ball to Cardinals 1st basemen Jack Clark, who flipped the ball back to pitcher Todd Worrell at first base. The ball beat Orta to the bag, but umpire Don Denkinger called him safe, and following a dropped popup by Clark and a passed ball, the Royals rallied to score two runs, winning on a walk-off single from pinch hitter Dane Iorg to send the series to game seven. In game seven Bret Saberhagen shutout the Cardinals as Kansas City dominated the Cardinals 11\u20130, clinching their first title in franchise history.\n1986\u20131994: Staying in the picture.\nThe Royals maintained a reputation as one of the American League West's top teams throughout the late 1980s. The club posted a winning record in three of the four seasons following its 1985 World Series championship, while developing young stars such as Bo Jackson, Tom Gordon, and Kevin Seitzer. The Royals finished the 1989 season with a 92\u201370 record (third-best in the major leagues) but did not qualify for the playoffs, finishing second in their division behind the eventual World Series champion Oakland Athletics.\nAt the end of the 1989 season, the team boasted a powerhouse pitching rotation, including the AL Cy Young Award-winner Bret Saberhagen (who set franchise record 23 wins that year), two-time All-Star Mark Gubicza (a 15-game winner in 1989) and 1989 AL Rookie of the Year runner-up Tom Gordon (who won 17 games that year). But the organization felt it was still missing a few necessary pieces to give its divisional rival Oakland Athletics a run for their money. So prior to the 1990 season, the Royals acquired Mark Davis, the 1989 National League Cy Young Award-winner and league leader in saves, signing him to a 4-year, $13 million contract (the largest annual salary in baseball history at the time). The Royals also signed starting pitcher Storm Davis, who was coming off a career-high 19-game win season (third-best in the AL), to a three-year $6 million contract. Despite the promising off-season moves, the team suffered critical bullpen injuries while both newly signed Davises experienced lackluster seasons in 1990. The Royals concluded the season with a 75\u201386 record, in second-to-last place in the AL West (and with the worst franchise record since 1970). Bo Jackson\u2014the team's potential future franchise player\u2014suffered a devastating hip injury while playing football in the off-season, so the Royals waived him during spring training in 1991.\nThough the team dropped out of contention from 1990 to 1992, the Royals still could generally be counted on to post winning records through the strike-shortened 1994 season. With no playoff appearances despite the winning records during this era, many of the team's highlights instead centered around the end of George Brett's career, such as his third and final batting title in 1990\u2014which made him the first player to win batting titles in three different decades\u2014and his 3,000th hit.\nIn 1994, the Royals moved from the AL West to the newly created AL Central along with the Chicago White Sox and Minnesota Twins, joined by the Cleveland Indians and Milwaukee Brewers from the AL East. The Brewers left for the NL Central in 1998, replaced by the Detroit Tigers that moved from the AL East.\n1995\u20132002: Decline in the post-Kauffman era.\nAt the start of the 1990s, the Royals had been hit with a double-whammy when General Manager John Schuerholz departed in 1990 and team owner Ewing Kauffman died in 1993. Shortly before Kauffman's death, he set up an unprecedented complex succession plan to keep the team in Kansas City. The team was donated at his death to the Greater Kansas City Community Foundation and Affiliated Trusts with operating decisions of the team decided by a five-member group chaired by Wal-Mart executive David Glass. According to the plan the Royals had six years to find a local owner for the team before opening ownership to an outside bidder. The new owners would be required to say they would keep the team in Kansas City. Kauffman had feared that new owners would move it noting, \"No one would want to buy a baseball team that consistently loses millions of dollars and had little prospect of making money because it was in a small city.\" If no owner could be found the Kauffman restrictions were to end on January 1, 2002, and the team was to be sold to the highest bidder. In 1999, New York City lawyer and minor league baseball owner Miles Prentice, vowing not to move the team, bid $75\u00a0million for the team. This was the minimum amount Kauffman had stipulated the team could be sold for. MLB rejected Prentice's first bid without specifying any reason. In a final round of bids on March 13, 2000, the Foundation voted to accept Glass' bid of $96\u00a0million, rejecting Prentice's revised bid of $115\u00a0million.\nDuring the interregnum under Foundation ownership, the team declined. In the 1994 season, the Royals reduced payroll by trading pitcher David Cone and outfielder Brian McRae, then continued their salary dump in the 1995 season. The team payroll, which had previously remained among the league's highest, was sliced in half from $40.5\u00a0million in 1994 (fourth-highest in the major leagues) to $18.5\u00a0million in 1996 (second-lowest in the major leagues).\nAs attendance slid and the average MLB salary continued to rise, rather than pay higher salaries or lose their players to free agency, the Royals traded their remaining stars such as Kevin Appier, Johnny Damon and Jermaine Dye. By 1999, the team's payroll had fallen again to $16.5\u00a0million. Making matters worse, most of the younger players that the Royals received in exchange for these All-Stars proved of little value, setting the stage for an extended downward spiral. Indeed, the Royals set a franchise-low with a .398 winning percentage (64\u201397 record) in 1999, and lost 97 games again in 2001.\nIn the middle of this era, in 1997, the Royals declined the opportunity to switch to the National League as part of a realignment plan to introduce the Arizona Diamondbacks and Tampa Bay Devil Rays as expansion teams. The Milwaukee Brewers made the switch instead.\nIn 2002, the Royals set a new team record for futility, losing 100 games for the first time in franchise history. They fired manager Tony Muser, and he was replaced by Tony Pe\u00f1a.\n2003: A winning season.\nThe 2003 season saw a temporary end to the losing, when manager Tony Pe\u00f1a, in his first full season with the club, guided the team to its first winning record (83\u201379) since 1994 and a third-place finish in the AL Central. He was named the American League Manager of the Year for his efforts and shortstop \u00c1ngel Berroa was named AL Rookie of the Year.\n2004\u20132008: Rock bottom.\nFrom the 2004 season through the 2012 season, the Royals posted nine consecutive losing records, the longest streak in team history. In six of those seasons, the team finished in last place in the American League Central, and in eight of those nine seasons the team lost at least 90 games. The worst seasons came in 2004\u20132006, when the Royals lost at least 100 games each year and set the franchise's all-time record for losses (56\u2013106 in 2005).\nPicked by many to win their division in 2004 after faring well in the free agent market, the Royals got off to a disappointing start and by late June were back in a rebuilding mode, releasing veteran reliever Curtis Leskanic and trading veteran reliever Jason Grimsley and superstar center fielder Carlos Beltr\u00e1n for prospects, all within a week of each other.\nThe team subsequently fell apart completely, losing 104 games and breaking the franchise record set just two years earlier. The Royals did, however, see promising seasons from two rookies, center fielder David DeJesus and starting pitcher Zack Greinke. The team continued a youth movement in 2005, but finished with a 56\u2013106 record (.346), a full 43 games out of first place, marking the third time in four seasons that the team reestablished the mark for worst record in franchise history. The season also saw the Royals lose 19 games in a row, a franchise record. During the season manager Tony Pe\u00f1a quit and was replaced by interim manager Bob Schaefer until the Indians' bench coach Buddy Bell was chosen as the next manager. Looking for a quick turnaround, general manager Allard Baird signed several veteran players prior to the 2006 season, including Doug Mientkiewicz, Mark Grudzielanek, Joe Mays and Scott Elarton. Nevertheless, the Royals struggled through another 100-loss season in 2006, becoming just the eleventh team in major league history to lose 100 games in three straight seasons. During the season Baird was fired as GM and replaced by Dayton Moore.\nKansas City entered the 2007 season looking to rebound from four out of five seasons ending with at least 100 losses. The Royals outbid the Cubs and Blue Jays for free agent righty Gil Meche, signing him to a five-year, $55\u00a0million contract, the largest contract in Royals history. Reliever Octavio Dotel also inked a one-year, $5\u00a0million contract. The team also added several new prospects, including Alex Gordon and Billy Butler. Among Dayton Moore's first acts as General Manager was instating a new motto for the team: \"True. Blue. Tradition.\" In June 2007, the Royals had their first winning month since July 2003 and followed it up with a winning July. The Royals finished the season 69\u201393, but 2007 marked the club's first season with fewer than 100 losses since 2003. Manager Buddy Bell resigned following the 2007 season.\nThe Royals hired Trey Hillman, formerly the manager of the Nippon Ham Fighters and a minor league manager with the New York Yankees, to be the 15th manager in franchise history. The 2008 season began with the release of fan-favorite Mike Sweeney and the trade of \u00c1ngel Berroa to the Dodgers. Through 13 games in 2008, the Royals were 8\u20135 and in first place in the AL Central, a vast improvement over their start from the previous season. However, by the All-Star break, the Royals were again in losing territory, with their record buoyed only by a 13\u20135 record in interleague play, the best in the American League. The team finished the season in fourth place in the division with a 75\u201387 record.\n2009\u20132012: Kauffman renovations and further rebuilding.\nPrior to the 2009 season, the Royals renovated Kauffman Stadium, and after the season began, the Royals ended April at the top of the AL Central, both of which raised excitement levels among fans. However, the team faded as the season progressed and finished the year with a final record of 65\u201397, in a tie for fourth place in the AL Central. The season was highlighted by starter Zack Greinke, who did not allow an earned run in the first 24 innings of the season, went on to finish the year with a Major League-leading 2.16 earned run average, and won the American League Cy Young Award. Greinke joined Bret Saberhagen (in 1985 and 1989) and David Cone (in 1994) as only the third player in Royals history to receive the award.\nThe Royals began the 2010 season with a rocky start, and after the team's record fell to 12\u201323, manager Trey Hillman was fired. Former Milwaukee Brewers skipper Ned Yost took over as the 16th manager in franchise history, At the end of the 2010 season, the Royals finished with a 67\u201395 record, in last place in the division for the sixth time in seven years. The Royals also set a dubious franchise record during the season, allowing 42 runs in a three-day span from July 25 to 27. The Royals began 2011 with a hot start, compiling 10\u20134 record after 14 games, but success faded as the season progressed. The Royals last had a .500 record at 22\u201322, and by the All-Star break, the Royals had a record of 37\u201354, the worst in the American League. Almost all of the Royals' bullpen was made up of 2011 minor league call ups, in addition to the infielders Eric Hosmer, Mike Moustakas, Johnny Giavotella, and catchers Salvador P\u00e9rez and Manny Pi\u00f1a. Hosmer won the AL Rookie of the Month award in July and September and finished the season with 19 home runs. Moustakas collected a fifteen-game hitting streak, which tied the longest such streak by a Royals rookie. The Royals finished the 2011 season with a 71\u201391 record, in fourth place in the AL Central. The 2012 team saw more of the same, as they improved by one game to 72\u201390, but finished one spot better in the division.\nThe 2012 Major League Baseball All-Star Game was hosted by the Royals at Kauffman Stadium on July 10, 2012 (in addition to the 2012 Home Run Derby, All-Star Futures Game and Taco Bell All-Star Legends and Celebrity Softball Game during the All-Star break), which the National League won 8\u20130. The 2012 season marked the third time the \"Midsummer Classic\" was held in Kansas City.\n2013: Return to respectability.\nOn December 10, 2012, in an attempt to strengthen the pitching staff (which was among the worst in baseball in 2012), the Royals traded for Rays pitchers James Shields and Wade Davis, giving Tampa top prospects Wil Myers, Jake Odorizzi, Mike Montgomery, and Patrick Leonard in return. This trade helped catalyze a return to winning records.\nFor most of the 2013 season, the Royals hovered near .500. The team also did not commit an error in its first seven games (for &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;64+2\u20443 innings) for the first time in team history. On September 22, the Royals won their 82nd game of the season to clinch the franchise's first winning season since 2003. The Royals finished the season 86\u201376 and in third place in the AL Central, securing the team's best winning percentage since 1994.\n2014: Return to the World Series.\nThe 2014 season featured a return to the postseason for the first time in 29 years, and what would unfold as a historic playoff run from the Wild Card all the way to the 2014 World Series.\nAnchored by the \"HDH\" trio of Kelvin Herrera, Wade Davis, and Greg Holland, the bullpen became one of the most dominant in MLB history.\nEntering the 2014 season, the Royals had the longest playoff drought of any team in the four main American professional sports leagues (NFL, MLB, NHL, and NBA). On July 21, 2014, the Royals had a losing record (48\u201350) and were eight games behind the Detroit Tigers in the AL Central standings. But spurred by a 22\u20135 record from July 22 to August 19 coinciding with a mediocre 12\u201315 stretch by the Tigers, the team surged into first place in the AL Central. The Royals reached the top of the division standings on August 11, after winning their eighth game in a row. This marked the latest date the Royals had led their division since August 29, 2003. The team retained its division lead for a month, before falling out of first-place permanently on September 12. They finished the 2014 regular season with a record 89\u201373, still the most wins for the Royals since 1989. Though the team finished one game behind Detroit in the AL Central, the Royals secured their first-ever wild card berth.\nAfter qualifying for the postseason, the Royals embarked on a record-setting eight-game winning streak. They hosted the Oakland Athletics in the 2014 American League Wild Card Game and won 9\u20138 on a Salvador P\u00e9rez walk-off single in the 12th inning, having earlier rallied back from a 7\u20133 deficit in the eighth. The Royals then swept the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim in the 2014 American League Division Series. In Game 1 of the ALDS, the score was 2\u20132 going into the 11th inning, when Mike Moustakas hit a game-winning solo home run. The next day, Kansas City beat the Angels 4\u20131 in another extra-innings affair, in the process setting an MLB postseason record of three straight extra-inning wins. The Royals then completed the sweep at home, winning 8\u20133 in game three and advancing to the 2014 American League Championship Series against the Baltimore Orioles.\nIn the opening game of the ALCS on October 11, 2014, the Royals defeated the Orioles 8\u20136, with two home runs in the 10th inning. Thus, in eight extra innings over five postseason games in 2014, they succeeded in hitting four homers in extra innings, more than any team in the history of Major League Baseball. In the second ALCS game, the Royals again beat the Orioles 6\u20134, behind Lorenzo Cain's four hits, including an RBI single. After game three, the ALCS was delayed one day due to rainy weather, when the Royals hosted the Orioles at Kauffman Stadium on October 14, 2014. Pitcher Jeremy Guthrie allowed only one run as KC beat the Orioles 2\u20131, taking a 3\u20130 lead in the series. In game four, the Royals completed the sweep of the Orioles with another 2\u20131 win to advance to the World Series for the first time since 1985. The win marked the team's eighth consecutive postseason win in one year, breaking a major league record previously held by the Colorado Rockies in 2007 and Cincinnati Reds in 1976. It also marked the Royals' 11th win in a row overall in postseason play, dating back to the franchise's final three wins of the 1985 Series, the third-longest multi-year postseason streak in baseball history.\nThe Royals faced the San Francisco Giants in the 2014 World Series. They had home-field advantage, due to the American League's win in the 2014 All-Star Game.\nAfter setting an AL record by winning eight straight games to reach the World Series, the Royals opened the series by losing 7\u20131 in the first game against starter Madison Bumgarner. The Royals bounced back with a 7\u20132 win in game two to tie the series at 1\u20131. The Royals won game three in San Francisco 3\u20132 to take the series lead for the first time. In game four, the Royals lost 11\u20134, which tied the series with the Giants. In game five, they lost 5\u20130 to the Giants against starter Madison Bumgarner. In game six, the Royals beat the Giants 10\u20130. In game seven, the Royals started Jeremy Guthrie against Giants pitcher Tim Hudson. Guthrie lasted &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20443 innings before he was replaced by Kelvin Herrera, who himself lasted &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+2\u20443 innings. He was then replaced by Wade Davis, who pitched in two innings. Closer Greg Holland ended the game. On the Giants side, Hudson lasted only &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+2\u20443 innings before he was replaced by Jeremy Affeldt, who was later replaced by Madison Bumgarner. The Royals lost game seven, 3\u20132, with the tying run (Alex Gordon) on third base in the bottom of the ninth with two outs, when Salvador P\u00e9rez fouled out to Pablo Sandoval to end the game and the series.\n2015: World Series Champions.\nAfter earning a wild card entry to the playoffs in 2014, in 2015, the Royals won the franchise's first division title since 1985 and first Central division title ever. The Royals went on to win the 2015 World Series \u2013 the first championship for the Royals since 1985 \u2013 beating the New York Mets four games to one.\nThe Royals entered the 2015 All-Star break with the best record in the American League at 52\u201334. The team continued its momentum into the second half of the season, and on July 26, Royals management traded three prospects Brandon Finnegan, https://, and Cody Reed for 2014 All-Star pitcher Johnny Cueto to help bolster its starting pitching rotation, as well as trading two pitchers to the Oakland Athletics for super-utility player Ben Zobrist. The team ended the regular season with a record of 95\u201367, the best in the entire American League, and the organization's best record since 1980.\nThe Royals faced the Houston Astros in the ALDS. Down 2\u20131 in the series and trailing 6\u20132 in the 8th inning of Game 4, the Royals rallied for 5 runs en route to a 9\u20136 win before Cueto's gem in Game 5 powered the Royals to a second consecutive ALCS. The Royals defeated the Toronto Blue Jays in Game 6, to win the 2015 ALCS and earn a trip to face the New York Mets in the 2015 World Series.\nThe Royals beat the New York Mets 4 games to 1 to become the 2015 World Series champions. It was the Royals' first World Series title since 1985. The series win was sealed after the Royals beat the Mets 7\u20132 in the 12th inning of Game 5. The Royals rallied in the 9th inning down 2\u20130 to tie the score 2\u20132, forcing the game into extra innings. The five-run 12th inning was initiated by a Salvador P\u00e9rez single, with Jarrod Dyson pinch-running for him. This was followed by a single from Christian Colon and doubles from both Alcides Escobar and Lorenzo Cain, scoring runs from Jarrod Dyson, Colon, Paulo Orlando (who reached base on an error by Daniel Murphy), Escobar and Ben Zobrist (who was intentionally walked). Wade Davis, who hadn't allowed a run yet that postseason, closed out the game with a flawless 12th, allowing one hit and striking out Wilmer Flores to end the game and win the World Series for the Royals. Upon conclusion of the final game, catcher Salvador Perez was named World Series MVP.\n2016\u20132017: End of an era.\nThe Royals followed up their World Series victory with an underachieving, injury-riddled campaign in 2016. The Royals had an inconsistent season in which they ultimately finished 81\u201381, third place in the division and out of playoff contention. This season is notable for the debut of future star Whit Merrifield. The 2017 season marked the end of the World Series core: pitcher Yordano Ventura was killed in a car accident on January 22, and the Royals wore patches that said 'ACE 30' on their jerseys for the 2017 season to honor him; Wade Davis was traded in the offseason. In 2017, the Royals finished similarly to 2016 at 80\u201382, third place in the division, and missed the playoffs for a second consecutive year. Stars Lorenzo Cain and Eric Hosmer became free agents after the season and signed contracts with the Milwaukee Brewers and San Diego Padres, respectively. However, through both of these years the Royals were one of the most successful teams in the league at challenging umpire calls via instant replay thanks to the work of replay coordinator Bill Duplissea.\n2018\u2013present: John Sherman era.\nAlthough Eric Hosmer and Lorenzo Cain left in free agency, the Royals were able to re-sign Mike Moustakas and Alcides Escobar. In 2018, the team started a new rebuild, trading Moustakas mid-season for prospects, and giving playing time to young players like Adalberto Mondesi, Ryan O'Hearn, and Brad Keller. Despite this, the team finished with only 58 wins, the team's lowest win total since 2005. The 2018 season also marked the emergence of Whit Merrifield as a star, as he led MLB in hits (192) and stolen bases (45).\nOn June 3, 2019, the Royals selected Bobby Witt Jr. with the second pick in the MLB draft. Widely considered one of the top prospects in baseball, Witt is regarded as one of the biggest prospects to be drafted by Kansas City since Eric Hosmer and Mike Moustakas.\nOn August 30, 2019, it was announced that John Sherman, a minority owner of the Cleveland Indians, had agreed to purchase the team from David Glass for a reported amount of $1 billion. In September, manager Ned Yost announced that he would retire at the end of the season after ten seasons and a franchise-record 746 wins. The Royals finished the 2019 season one game better than 2018, at 59\u2013103. Whit Merrifield once again led the league in hits, while Jorge Soler led the American League with 48 home runs and three Royals players paced the league in triples (Mondesi, Merrifield and Hunter Dozier, with 10 apiece). On October 31, 2019, the Royals announced the hiring of former St. Louis Cardinals manager Mike Matheny to replace Ned Yost. In 2020, the season was shortened to 60 games because of the COVID-19 pandemic; the Royals finished with a 26\u201334 record (a .433 winning percentage), good for fourth place in the AL Central. Overall in 2021, the Royals finished with a 74\u201388 record (a .457 winning percentage), landing in fourth place in the AL Central but seeing improvement over both 2019 and 2020, as catcher Salvador P\u00e9rez led MLB in both home runs and runs batted in and Bobby Witt Jr. continued to emerge as one of the top prospects in Minor League Baseball.\nBeginning with the 2022 season, Dayton Moore was promoted to the team's President of Baseball Operations and J. J. Picollo began his tenure as general manager. Moore was fired by the end of the season. The Royals spent 2022 blending their roster with several rookies (including Bobby Witt Jr., MJ Melendez, and Vinnie Pasquantino among others), often fielding lineups with six or more rookies on a given night. The team finished in fourth place of the AL Central with a 65\u201397 record, and Mike Matheny was fired after their season finale in Cleveland.\nMatt Quatraro was hired as manager for the 2023 season, and the team finished with a record of 56\u2013106. Leading into the 2024 season, the Royals were aggressive in the offseason signing pitchers such as Michael Wacha and Seth Lugo. The 2024 Royals became the second team ever to go from over 100 losses from the season prior to a playoff berth in the next. They clinched their first playoff berth since 2015 on September 27, 2024. They swept the Baltimore Orioles in the Wild Card round and lost to the New York Yankees in the American League Division series.\nIn February 2025, former manager Ned Yost rejoined the team as a senior advisor to general manager J. J. Picollo. The team finished the 2025 season in third place of the AL Central with a record of 82\u201380.\nFuture stadium plans.\nTeam owner John Sherman announced in November 2022 that the team plans to leave Kauffman Stadium prior to the end of their lease which expires at the end of the 2030 MLB season. The team announced in June 2023 that the two final sites under consideration for the stadium district were the East Village neighborhood and North Kansas City, but a third site in the Crossroads district emerged as the final site chosen by the team in February 2024. In April 2024, Jackson County voters rejected a ballot initiative to help fund the stadium. The Royals, who had pledged at least $1 billion from ownership for their project, wanted to use their share of the tax revenue to help fund a $2 billion-plus ballpark district. The team plans to open a new stadium by the start of the 2027 or 2028 MLB season, and it would have a seating capacity of about 34,000. The Royals are also considering relocating across the state border to Kansas City, Kansas, as well as considering building a downtown ballpark in Washington Square Park, an area located between Union Station and Crown Center on the Missouri side. In November 2024, it was reported that the Royals were also examining \"two or three\" potential stadium sites in Johnson County, Kansas.\nUniform history.\n1969\u20131972: Original look.\nThe Royals' home uniform remained almost unchanged from its first season. The original design featured blue arm and neck piping, along with \"Royals\" in blue and in script lettering. The road uniform was inverted from the home uniform, with \"Kansas City\" written in blue, in script lettering and in an arch arrangement. For the 1971 season the \"Kansas City\" on the road uniforms were changed to block lettering, while both uniforms added a roundel containing the team logo on the left sleeve. The blue cap with \"KC\" stitched in front was also introduced and remains in use today.\n1973\u20131982: Pullover and powder blue uniforms.\nThe Royals switched to pullover uniforms for the 1973 season. While the home uniform did not deviate much from its original design, the road uniform changed to a powder blue base and white letters. Names were added in the 1978 season.\n1983\u20131991: Return to button-down style.\nThe Royals returned to wearing buttoned uniforms for the 1983 season. The most notable change came on the powder blue uniform, where \"Royals\" in script replaced \"Kansas City\". Both uniforms added numbers on the left chest.\n1992\u20132001: Return to grey uniforms and alternate blue uniforms.\nFor the 1992 season, the Royals resumed wearing grey uniforms on the road, but the uniforms retained the \"Royals\" script and letters in blue with white trim. In 1994 a blue alternate uniform was introduced, with \"Royals\" script and letters in white. The following season, the road uniforms were tweaked to feature \"Kansas City\" in block letters, while neck piping was removed. A grey cap with blue brim and \"KC\" in blue was also used for a few games.\n2002\u20132005: Addition of black.\nBefore the 2002 season, the Royals added black to the color scheme, and this was also reflected on the team's uniforms. Initially, the home uniforms were only updated to remove blue piping and include black drop shadows, but in 2003, the Royals went with sleeveless uniforms with blue undershirts. The grey uniforms also removed the sleeves and piping, and were paired with black undershirts and a black cap with blue brim. Letters were also given black drop shadows. The Royals also went with a black alternate uniform, featuring blue piping and \"Royals\" written in blue with white trim. The sleeve patch was updated without the roundel on the home and blue alternate uniforms, while a new \"Royals\" roundel logo was placed on the grey undershirt and black alternates. The logo removed the \"R\" from the shield, enlarged the \"KC\" and added black drop shadows, and the crown was changed to black.\n2006\u20132021: New alternates and return to powder blue.\nIn 2006, black was eliminated from the uniforms, and the Royals returned to wearing sleeved uniforms with arm piping. The crown on the \"KC\" shield logo reverted back to gold, but the black drop shadows were not removed until 2019. The road uniforms brought back the \"Kansas City\" script, albeit written diagonally, with a slight adjustment in size prior to the 2012 season. For a few games in 2006, the black uniforms were used, albeit with the \"Kansas City\" script, before it was retired. In 2008, the Royals introduced a new powder blue alternate with \"Royals\" in blue with white trim, and letters in white with blue trim; the color lettering scheme in front was reversed starting in 2012. The uniforms were briefly paired with a powder blue cap with blue brim in 2010. Unlike the previous powder blue uniform, this set is paired with the home white pants. As a result, the royal blue alternates were worn exclusively on select road games.\nPowder blue was added as a trim color when the Royals issued a new blue alternate in 2014. The \"KC\" insignia replaced \"Royals\" and the number in front, while piping was added. After winning the 2015 World Series, the Royals began wearing an alternate white uniform, featuring \"Royals\" in metallic gold with blue trim. In 2017, the uniform was updated with the team name in blue with gold trim, and numbers in gold and blue trim. A new blue cap with \"KC\" in gold was paired with this uniform.\n2022\u2013present: Block road letters return; City Connect.\nThe Royals unveiled a fresh uniform set for the 2022 season. The primary home uniform remained the same save for the thicker sleeve stripes. The road primary and blue road alternate returned to the block \"Kansas City\" wordmark the team used from 1971 to 1982, adding chest numbers on both uniforms. The alternate home powder blue uniform removed the royal blue elements, with the numbers taking the same color as the \"Royals\" script.\nAlso in 2022, the Royals wore \"City Connect\" uniforms in homage to Kansas City's \"City of Fountains\" moniker. The top of the uniform is navy blue with powder blue accents, with a stylized \"KC\" insignia on the left chest. The \"KC\" insignia was shaped to resemble a fountain of water shooting up. Pants worn are white with a powder blue stripe on each side. Caps are all-navy while helmets are navy with powder blue brim; both designs incorporate the \"KC\" in front.\nBeginning in 2023, the Royals' powder blue alternate uniform would be worn with powder blue pants for select games, a combination not worn since the 1991 season. In 2025, the Royals' full powder blue uniform would be worn every Saturday home game, and would be paired with their batting practice cap featuring the classic \"KCR\" crown logo in a white panel along with a powder blue crown and royal blue brim. While the plan had been for the Royals to wear their full powder blue uniforms at home, they began to wear them on select road games as well, something they have not done since 1991.\nRivalries.\nSt. Louis Cardinals.\nThe Royals' most prominent rivalry is with the intrastate St. Louis Cardinals. For geographic reasons, the teams long played exhibition games, but a true rivalry began with the Royals' victory over the Cardinals in the 1985 World Series, known as the \"I-70 Series.\" Notably, the manager for the Cardinals in the series was Whitey Herzog, who had been the Royals' manager from 1975 to 1979, and led Kansas City to the franchise's first three playoff appearances \u2013 in 1976, 1977, and 1978 \u2013 before getting fired just shortly after the Royals were eliminated from playoff contention in 1979. Interleague play in 1997 allowed the I-70 Series to be revived in non-exhibition games. The first few seasons of the series were rather even, with the Cardinals holding a slight advantage with a 14\u201313 record through the 2003 season. Through the 2023 season, the Cardinals hold the series advantage 75\u201349.\nNew York Yankees.\nFrom 1976 to 1980, the Royals faced the New York Yankees four times in five years in the American League Championship Series. The Yankees won in 1976, 1977 and 1978, while the Royals won in 1980. The teams did not face each other in the postseason again until the 2024 American League Division Series, with the Yankees winning in four games. In a 2013 article about the 1983 Pine Tar Incident involving the two teams, Lou Pinella said: \"As a team, we didn't really like Kansas City. We had played them in the '76, '77 and '78 postseason and beaten them every time. There was no love lost between the teams. We didn't like each other. They were our big rivals...\" George Brett agreed: \"I hated everyone on the Yankees, I really did. I hated 'em all, back in that era.\" Kansas City also held historic grudges against the Yankees in general, as during the Athletics' residency under Arnold Johnson's ownership, it was effectively a \"de facto\" \"farm team\" for the Bronx Bombers due to lopsided trades in favor of New York.\nBaseball Hall of Famers.\nKansas City Royals Hall of Famers\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\nKansas City Royals\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFord C. Frick Award recipients.\nKansas City Royals Ford C. Frick Award recipients\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther players of note.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Royals have retired the numbers of former players George Brett (No. 5) and Frank White (No. 20). Former manager Dick Howser's No. 10 was retired following his death in 1987. Former Brooklyn Dodgers player Jackie Robinson's No. 42 is retired throughout Major League Baseball.\nOut of circulation, but not retired.\nNo. 29, worn by Royals greats Dan Quisenberry (238 saves, 2.55 ERA) and Mike Sweeney (.299 batting average, 197 home runs, 837 RBI), has not been assigned since Sweeney's departure in 2007.\nManagers.\n\"Statistics current through 2024 season\"\nMinor league affiliations.\nThe Kansas City Royals farm system consists of seven minor league affiliates.\nRadio and television.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], the Royals flagship radio stations are KFNZ-FM (96.5) and KFNZ (610 AM). As KCSP, 610 AM had been carrying games since 2008, and entered into a new four-year deal starting from the 2020 season. The radio announcers are Denny Matthews and Ryan Lefebvre, with Steve Stewart and Steve Physioc.\nTelevised games are aired on FanDuel Sports Network Kansas City, a branch of FanDuel Sports Network Midwest. For the 2012 season, Ryan Lefebvre was joined by Jeff Montgomery for about 20 games while the rest of the broadcasts were covered by former Angels announcer duo of Rex Hudler and Steve Physioc. During the 2016 season, the Royals averaged an 11.7 rating and 105,000 viewers on primetime TV broadcasts. Selected Royals games previously aired in the 2000s on the Royals Network, and its former flagship was KMCI-TV.\nOn February 22, 2007, Matthews was selected as the 2007 recipient of the Ford C. Frick Award, presented annually for major contributions to baseball broadcasting.\nMascot.\nSluggerrr is the mascot of the Royals. Sluggerrr is a lion, and made his first appearance on April 5, 1996.\nOn game day, Sluggerrr can be found giving aggressive encouragement to players and fans, pitching in the \"Little K\", and firing hot dogs from an air cannon into the stands between innings.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16884", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16884", "title": "King Alfred", "text": ""}
{"id": "16887", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16887", "title": "Kosher (disambiguation)", "text": "Kosher is food that may be consumed according to \"kashrut\", or Jewish dietary laws.\nKosher may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16888", "revid": "300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16888", "title": "Karl IX", "text": ""}
{"id": "16890", "revid": "50922586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16890", "title": "Klingon language", "text": "Language constructed for Star Trek\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe Klingon language (, \"pIqaD\": , ) is the constructed language spoken by a fictional alien race called the Klingons in the \"Star Trek\" universe.\nDescribed in the 1985 book \"The Klingon Dictionary\" by Marc Okrand, and deliberately designed to sound \"alien\", Klingon has a number of typologically uncommon features. The language's basic sound, along with a few words, was devised by actor James Doohan (\"Scotty\") and producer Jon Povill for \"\". The film marked the first time the language had been heard. In all previous appearances, Klingons spoke in English, even to each other. Klingon was subsequently developed by Okrand into a full-fledged language.\nKlingon is sometimes referred to as Klingonese (most notably in the ' episode \"The Trouble with Tribbles\", where it was actually pronounced by a Klingon character as \"Klingonee\" ), but among the Klingon-speaking community, this is often understood to refer to another Klingon language called Klingonaase\"' that was introduced in John M. Ford's 1984 \"Star Trek\" novel \"The Final Reflection,\" and appears in other \"Star Trek\" novels by Ford.\nThere are many uncommon words, like nuqneH, which is pronounced like \"noo-ck-neH(harsh H)\". Many words translated into English are phrases and not words, similar to the Chinese Language.\nThe play \"A Klingon Christmas Carol\" is the first production that is primarily in Klingon (only the narrator speaks English). The opera is entirely in Klingon.\nA small number of people are capable of conversing in Klingon. Because its vocabulary is heavily centered on \"Star Trek\"-Klingon concepts such as spacecraft or warfare, it can be hard for everyday use because of the lack of words for a casual conversation.\nHistory.\nThe language is first mentioned in the original \"Star Trek\" series episode \"The Trouble with Tribbles\" (1967), but is not heard until \"\" (1979). According to the actor who spoke the lines, Mark Lenard, James Doohan recorded the lines he had written on a tape, and Lenard transcribed the recorded lines in a way he found useful in learning them.\nFor ' (1984), director Leonard Nimoy and writer-producer Harve Bennett wanted the Klingons to speak a structured language instead of random gibberish, and so commissioned a full language, based on the phrases Doohan had originated, from Marc Okrand, who had earlier constructed four lines of Vulcan dialogue for '.\nOkrand enlarged the lexicon and developed a grammar based on Doohan's original dozen words. The language appeared intermittently in later films featuring the original cast; for example, in ' (1989) and in ' (1991), where translation difficulties served as a plot device.\nTwo \"non-canon\" dialects of Klingon are hinted at in the novelization of ', as Saavik speaks in Klingon to the only Klingon officer aboard Cpt. Kruge's starship after his death, as the survivors of the \"Enterprises self-destruction transport up from the crumbling Genesis Planet to the Klingon ship. The surviving officer, Maltz, states that he speaks the \"Rumaiy\" dialect, while Saavik is speaking to him in the \"Kumburan\" dialect of Klingon, per Maltz's spoken reply to her.\nWith the advent of the series \"\" (1987)\u2014in which one of the main characters, Worf, was a Klingon\u2014and successors, the language and various cultural aspects for the fictional species were expanded. In the episode \"A Matter of Honor\", several members of a Klingon ship's crew speak a language that is not translated for the benefit of the viewer (even Commander Riker, enjoying the benefits of a universal translator, is unable to understand) until one Klingon orders the others to \"speak their [i.e., human] language\".\nA small number of non-Klingon characters were later depicted in \"Star Trek\" as having learned to speak Klingon, notably Jean-Luc Picard and Dax.\nLanguage.\nHobbyists around the world have studied the Klingon language. At least nine Klingon translations of works of world literature have been published, among which are: \"Hamlet\" (\"Hamlet\"), \"ghIlghameS\" (\"The Epic of Gilgamesh\"), \"paghmo\u02bc tIn mIS\" (\"Much Ado About Nothing)\", \"pIn\u02bca\u02bc qan paQDI\u02bcnorgh\" (\"Tao Te Ching\"), \"Sun pIn\u02bca\u02bc veS mIw\" (\"The Art of War\"), \"chIjwI' tIQ bom\" (\"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\"), \"'aS 'IDnar pIana' Duna\" (\"The Wonderful Wizard of Oz\"), \"ta\u02bcpuq mach\" (\"The Little Prince\"), and \"QelIS boqHarmey\" (\"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\"). The Shakespearean choices were inspired by a remark from High Chancellor Gorkon in \"\", who said, \"You have not experienced Shakespeare until you have read him in the original Klingon.\" In the bonus material on the DVD, screenwriter Nicholas Meyer and actor William Shatner both explain that this was an allusion to the German myth that Shakespeare was in fact German.\nThe Klingon Language Institute exists to promote the language.\nCBS Studios owns the copyright on the official dictionary and other canonical descriptions of the language. While constructed languages (\"conlangs\") are viewed as creations with copyright protection, natural languages are not protected, excluding dictionaries and other works created with them. Mizuki Miyashita and Laura Moll note, \"Copyrights on dictionaries are unusual because the entries in the dictionary are not copyrightable as the words themselves are facts, and facts can not be copyrighted. However, the formatting, example sentences, and instructions for dictionary use are created by the author, so they are copyrightable.\"\nOkrand had studied some Native American and Southeast Asian languages, and phonological and grammatical features of these languages \"worked their way into Klingon, but for the most part, not by design.\" Okrand himself has stated that a design principle of the Klingon language was dissimilarity to existing natural languages in general, and English in particular. He therefore avoided patterns that are typologically common and deliberately chose features that occur relatively infrequently in human languages. This includes above all the highly asymmetric consonant inventory and the basic word order. Kwantlen journalist Robert Jago has pointed out similarities between Klingon and Halkomelem, a language spoken by the Indigenous people of the area where James Doohan grew up.\nSpeakers.\nA small number of people are capable of conversing in Klingon. Arika Okrent guessed in her 2009 book \"In the Land of Invented Languages\" that there might be 20\u201330 fluent speakers. Its vocabulary, heavily centered on \"Star Trek\"\u2013Klingon concepts such as spacecraft or warfare, can sometimes make it cumbersome for everyday use. For instance, while words for \"transporter ionizer unit\" (\"jolvoy\u02bc\") or \"bridge\" (of a ship) (\"meH\") have been known since close to the language's inception, the word for \"bridge\" in the sense of a crossing over water (\"QI\") was unknown until August 2012. Nonetheless, mundane conversations are possible among skilled speakers.\nOne Klingon speaker, d'Armond Speers of the Klingon Language Institute, raised his son Alec to speak Klingon as a native language, while the boy's mother communicated with him in English. Alec rarely responded to his father in Klingon, although when he did, his pronunciation was \"excellent\". After Alec's fifth birthday, Speers reported that his son eventually stopped responding to him when spoken to in Klingon as he clearly did not enjoy it, so Speers switched to English.\nIn 2007, a report surfaced that Multnomah County, Oregon, was hiring Klingon translators for its mental health program in case patients came into a psychiatric hospital speaking nothing but Klingon. Most circulations of the report seemingly implied that this was a problem that health officials faced before; however, the original report indicated that this was just a precaution for a hypothetical and that said translator would only be paid on an as needed basis. After the report was misinterpreted, the County issued another release noting that releasing the original report was a \"mistake\".\nIn May 2009, Simon &amp; Schuster, in collaboration with Ultralingua Inc., a developer of electronic dictionary applications, announced the release of a suite of electronic Klingon language software for most computer platforms including a dictionary, a phrasebook, and an audio learning tool.\nIn September 2011, Eurotalk released the \"Learn Klingon\" course in its \"Talk Now!\" series. The language is displayed in both Latin and pIqaD fonts, making this the first language course written in pIqaD and approved by CBS and Marc Okrand. It was translated by Jonathan Brown and Okrand and uses the Hol-pIqaD TrueType font.\nIn August 2016, a company in the United Kingdom, Bidvine, began offering Klingon lessons as one of their services.\nIn March 2018, the popular language learning site Duolingo opened a beta course in Klingon. After proving popular, the company offered to promote it from beta status, but due to ongoing software issues regarding Klingon's unexpected use of upper- and lower-case letters and the apostrophe as a consonant instead of punctuation, the course developers chose not to accept the offer until the problems were addressed.\nThere are Klingon language meetings and linguists or students are interested in researching this topic, even writing essays about the language or its users.\nKlingon speakers are also referred to in non-\"Star Trek\" TV series, including \"Frasier\", \"The Big Bang Theory\", and \"Lucifer\", and were heavily featured in the \"My Big Fat Geek Wedding\" episode of \"The Simpsons\". In the 2017 film \"Please Stand By\", in which a young autistic woman played by Dakota Fanning leaves her group home in San Francisco to deliver a \"Star Trek\" screenplay she wrote to Paramount Pictures, a Los Angeles police officer played by Patton Oswalt coaxes her out of hiding by speaking with her in Klingon.\nReal world usage.\nIn July 2015, the Welsh Government issued a written statement in the Klingon language. Following a formal questioning of the Economy Minister Edwina Hart regarding the funding of research into UFO sightings around Cardiff Airport by Member of the Senedd Darren Millar, a press officer in the Minister's office issued the reply: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhich was translated as: \"The minister will reply in due course. However this is a non-devolved matter.\"\nThe Bible is translated from English into Klingon.\nThe Klingon Bible Translation Project, coordinated by Melanie Roney, translates the books of the Bible, both the Old and New Testaments, into Klingon. It is promoted by the Klingon Language Institute, whose goals do not include missionary work, but this project was considered worthy of KLI's efforts for purely secular reasons.\nNSKOL has published two volumes containing several portions of the Bible translated. One can find online the following specimen:\nThe linguist and Lojbanist Nick Nicholas has also translated the https:// into Klingon.\nUse in other media.\nIn the Quentin Tarantino film \"Kill Bill Volume 1\" (2003), the opening of the film cites 'Revenge is a dish best served cold' as an 'old Klingon proverb'.\nIn 2010, a Chicago Theatre company presented a version of Charles Dickens' \"A Christmas Carol\" in Klingon language and a Klingon setting. On September 25, 2010, the Washington Shakespeare Company (now known as WSC Avant Bard) performed selections from \"Hamlet\" and \"Much Ado About Nothing\" in the Klingon language in Arlington County, Virginia. The performance was proposed by Okrand in his capacity as chairman of the group's board. This performance was reprised on February 27, 2011 featuring Stephen Fry as the Klingon Osric and was filmed by the BBC as part of a 5-part documentary on language entitled \"Fry's Planet Word\".\nThe Java edition of \"Minecraft\" has a Klingon language setting.\nThe 2003\u20132010 version of the puzzle globe logo of Wikipedia, representing its multilingualism, contained a Klingon character. When updated in 2010, the Klingon character was removed from the logo, and substituted with one from the Ge'ez script. A was started in June 2004 at \"tlh.wikipedia.org\". It was permanently locked in August 2005 and moved to Wikia. The Klingon Wiktionary was closed in 2008.\nIn the 2010 \"Dragon Ball Z Abridged\" episode \"Episode 16\", the Klingon language is used as the same language as the Namekian language.\nThe file management software XYplorer has been translated into Klingon by its developer.\nMicrosoft's Bing Translator attempts to translate Klingon from and to other languages. It can do a good job with individual words, and with phrases included in its training corpus, but it is not well tuned for Klingon's system of prefixes and suffixes. For example, DaHaDnIS \"You must study it\" is rendered instead as \"They Must Study.\"\nWith the digital-only release of \"\" in 2017, streaming service Netflix announced it would provide Klingon subtitles for the entire first season, translated by Klingon language expert Lieven L. Litaer. They can be enabled like any other language provided by the streaming service, and are shown using romanized transliteration rather than Klingon script.\nIn 2020 the German artist Hans Solo (\u00c4i-Tiem) released an EP \"NuqneH\", whose 5 tracks are completely rapped in Klingon language.\nCanon.\nAn important concept to spoken and written Klingon is canonicity. Only words and grammatical forms introduced by Marc Okrand are considered canonical Klingon by the KLI and most Klingonists. However, as the growing number of speakers employ different strategies to express themselves, it is often unclear as to what level of neologism is permissible. New vocabulary has been collected in a list maintained by the KLI until 2005 and has since then been followed up by Klingon expert Lieven Litaer until the KLI's website was renewed in 2015.\nInternal history.\nWithin the fictional universe of \"Star Trek\", Klingon is derived from the original language spoken by the messianic figure Kahless the Unforgettable, who united the Klingon home-world of Qo\u02bcnoS under one empire more than 1500 years ago.\nPhonology.\nKlingon has been developed with a phonology that, while based on human natural languages, is intended to sound alien to human ears. When initially developed, Paramount Pictures (owners of the \"Star Trek\" franchise) wanted the Klingon language to be guttural and harsh and Okrand wanted it to be unusual, so he selected sounds that combined in ways not generally found in other languages. The effect is mainly achieved by the use of a number of retroflex and uvular consonants in the language's inventory. Klingon has twenty-one consonants and five vowels. Klingon is normally written in a variant of the Latin alphabet. The orthography of this transliteration is case-sensitive, that is, upper and lower case letters are not interchangeable (uppercase letters mostly represent sounds different from those expected by English speakers), although the only minimal pair is \u27e8Q\u27e9 and \u27e8q\u27e9. In other words, while hol is incorrect Klingon, it cannot be misread as anything but an erroneous form of Hol (which means \"language\"); on the other hand, Qat and qat are two different words, the first meaning \"be popular\" and the second meaning \"accompany\". In the discussion below, standard Klingon orthography appears in \"\u27e8angle brackets\u27e9\", and the phonemic transcription in the International Phonetic Alphabet is written between \"/slashes/\".\nConsonants.\nThe inventory of consonants in Klingon is spread over a number of places of articulation. In spite of this, the inventory has many gaps: Klingon has no velar plosives, and only one sibilant fricative; common consonants absent in Klingon include . Deliberately, this arrangement is very different from that of most human languages. The combination of an aspirated voiceless alveolar plosive and a voiced retroflex plosive is particularly unusual.\nThere are a few dialectal pronunciation differences (it is not known if the aforementioned non-canon \"Kumburan\" or \"Rumaiy\" dialects of \"tlhIngan Hol\" hinted at in the novelization of \"\" might differ):\nIn the Morskan dialect:\nVowels.\nIn contrast to its consonants, Klingon's inventory of vowels is simple, and similar to those of many human languages, such as Spanish or Japanese. There are five vowels spaced more or less evenly around the vowel space, with two back rounded vowels, one back unrounded vowel, and two front or near-front unrounded vowels. The vowel inventory is asymmetrical in that the back rounded vowels are tense and the front vowels are lax.\nThe two front vowels, \u27e8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u27e9, represent sounds that are found in English, but are more open and lax than a typical English speaker might assume when reading Klingon text written in the Latin alphabet, thus causing the consonants of a word to be more prominent. This enhances the sense that Klingon is a clipped and harsh-sounding language.\n\u27e8\u27e9\u00a0\u2013 \u00a0\u2013 open back unrounded vowel (in English \"spa\")\n\u27e8\u27e9\u00a0\u2013 \u00a0\u2013 open-mid front unrounded vowel (in English \"bed\")\n\u27e8\u27e9\u00a0\u2013 \u00a0\u2013 near-close near-front unrounded vowel (in English \"bit\")\n\u27e8\u27e9\u00a0\u2013 \u00a0\u2013 close-mid back rounded vowel (in French \"eau\" and English \"cold\")\n\u27e8\u27e9\u00a0\u2013 \u00a0\u2013 close back rounded vowel (in Spanish \"tu\" and English \"you\")\nDiphthongs can be analyzed phonetically as the combination of the five vowels plus one of the two semivowels and (represented by \u27e8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u27e9, respectively). Thus, the combinations \u27e8\u27e9, \u27e8\u27e9, \u27e8\u27e9, \u27e8\u27e9, \u27e8\u27e9, \u27e8\u27e9, \u27e8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u27e9 are possible. There are no words in the Klingon language that contain *\u27e8\u27e9 or *\u27e8\u27e9.\nSyllable structure.\nKlingon follows a strict syllable structure. A syllable must start with a consonant (including the glottal stop) followed by one vowel. In prefixes and rare other syllables, this is enough. More commonly, this consonant-vowel pair is followed by one consonant or one of three biconsonantal codas: /-w\u02bc\u00a0-y\u02bc\u00a0-rgh/. Thus, \"ta\" \"record\", \"tar\" \"poison\" and \"targh\" \"targ\" (a type of animal) are all legal syllable forms, but *\"tarD\" and *\"ar\" are not. Despite this, one suffix takes the shape vowel+consonant: the endearment suffix -oy.\nStress.\nIn verbs, the stressed syllable is usually the verbal stem itself, as opposed to a prefix or any suffixes, except when a suffix ending with is separated from the verb by at least one other suffix, in which case the suffix ending in is also stressed. In addition, stress may shift to a suffix that is meant to be emphasized.\nIn nouns, the final syllable of the stem (the noun itself, excluding any affixes) is stressed. If any syllables ending in are present, the stress shifts to those syllables.\nThe stress in other words seems to be variable, but this is not a serious issue because most of these words are only one syllable in length. There are some words which should fall under the rules above, but do not, although using the standard rules would still be acceptable.\nGrammar.\nKlingon is an agglutinative language, using mainly affixes in order to alter the function or meaning of words. Some nouns have inherently plural forms, such as \"jengva\u02bc\" \"plate\" (vs. \"ngop\" \"plates\"), but most nouns require a suffix to express plurality explicitly. Depending on the type of noun (body part, being capable of using language, or neither) the suffix changes. For beings capable of using language, the suffix is \"-pu\u02bc,\" as in \"tlhInganpu\u02bc,\" meaning \"Klingons,\" or \"jaghpu\u02bc,\" meaning \"enemies\". For body parts, the plural suffix is \"-Du\u02bc,\" as in \"mInDu\u02bc,\" \"eyes\". For items that are neither body parts nor capable of speech, the suffix is \"-mey,\" such as in \"Hovmey\" (\"stars\"), or \"targhmey\" (\"targs\") for a Klingon animal somewhat resembling a boar. (However, a plural suffix is never obligatory. To say \"The stars are beautiful\", \"\u02bcIH Hovmey\" and \"\u02bcIH Hov\" are equally grammatical, although the second can also mean \"The star is beautiful\".)\nThe words \"loD\" and \"be\u02bc\", which on their own mean \"man\" and \"woman\" respectively, can be used in compound words to refer to the referent's sex. For example, from \"puq\" (\"child\") this process derives \"puqloD\" (\"son\") and \"puqbe\u02bc\" (\"daughter\").\nKlingon nouns take suffixes to indicate grammatical number. There are three noun classes, two levels of deixis, and a possession and syntactic function. In all, twenty-nine noun suffixes from five classes may be employed: \"jupoypu\u02bcna\u02bcwI\u02bcvaD\" \"for my beloved true friends\". A word may carry no more than one suffix from each class, and the classes have a specific order of appearance.\nVerbs in Klingon take a prefix indicating the number and person of the subject and object, whereas suffixes are taken from nine ordered classes and a special suffix class called rovers. Each of the four known rovers has a unique rule controlling its position among the suffixes in the verb. Verbs are marked for aspect, certainty, predisposition and volition, dynamic, causative, mood, negation, and honorific. The Klingon verb has two moods: indicative and imperative.\nThe most common word order in Klingon is object\u2013verb\u2013subject, and, in most cases, the word order is the exact reverse of English for an equivalent sentence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAn important aspect of Klingon grammar is its \"ungrammaticality\". As with for example Japanese, shortening of communicative statements is common, and is called \"Clipped Klingon\" (\"tlhIngan Hol poD\" or, more simply, \"Hol poD\") and Ritualized Speech. Clipped Klingon is especially useful in situations where speed is a decisive factor. Grammar is abbreviated, and sentence parts deemed to be superfluous are dropped. Intentional ungrammaticality is widespread, and it takes many forms. It is exemplified by the practice of \"pabHa\u02bc\", which Marc Okrand translates as \"to misfollow the rules\" or \"to follow the rules wrongly\".\nWriting systems.\nWhen written in the Latin alphabet, Klingon is unusual in being case-sensitive, with some letters written in capitals and others in lowercase.\nFor example, \"q\" and \"Q\" are an actual case-sensitive pair representing two different consonants.\nCapitals are generally reserved for uvular or retroflex consonants pronounced further back in the mouth or throat than is normal for the corresponding English sounds, as with \"D\", \"Q\", and \"S\".\nThe letter \"H\", pronounced like the \u27e8ch\u27e9 in German \"ach\" or Scottish \"loch\", is further forward in the throat than English /h/.\nOne phoneme, the vowel \"I\", is written capital to look more like the IPA symbol for the sound /\u026a/, and can pose problems when writing Klingon in sans-serif fonts such as Arial, as it looks almost the same as the consonant \"l\".\nThis has led some Klingon enthusiasts to write it lowercase like the other vowels (\"i\") to prevent confusion, but this use is non-canonical. Instead, a serif font that clearly distinguishes \"I\" and \"l\", such as Courier or Courier New, has traditionally been employed for writing Klingon in the Latin alphabet. In any case, it can be disambiguated through context, as I never occurs next to another vowel, while l always does.\nThe apostrophe, denoting the glottal stop, is considered a letter, not a punctuation mark, as with the \u02bbokina in the Hawaiian alphabet.\n a b ch D e gh H I j l m n ng o p q Q r S t tlh u v w y \u02bc\nKlingon is often written in (in-universe, \"transliterated to\") the Latin alphabet as used above, but on the television series, the Klingons use their own alien writing system. In \"The Klingon Dictionary\", this alphabet is named \"pIqaD\", but no information is given about it. When Klingon symbols are used in \"Star Trek\" productions, they are merely decorative graphic elements, designed to emulate real writing and create an appropriate atmosphere. Enthusiasts have settled on the name pIqaD for this writing system.\nThe Astra Image Corporation designed the symbols currently used to \"write\" Klingon for \"\", although these symbols are often incorrectly attributed to Michael Okuda. They based the letters on the Klingon battlecruiser hull markings (three letters) first created by Matt Jefferies and on Tibetan writing because the script has sharp letter forms\u2014used as a testament to the Klingons' love for knives and blades.\nFor April Fools' Day in 2013, Nokia and the typography company Dalton Maag claimed to have used \"communication devices to far-flung star systems\" to assist them in localizing the Nokia Pure font of the Klingon writing system. Though the explanation was of course humorous in nature, as part of the practical joke, a series of real fonts based upon the most commonly used \"pIqaD\" character mapping were in fact developed, and have been made available for free download.\nVocabulary.\nA design principle of the Klingon language is the great degree of lexical-cultural correlation in the vocabulary. For example, there are several words meaning \"to fight\" or \"to clash against\", each having a different degree of intensity. There is an abundance of words relating to warfare and weaponry and also a great variety of curses (cursing is considered a fine art in Klingon culture). This helps lend a particular character to the language.\nThere are many in-jokes built into the language. For example, the word for \"pair\" is chang\u02bceng, a reference to the original \"Siamese twins\" Chang and Eng Bunker; a leSpal is a mid-size stringed instrument, comparable to a guitar (i.e. Les Paul); a \"chronometer\" is tlhaq (pronounced similar to \"clock\"); the word for \"torture\" is joy; \"hangover\" is \u02bcuH, and the word for \"fish\" is \"ghotI\u02bc\".\nSources for the vocabulary include English (albeit heavily disguised), and also Yiddish: Sa\u02bcHut for \"buttocks\" (from \u05ea\u05bc\u05d7\u05ea \"tuches\" spelled backwards), and \u02bcoy\u02bc for \"ache, pain, sore\" (cf. \"oy vey\").\nMany English words do not have direct translations into Klingon. To express \"hello\", the nearest equivalent is nuqneH, meaning \"What do you want?\", with \"goodbye\" translated as Qapla', \"Success!\".\nDo you speak Klingon?\nI don't understand.\nI can't eat that thing.\nYou are wrong.\nRevenge is a dish best served cold. (lit: When cold revenge is served, the dish is always very good)\nToday is a good day to die.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16891", "revid": "47738556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16891", "title": "KJV", "text": ""}
{"id": "16892", "revid": "1719098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16892", "title": "Kid Icarus", "text": "1986 video game\nKid Icarus is a 1986 action-platform game developed and published by Nintendo for the Family Computer Disk System in Japan and the Nintendo Entertainment System in Europe and North America. It was released in Japan in December 1986, in Europe in February 1987, and in North America in July.\nThe plot of \"Kid Icarus\" revolves around protagonist Pit's quest for three sacred treasures, which he must equip to rescue the Greek-inspired fantasy world Angel Land and its ruler, the goddess Palutena. The player controls Pit through platform areas while fighting monsters and collecting items. The objective is to reach the end of the levels, and to find and defeat boss monsters that guard the three treasures. The game was developed by Nintendo's Research and Development 1 division with assistance with an external company (later identified to be Tose), which helped with testing. It was designed by Toru Osawa and Yoshio Sakamoto, directed by Satoru Okada, and produced by Gunpei Yokoi.\n\"Kid Icarus\" had a mixed critical reception but became a cult classic. Reviewers praised its music and its mixture of gameplay elements from different genres, but criticized its graphics and high difficulty level. It was included in several lists of the best games compiled by \"IGN\" and \"Nintendo Power\".\nIt was later re-released for the Game Boy Advance in Japan in 2004. It was released on the Wii's Virtual Console in 2007 and the Wii U's Virtual Console in 2013. A \"3D Classics\" remake was released in Japan in 2011 and in North America, Europe, and Australia in 2012. In 2016, \"Kid Icarus\" was included on the North American and PAL region releases of the NES Classic Edition. It was released on the Nintendo Classics service in 2019.\nA sequel, ', was released for the Game Boy in 1991. A third entry in the series, ', was released for the Nintendo 3DS in March 2012, after Pit's inclusion as a playable character in the 2008 game \"Super Smash Bros. Brawl\".\nGameplay.\n\"Kid Icarus\" is a side-scrolling platformer with role-playing elements. The player controls the protagonist Pit through two-dimensional levels, which contain monsters, obstacles and items. Pit's primary weapon is a bow with an unlimited supply of arrows that can be upgraded with three collectable power items: the Protective Crystal shields Pit from enemies, the Flaming Arrows hit multiple targets, and the Sacred Bow increases the range of the arrows. These upgrades will work only if Pit's health is high enough. The game keeps track of the player's score, and increases Pit's health bar at the end of a level if enough points were collected.\nThroughout the stages, the player may enter doors to access seven different types of chambers. Stores and black markets offer items in exchange for hearts, which are left behind by defeated monsters. Treasure chambers contain items, enemy nests give the player an opportunity to earn extra hearts, and hot springs restore Pit's health. In the god's chamber, the strength of Pit's bow and arrow may be increased depending on several factors, such as the number of enemies defeated and the amount of damage taken in battle. In the training chamber, Pit will be awarded with one of the three power items if he passes a test of endurance.\nThe game world is divided into three stages: the Underworld, the Overworld (Earth) and the Skyworld. Each stage encompasses three unidirectional area levels and a fortress. The areas of the Underworld and Skyworld stages have Pit climb to the top, while those of the surface world are side-scrolling levels. The fortresses at the end of the stages are labyrinths with non-scrolling rooms, in which the player must find and defeat a gatekeeper boss. Within a fortress, Pit may buy a check sheet, pencil, and torch to guide him through the labyrinth. A single-use item, the mallet, can destroy stone statues, which frees a flying soldier called a Centurion that will aid the player in boss battles. For each of the bosses destroyed, Pit receives one of three sacred treasures that are needed to access the fourth and final stage, the sky temple. This last portion abandons the platforming elements of the previous levels, and resembles a scrolling shooter.\nPlot.\nThe game is set in Angel Land, which is a fantasy world with a Greek mythology theme. Before the events of the game, Earth was ruled by Palutena (Goddess of Light) and Medusa (Goddess of Darkness). Palutena bestowed the people with light to make them happy. Medusa hated the humans, dried up their crop, and turned them to stone. Enraged by this, Palutena transformed Medusa into a monster and banished her to the Underworld. Out of revenge, Medusa conspired with the monsters of the Underworld to take over Palutena's residence the Palace in the Sky. She launched a surprise attack, and stole the three sacred treasures \u2014 the Mirror Shield, the Light Arrows and the Wings of Pegasus \u2014 which deprived Palutena's army of its power. After her soldiers had been turned to stone by Medusa, Palutena was defeated in battle and imprisoned deep inside the Palace in the Sky.\nWith her last power, she sent a bow and arrow to the young angel Pit. He escapes from his prison in the Underworld and sets out to save Palutena and Angel Land. Throughout the course of the story, Pit retrieves the three sacred treasures from the fortress gatekeepers at their respective fortresses in the Underworld, the Overworld, and the Skyworld. Afterward, he equips himself with the treasures and storms the sky temple where he defeats Medusa and rescues Palutena. The game has five different endings; depending on the player's performance, Palutena may present Pit with headgear or transform him into a full-grown angel. In the Japanese version, the best ending from the English version does not exist, and instead another bad ending is present.\nDevelopment.\nThe game was designed at Nintendo's Research and Development 1 (R&amp;D1) division. It was developed for the Family Computer Disk System (FDS) because its floppy disk, called Disk Card, has three times the storage capacity of the Family Computer's cartridges of the time. Combined with the possibility to store the players' progress, the Disk Card format enabled the developers to create a longer game with a more extensive game world. \"Kid Icarus\" was the debut of Toru Osawa (credited as Inusawa) as a video game designer, and he was the only staff member working on the game at the beginning of the project. Originally he wanted to make an action game with role-playing elements, and wrote a story rooted in Greek mythology, which he had always been fond of. He drew the pixel art, and wrote the technical specifications, which were the basis for the playable prototype. After Nintendo's action-adventure \"Metroid\" had been finished, more staff members were allotted to the development of \"Kid Icarus\".\nThe game was directed by Satoru Okada (credited as S. Okada), and produced by the general manager of the R&amp;D1 division, Gunpei Yokoi (credited as G. Yokoi). Hirokazu Tanaka (credited as Hip Tanaka) composed the music. Yoshio Sakamoto (credited as Shikao.S) joined the team upon return from his vacation after the completion of \"Metroid\". He streamlined the development process, and made many decisions that affected the design of \"Kid Icarus\". Several out-of-place elements were included in the game, such as credit cards, a wizard turning player character Pit into an eggplant, and a large, moving nose that was meant to resemble composer Tanaka. Sakamoto attributed this unrestrained humor to the former personnel of the R&amp;D1 division, which he referred to as \"strange\". Osawa said that he had originally tried to make \"Kid Icarus\" completely serious, but opted for a more humorous approach after objections from the team.\nTo meet the projected release date of December 19, 1986, the staff members worked overtime and often stayed in the office at night. They used torn cardboard boxes as beds, and covered themselves in curtains to resist the low temperatures of the unheated development building. Eventually, \"Kid Icarus\" was finished and entered production a mere three days before the release date. Several ideas for additional stages had to be dropped because of these scheduling conflicts.\nRelease.\nIn February and July 1987, respectively, a cartridge-based version was published for the NES in Europe and North America. For this release, the graphics of the ending were updated, and staff credits were added. Unlike the Japanese version, which saves the player's progress on the Disk Card, the cartridge version uses a password system to restore progress, an almost unprecedented feature.\nIn August 2004, \"Kid Icarus\" was re-released in the \"Famicom Mini Disk System Selection\" for the Game Boy Advance. It was released on the Wii's Virtual Console on January 23, 2007, in Japan, on February 12 in North America, and on February 23 in Europe and Australia; it was released on the Wii U's Virtual Console on August 14, 2013, in Japan, on July 11 in Europe and Australia, and on July 25 in North America. Passwords from the NES version do not work in the Virtual Console version. In 2016, the game was included on the North American and PAL region releases of the NES Classic Edition. In 2019, it was released on the Nintendo Classics service.\n\"3D Classics\".\nA \"3D Classics\" remake of \"Kid Icarus\" was published for the Nintendo 3DS handheld console. The remake features stereoscopic 3D along with updated graphics including backgrounds. It uses the save system instead of passwords. It has the Family Computer Disk System's extra sound channel for music and sound effects.\nIt became available on the Nintendo eShop on January 18, 2012, in Japan, on February 2 in Europe, on April 12 in Australia, and on April 19 in North America. It was available early for free via download code to users who registered two selected 3DS games with Nintendo in Japan, Europe, and Australia. In Japan, it was available to users who registered any two Nintendo 3DS games on Club Nintendo between October 1, 2011, and January 15, 2012, and became available for download starting on December 19, 2011; in Europe, it was available to users who registered any two of a selection of Nintendo 3DS games on Club Nintendo between November 1, 2011, and January 31, 2012, with the first batch of emails with codes being sent out on January 5, 2012; in Australia, it was available to users who registered any two of a selection of Nintendo 3DS games on Club Nintendo between November 1, 2011, and March 31, 2012, with the first batch of emails with codes being sent out in January 2012. In North America, download codes for the \"3D Classics\" version were given to customers who pre-ordered \"\" at select retailers when they picked up the game, which was released on March 23, 2012, allowing them to obtain the game early.\nReception.\nContemporary reviews.\nReviewing the release for the Famicom Disk System, \"Famicom Hisshoubon\u200a\"'s first reviewer complimented the game saying it felt fresh because of its simplicity and that its mysterious atmosphere would appeal to children and adults alike. The second reviewer felt the graphics didn't quite capture the Greek mythology setting of the game and said it felt a bit dated due to the wrap-around effects of moving character to the left off the screen to appear on the right side which they said was best left behind in the era of \"Pac-Man\" (1980). In \"Famicom Ts\u016bshin\", two reviewers said it was too similar and a lesser game than \"Metroid\" (1986). Two other commented on the games difficulty, with one reviewer saying the game makes players to extremely tense sequences without providing any pleasure for accomplishing them.\nRetrospective reviews.\nBy late 2003, 1.76 million copies of \"Kid Icarus\" had been sold worldwide, with a cult following. It received mixed reviews from critics over the years. In October 1992, a staff writer of the UK publication \"Nintendo Magazine System\" said that it was \"pretty good fun\", but did not \"compare too well\" to other platform games, due in part to its \"rather dated\" graphics. \"Retro Gamer\" magazine's Stuart Hunt called it an \"unsung hero of the NES\" that \"looks and sounds pretty\". He described the music as \"sublime\", and the enemy characters as \"brilliantly drawn\". Although he considered the blend of gameplay elements from different genres a success, he said that it suffered from \"frustrating\" design flaws, such as its high difficulty level. Jeremy Parish of \"1Up.com\" disagreed with the game's status as an \"unfairly forgotten masterpiece\" among its substantial Internet following. He found it to be \"underwhelming\", \"buggy\", and \"pretty annoying\", because of \"shrill music, loose controls, and some weird design decisions\". He said that the game was \"[not] terrible, or even bad \u2013 just a little lacking\". He recommended players to buy the Virtual Console version, if only because it allowed them to experience \"Kid Icarus\" \"with a fresh perspective\".\n\"GameSpot\"'s Frank Provo reviewed the Virtual Console version. He noted that the gameplay was \"[not] the most unique blueprint for a video game\", but that it had been \"fairly fresh back in 1987\". He considered the difficulty \"excessive\", and found certain areas to be designed to frustrate players. He said that the presentation had not aged well. Though favoring the Grecian scenery, he criticized the graphics for the small, bicolored, and barely animated sprites, the black backgrounds, and the absence of multiple scrolling layers. He said the music was \"nicely composed\", but the sound effects were \"all taps and thuds\". He was dissatisfied with the emulation, because the Virtual Console release preserves the slowdown problems of the NES, and removed its cheat codes. He warned potential buyers that they might appreciate \"Kid Icarus\" for its \"straightforward gameplay and challenging level layouts\", but might \"find nothing special in the gameplay and recoil in horror at the unflinching difficulty\". Lucas M. Thomas of \"IGN\" noted that the game design was \"odd\" and \"not Nintendo's most focused\". He said it had \"[not] aged in as timeless a manner as many other first-party Nintendo games from the NES era\", and described it as \"one of those games that made a lot more sense back in the '80s, accompanied by a tips and tricks strategy sheet\". He complimented the theme music, which he considered heroic and memorable. In his review of the Virtual Console release, Thomas criticized the removal of cheat codes as \"nonsensical\". He found it to be \"not an issue worthy of a prolonged rant\", but said that \"[Nintendo has] willfully edited its product, and damaged its nostalgic value in the process\".\n\"Kid Icarus\" is \"IGN\"'s 20th of the top 100 NES games and 84th of the top 100 games of all time. It is 34th on \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\"'s 1997 \"100 Best Games of All Time\", which said it \"was one of the first big NES games to show that the system went way beyond offering the single-screen arcade-style experience\". In 2001 \"Game Informer\" ranked it the 83rd best game ever made. They claimed that despite its high level of difficulty and frustration, it was fun enough to be worth playing. The game was inducted into \"GameSpy\"'s \"Hall of Fame\", and was voted 54th place in \"Nintendo Power\"'s top 200 Nintendo games. \"Nintendo Power\" also listed it as the 20th best NES video game, and praised it for its \"unique vertically scrolling stages, fun platforming, and infectious 8-bit tunes\", but with \"unmerciful difficulty\". \"Official Nintendo Magazine\" placed the game 67th on a list of greatest Nintendo games.\nLegacy.\nSequels.\nA Game Boy sequel to \"Kid Icarus\", titled \"\", was released in North America in November 1991, and in Europe on May 21, 1992. It was developed by Nintendo and Tose, and largely adopts the gameplay mechanics of its predecessor. \"Of Myths and Monsters\" remained the last installment in the series for over 20 years.\nIn 2008, a 3D \"Kid Icarus\" game for the Wii was allegedly in development by the German American studio Factor 5, but was in production without the approval of Nintendo, and Factor 5 canceled multiple projects following the closure of its American branch in early 2009. In a 2010 interview, Yoshio Sakamoto was asked about a \"Kid Icarus\" game for the Wii, to which he replied that he was not aware of any plans to revive the franchise. A new series entry for the Nintendo 3DS, \"\", was eventually released in 2012. The game is a third-person shooter, and was developed by Project Sora, the company of \"Super Smash Bros.\" designer Masahiro Sakurai.\nOther appearances.\nPit is a recurring character named \"Kid Icarus\" in the American animated television series \"\", and made cameo appearances in Nintendo games such as \"Tetris\", \"F-1 Race\", and the \"Super Smash Bros.\" series.\nIn May 2011, independent developer Flip Industries released \"Super Kid Icarus\", an unofficial Flash game with a SNES style.\nIn \"The Super Mario Bros. Movie\", Mario is seen playing \"Kid Icarus\" in his room shortly after an argument with his family.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16893", "revid": "1303231390", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16893", "title": "Kansas City (disambiguation)", "text": "Kansas City is a metropolitan area in Missouri and Kansas, United States.\nKansas City may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlaces.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16894", "revid": "584824", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16894", "title": "Kylie Minogue", "text": "Australian singer and actress (born 1968)\n \nKylie Ann Minogue ( ; born 28 May 1968) is an Australian singer, songwriter, and actress. Frequently referred to as the \"Princess of Pop\", she has achieved recognition in both the music industry and the fashion world as a major style icon. Her accolades include two Grammy Awards, four Brit Awards and eighteen ARIA Music Awards. Minogue is the highest-selling Australian female artist of all time, with sales surpassing 80 million records worldwide. In 2024, \"Time\" listed her in its annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world.\nBorn and raised in Melbourne, Minogue first achieved recognition starring as Charlene Robinson in the Australian soap opera \"Neighbours\" (1986\u20131988). She began her music career in the late 1980s, releasing four dance-pop studio albums under PWL. By the early 1990s, Minogue had amassed several hit singles in Australia and the UK, including \"The Loco-Motion\", \"I Should Be So Lucky\", \"Especially for You\", \"Hand on Your Heart\", and \"Better the Devil You Know\". Taking more creative control over her music, she signed with Deconstruction Records in 1993 and released the albums \"Kylie Minogue\" (1994) and \"Impossible Princess\" (1997).\nBy joining Parlophone in 1999, Minogue returned to mainstream dance-oriented music with \"Light Years\" (2000), including the number-one hits \"Spinning Around\" and \"On a Night Like This\". The follow-up, \"Fever\" (2001), was an international breakthrough for Minogue, becoming her best-selling album to date. The lead single, \"Can't Get You Out of My Head\", was a worldwide chart-topper and became one of the most successful singles of the 2000s, selling over five million units. Follow-up singles \"In Your Eyes\" and \"Love at First Sight\" became hits as well. She continued reinventing her image and experimenting with a range of genres on her subsequent albums, which spawned successful singles such as \"Slow\", \"I Believe in You\", \"2 Hearts\" and \"All the Lovers\". In 2017, she signed with BMG Rights Management, leading to several number-one albums in Australia and the UK \u2013 \"Golden\" (2018), \"\" (2019), \"Disco\" (2020), \"Tension\" (2023) and \"Tension II\" (2024). She is the only female artist in the UK charts with chart-topping albums and a top ten single in five consecutive decades.\nIn film, Minogue made her debut in \"The Delinquents\" (1989), and appeared in \"Street Fighter\" (1994), \"Moulin Rouge!\" (2001), \"Holy Motors\" (2012) and \"San Andreas\" (2015). In reality television, she appeared as a judge on \"The Voice UK\" and \"The Voice Australia\", both in 2014. Her other ventures include product endorsements, books, perfumes, charitable work and a wine brand. Minogue's achievements include being an ARIA Hall of Fame inductee, Officer of the Order of Australia (AO), Officer of the Order of the British Empire, Chevalier (knight) of the and an honorary Doctor of Health Science (D.H.Sc.).\nLife and career.\n1968\u20131986: Early life and career beginnings.\nKylie Ann Minogue was born at Bethlehem Hospital in Caulfield South, a suburb of Melbourne, Victoria, on 28 May 1968, to Carol Ann (n\u00e9e Jones), a former ballet dancer, and Ronald Charles Minogue, car company accountant. Her mother moved to Australia from Wales in 1958 as part of an assisted migration scheme on the ship \"Fairsea\". Also aboard were the Gibb family of later Bee Gees fame. Minogue is of Irish, English and Welsh descent. She was named Kylie after the Nyungar word for \"boomerang\". She is the eldest of three children: her brother, Brendan Minogue, is a news cameraman in Australia, and her sister, Dannii Minogue, is an actress, singer and television host. The family frequently moved around various suburbs in Melbourne to sustain their living expenses, which Minogue found unsettling as a child. She often stayed at home reading, sewing, and learning to play violin and piano. When they moved to Surrey Hills, Victoria, she went on to Camberwell High School. During her schooling years, she found it difficult to make friends. She got her HSC with subjects including Arts and Graphics and English. Minogue described herself as being of \"average intelligence\" and \"quite modest\" during her high school years. Growing up, she and her sister Dannii took singing and dancing lessons.\nA 10-year-old Minogue accompanied Dannii to a hearing arranged by the sisters' aunt, Suzette, and, while producers found Dannii too young, Australian television producer Alan Hardy gave Minogue a minor role in soap opera \"The Sullivans\" (1979). She also appeared in another small role in soap opera \"Skyways\" (1980). In 1985, she was cast in one of the lead roles in the television series \"The Henderson Kids\". Minogue took time off school to film \"The Henderson Kids\" and while Carol was not impressed, Minogue felt she needed the independence to make it into the entertainment industry. During filming, co-star Nadine Garner labelled Minogue \"fragile\" after producers yelled at her for forgetting her lines; she would often cry on set. Minogue was dropped from the second season of the show after Hardy felt the need for her character to be \"written off\". In retrospect, Hardy stated removing her from the show \"turned out to be the best thing for her\". Interested in following a career in music, Minogue made a demo tape for the producers of weekly music program \"Young Talent Time\", which featured Dannii as a regular performer. Minogue gave her first television singing performance on the show in 1985, and was not invited to join the cast.\nShe was cast in the soap opera \"Neighbours\" in 1986, as Charlene Mitchell, a schoolgirl turned garage mechanic. The show achieved popularity in the UK and a story arc that created a romance between her character and the character played by Jason Donovan culminated in a wedding episode in 1987 that attracted an audience of 20 million viewers. She became the first person to win four Logie Awards in one year and was the youngest recipient of the \"Gold Logie Award for Most Popular Personality on Australian Television\", with the result determined by public vote.\n1987\u20131989: \"Kylie\" and \"Enjoy Yourself\".\nDuring a Fitzroy Football Club benefit concert, Minogue performed \"I Got You Babe\" as a duet with fellow actor John Waters, and \"The Loco-Motion\" as an encore. Producer Greg Petherick arranged for Minogue to record a demo of the latter song, re-titled as \"Locomotion\". The demo was sent to the head of Mushroom Records Michael Gudinski, who decided to sign Minogue in early 1987 based on her popularity from \"Neighbours\". The track was first recorded in big band style, and was later given a completely new backing track by producer Mike Duffy, inspired by the hi-NRG sound of English band Dead or Alive. \"Locomotion\" was released as her debut single in Australia on 13 July 1987, the week after the wedding episode of \"Neighbours\" premiered. The single became the best-selling single of the decade in Australia, according to the Kent Music Report.\nThe success of the single resulted in Minogue travelling to London to work with record producing trio Stock Aitken Waterman in September 1987. They knew little of Minogue and had forgotten she was arriving; as a result, they wrote \"I Should Be So Lucky\" while she waited outside the studio. The track was written and recorded in under 40 minutes. The song reached number one in Australia, Finland, Germany, Hong Kong, Israel, Switzerland and the UK. Although Minogue needed to be convinced to work with Stock Aitken Waterman again after feeling she'd been disrespected during her first recording session, more sessions with the producers occurred from February to April 1988 in London and Melbourne, where the singer was filming her last episodes for \"Neighbours\". The trio ended up composing and producing all the tracks on the forthcoming album and produced a new version of \"The Loco-Motion\". Producer Pete Waterman justified the highly controversial decision to re-record the latter track by claiming Minogue's platinum-selling Australian version was poorly produced, but Mike Duffy instead blamed the decision on Waterman's alleged wish to claim the prestige and royalties from the track's placement on the soundtrack of the 1988 film \".\"\nMinogue's self-titled debut album, \"Kylie\", was released in July 1988. The album is a collection of dance-oriented pop tunes and spent more than a year on the UK Albums Chart, including several weeks at number one, eventually becoming the best-selling album of the 1980s by a female artist. It went gold in the United States, while the single \"The Locomotion\" reached number three on the U.S. \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart, and number one on the Canadian dance chart. The single \"Got to Be Certain\" became her third consecutive number one single in Australia. Later in the year, she left \"Neighbours\" to focus on her music career. She collaborated with Jason Donovan on the song \"Especially for You\" after \"intense\" demand for the duet from the public, media and retailers overcame her initial reservations. The single peaked at number one in the UK. By December 2014, it sold its one-millionth copy in the country. She was sometimes referred to as \"the Singing Budgie\" by her detractors over the coming years. In a review of the album \"Kylie\" for AllMusic, Chris True described the tunes as \"standard, late-80s ... bubblegum\", but added, \"her cuteness makes these rather vapid tracks bearable\". She received the ARIA Award for the year's highest-selling single. She won her second consecutive ARIA Award for the year's highest-selling single and received a \"Special Achievement Award\".\nMinogue's second studio album, \"Enjoy Yourself\", was released in October 1989. The album was number-one in the UK, and spawned the number-one singles in the country such as \"Hand on Your Heart\" and \"Tears on My Pillow\". In North America, it failed to sell well and she was dropped by American record label Geffen Records. Sal Cinquemani of \"Slant Magazine\", stated \"there isn't a lot to differentiate her sophomore effort from its predecessor by repeating the sonic template of her debut album.\" In support of the album, she embarked on her concert tour, the Enjoy Yourself Tour in Europe, Asia and Australia in February 1990. Minogue's debut film, \"The Delinquents\", was released in December 1989. The film received mixed reviews from critics and was popular with audiences. In the UK, it grossed more than \u00a3200,000, and in Australia, it was the fourth-highest-grossing local film of 1989 and the highest-grossing local film of 1990. From 1989 to 1991, Minogue dated Australian INXS frontman Michael Hutchence.\n1990\u20131992: \"Rhythm of Love\", \"Let's Get to It\" and \"Greatest Hits\".\nUnhappy with her level of creative input on her first two albums, Minogue worked with her manager Terry Blamey and her Australian label Mushroom Records to force a change in her relationship with SAW, and to push for a more mature sound. Minogue's third album, \"Rhythm of Love\", was released in November 1990 and was described as \"leaps and bounds more mature\" than her previous albums by AllMusic's Chris True. The project contained more \"sophisticated\" themes and influences, with composer Mike Stock stating that \"Shocked\" was influenced by the writings of Virginia Woolf, and was meant to be evocative of \"a trip\". Despite exhibiting creative growth, the album did not match the commercial success of its predecessors, peaking at number nine in the UK. However, Blamey described the album as a \"big success\" that \"made lots of money for PWL\". Three of its singles \u2013 \"Better the Devil You Know\", \"Step Back in Time\" and \"Shocked\" \u2013 reached the top ten in Australia. In the UK, all four singles entered the top ten.\n\"Entertainment Weekly\"'s Ernest Macias observed that, by the third album, Minogue \"presented a more mature and sexually-fuelled image\". Macias also pointed out that the album \"showcases the beginning of Minogue's career as a pop icon, propelled by her angelic vocals, sensual music videos, chic fashion, and distinct dance sound.\" Minogue's relationship with Australian musician-actor Michael Hutchence was also seen as part of her departure from her earlier persona. The making of the music video for \"Better the Devil You Know\" was the first time Minogue \"felt part of the creative process\". She said: \"I wasn't in charge, but I had a voice. I'd bought some clothes on King's Road for the video. I saw a new way to express my point of view creatively.\" To promote the album, she embarked on the Rhythm of Love Tour in February 1991.\nMinogue's fourth album, \"Let's Get to It\", was released in October 1991. It peaked at number fifteen in the UK, making it her first album to fail to reach the top ten. The first single from the album, \"Word Is Out\", became her first one to miss the top ten in the UK. Subsequent singles \"If You Were with Me Now\", \"Give Me Just a Little More Time\" and \"Finer Feelings\" \u2013 all reached the top eleven. Nick Levine of Digital Spy labelled the album \"lacking a moment of pure pop brilliance to match her [Minogue's] previously released singles.\" In support of the album, she embarked on the Let's Get to It Tour in October. She later expressed her opinion that Stock, Aitken and Waterman stifled her, saying, \"I was very much a puppet in the beginning. I was blinkered by my record company. I was unable to look left or right.\"\nMinogue's first best-of compilation album, titled \"Greatest Hits\", was released in August 1992. Chris True of AllMusic called it \"an excellent overview of the first half of Minogue's career.\" It reached number one in the UK and number three in Australia. The compilation's singles \u2013 \"What Kind of Fool (Heard All That Before)\" and a cover of Kool &amp; the Gang's \"Celebration\", both peaked outside of the top ten in the UK. By the end of 1992, PWL did not renew their contract with Minogue, believing the singer \"was [not] moving in a direction that was going to be successful\".\n1993\u20131999: \"Kylie Minogue\" and \"Impossible Princess\".\nMinogue's signing with British record label Deconstruction Records in 1993 marked a new phase in her career. Her fifth studio album, \"Kylie Minogue\", was released in September 1994 and was a departure from her previous efforts as it \"no longer featured the Stock-Aitken-Waterman production gloss\", with critics noting Minogue's vocals and the album production. It was produced by dance music producers the Brothers in Rhythm, namely Dave Seaman and Steve Anderson, who had previously produced \"Finer Feelings\". As of 2015, Anderson continued to be Minogue's musical director. The album peaked at number four in the UK. Its lead single, \"Confide in Me\", spent four weeks at number one in Australia, and peaked at number two in the UK. The follow-up singles, \"Put Yourself in My Place\" and \"Where Is the Feeling?\", both reached the top twenty in the UK.\nDuring this period, Minogue made a guest appearance as herself in an episode of the British sitcom, \"The Vicar of Dibley\". Director Steven E. de Souza saw her cover photo in Australia's \"Who Magazine\" as one of \"The 30 Most Beautiful People in the World\" and offered her a role opposite Belgian actor Jean-Claude Van Damme in the film \"Street Fighter\". The film was a moderate success, earning US$70 million in the U.S. box-office, and received \"poor\" reviews, with \"The Washington Post\"'s Richard Harrington calling Minogue \"the worst actress in the English-speaking world\". She had an affair with Van Damme while shooting the film in Thailand. She had a minor role in the 1996 film \"Bio-Dome\" starring American actors Pauly Shore and Stephen Baldwin. She also appeared in the 1995 short film \"Hayride to Hell\" and in the 1997 film \"Diana &amp; Me\". In 1995, she collaborated with Australian artist Nick Cave for the song \"Where the Wild Roses Grow\". Cave had been interested in working with Minogue since hearing \"Better the Devil You Know\", saying it contained \"one of pop music's most violent and distressing lyrics\". The music video for the song was inspired by John Everett Millais's painting \"Ophelia\" (1851\u201352), and showed Minogue as the murdered woman, floating in a pond as a serpent swam over her body. The single received widespread attention in Europe, where it reached the top 10 in several countries, and reached number two in Australia. The song won ARIA Awards for \"Song of the Year\" and \"Best Pop Release\". Following concert appearances with Cave, Minogue recited the lyrics to \"I Should Be So Lucky\" as poetry in London's Royal Albert Hall.\nBy 1997, Minogue was in a relationship with French photographer St\u00e9phane Sednaoui, who encouraged her to develop her creativity. Inspired by a mutual appreciation of Japanese culture, they created a visual combination of \"geisha and manga superheroine\" for the photographs taken for Minogue's sixth studio album, \"Impossible Princess\", and the music video for \"GBI (German Bold Italic)\", her collaboration with Japanese musician Towa Tei. She drew inspiration from the music of artists such as Scottish singer Shirley Manson and American rock band Garbage, Icelandic singer Bj\u00f6rk, British rapper Tricky and Irish rock band U2, and Japanese pop musicians such as Pizzicato Five and Towa Tei. The album featured collaborations with musicians including James Dean Bradfield and Sean Moore of the Welsh rock band Manic Street Preachers. It garnered some negative reviews upon its release in 1997, but would be cited as her \"most personal\" and \"best\" work in retrospective reviews. In 2003, \"Slant Magazine\"'s Sal Cinquemani called it a \"deeply personal effort\" and \"Minogue's best album to date\", with the magazine later ranking it as her best album. Evan Sawdey, from \"PopMatters\", described the album as \"one of the most crazed, damn-near perfect dance-pop albums ever created\" in a 2008 review. Mostly a dance album, she countered suggestions she was trying to become an indie artist.\nAcknowledging Minogue had attempted to escape the perceptions of her that had developed during her early career, she commented she was ready to \"forget the painful criticism\" and \"accept the past, embrace it, use it\". The music video for \"Did It Again\" paid homage to her earlier \"incarnations\". Retitled \"Kylie Minogue\" in the UK following the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, it became the lowest-selling album of her career. At the end of the year, a campaign by \"Virgin Radio\" stated, \"We've done something to improve Minogue's records: we've banned them.\" The lead single \"Some Kind of Bliss\" failed to reach the top twenty in the UK, whereas \"Did It Again\" fared better, reaching the top fifteen in both the UK and Australia. In Australia, the album was a success and spent 35 weeks on the album chart. After the album's release, she was dropped by Deconstruction in 1998. Her Intimate and Live tour in 1998 was extended due to demand. She gave several live performances in Australia, including the 1998 Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras, and the opening ceremonies of Melbourne's Crown Casino, and Sydney's Fox Studios in 1999 (where she performed Marilyn Monroe's \"Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend\") as well as a Christmas concert in Dili, East Timor, in association with the United Nations Peace-Keeping Forces. She performed a duet with the English synth-pop duo Pet Shop Boys' on their \"Nightlife\" album and spent several months in Barbados performing in William Shakespeare's \"The Tempest\". She then appeared in the film \"Sample People\" and recorded a cover version of Russell Morris's \"The Real Thing\" for the soundtrack.\n2000\u20132002: \"Light Years\" and \"Fever\".\nMinogue signed with German\u2013British record label Parlophone in April, who wanted to re-establish Minogue as a pop artist. Her seventh studio album, \"Light Years\", was released in September 2000. \"NME\" magazine called it a \"fun, perfectly-formed\" record, which saw Minogue \"dropping her considerable concern for cool and bouncing back to her disco-pop roots\". It was a commercial success, becoming her first number one album in her native Australia and charting at number two in the UK. The lead single, \"Spinning Around\", debuted atop the UK in July, making her the second artist to have a number-one single in three consecutive decades, after American singer-songwriter Madonna. Its accompanying video featured Minogue in revealing gold hotpants, which came to be regarded as a \"trademark\". Three other singles \u2014 \"On a Night Like This\", \"Kids\" with English singer Robbie Williams and \"Please Stay\" all peaked in the top ten in the UK, with the former becoming her sixth number-one in Australia.\nAn elaborate art book titled \"Kylie\", featuring contributions by Minogue and creative director William Baker, was published by Booth-Clibborn in March 2000. At the time, she began a romantic relationship with model James Gooding. Their relationship ended after two and a half years. In October, she performed at both the closing ceremonies of the 2000 Summer Olympics and in the opening ceremony of the Paralympics, all held in Sydney. Her performance of ABBA's \"Dancing Queen\" was chosen as one of the most memorable Olympic closing ceremony moments by Kate Samuelson of \"TNT\". In March 2001, she embarked on the On a Night Like This Tour, which was inspired by the style of Broadway shows and the musicals of the 1930s. She also made a brief cameo as The Green Fairy in Baz Luhrmann's film, \"Moulin Rouge!\". It earned her an MTV Movie Award nomination in 2002. \"Spinning Around\" and \"Light Years\" consecutively won the ARIA Award for Best Pop Release in 2000 and 2001. In early 2001, she launched her own brand of underwear called \"Love Kylie\" in partnership with the Holeproof brand of Australian Pacific Brands.\nIn September 2001, Minogue released \"Can't Get You Out of My Head\", the lead single from her eighth studio album, \"Fever\". It reached number one in over forty countries and sold five million copies, becoming her most successful single. The accompanying music video featured the singer sporting a hooded white jumpsuit with deep plunging neckline. The remaining singles \u2014 \"In Your Eyes\", \"Love at First Sight\" and \"Come into My World\" \u2014 all peaked in the top ten in Australia and the UK. The album was released in October and topped the charts in Australia, Austria, Germany, Ireland, and the UK, eventually achieving worldwide sales in excess of six million. Dominique Leone from \"Pitchfork\" complimented its simple and \"comfortable\" composition, terming it a \"mature sound from a mature artist, and one that may very well re-establish Minogue for the VH1 generation\".\nThe warm reception towards the album led to its release in the U.S. in February 2002, through Capitol Records. Her first release in the U.S. in thirteen years led to her highest-charting album in the country, debuting at number three on the \"Billboard\" 200. On the Canadian Albums Chart, it peaked at number ten.\nIn April 2002, Minogue embarked on her KylieFever2002 tour in Europe and Australia, in support of the album. In the U.S., she performed several songs from the setlist in a series of KIIS-FM Jingle Ball concerts throughout 2002 and 2003. She received four accolades at the ARIA Music Awards of 2002, including Highest Selling Single and Single of the Year for \"Can't Get You Out of My Head\". That same year, she won her first Brit Award for International Female Solo Artist and Best International Album for \"Fever\". She also performed a mashup of \"Can't Get You Out of My Head\" and New Order's \"Blue Monday\" at the show, which was named one of the \"50 key events in the history of dance music\" by \"The Guardian\".\n2003\u20132006: \"Body Language\", \"Ultimate Kylie\" and \"Showgirl\".\nIn 2003, for the 45th Annual Grammy Awards, Minogue received her first Grammy nomination for Best Dance Recording for \"Love at First Sight\", before winning the award for \"Come into My World\" the following year. It marked the first time an Australian recording artist had won in a major category since Men at Work in 1983. She began a relationship with French actor Olivier Martinez after meeting him at the 2003 Grammy Awards ceremony. They ended their relationship in February 2007 and remained on friendly terms.\nIn November 2003, Minogue released her ninth studio album, \"Body Language\", following an invitation-only concert titled \"Money Can't Buy\", at the Hammersmith Apollo in London. The album downplayed the disco style and was inspired by 1980s artists such as Scritti Politti, The Human League, Adam and the Ants and Prince, blending their styles with elements of hip hop. Andy Battaglia from \"The A.V. Club\" stated the album \"shows Minogue as a surprisingly impressive presence in spurts, but she sounds better with her pleasure engine revving at full purr\". The sales of the album were lower than anticipated after the success of \"Fever\", peaking at number six in the UK. The album achieved first week sales of 43,000 and declined significantly in the second week. The lead single, \"Slow\", was a number one hit in Australia and the UK. In the U.S., it received a Grammy Award nomination in the Best Dance Recording category. Two more singles were released \u2013 \"Red Blooded Woman\" and \"Chocolate\", both charted within the top ten in the UK.\nIn November 2004, Minogue released her second greatest hits compilation album, \"Ultimate Kylie\". It peaked at number five in Australia and number four in the UK. \"The Guardian\" included the compilation in their \"1000 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die\" list in 2007. The album yielded two singles: \"I Believe in You\" and \"Giving You Up\", which both entered the top ten in Australia and in the UK. \"I Believe in You\" was later nominated for a Grammy Award in the category of \"Best Dance Recording\". In the same month, she had a \"prominent\" guest star role in the season finale of the Australian sitcom \"Kath &amp; Kim\", playing a grown up Epponnee-Rae Craig.\nIn February 2005, the animated film \"The Magic Roundabout\" was released, in which she served as the voice actress for the role of Florence. She reprised the role in 2006 and recorded the theme song for the American edition, re-titled as \"Doogal\". In March, Minogue commenced her . It initially had tour dates in Europe, Australia, Asia and a headlining appearance in Glastonbury Festival announced. In May, she was diagnosed with breast cancer, forcing her to cancel the remainder of the tour. In the same month, she underwent surgery and commenced chemotherapy treatment soon after.\nIn January 2006, it was announced Minogue had finished chemotherapy and the disease \"had no recurrence\" after the surgery. She would continue her treatment for the next months. Her children's book, \"The Showgirl Princess\", written during her period of convalescence, was published in October, and her perfume, Darling, was launched in November. The range was later augmented by eau de toilettes including Pink Sparkle, Couture and Inverse. She resumed her then cancelled tour in November, under the title . Her dance routines had been reworked to accommodate her medical condition, with slower costume changes and longer breaks between sections of the show to conserve her strength. \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" described the tour as an \"extravaganza\" and \"nothing less than a triumph\".\n2007\u20132011: \"X\" and \"Aphrodite\".\nIn October 2007, Minogue was featured in \"\", a documentary filmed during 2006 and 2007 as she embarked on her Showgirl: The Homecoming Tour. In November, her tenth studio and \"comeback\" album, \"X\" was released. The electro-styled album included contributions from British producer Guy Chambers, British singer-songwriter Cathy Dennis, Swedish production duo Bloodshy &amp; Avant and Scottish DJ-producer Calvin Harris. Both the album and its lead single, \"2 Hearts\", entered at number one in Australia. The lead single and follow-up singles \u2013 \"In My Arms\" and \"Wow\", all peaked inside the top ten in the UK. In the U.S., the album was nominated at the 51st Annual Grammy Awards for Best Electronic/Dance Album, but lost to Daft Punk. She appeared on her own television special \"The Kylie Show\", which featured music performances and comedy sketches. By December, she guest-starred in the British television series \"Doctor Who\"'s Christmas special \u2013 \"Voyage of the Damned\" as Astrid Peth. 13.31 million viewers in the UK watched it, the series' highest viewing figure since 1979.\nIn February 2008, Minogue launched her range of home furnishings, Kylie Minogue at Home. Her business venture later went on to launch its newest collection by February 2018, for its tenth anniversary. In May, she embarked on the KylieX2008 tour, her most expensive tour to date with production costs of \u00a310 million. It was considered a success, with ticket sales estimated at US$70 million. She was then appointed a Chevalier of the French , the junior grade of France's highest cultural honour. In July, she was officially invested by the Prince of Wales as an Officer of the Order of the British Empire. She won the \"Best International Female Solo Artist\" award at the Brit Awards 2008. In September, she made her Middle East debut as the headline act at the opening of Atlantis, The Palm, a hotel resort in Dubai. She was in a relationship with Spanish model Andr\u00e9s Velencoso, starting from 2008 up until 2013.\nIn January 2009, Minogue hosted the Brit Awards with English multi-hyphenates James Corden and Mathew Horne. She then embarked on the For You, for Me tour by September, her first concert tour in North America. In October, she was featured in the Hindi film, \"Blue\", performing an A. R. Rahman song.\nIn July 2010, Minogue released her eleventh studio album, \"Aphrodite\". The album featured work from English record producer Stuart Price, Scottish DJ and record producer Calvin Harris, American musician Jake Shears, English singer-songwriter Nerina Pallot, Belgian musician Pascal Gabriel, Danish record producer Lucas Secon, English alternative rock band member Tim Rice-Oxley of Keane and British group Kish Mauve. Price served as an executive producer. Rob Sheffield from \"Rolling Stone\" labelled the album as Minogue's \"finest work since 1997's \"Impossible Princess\".\" Tim Sendra from AllMusic commended Minogue's choice of collaborators and producers, commenting it is the \"work of someone who knows exactly what her skills are and who to hire to help showcase them to perfection.\" The album debuted at number-one in the UK. The lead single, \"All the Lovers\" peaked at number three in the UK. Subsequent singles from the album \u2014 \"Get Outta My Way\", \"Better than Today\" and \"Put Your Hands Up (If You Feel Love)\" followed. In November, she was featured on the single by the English singer Taio Cruz, \"Higher\". It entered the top ten in the UK by January of next year.\nIn February 2011, Minogue embarked on the , performing in Europe, North America, Asia, Australia and Africa. With a stage set inspired by the \"goddess of love\" Aphrodite and Grecian culture and history, it was greeted with positive reviews from critics, who praised the concept and the stage production. The tour was a commercial success, grossing US$60 million.\n2012\u20132016: \"The Abbey Road Sessions\", \"Kiss Me Once\" and \"Kylie Christmas\".\nIn 2012, Minogue began a year-long celebration of her 25 years in the music industry, which was often called \"K25\". The anniversary started in March, with her embarking on the Anti Tour in England and Australia. The tour featured b-sides, demos and rarities from her music catalogue. The tour was positively received for its intimate atmosphere and was a commercial success. She released the single \"Timebomb\" in May and the greatest hits compilation album, \"The Best of Kylie Minogue\" in June. She performed at events such as Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras, Elizabeth II's \"Diamond Jubilee Concert\" and BBC Proms in the Park London 2012. In October, she released the compilation album \"The Abbey Road Sessions\", which contained reworked and orchestral versions of her previously released songs. It was recorded at London's Abbey Road Studios. It was produced by British record producer Steve Anderson and Colin Elliot. The album received favourable reviews from music critics. Andy Gill of \"The Independent\" called it \"a more traditional makeover, an attempt to give a more elegant lustre to callow pop kitsch, usually by slowing the song down and loading on strings.\" It debuted at number two in the UK. In film, she has appeared in the American independent film \"Jack &amp; Diane\" for a cameo role, and a lead role in the French film \"Holy Motors\". \"Jack &amp; Diane\" opened at the Tribeca Festival in April, while \"Holy Motors\" opened at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival in May.\nIn January 2013, Minogue parted ways with manager Terry Blamey, who managed her since the start of her singing career. The following month, she signed to entertainment agency Roc Nation for a management deal. In September, she was featured on Italian singer-songwriter Laura Pausini's single \"Limpido\", which was a number-one hit in Italy. In the same month, she was hired as a coach for the third series of BBC One's talent competition television show \"The Voice UK\", alongside American record producer and the Black Eyed Peas member, will.i.am, English singer Ricky Wilson of Kaiser Chiefs and Welsh singer Tom Jones. The series opened with 9.35 million views in the UK, an increase from the previous series. It accumulated an estimated 8.10 million viewers on average. Ed Power from \"The Daily Telegraph\" commented on Minogue for being \"glamorous, agreeably giggly [and] a card-carrying national treasure\". In November, she was hired as a coach for the third season of Nine Network's \"The Voice Australia\".\nIn March 2014, Minogue released her twelfth studio album, \"Kiss Me Once\". It featured contributions from Australian singer-songwriter Sia, American record producer Mike Del Rio, Danish record producer Cutfather, American multi-hyphenate Pharrell Williams, British record producer MNEK, American record producer Ariel Rechtshaid and Spanish singer-songwriter Enrique Iglesias. Kitty Empire from \"The Observer\" described it \"polished but kittenish... remains true to the effervescent dance-pop for which Minogue is known.\" The album peaked at number one in Australia and number two in the UK. Two singles were released, \"Into the Blue\" and \"I Was Gonna Cancel\". In August, she performed at the 2014 Commonwealth Games closing ceremony, donning a custom Jean Paul Gaultier corset. In September, she embarked on the Kiss Me Once Tour.\nIn March 2015, Minogue left Parlophone Records and Roc Nation. She entered into a trademark dispute with reality television personality Kylie Jenner, in Jenner's attempt to trademark the brand \"Kylie\", which Minogue has been trading under since the 1990s. The dispute was eventually resolved in Minogue's favour in 2017. In May, she appeared as Susan Riddick in the American film \"San Andreas\", starring American actor Dwayne Johnson and American actress Carla Gugino. In September, an extended play with Mexican-American record producer Fernando Garibay titled \"Kylie + Garibay\" was released. Garibay and Moroder served as producers for the extended play.\nIn November, Minogue released her thirteenth studio album and first Christmas album, \"Kylie Christmas\". It features work from actress-singer-presenter Dannii Minogue, English musician Chris Martin of Coldplay and record producing team Stargate. The album missed the top ten in the UK. Lauren Murphy from \"The Irish Times\" commented on her review, \"do we really need another pop star doing another bog-standard Christmas album with a sprinkling of festive cheese?... Minogue is better placed than most to do such an album, given her longevity in the business.\" The following year, it was re-released entitled as \"Kylie Christmas: Snow Queen Edition\". A Christmas concert series in the Royal Albert Hall, London was held in both December 2015 and 2016, in support of the album. In 2016, she was engaged to British actor Joshua Sasse, with their relationship ending in 2017.\n2017\u20132021: \"Golden\", \"Step Back in Time: The Definitive Collection\" and \"Disco\".\nIn February 2017, Minogue signed a record deal with BMG Rights Management. In December 2017, she and BMG had struck a joint-deal with Mushroom Group \u2014 under the sub-division label, Liberator Music to release her next album in Australia and New Zealand. Throughout 2017, she worked with writers and producers for her fourteenth studio album, including Nigerian-German record producer Sky Adams and British record-producer Richard Stannard. It was recorded in London, Los Angeles and Nashville, with the latter profoundly influencing the record.\nThe album \"Golden\" was released in April 2018, with \"Dancing\" serving as its lead single. It debuted at number one in Australia and in the UK. Tim Sendra from AllMusic labelled the album a \"darn bold\" for an artist of Minogue's longevity, stating \"the amazing thing about the album, and about her, is that she pulls off the country as well as she's pulled off new wave, disco, electro, murder ballads, and everything else she's done in her long career.\" \"Pitchfork\"'s Ben Cardew stated it \"sounds like someone playing at country music, rather than someone who understands it.\" The album led several more singles such as \"Stop Me from Falling\", the title track \"Golden\", \"A Lifetime to Repair\" and \"Music's Too Sad Without You\" featuring English singer Jack Savoretti. In support of the album, she embarked on Kylie Presents Golden and Golden Tour. She was among the performers at The Queen's Birthday Party held at the Royal Albert Hall in April. In the same year, she began dating Paul Solomons, the creative director of \"British GQ\". After five years, they split in February 2023.\nIn June 2019, Minogue released the greatest hits compilation album \"\", featuring \"New York City\" as the lead single. Tim Sendra of AllMusic complimented the collection describing it as a \"truly definitive and essential for anyone who wants to look back on her [Minogue's] brilliant career.\" It was number one in Australia and in the UK. In the same month, she embarked on her Summer 2019 tour, which included her debut performance at the Glastonbury Festival \u2013 fourteen years after her breast cancer diagnosis forced her to cancel her 2005 headlining slot. Performing in the \"Legends slot\", her set featured appearances from Australian musician Nick Cave and English musician Chris Martin. \"The Guardian\" labeled it as \"solid-gold, peerless and phenomenal\". Her set was the most watched of the BBC coverage, earning three million viewers and setting a history record for the most attended Glastonbury set. By December, she appeared in her own Christmas television special, \"Kylie's Secret Night\" on Channel 4.\nIn May 2020, Minogue launched Kylie Minogue Wines in partnership with English beverages distributor Benchmark Drinks, with Ros\u00e9 Vin de France serving as the debut product. Her prosecco ros\u00e9 had become the number one branded prosecco in the UK, according to Nielsen Holdings data. The wine brand has sold over five million bottles by June 2022, and won a Golden Vines Award for entrepreneurship.\nFollowing her Glastonbury performance, Minogue stated she would like to create a \"disco-pop album\" and return to recording new material after the performance. In 2020, work continued on her fifteenth studio album during the COVID-19 pandemic. Using a home studio to record throughout lockdowns, she also recorded and audio engineered her own vocals. The singles, \"Say Something\" and \"Magic\" were released in July and September respectively. In November, \"Disco\" was released, reaching number one in Australia and the UK. She became the only female artist to achieve a number one album in five consecutive decades, from the 1980s to the 2020s. In support of the album, a livestream concert titled Infinite Disco was held. Nick Levine of \"NME\" called the album her \"most consistent and enjoyable album in a decade.\" In December, \"Real Groove\" was released as a single, with a subsequent remix featuring English singer Dua Lipa. The album was reissued in November 2021, titled \"Disco: Guest List Edition\". It contained new tracks featuring British band Years &amp; Years, English singer Jessie Ware and American singer Gloria Gaynor.\n2022\u2013present: \"Tension\" and \"Tension II\".\nBy 2022, Minogue began working for her sixteenth studio album. In February, after living in London since the 1990s, she relocated back to Melbourne, citing a desire to be closer to her family in Australia. In July, she returned to her role in \"Neighbours\" as Charlene, for a brief appearance for the show's intended .\nIn May 2023, Minogue released the lead single \"Padam Padam\" from her sixteenth album \"Tension\". The song entered the top ten in the United Kingdom and marked her as the only female artist to achieve a UK top ten entry in the 1980s to the 2020s. The single won an ARIA Award for Best Pop Release and a Grammy Award for Best Pop Dance Recording, becoming her second Grammy win after \"Come into My World\" in 2004. The album later released in September to critical acclaim. Featuring works from British record producer Lostboy, singer-songwriter Kamille, Dutch DJ Oliver Heldens, and previous collaborators Richard Stannard, Duck Blackwell, and Jon Green; Minogue described the album as \"a blend of personal reflection, club abandon and melancholic high\". Hannah Mylrea of \"Rolling Stone UK\" claimed it as \"brilliantly good fun and soaring pop music, with a huge amount of heart that brings big emotions to the dancefloor, much like its creator.\" The album debuted at number one in Australia and the UK. The title track \"Tension\" and \"Hold On to Now\" both served as the follow up singles.\nIn November, Minogue embarked on a concert residency \u2013 More Than Just a Residency at Voltaire at The Venetian in Las Vegas, Nevada. The show sold out within minutes. Michael Idato of \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" said the show was \"brief and a blast of Vegas high\". In December, a television concert special, \"An Audience with Kylie\" filmed at the Royal Albert Hall, aired on ITV. Ateeqe Bhatti of \"Attitude\" gave her performance a good review, labeling Minogue as a \"masterclass in stage performance\".\nIn February 2024, Minogue signed with United Talent Agency for live representation in Canada and the U.S., as well for acting roles worldwide. In March, she received the Global Icon Award at the Brit Awards 2024, and performed a medley of her singles. In the same month, she also received \"Billboard\" Women in Music's Icon Award. She then performed with American singer Madonna for the 7 March concert of Madonna's The Celebration Tour. Minogue stated that it was a \"long time coming\", with Madonna describing Minogue as a \"survivor and a fighter.\"\nMinogue released her seventeenth studio album, \"Tension II\" on 18 October 2024, with \"Lights Camera Action\" as the lead single. Serving as a \"companion\" to \"Tension\", the album features collaborations with the Blessed Madonna, Diplo, Tove Lo, Orville Peck, Bebe Rexha and Sia. The album peaked at number one in Australia and the UK. Puah Ziwei of \"NME\" described the album as \"tighter and bolder\", claiming it \"surpasses its predecessor and stands strong on its own\".\nIn 2025, Minogue embarked on the Tension Tour on 15 February on Perth, Australia. Described as Minogue's \"biggest tour since 2011\" by \"Billboard\", the tour would visit North America, South America, Europe, Asia and Australia. Sian Cain of \"The Guardian\" called the tour an \"excursion to every Kylie Minogue era and a reminder of the many hits Minogue has produced.\" In March, the mystery drama television series \u2013 \"The Residence\" premiered on Netflix, featuring Minogue portraying herself as a musical guest. In December, the tenth anniversary edition of Minogue's studio album \"Kylie Christmas\" \u2013 \"Kylie Christmas (Fully Wrapped)\" is set to be released, with the single \"XMAS\".\nArtistry.\nMinogue explained she first became interested in pop music during her adolescence: \"I first got into pop music in 1981, I'd say. It was all about Prince, Adam + the Ants, that whole New Romantic period. Before that, it was the Jackson 5, Donna Summer, and my dad's records \u2013 the Stones and Beatles.\" She would also listen to the records of Olivia Newton-John and ABBA. She said she \"wanted to be\" Newton-John while growing up. Her producer, Pete Waterman, recalled Minogue during the early years of her music career with the observation: \"She was setting her sights on becoming the new Prince or Madonna... What I found amazing was that she was outselling Madonna four to one, but still wanted to be her.\" Minogue came to prominence in the music scene as a bubblegum pop singer and was deemed a \"product of the Stock Aitken Waterman Hit Factory\". Australian musician Nick Cave, who worked with her, was a major influence on her artistic development. She told \"The Guardian\": \"He's definitely infiltrated my life in beautiful and profound ways.\" Throughout her career, her work was also influenced by Jamaican singer Grace Jones, British singer-songwriter-producer Cathy Dennis, British record producer D Mob, British band Scritti Politti, Icelandic singer-songwriter Bj\u00f6rk, British rapper Tricky, Irish rock band U2 and Japanese pop band Pizzicato Five.\nMinogue has been known for her soft soprano vocal range. Tim Sendra of AllMusic reviewed her album \"Aphrodite\" and said Minogue's \"slightly nasal, girl next door vocals serve her needs perfectly.\" According to Fiona MacDonald from \"Madison\" magazine, Minogue \"has never shied away from making some brave but questionable artistic decisions\". In musical terms, Minogue has worked with many genres in pop and dance music. However, her signature music has been contemporary disco music. Her first studio albums with Stock, Aitken, and Waterman present a more bubblegum pop influence, with many critics comparing her to American singer-songwriter Madonna. Chris True from AllMusic, reviewed her debut album, \"Kylie\" and found her music \"standard late-'80s Stock-Aitken-Waterman bubblegum\", however he stated she presented the most personality of any 1980s recording artist. He said of her third album \"Rhythm of Love\", from the early 1990s, \"the songwriting is stronger, the production dynamic, and Kylie seems more confident vocally.\" At the time of her third studio album, \"she began to trade in her cutesy, bubblegum pop image for a more mature one, and in turn, a more sexual one.\" Chris True stated during her relationship with Australian singer-actor Michael Hutchence, \"her shedding of the near-virginal fa\u00e7ade that dominated her first two albums, began to have an effect, not only on how the press and her fans treated her, but in the evolution of her music.\"\nHer self-titled fifth studio album, primarily a dance-pop album integrating elements of R&amp;B and adult contemporary music, saw a shift in her music. Chris True of AllMusic stated the album is a \"remarkable change from Minogue's previous teen pop material\" and the \"start of a second phase\" in her music career. From her work on her sixth studio album, \"Impossible Princess\", her songwriting and musical content began to change. She was constantly writing down words, exploring the form and meaning of sentences. She had written lyrics before, but called them \"safe, just neatly rhymed words, and that's that\". Sal Cinquemani from \"Slant Magazine\" said the album bears a resemblance to Madonna's \"Ray of Light\" (1998). He said she took inspiration from \"both the Britpop and electronica movements of the mid-'90s\", saying \"\"Impossible Princess\" is the work of an artist willing to take risks\".\nHer seventh studio album, \"Light Years\" is a disco-influenced dance-pop record, with AllMusic's Chris True calling it \"arguably one of the best disco records since the '70s\". True stated her eighth studio album, \"Fever\", \"combines the disco-diva comeback of \"Light Years\" with simple dance rhythms\". Her ninth studio album, \"Body Language\", was quite different from her musical experiments in the past as it was a \"successful\" attempt at broadening her sound with electro and hip-hop for instance. Incorporating styles of dance music with funk, disco and R&amp;B, the album was listed on \"Q\"'s \"Best Albums of 2003\".\nCritics said Minogue's tenth studio album, \"X\", did not feature enough \"consistency\", and Chris True called the tracks \"cold, calculated dance-pop numbers.\" Tim Sendra of AllMusic said her eleventh album, \"Aphrodite\", \"rarely strays past sweet love songs or happy dance anthems\" and \"the main sound is the kind of glittery disco-pop that really is her strong suit.\" Sendra found \"Aphrodite\" \"One of her best, in fact.\" \"Kiss Me Once\", her twelfth studio album has been described by critics as her return to contemporary pop music.\nHer fourteenth studio album, \"Golden\" was heavily influenced by country music, although maintaining her dance-pop sensibilities. Sal Cinquemani from \"Slant Magazine\" wrote \"\"Golden\" further bolsters Minogue's reputation for taking risks\u2014and artfully sets the stage for her inevitable disco comeback.\" For her fifteenth studio album, \"Disco\", she began\nto audio engineer her own music due to the restrictions surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic.\nPublic image.\nMinogue's efforts to be taken seriously as a recording artist were initially hindered by the perception she had not \"paid her dues\" and was no more than a manufactured pop star exploiting the image she had created during her stint on the soap opera \"Neighbours\". She acknowledged this viewpoint, saying, \"If you're part of a record company, I think to a degree it's fair to say that you're a manufactured product. You're a product and you're selling a product. It doesn't mean that you're not talented and that you don't make creative and business decisions about what you will and won't do and where you want to go.\"\nIn 1993, Australian director Baz Luhrmann introduced Minogue to photographer Bert Stern, notable for his work with American actress Marilyn Monroe. Stern photographed her in Los Angeles and, comparing her to Monroe, commented Minogue had a similar mix of vulnerability and eroticism. Throughout her career, she has chosen photographers who attempt to create a new \"look\" for her, and the resulting photographs have appeared in a variety of magazines, from the cutting edge \"The Face\" to the more traditionally sophisticated \"Vogue\" and \"Vanity Fair\", making the Minogue face and name known to a broad range of people. Stylist William Baker has suggested this is part of the reason she entered mainstream pop culture in Europe more successfully than many other pop singers who concentrate solely on selling records.\nBy 2000, Minogue was considered to have achieved a degree of musical credibility for having maintained her career longer than her critics had expected. Her progression from the wholesome \"girl next door\" to a more sophisticated performer with a flirtatious and playful persona attracted new fans. Her music video for \"Spinning Around\" led to some media outlets referring to her as \"SexKylie\", and sex became a stronger element in her subsequent videos. In September 2002, she was ranked 27 on VH1's 100 Sexiest Artists list. She was also named one of the 100 Hottest Women of All-Time by \"Men's Health\" in 2013. William Baker described her status as a sex symbol as a \"double edged sword\", observing \"we always attempted to use her sex appeal as an enhancement of her music and to sell a record. But now it has become in danger of eclipsing what she actually is: a pop singer.\" After 20 years as a performer, she was described by BBC's Fiona Pryor as a fashion \"trend-setter\" and a \"style icon who constantly reinvents herself\". Pointing out the several reinventions in Minogue's image, Larissa Dubecki from \"The Age\" labelled her the \"Mother of Reinvention\".\nMinogue has been inspired by and compared to American artist Madonna throughout her career. She received negative comments her Rhythm of Love Tour in 1991 was too similar visually to Madonna's Blond Ambition World Tour, for which critics labelled her a Madonna wannabe. Writing for \"The Observer's Music Monthly\", Rufus Wainwright described her as \"the anti-Madonna. Self-knowledge is a truly beautiful thing and Kylie knows herself inside out. She is what she is and there is no attempt to make quasi-intellectual statements to substantiate it. She is the gay shorthand for joy.\" Kathy McCabe for \"The Telegraph\" noted Minogue and Madonna follow similar styles in music and fashion, but concluded, \"Where they truly diverge on the pop-culture scale is in shock value. Minogue's clips might draw a gasp from some but Madonna's ignite religious and political debate unlike any other artist on the planet... Simply, Madonna is the dark force; Kylie is the light force.\" Minogue has said of Madonna, \"Her huge influence on the world, in pop and fashion, meant that I wasn't immune to the trends she created. I admire Madonna greatly but in the beginning she made it difficult for artists like me, she had done everything there was to be done\", and \"Madonna's the Queen of Pop, I'm the princess. I'm quite happy with that.\"\nIn January 2007, Madame Tussauds in London unveiled its fourth waxwork of Minogue. During the same week a bronze cast of her hands was added to Wembley Arena's \"Square of Fame\". In 2007, a bronze statue of Minogue was unveiled at Melbourne Docklands for permanent display.\nIn March 2010, researchers declared Minogue as the \"most powerful celebrity in Britain\". The study examined how marketers identify celebrity and brand partnerships. Mark Husak, head of Millward Brown's UK media practice, said: \"Kylie is widely accepted as an adopted Brit. People know her, like her and she is surrounded by positive buzz\". In 2016, according to the \"Sunday Times Rich List\", Minogue had a net worth of \u00a355 million.\nIn May 2020, Alison Boshoff of \"The New Zealand Herald\" labelled her as the \"great comeback queen of Pop, for springing back from any setback\" in her life and career. In November 2020, Nick Levine of BBC described her as \"pop's most underestimated icon\", adding Minogue has \"lasted more than 30 years by delivering pop songs with passion and panache, and retaining a quintessentially likeable persona along the way, in such a cutthroat industry.\" In June 2023, Barbara Ellen of \"The Guardian\" commented \"modesty, likeability and vulnerability have aided Minogue enduring appeal\", 36 years after the 1987 single \"I Should Be So Lucky\" was released.\nMinogue is regarded as a gay icon, which she has encouraged with comments including \"I am not a traditional gay icon. There's been no tragedy in my life, only tragic outfits\" and \"My gay audience has been with me from the beginning ... they kind of adopted me.\" Her status as a gay icon has been attributed to her music, fashion sense and career longevity. Author Constantine Chatzipapatheodoridis wrote about Minogue's appeal to gay men in \"Strike a Pose, Forever: The Legacy of Vogue...\" and observed she \"frequently incorporates camp-inflected themes in her extravaganzas, drawing mainly from the disco scene, the S/M culture, and the burlesque stage.\" In \"Beautiful Things in Popular Culture\" (2007), Marc Brennan stated Minogue's work \"provides a gorgeous form of escapism\". Minogue has explained she first became aware of her gay audience in 1988, when several drag queens performed to her music at a Sydney pub, and she later saw a similar show in Melbourne. She said she felt \"very touched\" to have such an \"appreciative crowd\", and this encouraged her to perform at gay venues throughout the world, as well as headlining the 1994 Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras. Minogue has one of the largest gay followings in the world.\nLegacy.\n\"Entertainment Weekly\"'s Ernest Macias said that by combining \"a panache for fabulous fashion\" with \"her unequivocal disco-pop sound\", Minogue \"established herself as a timeless icon.\" Paula Joye of \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" wrote, \"Minogue's fusion of fashion and music has made a huge contribution to the style \"zeitgeist\".\" Fiona MacDonald, from fashion magazine \"Madison\", acknowledged Minogue as \"one of the handful of singers recognised around the world by her first name alone. ... And yet despite becoming an international music superstar, style icon and honorary Brit, those two syllables still seem as Australian as the smell of eucalyptus or a barbeque on a hot day.\" In 2007 and 2009, the Victoria and Albert Museum \"celebrated her influence on fashion\" with an exhibition.\nIn 2012, Dino Scatena of \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" wrote about Minogue: \"A quarter of a century ago, a sequence of symbiotic events altered the fabric of Australian popular culture and set in motion the transformation of a 19-year-old soap actor from Melbourne into an international pop icon.\" Scatena also described her as \"Australia's single most successful entertainer and a world-renowned style idol\". In the same year, VH1 cited Minogue among its choices on the 100 Greatest Women in Music and the 50 Greatest Women of the Video Era.\nMinogue has been recognised with many honorific nicknames, most notably the \"Princess of Pop\". Jon O'Brien of AllMusic reviewed her box-set \"The Albums 2000\u20132010\" and stated it \"contains plenty of moments to justify her position as one of the all-time premier pop princesses.\" In January 2012, \"NME\" critics ranked her single \"Can't Get You Out of My Head\" at number four on their Greatest Pop Songs in History list. Channel 4 listed her as one of the world's greatest pop stars. In 2020, \"Rolling Stone Australia\" placed her at number three on its 50 Greatest Australian Artists of All Time list. In March 2024, to commemorate the 65th anniversary of International Women's Day, Minogue was one of a number of female celebrities had their likeness turned into Barbie dolls. In April 2024, she was included in \"Time\"'s annual list of top 100 \"most influential\" people in the world. In February 2025, she received a \"commemorative star\" at Melbourne Park.\nMinogue's work has influenced pop and dance artists including Olly Alexander, Melanie C, Alice Chater, Ricki-Lee Coulter, Paris Hilton, Dua Lipa, Kim Petras, Rina Sawayama, September, Slayyyter, The Veronicas, Diana Vickers, Pabllo Vittar, and Jessie Ware. French avant-garde guitarist No\u00ebl Akchot\u00e9 released the album \"So Lucky\" in 2007, featuring solo guitar versions of songs recorded by Minogue.\nAchievements.\nMinogue has received many accolades, including two Grammy Awards, four Brit Awards, eighteen ARIA Music Awards, two MTV Video Music Awards, three MTV Europe Music Awards and six Mo Awards, including the Australian Performer of the Year in 2001 and 2003. In October 2007, she was honoured with Music Industry Trust's award for recognition of her 20-year career and was hailed as \"an icon of pop and style\", becoming the first female musician to receive a Music Industry Trust award. In July 2008, she was invested by Charles III (when Prince of Wales) as an Officer of the Order of the British Empire. In April 2017, the Britain\u2013Australia Society recognised Minogue with its 2016 award for outstanding contribution to the improving of relations and bilateral understanding between the countries. The citation reads: \"In recognition of significant contributions to the Britain-Australia relationship as an acclaimed singer, songwriter, actor and iconic personality in both countries\". The award was announced at a reception in Australia House but was personally presented the next day by Prince Philip, Patron of the Society, at Windsor Castle. In January 2019, she was appointed Officer of the Order of Australia in the Australia Day Honours.\nIn August 2004, she held the record for the most singles at number one in the ARIA singles chart, with nine. In November 2011, Minogue was inducted by the Australian Recording Industry Association into the ARIA Hall of Fame. In January 2011, Minogue received a \"Guinness World Records\" citation for having the most consecutive decades with top five albums in the UK, with all her albums doing so. In February 2011, she made history for having two songs inside the top three on the U.S. Dance Club Songs chart, with her singles \"Better than Today\" and \"Higher\" charting at one and three, respectively. In June 2012, Official Charts Company mentioned Minogue is the 12th best selling singer in the United Kingdom to date, and the third best selling female artist, selling over 10.1 million singles. In December 2016, \"Billboard\" ranked her as the eighteenth most successful dance artist of all time. In November 2020, she became the only female artist to reach the top spot of the UK Albums Chart in five consecutive decades, when her studio album, \"Disco\" reached number one. In June 2023, she became the only female artist to reach the top ten of the UK singles chart in the 1980s to the 2020s, when her single \"Padam Padam\" entered the top ten. As of November 2020, Minogue has sold 80 million records worldwide. She is the most successful Australian female recording artist of all time. According to PRS for Music, her 2001 single \"Can't Get You Out of My Head\" was the most-played track of the 2000s, \"after receiving the most airplay and live covers\" in the decade.\nPersonal life.\nActor Jason Donovan and Kylie Minogue started going out while both were actors on the Australian soap opera, \"Neighbours\". They remained in a relationship from 1986 to 1989. From 1989 to 1991, she dated Australian singer Michael Hutchence of the band INXS.\nMinogue later had a relationship with French actor Olivier Martinez, which ended in 2007. She was also engaged to British actor Joshua Sasse up until 2017, followed by a five year relationship with GQ Executive Paul Solomons from 2018 to 2023.\nHealth.\nMinogue was diagnosed with breast cancer at age 36 in May 2005, leading to the postponement of the remainder of her and her withdrawal from the Glastonbury Festival. Her hospitalisation and treatment in Melbourne resulted in a brief but intense period of media coverage, particularly in Australia, where then Prime Minister John Howard issued a statement of support. As media and fans began to congregate outside the Minogue residence in Melbourne, Victorian Premier Steve Bracks warned the international media any disruption of the Minogue family's rights under Australian privacy laws would not be tolerated.\nMinogue underwent a lumpectomy, on 21 May 2005 at Cabrini Hospital in Malvern and commenced chemotherapy treatment soon after. After the surgery, the disease \"had no recurrence\". On 8 July 2005, she made her first public appearance after surgery when she visited a children's cancer ward at Melbourne's Royal Children's Hospital. She returned to France where she completed her chemotherapy treatment at the Institut Gustave Roussy in Villejuif, near Paris. In January 2006, her publicist announced she had finished chemotherapy, and her treatment continued for the next months. On her return to Australia for her concert tour, she discussed her illness and said her chemotherapy treatment had been like \"experiencing a nuclear bomb\". While appearing on the American television talk show, \"The Ellen DeGeneres Show\" in 2008, she said her cancer had originally been misdiagnosed. She commented, \"because someone is in a white coat and using big medical instruments doesn't necessarily mean they're right\", but later spoke of her respect for the medical profession.\nMinogue was acknowledged for the impact she made by publicly discussing her breast cancer diagnosis and treatment. In May 2008, the French Cultural Minister Christine Albanel said, \"Doctors now even go as far as saying there is a \"Kylie effect\" encouraging young women to have regular checks.\" Several scientific studies have been carried out how publicity around her case resulted in more women undergoing regular checks for cancer symptoms. Television host Giuliana Rancic cited Minogue's cancer story as \"inspirational\", when Rancic was diagnosed with breast cancer.\nPhilanthropy.\nMinogue has helped fundraise on many occasions. In 1989, she participated in recording \"Do They Know It's Christmas?\" under the name Band Aid II to help raise money. In 2008, Minogue pledged her support for a campaign to raise funds for abused children, to be donated to the British charities ChildLine and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children. According to the source, around $93 million was raised. She spoke out in relation to the cause, saying: \"Finding the courage to tell someone about being abused is one of the most difficult decisions a child will ever have to make.\" Since her breast cancer diagnosis in 2005, she has been a sponsor and ambassador for the cause. In May 2010, she held a breast cancer campaign for the first time. She later spoke about the cause saying \"It means so much to me to be part of this year's campaign for Fashion Targets Breast Cancer. I wholeheartedly support their efforts to raise funds for the vital work undertaken by Breakthrough Breast Cancer.\" For the cause, she \"posed in a silk sheet emblazoned with the distinctive target logo of Fashion Targets Breast Cancer\" for photographer Mario Testino. Minogue is a supporter of amfAR, The Foundation for AIDS Research, hosting the amfAR Inspiration Gala in Los Angeles in 2010. She has also attended amfAR fundraising benefits in Cannes, and performed at galas for the charity in S\u00e3o Paulo and Hong Kong.\nIn early 2010, Minogue along with many other artists, under the name Helping Haiti, recorded a cover version of \"Everybody Hurts\". The single was a fundraiser to help after the 2010 Haiti earthquake. During her 2011 Aphrodite World Tour, the 2011 T\u014dhoku earthquake and tsunami struck Japan, which was on her itinerary. She declared she would continue to tour there, stating, \"I was here to do shows and I chose not to cancel, Why did I choose not to cancel? I thought long and hard about it and it wasn't an easy decision to make.\" While she was there, she and Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard were star guests at an Australian Embassy fundraiser for the disaster. In April 2014, she launched One Note Against Cancer, a campaign to raise funds and awareness for French cancer research charity APREC (The Alliance for Cancer Research). As part of the campaign, she released the single \"Crystallize\", with the public able to bid via online auction to own each of the song's 4,408 notes. The proceeds of the auction were donated to APREC, with the names of the successful bidders appearing in the accompanying music video's credits. In January 2020, in response to the 2019\u201320 Australian bushfire season, she announced she and her family were donating A$500,000 towards immediate firefighting efforts and ongoing support.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16895", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16895", "title": "Kolberg", "text": ""}
{"id": "16897", "revid": "37025100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16897", "title": "Knight", "text": "Honorary title awarded for service to a state or church\nA knight is a person granted an honorary title of a knighthood by a head of state (including the pope) or representative for service to the monarch, the church, or the country, especially in a military capacity.\nThe concept of knighthood may have been inspired by the ancient Greek () and Roman . In the Early Middle Ages in Western Christian Europe, knighthood was conferred upon mounted warriors. During the High Middle Ages, knighthood was considered a class of petty nobility. By the Late Middle Ages, the rank had become associated with the ideals of chivalry, a code of conduct for the perfect courtly Christian warrior. Often, a knight was a vassal who served as an elite fighter or a bodyguard for a lord, with payment in the form of land holdings. The lords trusted the knights, who were skilled in battle on horseback. In the Middle Ages, knighthood was closely linked with horsemanship (and especially the joust) from its origins in the 12th century until its final flowering as a fashion among the high nobility in the Duchy of Burgundy in the 15th century. This linkage is reflected in the etymology of \"chivalry\", \"cavalier\", and related terms such as the French title of . In that sense, the special prestige accorded to mounted warriors in Christendom finds a parallel in the in the Islamic world. The Crusades brought various military orders of knights to the forefront of defending Christian pilgrims traveling to the Holy Land.\nIn the Late Middle Ages, new methods of warfare \u2013 such as the introduction of the culverin as an anti-personnel, gunpowder-fired weapon \u2013 began to render classical knights in armour obsolete, but the titles remained in many countries. Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I (1459\u20131519) is often referred to as the \"last knight\" in this regard;[] however, some of the most iconic battles of the Knights Hospitaller, such as the Siege of Rhodes and the Great Siege of Malta, took place after his rule. The ideals of chivalry were popularized in medieval literature, particularly the literary cycles known as the Matter of France, relating to the legendary companions of Charlemagne and his men-at-arms, the paladins, and the Matter of Britain, relating to the legend of King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table.\nToday, a number of orders of knighthood continue to exist in Christian Churches, as well as in several historically Christian countries and their former territories, such as the Roman Catholic Sovereign Military Order of Malta, the Protestant Order of Saint John, as well as the English Order of the Garter, the Swedish Royal Order of the Seraphim, the Spanish Order of Santiago, and the Norwegian Order of St Olav. There are also dynastic orders like the Order of the Golden Fleece, the Imperial Order of the Rose, the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle and the Order of St George. In modern times these are orders centred around charity and civic service, and are no longer military orders. Each of these orders has its own criteria for eligibility, but knighthood is generally granted by a head of state, monarch, or prelate to selected persons to recognise some meritorious achievement, often for service to the Church or country.\nThe modern female equivalent of a knight in the English language is dame. Knighthoods and damehoods are traditionally regarded as prestigious.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"knight\", from Old English \"cniht\" (\"boy\" or \"servant\"), is a cognate of the German word \"Knecht\" (\"servant, bondsman, vassal\"). This meaning, of unknown origin, is common among West Germanic languages (cf Old Frisian \"kniucht\", Dutch \"knecht\", Danish \"kn\u00e6gt\", Swedish \"knekt\", Norwegian \"knekt\", Middle High German \"kneht\", all meaning \"boy, youth, lad\"). Middle High German had the phrase \"guoter kneht\", which also meant knight; but this meaning was in decline by about 1200.\nThe meaning of \"cniht\" changed over time from its original meaning of \"boy\" to \"household retainer\". \u00c6lfric's homily of St. Swithun describes a mounted retainer as a \"cniht\". While \"cnihtas\" might have fought alongside their lords, their role as household servants features more prominently in the Anglo-Saxon texts. In several Anglo-Saxon wills \"cnihtas\" are left either money or lands. In his will, King \u00c6thelstan leaves his cniht, Aelfmar, eight hides of land.\nA \"r\u0101dcniht\", \"riding-servant\", was a servant on horseback.\nA narrowing of the generic meaning \"servant\" to \"military follower of a king or other superior\" is visible by 1100. The specific military sense of a knight as a mounted warrior in the heavy cavalry emerges only in the Hundred Years' War. The verb \"to knight\" (to make someone a knight) appears around 1300; and, from the same time, the word \"knighthood\" shifted from \"adolescence\" to \"rank or dignity of a knight\".\nAn Equestrian (Latin, from \"eques\" \"horseman\", from \"equus\" \"horse\") was a member of the second highest social class in the Roman Republic and early Roman Empire. This class is often translated as \"knight\"; the medieval knight, however, was called \"miles\" in Latin (which in classical Latin meant \"soldier\", normally infantry).\nIn the later Roman Empire, the classical Latin word for horse, \"equus\", was replaced in common parlance by the vulgar Latin \"caballus\", sometimes thought to derive from Gaulish \"caballos\". From \"caballus\" arose terms in the various Romance languages cognate with the (French-derived) English \"cavalier\": Italian \"cavaliere\", Spanish \"caballero\", French \"chevalier\" (whence \"chivalry\"), Portuguese \"cavaleiro\", and Romanian \"cavaler\". The Germanic languages have terms cognate with the English \"rider\": German \"Ritter\", and Dutch and Scandinavian \"ridder\". These words are derived from Germanic \"r\u012bdan\", \"to ride\", in turn derived from the Proto-Indo-European root \"*reidh-\".\nHistory and evolution of medieval knighthood.\nPre-Carolingian legacies.\nIn ancient Rome, there was a knightly class \"Ordo Equestris\" (order of mounted nobles). Some portions of the armies of Germanic peoples who occupied Europe from the 3rd century CE onward had been mounted, and some armies, such as those of the Ostrogoths, were mainly cavalry. However, it was the Franks who generally fielded armies composed of large masses of infantry, with an infantry elite, the comitatus, which often rode to battle on horseback rather than marching on foot. When the armies of the Frankish ruler Charles Martel defeated the Umayyad Arab invasion at the Battle of Tours in 732, the Frankish forces were still largely infantry armies, with elites riding to battle but dismounting to fight.\nCarolingian age.\nIn the Early Medieval period, any well-equipped horseman could be described as a knight, or \"miles\" in Latin. The first knights appeared during the reign of Charlemagne in the 8th century. As the Carolingian Age progressed, the Franks were generally on the attack, and larger numbers of warriors took to their horses to ride with the Emperor in his wide-ranging campaigns of conquest. At about this time the Franks increasingly remained on horseback to fight on the battlefield as true cavalry rather than mounted infantry, with the discovery of the stirrup, and would continue to do so for centuries afterwards. Although in some locations the knight returned to foot combat in the 14th century, the association of the knight with mounted combat with a spear, and later a lance, remained a strong one. The older Carolingian ceremony of presenting a young man with weapons influenced the emergence of knighthood ceremonies, in which a noble would be ritually given weapons and declared to be a knight, usually amid some festivities. These mobile mounted warriors made Charlemagne's far-flung conquests possible, and to secure their service he rewarded them with grants of land called benefices. These were given to the captains directly by the Emperor to reward their efforts in the conquests, and they in turn were to grant benefices to their warrior contingents, who were a mix of free and unfree men. In the century or so following Charlemagne's death, his newly empowered warrior class grew stronger still, and Charles the Bald declared their fiefs to be hereditary, and also issued the Edict of P\u00eetres in 864, largely moving away from the infantry-based traditional armies and calling upon all men who could afford it to answer calls to arms on horseback to quickly repel the constant and wide-ranging Viking attacks, which is considered the beginnings of the period of knights that were to become so famous and spread throughout Europe in the following centuries. The period of chaos in the 9th and 10th centuries, between the fall of the Carolingian central authority and the rise of separate Western and Eastern Frankish kingdoms (later to become France and Germany respectively) only entrenched this newly landed warrior class. This was because governing power and defense against Viking, Magyar and Saracen attack became an essentially local affair which revolved around these new hereditary local lords and their \"demesnes\".\nMultiple crusades and military orders.\nClerics and the Church often opposed the practices of the Knights because of their abuses against women and civilians, and many such as St. Bernard de Clairvaux were convinced that Knights served the devil and not God, and needed reforming.\nIn the course of the 12th century, knighthood became a social rank with a distinction being made between \"milites gregarii\" (non-noble cavalrymen) and \"milites nobiles\" (true knights). As the term \"knight\" became increasingly confined to denoting a social rank, the military role of fully armoured cavalryman gained a separate term, \"man-at-arms\". Although any medieval knight going to war would automatically serve as a man-at-arms, not all men-at-arms were knights.\nThe first military orders of knighthood were the Knights of the Holy Sepulchre and the Knights Hospitaller, both founded shortly after the First Crusade of 1099, followed by the Order of Saint Lazarus (1100), Knights Templars (1118), the Order of Montesa (1128), the Order of Santiago (1170) and the Teutonic Knights (1190). At the time of their foundation, these were intended as monastic orders, whose members would act as simple soldiers protecting pilgrims.\nIt was only over the following century, with the successful conquest of the Holy Land and the rise of the crusader states, that these orders became powerful and prestigious.\nThe great European legends of warriors such as the paladins, the Matter of France and the Matter of Britain popularized the notion of chivalry among the warrior class. The ideal of chivalry as the ethos of the Christian warrior, and the transmutation of the term \"knight\" from the meaning \"servant, soldier\", and of \"chevalier\" \"mounted soldier\", to refer to a member of this ideal class, is significantly influenced by the Crusades, on one hand inspired by the military orders of monastic warriors, and on the other hand also cross-influenced by Islamic (Saracen) ideals of \"furusiyya\".\nKnightly culture in the Middle Ages.\nTraining.\nThe institution of knights was already well-established by the 10th century. While the knight was essentially a title denoting a military office, the term could also be used for positions of higher nobility such as landholders. The higher nobles grant the vassals their portions of land (fiefs) in return for their loyalty, protection, and service. The nobles also provided their knights with necessities, such as lodging, food, armour, weapons, horses, and money. The knight generally held his lands by military tenure which was measured through military service that usually lasted 40\u00a0days a year. The military service was the \"quid pro quo\" for each knight's fief. Vassals and lords could maintain any number of knights, although knights with more military experience were those most sought after. Thus, all petty nobles intending to become prosperous knights needed a great deal of military experience. A knight fighting under another's banner was called a \"knight bachelor\" while a knight fighting under his own banner was a \"knight banneret\".\nSome knights were familiar with city culture or familiarized with it during training. These knights, among others, were called in to end large insurgencies and other large uprisings that involved urban areas such as the Peasants' Revolt of England and the 1323\u20131328 Flemish revolt.\nPage.\nA knight had to be born of nobility \u2013 typically sons of knights or lords. In some cases, commoners could also be knighted as a reward for extraordinary military service. Children of the nobility were cared for by noble foster-mothers in castles until they reached the age of seven.\nThese seven-year-old boys were given the title of \"page\" and turned over to the care of the castle's lords. They were placed on an early training regime of hunting with huntsmen and falconers, and academic studies with priests or chaplains. Pages then become assistants to older knights in battle, carrying and cleaning armour, taking care of the horses, and packing the baggage. They would accompany the knights on expeditions, even into foreign lands. Older pages were instructed by knights in swordsmanship, equestrianism, chivalry, warfare, and combat (using wooden swords and spears).\nSquire.\nWhen the boy turned 14, he became a \"squire\". In a religious ceremony, the new squire swore on a sword consecrated by a bishop or priest, and attended to assigned duties in his lord's household. During this time, the squires continued training in combat and were allowed to own armour (rather than borrowing it).Squires were required to master the \"seven points of agilities\" \u2013 riding, swimming and diving, shooting different types of weapons, climbing, participation in tournaments, wrestling, fencing, long jumping, and dancing \u2013 the prerequisite skills for knighthood. All of these were even performed while wearing armour.\nThe knighting of a squire represented passage into adulthood, and while the age a squire was knighted at could vary, typically they were younger men.\nAccolade.\nThe accolade or knighting ceremony was usually held during one of the great feasts or holidays, like Christmas or Easter, and sometimes at the wedding of a noble or royal. The knighting ceremony usually involved a ritual bath on the eve of the ceremony and a prayer vigil during the night. On the day of the ceremony, the would-be knight would swear an oath and the master of the ceremony would dub the new knight on the shoulders with a sword. Squires, and even soldiers, could also be conferred direct knighthood early if they showed valor and efficiency for their service; such acts may include deploying for an important quest or mission, or protecting a high diplomat or a royal relative in battle.\nChivalric code.\nKnights were expected, above all, to fight bravely and to display military professionalism and courtesy. When knights were taken as prisoners of war, they were customarily held for ransom in somewhat comfortable surroundings. This same standard of conduct did not apply to non-knights (archers, peasants, foot-soldiers, etc.) who were often slaughtered after capture, and who were viewed during battle as mere impediments to knights' getting to other knights to fight them.\nChivalry developed as an early standard of professional ethics for knights, who were relatively affluent horse owners and were expected to provide military services in exchange for landed property. Early notions of chivalry entailed loyalty to one's liege lord and bravery in battle, similar to the values of the Heroic Age. During the Middle Ages, this grew from simple military professionalism into a social code including the values of gentility, nobility and treating others reasonably. In \"The Song of Roland\" (c. 1100), Roland is portrayed as the ideal knight, demonstrating unwavering loyalty, military prowess and social fellowship. In Wolfram von Eschenbach's \"Parzival\" (c. 1205), chivalry had become a blend of religious duties, love and military service. Ramon Llull's \"Book of the Order of Chivalry\" (1275) demonstrates that by the end of the 13th century, chivalry entailed a litany of very specific duties, including riding warhorses, jousting, attending tournaments, holding Round Tables and hunting, as well as aspiring to the more \u00e6thereal virtues of \"faith, hope, charity, justice, strength, moderation and loyalty.\" \nIn the military orders, knights tried to maintain moral principles such as honor, loyalty, courage, generosity, justice, and religious principles such as faith, charity, humility and temperance. The orders were influenced by the Rule of Saint Benedict and Cistercian spirituality; a knight of a military order was seen as a soldier-monk and was required to have the discipline and piety of a monk, along with the bravery and honor of a knight, although the rules in the military orders were less strict than those of Saint Benedict. For example, while monks could only eat twice a day, being forbidden the meat of four-legged animals, knights of the orders could eat more frequently. The Liber ad milites templi de laude novae militiae (1129), written by Saint Bernard of Clairvaux, explains it clearly: the Templar had to fight with physical courage and spiritual purity, without fear of death, because he served Christ himself.\nKnights of the late medieval era were expected by society to maintain all these skills and many more, as outlined in Baldassare Castiglione's \"The Book of the Courtier\", though the book's protagonist, Count Ludovico, states the \"first and true profession\" of the ideal courtier \"must be that of arms.\" \"Chivalry\", derived from the French word \"chevalier\" ('cavalier'), simultaneously denoted skilled horsemanship and military service, and these remained the primary occupations of knighthood throughout the Middle Ages.\nChivalry and religion were mutually influenced during the period of the Crusades. The early Crusades helped to clarify the moral code of chivalry as it related to religion. As a result, Christian armies began to devote their efforts to sacred purposes. As time passed, clergy instituted religious vows which required knights to use their weapons chiefly for the protection of the weak and defenseless, especially women and orphans, and of churches.\nTournaments.\nIn peacetime, knights often demonstrated their martial skills in tournaments, which usually took place on the grounds of a castle. Knights could parade their armour and banner to the whole court as the tournament commenced. Medieval tournaments were made up of martial sports called \"hastiludes\", and were not only a major spectator sport but also played as a real combat simulation. It usually ended with many knights either injured or even killed. One contest was a free-for-all battle called a \"melee\", where large groups of knights numbering hundreds assembled and fought one another, and the last knight standing was the winner. The most popular and romanticized contest for knights was the \"joust\". In this competition, two knights charge each other with blunt wooden lances in an effort to break their lance on the opponent's head or body or unhorse them completely. The loser in these tournaments had to turn his armour and horse over to the victor. The last day was filled with feasting, dancing and minstrel singing.\nBesides formal tournaments, there were also unformalized judicial duels done by knights and squires to end various disputes. Countries like Germany, Britain and Ireland practiced this tradition. Judicial combat was of two forms in medieval society, the feat of arms and chivalric combat. The feat of arms were done to settle hostilities between two large parties and supervised by a judge. The chivalric combat was fought when one party's honor was disrespected or challenged and the conflict could not be resolved in court. Weapons were standardized and must be of the same caliber. The duel lasted until the other party was too weak to fight back and in early cases, the defeated party were then subsequently executed. Examples of these brutal duels were the judicial combat known as the Combat of the Thirty in 1351, and the trial by combat fought by Jean de Carrouges in 1386. A far more chivalric duel which became popular in the Late Middle Ages was the \"pas d'armes\" or \"passage of arms\". In this hastilude, a knight or a group of knights would claim a bridge, lane or city gate, and challenge other passing knights to fight or be disgraced. If a lady passed unescorted, she would leave behind a glove or scarf, to be rescued and returned to her by a future knight who passed that way.\nHeraldry.\nOne of the greatest distinguishing marks of the knightly class was the flying of coloured banners, to display power and to distinguish knights in battle and in tournaments. Knights are generally \"armigerous\" (bearing a coat of arms), and indeed they played an essential role in the development of heraldry. As heavier armour, including enlarged shields and enclosed helmets, developed in the Middle Ages, the need for marks of identification arose, and with coloured shields and surcoats, coat armoury was born. Armorial rolls were created to record the knights of various regions or those who participated in various tournaments.\nEquipment.\nKnights used a variety of weapons, including maces, axes and swords. Elements of the knightly armour included helmet, cuirass, gauntlet and shield.\nThe sword was a weapon designed to be used solely in combat; it was useless in hunting and impractical as a tool. Thus, the sword was a status symbol among the knightly class. Swords were effective against lightly armoured enemies, while maces and warhammers were more effective against heavily armoured ones.\nOne of the primary elements of a knight's armour was the shield, which could be used to block strikes and projectiles. Oval shields were used during the Dark Ages and were made of wooden boards that were roughly half an inch thick. Towards the end of the 10th century, oval shields were lengthened to cover the left knee of the mounted warrior, called the kite shield. The heater shield was used during the 13th and the first half of the 14th century. Around 1350, square shields called bouched shields appeared, which had a notch in which to place the couched lance.\nUntil the mid-14th century, knights wore mail armour as their main form of defence. Mail was extremely flexible and provided good protection against sword cuts, but weak against piercing weapons such as the lance and projectiles. Padded undergarment known as aketon was worn to absorb shock damage and prevent chafing caused by mail. In hotter climates metal rings became too hot, so sleeveless surcoats were worn as a protection against the sun, and also to show their heraldic arms. This sort of coat also evolved to be tabards, waffenrocks and other garments with the arms of the wearer sewn into it.\nHelmets of the knight of the early periods usually were more open helms such as the nasal helmet, and later forms of the spangenhelm. The lack of more facial protection lead to the evolution of more enclosing helmets to be made in the late 12th to early 13th centuries, this eventually would evolve to make the great helm. Later forms of the bascinet, which was originally a small helm worn under the larger great helm, evolved to be worn solely, and would eventually have pivoted or hinged visors, the most popular was the hounskull, also known as the \"pig-face visor\".\nPlate armour first appeared in the 13th century, when plates were added onto the torso and mounted to a base of leather. This form of armour is known as a coat of plates, and was initially used over chain mail in the 13th and 14th centuries, at the time of Transitional armour. The torso was not the only part of the knight to receive this plate protection evolution, as the elbows and shoulders were covered with circular pieces of metal, commonly referred to as rondels, eventually evolving into the plate arm harness consisting of the rerebrace, vambrace, and spaulder or pauldron. The legs too were covered in plates, mainly on the shin, called schynbalds which later evolved to fully enclose the leg in the form of enclosed greaves. As for the upper legs, cuisses came about in the mid 14th century. Overall, plate armour offered better protection against piercing weapons such as arrows and especially bolts than mail armour did.Plate armor reached its peak in the 15th and 16th centuries, but was still used at the beginning of the 17th century by the first Cuirassiers like the London lobsters.\nKnights' horses were also armoured in later periods; caparisons were the first form of medieval horse coverage and was used much like the surcoat. Other armours, such as the facial armouring chanfron, were made for horses.\nMedieval and Renaissance chivalric literature.\nKnights and the ideals of knighthood featured largely in medieval and Renaissance literature, and have secured a permanent place in literary romance. While chivalric romances abound, particularly notable literary portrayals of knighthood include \"The Song of Roland\", \"Cantar de Mio Cid\", The Twelve of England, Geoffrey Chaucer's \"The Knight's Tale\", Baldassare Castiglione's \"The Book of the Courtier\", and Miguel de Cervantes' \"Don Quixote\", as well as Sir Thomas Malory's \"Le Morte d'Arthur\" and other Arthurian tales (Geoffrey of Monmouth's \"Historia Regum Britanniae\", the Pearl Poet's \"Sir Gawain and the Green Knight\", etc.).\nGeoffrey of Monmouth's \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" (\"History of the Kings of Britain\"), written in the 1130s, introduced the legend of King Arthur, which was to be important to the development of chivalric ideals in literature. Sir Thomas Malory's \"Le Morte d'Arthur\" (\"The Death of Arthur\"), written in 1469, was important in defining the ideal of chivalry, which is essential to the modern concept of the knight, as an elite warrior sworn to uphold the values of faith, loyalty, courage, and honour.\nInstructional literature was also created. Geoffroi de Charny's \"Book of Chivalry\" expounded upon the importance of Christian faith in every area of a knight's life, though still laying stress on the primarily military focus of knighthood.\nIn the early Renaissance, greater emphasis was laid upon courtliness. The ideal courtier\u2014the chivalrous knight\u2014of Baldassarre Castiglione's \"The Book of the Courtier\" became a model of the ideal virtues of nobility. Castiglione's tale took the form of a discussion among the nobility of the court of the Duke of Urbino, in which the characters determine that the ideal knight should be renowned not only for his bravery and prowess in battle, but also as a skilled dancer, athlete, singer and orator, and he should also be well-read in the humanities and classical Greek and Latin literature.\nLater Renaissance literature, such as Miguel de Cervantes's \"Don Quixote\", rejected the code of chivalry as unrealistic idealism. The rise of Christian humanism in Renaissance literature demonstrated a marked departure from the chivalric romance of late medieval literature, and the chivalric ideal ceased to influence literature over successive centuries until it saw some pockets of revival in post-Victorian literature.\nDecline.\nBy the mid to late 16th century, knights were quickly becoming obsolete as countries started creating their own standing armies that were faster to train, cheaper to equip, and easier to mobilize. The advancement of high-powered firearms contributed greatly to the decline in use of plate armour, as the time it took to train soldiers with guns was much less compared to that of the knight. The cost of equipment was also significantly lower, and guns had a reasonable chance to easily penetrate a knight's armour. In the 14th century the use of infantrymen armed with pikes and fighting in close formation also proved effective against heavy cavalry, such as during the Battle of Nancy, when Charles the Bold and his armoured cavalry were decimated by Swiss pikemen. As the feudal system came to an end, lords saw no further use of knights. Many landowners found the duties of knighthood too expensive and so contented themselves with the use of squires. Mercenaries also became an economic alternative to knights when conflicts arose.\nArmies of the time started adopting a more realistic approach to warfare than the honor-bound code of chivalry. Soon, the remaining knights were absorbed into professional armies. Although they had a higher rank than most soldiers because of their valuable lineage, they lost their distinctive identity that previously set them apart from common soldiers. Some knightly orders survived into modern times. They adopted newer technology while still retaining their age-old chivalric traditions. Examples include the Knights of the Holy Sepulchre, Knights Hospitaller and Teutonic Knights.\nTypes of knighthood.\nHereditary knighthoods.\nContinental Europe.\nIn continental Europe different systems of hereditary knighthood have existed or do exist.\nIn the Kingdom of Spain, the Royal House of Spain grants titles of knighthood to the successor of the throne. This knighthood title, known as Order of the Golden Fleece, is probably the most prestigious and exclusive chivalric order. This order can also be granted to persons not belonging to the Spanish Crown, as the former Emperor of Japan Akihito, Queen of United Kingdom Elizabeth\u00a0II or the relevant Spanish politician of the Spanish democratic transition Adolfo Su\u00e1rez, among others.\n\"Ridder\", Dutch for \"knight\", is a hereditary noble title in the Netherlands. It is the lowest title within the nobility system and ranks below that of \"Baron\" but above \"Jonkheer\" (the latter is not a title, but a Dutch honorific to show that someone belongs to the untitled nobility). The collective term for its holders in a certain locality is the Ridderschap (e.g. Ridderschap van Holland, Ridderschap van Friesland, etc.). In the Netherlands no female equivalent exists. Before 1814, the history of nobility is separate for each of the eleven provinces that make up the Kingdom of the Netherlands. In each of these, there were in the early Middle Ages a number of feudal lords who often were just as powerful, and sometimes more so than the rulers themselves. During this period, knights ranked below the ruler and above the feudal barons (Dutch: \"heren\"). In the Netherlands only 10 knightly families are still extant, a number which steadily decreases because in that country ennoblement or incorporation into the nobility is not possible anymore.\nLikewise \"Ridder\", Dutch for \"knight\", or the equivalent French \"Chevalier\" is a hereditary noble title in Belgium. It is the second lowest title within the nobility system above \"\u00c9cuyer\" or \"Jonkheer/Jonkvrouw\" and below \"Baron\". Like in the Netherlands, no female equivalent to the title exists. Belgium still does have about 232 registered knightly families.\nThe German and Austrian equivalent of an hereditary knight is a \"Ritter\". This designation is used as a title of nobility in all German-speaking areas. Traditionally it denotes the second lowest rank within the nobility, standing above \"Edler\" (noble) and below \"Freiherr\" (baron). For its historical association with warfare and the landed gentry in the Middle Ages, it can be considered roughly equal to the titles of \"Knight\" or \"Baronet\".\nThe Royal House of Portugal historically bestowed hereditary knighthoods to holders of the highest ranks in the Royal Orders. Today, the head of the Royal House of Portugal Duarte Pio, Duke of Braganza, bestows hereditary knighthoods for extraordinary acts of sacrifice and service to the Royal House. There are very few hereditary knights and they are entitled to wear an oval neck badge with the shield of the house of Braganza. As there are two classes of hereditary knights in Portugal, the highest grade is the hereditary knight with grand collar. Portuguese hereditary knighthoods confer nobility.\nIn France, the hereditary knighthood existed similarly throughout as a title of nobility, as well as in regions formerly under Holy Roman Empire control. One family ennobled with a title in such a manner is the house of Hauteclocque (by letters patents of 1752), even if its most recent members used a pontifical title of count. In some other regions such as Normandy, a specific type of fief was granted to the lower ranked knights () called the \"fief de haubert\", referring to the hauberk, or chain mail shirt worn almost daily by knights, as they would not only fight for their liege lords, but enforce and carry out their orders on a routine basis as well. Later the term came to officially designate the higher rank of the nobility in the Ancien R\u00e9gime (the lower rank being Squire), as the romanticism and prestige associated with the term grew in the Late Middle Ages and the Renaissance.\nItaly and Poland also had the hereditary knighthood that existed within their respective systems of nobility. Just as with the Royal House of Portugal, the Royal House of Italy \u2013 House of Savoy, continue to confer their dynastic orders of chivalry on both Italian and non-Italian citizens, these dynastic orders include the; Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation, Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus and the Civil Order of Savoy. Additionally the Royal House of Bourbon-Two Sicilies confers their dynastic orders of chivalry on both Italian and non-italian citizens, including the dynastic orders of; Order of Saint Januarius, Sacred Military Constantinian Order of Saint George, and the Order of Saint Ferdinand and of Merit.\nIreland.\nThere are traces of the Continental system of hereditary knighthood in Ireland. Notably all three of the following belong to the Hiberno-Norman FitzGerald dynasty, created by the Earls of Desmond, acting as Earls Palatine, for their kinsmen.\nAnother Irish family were the O'Shaughnessys, who were created knights in 1553 under the policy of surrender and regrant (first established by Henry VIII of England). They were attainted in 1697 for participation on the Jacobite side in the Williamite wars.\nBritish baronetcies.\nSince 1611, the British Crown has awarded a hereditary title in the form of the baronetcy. Like knights, baronets are accorded the title \"Sir\". Baronets are not peers of the Realm, and have never been entitled to sit in the House of Lords, therefore like knights they remain commoners in the view of the British legal system. However, unlike knights, the title is hereditary, through male primogeniture, and the recipient does not receive an accolade. The position is therefore more comparable with hereditary knighthoods in continental European orders of nobility, such as \"Ritter\", than with knighthoods under the British orders of chivalry. However, unlike the continental orders, the British baronetcy system was a modern invention, designed specifically to raise money for the Crown with the purchase of the title. Baronetcies are granted infrequently and the last notable one was the elevation of Denis Thatcher on the departure from the office of prime minister of his wife, Margaret, which was widely considered in the media to be in order to allow her son Mark to inherit the title, because her own title to the House of Lords as a baroness was a life peerage and died with her.\nChivalric orders.\nMilitary orders.\nOther orders were established in the Iberian peninsula, under the influence of the orders in the Holy Land and the Crusader movement of the Reconquista and generally aligned with geographical area, for example:\nHonorific orders of knighthood.\nAfter the Crusades, the military orders became idealized and romanticized, resulting in the late medieval notion of chivalry, as reflected in the chivalric romances of the time. The creation of chivalric orders was fashionable among the nobility in the 14th and 15th centuries, and this is still reflected in contemporary honours systems, including the term \"order\" itself. Examples of notable orders of chivalry are:\nFrom roughly 1560, purely honorific orders were established, as a way to confer prestige and distinction, unrelated to military service and chivalry in the more narrow sense. Such orders were particularly popular in the 17th and 18th centuries, and knighthood continues to be conferred in various countries:\nThere are other monarchies and also republics that also follow this practice. Modern knighthoods are typically conferred in recognition for services rendered to society, which are not necessarily martial in nature. The British musician Elton John, for example, is a Knight Bachelor, thus entitled to be called Sir Elton. The female equivalent is a \"Dame\", for example Dame Julie Andrews.\nIn the United Kingdom, honorific knighthood may be conferred in two different ways:\nIn the British honours system the knightly style of \"Sir\" and its female equivalent \"Dame\" are followed by the given name only when addressing the holder. Thus, Sir Elton John should be addressed as \"Sir Elton\", not \"Sir John\" or \"Mr John\". Similarly, actress Dame Judi Dench should be addressed as \"Dame Judi\", not \"Dame Dench\" or \"Ms Dench\".\nWives of knights, however, are entitled to the honorific pre-nominal \"Lady\" before their husband's surname. Thus Sir Paul McCartney's ex-wife was formally styled \"Lady McCartney\" (rather than \"Lady Paul McCartney\" or \"Lady Heather McCartney\"). The style \"Dame Heather McCartney\" could be used for the wife of a knight; however, this style is largely archaic and is only used in the most formal of documents, or where the wife is a Dame in her own right (such as Dame Norma Major, who gained her title six years before her husband Sir John Major was knighted). The husbands of Dames have no honorific pre-nominal, so Dame Norma's husband remained John Major until he received his own knighthood.\nUp until 1965 it was not permitted to use these titles until after the knight concerned had received the accolade; but in that year the prohibition was lifted, and it is now permitted to use the titles immediately, from the time the award is gazetted.\nWith the award of a KCVO to the Rt Rev. Randall Davidson in 1902, the custom was established whereby a clerk in holy orders in the Church of England, on being appointed to a degree of knighthood, does not receive the accolade. He receives the insignia of his honour and may place the appropriate letters after his name or title but he may not be called Sir and his wife may not be called Lady. This custom is not observed in Australia and New Zealand, where knighted Anglican clergymen routinely use the title \"Sir\". Ministers of other Christian Churches are entitled to receive the accolade. For example, Sir Norman Cardinal Gilroy did receive the accolade on his appointment as Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire in 1969. A knight who is subsequently ordained does not lose his title. A famous example of this situation was The Revd Sir Derek Pattinson, who was ordained just a year after he was appointed Knight Bachelor, apparently somewhat to the consternation of officials at Buckingham Palace. A woman clerk in holy orders may be made a Dame in exactly the same way as any other woman since there are no military connotations attached to the honour. A clerk in holy orders who is a baronet is entitled to use the title Sir.\nOutside the British honours system it is usually considered improper to address a knighted person as 'Sir' or 'Dame' (notable exceptions are members of the Order of the Knights of Rizal in the Republic of the Philippines.) Some countries, however, historically did have equivalent honorifics for knights, such as Cavaliere in Italy (e.g. \"Cavaliere\" Benito Mussolini), and Ritter in Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire (e.g. Georg \"Ritter von Trapp\").\nState knighthoods in the Netherlands are issued in three orders: the Order of William, the Order of the Netherlands Lion, and the Order of Orange Nassau. Additionally there remain a few hereditary knights in the Netherlands.\nIn Belgium, honorific knighthood (not hereditary) can be conferred by the king on particularly meritorious individuals such as scientists or eminent businessmen, or for instance to astronaut Frank De Winne, the second Belgian in space. This practice is similar to the conferral of the dignity of Knight Bachelor in the United Kingdom. In addition, there still are a number of hereditary knights in Belgium &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;.\nIn France and Belgium, one of the ranks conferred in some orders of merit, such as the L\u00e9gion d'Honneur, the Ordre National du M\u00e9rite, the Ordre des Palmes acad\u00e9miques and the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres in France, and the Order of Leopold, Order of the Crown and Order of Leopold\u00a0II in Belgium, is that of \"Chevalier\" (in French) or \"Ridder\" (in Dutch), meaning Knight.\nIn the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth the monarchs tried to establish chivalric orders, but the hereditary lords who controlled the Union did not agree and managed to ban such assemblies. They feared the king would use orders to gain support for absolutist goals and to make formal distinctions among the peerage, which could lead to its legal breakup into two separate classes, and that the king would later play one against the other and eventually limit the legal privileges of hereditary nobility. But finally in 1705 King August II managed to establish the Order of the White Eagle which remains Poland's most prestigious order of that kind. The head of state (now the President as the acting Grand Master) confers knighthoods of the order to distinguished citizens, foreign monarchs and other heads of state. The order has its chapter. There were no particular honorifics that would accompany a knight's name, as historically all (or at least by far most) of its members would be royals or hereditary lords anyway. So today, a knight is simply referred to as \"Name Surname, knight of the White Eagle (Order)\".\nIn Nigeria, holders of religious honours like the Knighthood of St. Gregory make use of the word \"Sir\" as a pre-nominal honorific in much the same way as it is used for secular purposes in Britain and the Philippines. Wives of such individuals also typically assume the title of Lady.\nWomen.\nEngland and the United Kingdom.\nWomen were appointed to the Order of the Garter almost from the start. In all, 68 women were appointed between 1358 and 1488, including all consorts. Though many were women of royal blood, or wives of knights of the Garter, some women were neither. They wore the garter on the left arm, and some are shown on their tombstones with this arrangement. After 1488, no other appointments of women are known, although it is said that the Garter was conferred upon Neapolitan poet Laura Bacio Terricina, by King Edward VI. In 1638, a proposal was made to revive the use of robes for the wives of knights in ceremonies, but this did not occur. Queens consort have been made Ladies of the Garter since 1901 (Queens Alexandra in 1901, Mary in 1910 and Elizabeth in 1937). The first non-royal woman to be made Lady Companion of the Garter was The Duchess of Norfolk in 1990, the second was The Baroness Thatcher in 1995 (post-nominal: LG). On 30 November 1996, Lady Fraser was made Lady of the Thistle, the first non-royal woman (post-nominal: LT). (See Edmund Fellowes, \"Knights of the Garter\", 1939; and Beltz: \"Memorials of the Order of the Garter\"). The first woman to be granted a knighthood in modern Britain seems to have been Nawab Sikandar Begum Sahiba, Nawab Begum of Bhopal, who became a Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India (GCSI) in 1861, at the foundation of the order. Her daughter received the same honor in 1872, as well as her granddaughter in 1910. The order was open to \"princes and chiefs\" without distinction of gender. The first European woman to have been granted an order of knighthood was Queen Mary, when she was made a Knight Grand Commander of the same order, by special statute, in celebration of the Delhi Durbar of 1911. She was also granted a damehood in 1917 as a Dame Grand Cross, when the Order of the British Empire was created (it was the first order explicitly open to women). The Royal Victorian Order was opened to women in 1936, and the Orders of the Bath and Saint Michael and Saint George in 1965 and 1971 respectively.\nFrance.\nMedieval French had two words, chevaleresse and chevali\u00e8re, which were used in two ways: one was for the wife of a knight, and this usage goes back to the 14th century. The other was possibly for a female knight. Here is a quote from M\u00e9nestrier, a 17th-century writer on chivalry: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was not always necessary to be the wife of a knight in order to take this title. Sometimes, when some male fiefs were conceded by special privilege to women, they took the rank of chevaleresse, as one sees plainly in Hemricourt where women who were not wives of knights are called chevaleresses.Modern French orders of knighthood include women, for example the L\u00e9gion d'Honneur (Legion of Honor) since the mid-19th century, but they are usually called chevaliers. The first documented case is that of Ang\u00e9lique Br\u00fblon (1772\u20131859), who fought in the Revolutionary Wars, received a military disability pension in 1798, the rank of 2nd lieutenant in 1822, and the Legion of Honor in 1852. A recipient of the Ordre National du M\u00e9rite recently requested from the order's Chancery the permission to call herself \"chevali\u00e8re,\" and the request was granted.\nItaly.\nAs related in \"Orders of Knighthood, Awards and the Holy See\" by H. E. Cardinale (1983), the Order of the Blessed Virgin Mary was founded by two Bolognese nobles Loderingo degli Andal\u00f2 and Catalano di Guido in 1233, and approved by Pope Alexander IV in 1261. It was the first religious order of knighthood to grant the rank of militissa to women. However, this order was suppressed by Pope Sixtus V in 1558.\nThe Low Countries.\nAt the initiative of Catherine Baw in 1441, and 10 years later of Elizabeth, Mary, and Isabella of the house of Hornes, orders were founded which were open exclusively to women of noble birth, who received the French title of chevali\u00e8re or the Latin title of equitissa. In his Glossarium (s.v. militissa), Du Cange notes that still in his day (17th century), the female canons of the canonical monastery of St. Gertrude in Nivelles (Brabant), after a probation of 3 years, are made knights (militissae) at the altar, by a (male) knight called in for that purpose, who gives them the accolade with a sword and pronounces the usual words.\nSpain.\nTo honour those women who defended Tortosa against an attack by the Moors, Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Barcelona, created the Order of the Hatchet (\"\"Orde de la Atxa\" in catalan\") in 1149.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The inhabitants [of Tortosa] being at length reduced to great streights, desired relief of the Earl, but he, being not in a condition to give them any, they entertained some thoughts of making a surrender. Which the Women hearing of, to prevent the disaster threatening their City, themselves, and Children, put on men's Clothes, and by a resolute sally, forced the Moors to raise the Siege. The Earl, finding himself obliged, by the gallentry of the action, thought fit to make his acknowlegements thereof, by granting them several Privileges and Immunities, and to perpetuate the memory of so signal an attempt, instituted an Order, somewhat like a Military Order, into which were admitted only those Brave Women, deriving the honour to their Descendants, and assigned them for a Badge, a thing like a Fryars Capouche, sharp at the top, after the form of a Torch, and of a crimson colour, to be worn upon their Head-clothes. He also ordained, that at all publick meetings, the women should have precedence of the Men. That they should be exempted from all Taxes, and that all the Apparel and Jewels, though of never so great value, left by their dead Husbands, should be their own. These Women having thus acquired this Honour by their personal Valour, carried themselves after the Military Knights of those days.\u2014\u200a\nNotable knights.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCounterparts in other cultures.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "16898", "revid": "2102840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16898", "title": "Kara Sea", "text": "Marginal sea of the Arctic Ocean\nThe Kara Sea is a marginal sea, separated from the Barents Sea to the west by the Kara Strait and Novaya Zemlya, and from the Laptev Sea to the east by the Severnaya Zemlya archipelago. Ultimately the Kara, Barents and Laptev Seas are all extensions of the Arctic Ocean north of Siberia.\nThe Kara Sea's northern limit is marked geographically by a line running from Cape Kohlsaat in Graham Bell Island, Franz Josef Land, to Cape Molotov (Arctic Cape), the northernmost point of Komsomolets Island in Severnaya Zemlya.\nThe Kara Sea is roughly long and wide with an area of around and a mean depth of .\nIts main ports are Novy Port and Dikson and it is important as a fishing ground although the sea is ice-bound for all but two months of the year. The Kara Sea contains the East-Prinovozemelsky field (an extension of the West Siberian Oil Basin), containing significant undeveloped petroleum and natural gas. In 2014, US government sanctions resulted in Exxon having until 26 September to discontinue its operations in the Kara Sea.\nName origin.\nIt is named after the Kara river (flowing into Baydaratskaya Bay), which is now relatively insignificant but which played an important role in the Russian conquest of northern Siberia. The Kara river name is derived from a Nenets word meaning 'hummocked ice'.\nGeography.\nExtent.\nThe International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Kara Sea as follows:\n\"On the West.\" The Eastern limit of Barents Sea [Cape Kohlsaat to Cape Zhelaniya (Desire); West and Southwest coast of Novaya Zemlya to Cape Kussov Noss and thence to Western entrance Cape, Dolgaya Bay () on Vaigach Island. Through Vaigach Island to Cape Greben; thence to Cape Belyi Noss on the mainland].\n\"On the North.\" Cape Kohlsaat to Cape Molotov () (Northern extremity of Severnaya Zemlya on Komsomolets Island).\n\"On the East.\" Komsomolets Island from Cape Molotov to South Eastern Cape; thence to Cape Vorochilov, Oktiabrskaya Revolutziya Island to Cape Anuchin. Then to Cape Unslicht on Bolshevik Island. Bolshevik Island to Cape Yevgenov. Thence to Cape Pronchisthehev on the main land (see Russian chart No. 1484 of the year 1935).\nIslands.\nThere are many islands and island groups in the Kara Sea. Unlike the other marginal seas of the Arctic, where most islands lie along the coasts, in the Kara Sea many islands, like the Arkticheskiy Institut Islands, the Izvesti Tsik Islands, the Kirov Islands, Uedineniya or Lonely Island, Wiese Island, and Voronina Island are located in the open sea of its central regions.\nThe largest group in the Kara Sea is by far the Nordenski\u00f6ld Archipelago, with five large subgroups and over ninety islands. Other important islands in the Kara Sea are Bely Island, Dikson Island, Taymyr Island, the Kamennyye Islands and Oleni Island. Despite the high latitude, all islands are unglaciated except for Ushakov Island at the extreme northern limit of the Kara Sea.\nCurrent patterns.\nWater circulation patterns in the Kara Sea are complex. The Kara Sea tends to be sea ice covered between September and May, and between May and August heavily influenced by freshwater run-off (roughly 1200\u00a0km3 yr\u22121) from the Russian rivers (e.g., Ob, Yenisei, Pyasina, Pur, and Taz). The Kara Sea is also affected by the water inflow from the Barents Sea, which brings 0.6 Sv in August and 2.6 Sv in December. The advected water originates from the Atlantic, but it was cooled and mixed with freshwater in the Barents Sea before it reaches the Kara Sea. Simulations with the Hamburg shelf ocean model (HAMSOM) suggest that no typical water current pattern consists in the Kara Sea throughout the year. Depending on the freshwater run-off, the dominant wind patterns, and the sea ice formation, the water currents change.\nHistory.\nThe Kara Sea was formerly known as Oceanus Scythicus or Mare Glaciale and it appears with these names in 16th century maps. Since it is closed by ice most of the year it remained largely unexplored until the late nineteenth century.\nIn 1556 Stephen Borough sailed in the \"Searchthrift\" to try to reach the Ob River, but he was stopped by ice and fog at the entrance to the Kara Sea. Not until 1580 did another English expedition, under Arthur Pet and Charles Jackman, attempt its passage. They too failed to penetrate it, and England lost interest in searching for the Northeast Passage.\nIn 1736\u20131737 Russian Admiral Stepan Malygin undertook a voyage from Dolgy Island in the Barents Sea. The two ships in this early expedition were the \"Perviy\", under Malygin's command and the \"Vtoroy\" under Captain A. Skuratov. After entering the little-explored Kara Sea, they sailed to the mouth of the Ob River. Malygin took careful observations of these hitherto almost unknown areas of the Russian Arctic coastline. With this knowledge he was able to draw the first somewhat accurate map of the Arctic shores between the Pechora River and the Ob River.\nIn 1878, Finnish explorer Adolf Erik Nordenski\u00f6ld on ship \"Vega\" sailed across the Kara Sea from Gothenburg, along the coast of Siberia, and despite the ice packs, got to 180\u00b0 longitude by early September. Frozen in for the winter in the Chukchi Sea, Nordenski\u00f6ld waited and bartered with the local Chukchi people. The following July, the Vega was freed from the ice, and continued to Yokohama, Japan. He became the first to force the Northeast Passage. During the same years, Christian Dahl explored the sailing conditions in the Kara Sea, and was instrumental in opening up a direct trade route from central Siberia to Western Europe. The largest group of islands in the Kara Sea, the Nordenski\u00f6ld Archipelago, has been named in his honour. The year 1912 was a tragic one for Russian explorers in the Kara Sea. In that fateful year unbroken consolidated ice blocked the way for the Northern Sea Route and three expeditions that had to cross the Kara Sea became trapped and failed: Sedov's on vessel \"St. Foka\", Brusilov's on the \"St. Anna\", and Rusanov's on the \"Gercules\". Georgy Sedov intended to reach Franz Josef Land on ship, leave a depot over there, and sledge to the pole. Due to the heavy ice the vessel could only reach Novaya Zemlya the first summer and wintered in Franz Josef Land. In February 1914 Sedov headed to the North Pole with two sailors and three sledges, but he fell ill and died on Rudolf Island. Georgy Brusilov attempted to navigate the Northeast Passage, was trapped in the Kara Sea, and drifted northward for more than two years reaching latitude 83\u00b0 17' N. Thirteen men, headed by Valerian Albanov, left the vessel and started across the ice to Franz Josef Land, but only Albanov and one sailor (Alexander Konrad) survived after a gruesome three-month ordeal. The survivors brought the ship log of \"St. Anna\", the map of her drift, and daily meteorological records, but the destiny of those who stayed on board remains unknown. In the same year the expedition of Vladimir Rusanov was lost in the Kara Sea. The prolonged absence of those three expeditions stirred public attention, and a few small rescue expeditions were launched, including Jan Nag\u00f3rski's five air flights over the sea and ice from the NW coast of Novaya Zemlya.\nAfter the Russian Revolution in 1917, the scale and scope of exploration of the Kara Sea increased greatly as part of the work of developing the Northern Sea Route. Polar stations, of which five already existed in 1917, increased in number, providing meteorologic, ice reconnaissance, and radio facilities. By 1932 there were 24 stations, by 1948 about 80, and by the 1970s more than 100. The use of icebreakers and, later, aircraft as platforms for scientific work were developed. In 1929 and 1930 the Icebreaker Sedov carried groups of scientists to Severnaya Zemlya, the last major piece of unsurveyed territory in the Soviet Arctic; the archipelago was completely mapped under Georgy Ushakov between 1930 and 1932.\nParticularly worth noting are three cruises of the Icebreaker \"Sadko\", which went farther north than most; in 1935 and 1936 the last unexplored areas in the northern Kara Sea were examined and the small and elusive Ushakov Island was discovered.\nIn the summer of 1942, German Kriegsmarine warships and submarines entered the Kara Sea to destroy as many Russian vessels as possible. This naval campaign was named \"Operation Wunderland\". Its success was limited by the presence of ice floes, as well as bad weather and fog. These effectively protected the Soviet ships, preventing the damage that could have been inflicted on the Soviet fleet under fair weather conditions.\nIn October 2010, the Russian government awarded a license to Russian oil company Rosneft for developing the East-Prinovozemelsky oil and gas structure in the Kara Sea.\nNuclear dumping.\nThere is concern about radioactive contamination from nuclear waste the former Soviet Union dumped in the sea and the effect this will have on the marine environment. According to an official \"White Paper\" report compiled and released by the Russian government in March 1993, the Soviet Union dumped six nuclear submarine reactors and ten nuclear reactors into the Kara Sea between 1965 and 1988. Solid high- and low-level wastes unloaded from Northern Fleet nuclear submarines during reactor refuelings were dumped in the Kara Sea, mainly in the shallow fjords of Novaya Zemlya, where the depths of the dumping sites range from 12 to 135 meters, and in the Novaya Zemlya Trough at depths of up to 380 meters. Liquid low-level wastes were released in the open Barents and Kara Seas. A subsequent appraisal by the International Atomic Energy Agency showed that releases are low and localized from the 16 naval reactors (reported by the IAEA as having come from seven submarines and the icebreaker \"Lenin\") which were dumped at five sites in the Kara Sea. Most of the dumped reactors had suffered an accident.\nThe Soviet submarine K-27 was scuttled in Stepovogo Bay with its two reactors filled with spent nuclear fuel. At a seminar in February 2012 it was revealed that the reactors on board the submarine could re-achieve criticality and explode (a buildup of heat leading to a steam explosion vs. nuclear). The catalogue of waste dumped at sea by the Soviets, according to documents seen by Bellona, includes some 17,000 containers of radioactive waste, 19 ships containing radioactive waste, 14 nuclear reactors, including five that still contain spent nuclear fuel; 735 other pieces of radioactively contaminated heavy machinery, and the K-27 nuclear submarine with its two reactors loaded with nuclear fuel.\nNature reserve.\nThe Great Arctic State Nature Reserve\u2014the largest nature reserve of Russia\u2014was founded on 11 May 1993, by Resolution No. 431 of the Government of the Russian Federation (RF). The Kara Sea Islands section (4,000\u00a0km2) of the Great Arctic Nature Reserve includes: the Sergei Kirov Archipelago, the Voronina Island, the Izvestiy TSIK Islands, the Arctic Institute Islands, the Svordrup Island, Uedineniya (Ensomheden) and a number of smaller islands. This section represents rather fully the natural and biological diversity of Arctic sea islands of the eastern part of the Kara Sea.\nNearby, the Franz Josef Land and Severny Island in northern Novaya Zemlya are also registered as a sanctuary, the Russian Arctic National Park.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16899", "revid": "43001725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16899", "title": "Kareem Abdul-Jabbar", "text": "American basketball player (born 1947)\nKareem Abdul-Jabbar (born Ferdinand Lewis Alcindor Jr., April 16, 1947) is an American former basketball player. He played professionally for 20 seasons for the Milwaukee Bucks and Los Angeles Lakers in the National Basketball Association (NBA), and played college basketball for the UCLA Bruins as a center. A member of the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, Abdul-Jabbar won a record six NBA Most Valuable Player (MVP) awards. He was a 19-time NBA All-Star, a 15-time All-NBA Team member, and an 11-time NBA All-Defensive Team selection. He was a member of six NBA championship teams as a player and two more as an assistant coach, and was twice voted the NBA Finals MVP. He was named to three NBA anniversary teams (35th, 50th, and 75th). Widely regarded as one of the greatest players of all time, Abdul-Jabbar broke the NBA's career scoring record in 1984, and held it until LeBron James surpassed him in 2023.\nAbdul-Jabbar was known as Lew Alcindor when he played at Power Memorial, a private Catholic high school in New York City, where he led their team to 71 consecutive wins. He played college basketball for the UCLA Bruins, winning three consecutive national championships under head coach John Wooden. Alcindor was a record three-time most outstanding player of the NCAA tournament. Drafted with the first overall pick by the one-season-old Milwaukee Bucks franchise in the 1969 NBA draft, he spent six seasons with the team. After leading the Bucks to their first NBA championship at age 24 in 1971, he took the Muslim name Kareem Abdul-Jabbar. Using his trademark skyhook shot, he established himself as one of the league's top scorers. In 1975, he was traded to the Lakers, with whom he played the final 14 seasons of his career, during which time the team won five NBA championships. Abdul-Jabbar's contributions were a key component in the Showtime era of Lakers basketball. Over his 20-year NBA career, his teams reached the playoffs 18 times, got past the first round 14 times, and reached the NBA Finals ten times.\nAt the time of his retirement at age 42 in 1989, Abdul-Jabbar was the NBA's regular season career leader in points (38,387), games played (1,560), minutes (57,446), field goals made (15,837), field goal attempts (28,307), blocked shots (3,189), defensive rebounds (9,394), and personal fouls (4,657). He remains the all-time leader in field goals made. He ranks second in career points, minutes played and field goal attempts, and is third all-time in both total rebounds (17,440) and blocked shots. ESPN named him the greatest center of all time in 2007, the greatest player in college basketball history in 2008, and the second best player in NBA history (behind Michael Jordan) in 2016. Abdul-Jabbar has also been an actor, a basketball coach, a best-selling author, and a martial artist, having trained in Jeet Kune Do under Bruce Lee and appeared in his film \"Game of Death\" (1972). In 2012, Abdul-Jabbar was selected by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to be a U.S. global cultural ambassador. In 2016, President Barack Obama awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom.\nEarly life.\nFerdinand Lewis Alcindor Jr. was born in Harlem, New York City, the only child of Cora Lillian, a department store price checker, and Ferdinand Lewis Alcindor Sr., a transit police officer and jazz musician. Cora was born in North Carolina but came to Harlem as part of the Great Migration. Ferdinand Sr. was the child of immigrants from Trinidad; his uncle was the Black activist and medical pioneer Dr. John Alcindor. Alcindor grew up in the Dyckman Street projects in the Inwood neighborhood of Upper Manhattan, which he moved to at the age of 3 in 1950. At birth, Alcindor weighed and was long. Always very tall for his age, he was already by the age of nine. Alcindor was often depressed as a teenager because of the stares and comments about his height. By the eighth grade (age 13\u201314), he had grown to and could already dunk a basketball.\nAlcindor attended Power Memorial Academy, a private all-boys Catholic high school, where he was one of the few Black students. He wore the jersey number 33, which he chose in tribute to his favorite player, New York Giants fullback Mel Triplett. He would continue wearing this number throughout his college and professional career. He led coach Jack Donohue's teams to three straight New York City Catholic championships, a 71\u2013game winning streak, and a 79\u20132 overall record. This earned him \"The Tower from Power\" nickname. His 2,067 total points were a New York City high school record. The team won the national high school boys basketball championship when Alcindor was in 10th and 11th grade and was runner-up his senior year. He had a strained relationship in his final year with Donohue after the coach called him a \"nigger\".\nAlcindor wrote for the Harlem Youth Action Project newspaper. The Harlem riot of 1964, which was prompted by the fatal shooting of 15-year old black boy James Powell by a New York police officer, triggered Alcindor's interest in racial politics. \"Right then and there, I knew who I was, who I had to be. I was going to be black rage personified, Black Power in the flesh\", he said.\nCollege career.\nAlcindor was not able to play professionally in the NBA out of high school. At the time, the league only accepted players beginning with the year that they could have hypothetically graduated from college. His other options to play basketball professionally would have been to join the Harlem Globetrotters or play overseas. However, Alcindor's goal was to attend college. Recruited by hundreds of schools, he was the most sought-after prospect since Wilt Chamberlain. Southern teams that were segregated were willing to break the color line to acquire Alcindor. He chose to attend the University of California, Los Angeles, after being recruited by Bruins assistant coach Jerry Norman. Baseball Hall of Famer and UCLA alumnus Jackie Robinson also wrote to Alcindor, encouraging him to attend the college. \nBy now tall, Alcindor was relegated to the freshman team in his first year with the Bruins, as freshmen were ineligible to play varsity until 1972. The freshman squad included Lucius Allen, Kenny Heitz, and Lynn Shackelford, who were fellow high-school All-Americans. On November 27, 1965, Alcindor made his first public performance in UCLA's annual varsity\u2013freshman exhibition game, attended by 12,051 fans in the inaugural game at the Bruins' new Pauley Pavilion. The 1965\u201366 varsity team was the two-time defending national champions and the top-ranked team in preseason polls. The freshman team won 75\u201360 behind Alcindor's 31 points and 21 rebounds. It was the first time a freshman team had beaten the UCLA varsity squad. The varsity had lost Gail Goodrich and Keith Erickson from the championship squad to graduation, and starting guard Freddie Goss was out sick. After the game, UPI wrote: \"UCLA's Bruins open defense of their national basketball title this week, but right now they're only the second best team on campus.\" The freshman team was 21\u20130 that year, dominating against junior college and other freshman teams, as Alcindor averaged 33 points and 21 rebounds per game.\nAlcindor made his varsity debut as a sophomore in 1966 and received national coverage. \"Sports Illustrated\" described him as \"The New Superstar\" after he scored 56 points in his first game, which is still an NCAA record for a player in their debut. He scored 61 later in the season. Averaging 29 points and 15.5 rebounds per game, he led UCLA to an undefeated 30\u20130 record and a national championship, their third title in four years and first of seven consecutive. After the season, the dunk was banned in college basketball in an attempt to curtail his dominance; critics dubbed it the \"Alcindor Rule\". It was not rescinded until the 1976\u201377 season. Alcindor was the main contributor to the team's three-year record of 88 wins and only two losses: one to the University of Houston in which Alcindor had an eye injury, and the other to crosstown rival USC who played a \"stall game\"; there was no shot clock in that era, allowing the Trojans to hold the ball as long as it wanted before attempting to score. They limited Alcindor to only four shots and 10 points.\nDuring his college career, Alcindor was a three-time national player of the year (1967\u20131969), a three-time unanimous first-team All-American (1967\u20131969), played on three NCAA basketball champion teams (1967, 1968, and 1969), was honored as the Most Outstanding Player in the NCAA Tournament three times, and became the first-ever Naismith College Player of the Year in 1969. He was the only player to win the Helms Foundation Player of the Year award three times. He had considered transferring to Michigan because of unfulfilled recruiting promises. UCLA player Willie Naulls introduced Alcindor and teammate Lucius Allen to athletic booster Sam Gilbert, who convinced the pair to remain at UCLA.\nDuring his junior year, Alcindor suffered a scratched left cornea on January 12, 1968, in a game against California (UC Berkeley) when he was struck by Tom Henderson in a rebound battle. He missed the next two games against Stanford and Portland. His cornea would again be scratched during his pro career, which subsequently caused him to wear goggles for eye protection. On January 20, the Bruins faced coach Guy Lewis's Houston Cougars in the first-ever nationally televised regular-season college basketball game, with 52,693 in attendance at the Astrodome. In a contest billed as the \"Game of the Century\", Cougar forward Elvin Hayes scored 39 points and had 15 rebounds, while Alcindor, suffering from his eye injury, was held to just 15 points as Houston won 71\u201369, ending UCLA's 47-game winning streak. Hayes and Alcindor had a rematch in the semifinals of the NCAA tournament, where UCLA, with a healthy Alcindor, defeated Houston 101\u201369 en route to the national championship. UCLA limited Hayes, who was averaging 37.7 points per game, to only ten points. Wooden credited his assistant Norman for devising the diamond-and-one defense that contained Hayes. \"Sports Illustrated\" ran a cover story on the game and used the headline: \"Lew's Revenge: The Rout of Houston.\" As a senior in 1968\u201369, Alcindor led the Bruins to their third consecutive national title.\nDuring the summer of 1968, Alcindor took the \"shahada\" twice and converted to Sunni Islam from Catholicism. He adopted the Arabic name Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, though he did not begin using it publicly until 1971. He boycotted the 1968 Summer Olympics, deciding not to try out for the U.S. Olympic basketball team, who went on to win the gold medal. Alcindor was protesting the unequal treatment of African Americans in the United States, stating that he was \"trying to point out to the world the futility of winning the gold medal for this country and then coming back to live under oppression\".\nAs the NBA did not allow college underclassmen to make an early NBA draft declaration, Alcindor completed his studies and earned a Bachelor of Arts with a major in history in 1969. In his free time, he practiced martial arts. He studied aikido in New York between his sophomore and junior year before learning Jeet Kune Do under Bruce Lee in Los Angeles.\nSchool records.\nAs of the 2019\u201320 UCLA Bruins men's basketball team season, he still holds or shares a number of individual records at UCLA:\nHe is represented in the top ten in a number of other school records, including season and career rebounds, second only to Bill Walton.\nProfessional career.\nMilwaukee Bucks (1969\u20131975).\nRookie of the Year (1969\u20131970).\nThe Globetrotters offered Alcindor $1 million to play for them, but he declined and was picked first overall in the 1969 NBA draft by the Milwaukee Bucks, who were in only their second season of existence. The Bucks had won a coin toss with the Phoenix Suns for the first pick. He was also chosen first overall in the 1969 American Basketball Association draft by the New York Nets. The Nets believed that they had the upper hand in securing Alcindor's services because he was from New York; however, when Alcindor told both the Bucks and the Nets that he would accept only one offer from each team, he rejected the Nets' bid as too low. Sam Gilbert negotiated the contract along with Los Angeles businessman Ralph Shapiro at no charge. After Alcindor chose the Milwaukee Bucks' offer of $1.4 million, the Nets offered a guaranteed $3.25 million. Alcindor declined the offer, saying: \"A bidding war degrades the people involved. It would make me feel like a flesh peddler, and I don't want to think like that.\"\nAlcindor's presence enabled the Bucks to claim second place in the NBA's Eastern Division with a 56\u201326 record (improved from 27\u201355 the previous year). On February 21, 1970, he scored 51 points in a 140\u2013127 win over the SuperSonics. Alcindor was an instant star, ranking second in the league in scoring (28.8 ppg) and third in rebounding (14.5 rpg), for which he was awarded the title of NBA Rookie of the Year. In the series-clinching game against the Philadelphia 76ers, he recorded 46 points and 25 rebounds. He was the second rookie to score at least 40 points and 25 rebounds in a playoff game, the first being Wilt Chamberlain. He also set an NBA rookie record with 10 or more games of 20+ points scored during the playoffs, tied by Jayson Tatum in 2018.\nFirst championship, MVP, and Finals MVP (1970\u20131971).\nThe next season, the Bucks acquired All-Star guard Oscar Robertson. Milwaukee went on to record the best record in the league with 66 victories in the 1970\u201371 season, including a then-record 20 straight wins. Alcindor was awarded his first of six NBA Most Valuable Player Awards, along with his first scoring title (31.7 ppg). He also led the league in total points, with 2,596. The Bucks won the NBA title, sweeping the Baltimore Bullets 4\u20130 in the 1971 NBA Finals. Alcindor posted 27 points, 12 rebounds and seven assists in Game 4, and he was named the Finals MVP after averaging 27 points per game on 60.5% shooting in the series.\nMVP recognition and trade request (1971\u20131975).\nDuring the offseason, Alcindor and Robertson joined Bucks head coach Larry Costello on a three-week basketball tour of Africa on behalf of the State Department. In a press conference at the State Department on June 3, 1971, he stated that going forward he wanted to be called by his Muslim name, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, its translation roughly \"noble one, servant of the Almighty [i.e., servant of God]\".\nAbdul-Jabbar remained a dominant force for the Bucks. The following year, he repeated as scoring champion (34.8 ppg and 2,822 total points) and became the first player to be named the NBA Most Valuable Player twice in his first three years. In 1974, Abdul-Jabbar led the Bucks to their fourth consecutive Midwest Division title, and he won his third MVP Award in four years. He was among the top five NBA players in scoring (27.0 ppg, third), rebounding (14.5 rpg, fourth), blocked shots (283, second), and field goal percentage (.539, second). Milwaukee advanced to the 1974 finals, losing to the Boston Celtics in seven games.\nRobertson, who became a free agent in the offseason, retired in September 1974 after he was unable to agree on a contract with the Bucks. On October 3, Abdul-Jabbar privately requested a trade to the New York Knicks, with his second choice being the Washington Bullets (now the Wizards) and his third, the Los Angeles Lakers. He had never spoken negatively of the city of Milwaukee or its fans, but he said that being in the Midwest did not fit his cultural needs. Two days later in a pre-season game before the 1974\u201375 season against the Celtics in Buffalo, New York, Abdul-Jabbar caught a fingernail in his left eye from Don Nelson and suffered a corneal abrasion; this angered him enough to punch the backboard stanchion, breaking two bones in his right hand. He missed the first 16 games of the season, during which the Bucks were 3\u201313, and returned in late November wearing protective goggles. On March 13, 1975, sportscaster Marv Albert reported that Abdul-Jabbar requested a trade to either New York or Los Angeles, preferably to the Knicks. The following day after a loss in Milwaukee to the Lakers, Abdul-Jabbar confirmed to reporters his desire to play in another city. He averaged 30.0 points during the season, but Milwaukee finished in last place in the division at 38\u201344.\nLos Angeles Lakers (1975\u20131989).\nFourth and fifth MVP awards (1975\u20131977).\nIn 1975, the Lakers acquired Abdul-Jabbar and reserve center Walt Wesley from the Bucks for center Elmore Smith, guard Brian Winters, blue-chip rookies Dave Meyers and Junior Bridgeman, and cash. In the 1975\u201376 season, his first with the Lakers, he had a dominating season, averaging 27.7 points per game and leading the league in rebounding (16.9), blocked shots (4.12), and total minutes played (3,379). His 1,111 defensive rebounds remains the NBA single-season record (defensive rebounds were not recorded prior to the 1973\u201374 season). He earned his fourth MVP award, becoming the first winner in Lakers' franchise history, but missed the post-season for the second straight year as the Lakers finished 40\u201342.\nAfter acquiring a cast of no-name free agents, the Lakers were projected to finished near the bottom of the Pacific Division in 1976\u201377. Abdul-Jabbar helped lead the team to the best record (53\u201329) in the NBA, and he won his fifth MVP award, tying Bill Russell's record. Abdul-Jabbar led the league in field goal percentage (.579), was third in scoring (26.2), and was second in rebounds (13.3) and blocked shots (3.18). In the playoffs, the Lakers beat the Golden State Warriors in the Western Conference semifinals, setting up a confrontation with the Portland Trail Blazers. The result was a memorable matchup, pitting Abdul-Jabbar against a young, injury-free Bill Walton. Although Abdul-Jabbar dominated the series statistically, Walton and the Trail Blazers (who were experiencing their first-ever run in the playoffs) swept the Lakers, behind Walton's skillful passing and timely plays.\nPlayoff disappointments (1977\u20131979).\nTwo minutes into the opening game of the 1977\u201378 season, Abdul-Jabbar broke his right hand punching Milwaukee's Kent Benson in retaliation to the rookie's elbow to his stomach. Benson suffered a black right eye and required two stitches. According to Benson, Abdul-Jabbar initiated the elbowing, but there were no witnesses and it was not captured on replays. Abdul-Jabbar, who broke the same bone in 1975 after he punched the backboard support, was out for almost two months and missed 20 games. He was fined a then-league record $5,000 but was not suspended. Benson missed one game but was not punished by the league. The Lakers were 8\u201313 when Abdul-Jabbar returned. He was not named to the 1978 NBA All-Star Game, the only time in his 20-year career he was not selected to an All-Star Game. Chicago's Artis Gilmore and Detroit's Bob Lanier were chosen as reserves for the West, with Walton starting\nat center. Amid criticism from the media over his performance, Abdul-Jabbar had 39 points, 20 rebounds, six assists and four blocks in a win over the Philadelphia 76ers the day the All-Star rosters were announced. He added 37 points and 30 rebounds in a victory over the New Jersey Nets (now Brooklyn) in the final game before the All-Star break.\nAbdul-Jabbar's play remained strong during the next two seasons, being named to the All-NBA Second Team twice, the All-Defense First Team once, and the All-Defense Second Team once. The Lakers, however, continued to be stymied in the playoffs, being eliminated by the Seattle SuperSonics in both 1978 (first round) and 1979 (semifinals).\nLast MVP award and championship success (1979\u20131985).\nThe Lakers selected Magic Johnson with the first overall pick of 1979 NBA draft. They had acquired the pick from the New Orleans Jazz (later Utah) in 1976, when league rules required that they compensate Los Angeles for their signing of free agent Gail Goodrich. The addition of Johnson paved the way for the Lakers' Showtime dynasty of the 1980s, appearing in the finals eight times and winning five NBA championships. While less dominant than in his younger years, Abdul-Jabbar reinforced his status as one of the greatest basketball players ever, adding an additional four All-NBA First Team selections and two All-Defense First Team honors. He won his record sixth MVP award in his first season with Johnson in 1979\u201380. In the 1980 finals, Abdul-Jabbar averaged 33.4 points in five games, spraining his ankle in Game 5, but returning to finish the contest with 40 points and leading the team to a win. He missed Game 6, when the Lakers clinched the title, and Johnson was named the Finals MVP after recording 42 points, 15 rebounds, and seven assists in the finale.\nAbdul-Jabbar continued to average 20 or more points per game in the following six seasons. The Lakers won another championship in 1981\u201382, but he suffered migraines in the finals, averaging just 18 points per game against Philadelphia. In 14 playoff games, he finished with a 20.4 point average, the lowest of his career at the time. The Lakers advanced to the 1983 NBA Finals in a rematch against the 76ers, who had acquired Moses Malone to shore up their center position after Abdul-Jabbar had outplayed their big-man duo of Darryl Dawkins and Caldwell Jones in the previous finals. The 76ers swept the Lakers 4\u20130, and Malone was named the Finals MVP after outrebounding Abdul-Jabbar 72\u201330 in the series. Malone had 27 offensive rebounds, which nearly equaled Abdul-Jabbar's total rebounds (30). \nBefore the 1983\u201384 season, Abdul-Jabbar signed a two-year, $3 million contract with the Lakers, with none of the amount deferred. He fell ill with viral hepatitis during training camp, rendering him weak for a month after returning. He scored 10 points at Golden State on December 22, 1983, dropping his season average to 17.7, almost 10 points below his career average. His scoring picked up after Christmas. On the road against Utah on April 5, 1984, Abdul-Jabbar broke Chamberlain's record for most career points in the NBA. He received a pass from Johnson and scored from on his patent skyhook over the shot-blocking specialist Mark Eaton. The game was played at the Thomas &amp; Mack Center, one of 11 home games for the Jazz in the Las Vegas Valley that season. The contest drew 18,389 fans, the Jazz's largest home crowd since moving from New Orleans before the 1979\u201380 season. For the first time since the 1980\u201381 season, Abdul-Jabbar led the Lakers in both scoring (21.5) and rebounding (7.3) during the season. Playing consistently better than he had over the past few years, he was named to the All-NBA First Team for the ninth time in his career, and he was voted to the All-NBA Defensive Second Team, the final all-defensive selection of his career. The team advanced to the 1984 NBA Finals but lost to Boston.\nThe 1984\u201385 season was expected to be Abdul-Jabbar's final season, as he had maintained since breaking Chamberlain's record that he would be retiring. Teams began honoring him in his final appearance in their home arena, but the Lakers instructed them not to use the word \"retirement\" in their ceremony. He had left open the possibility of changing his mind, but did not want to accept retirement gifts and play again, as Dave Cowens had done. On December 5, 1984, Abdul-Jabbar agreed to a one-year, $2 million contract extension with the Lakers, with none of the money deferred. He won his second Finals MVP in 1985, when he became the oldest to win the award at 38 years and 54 days old. He averaged 25.7 points, 9 rebounds, 5.2 assists and 1.5 blocks in the series against the Celtics. He was initially outplayed in Game 1, scoring 12 points with three rebounds against 30-year-old Boston center Robert Parish, who had 18 points and eight rebounds in a 148\u2013114 win over the Lakers, dubbed the \"Memorial Day Massacre\". At the team's film session the following day, Abdul-Jabbar\u2014who normally sat near the back\u2014was seated in the front row, and accepted all of head coach Pat Riley's criticism. Before Game 2, Abdul-Jabbar asked if his father could ride on the team bus to the game. Typically a hard-liner on rules, Riley agreed to make an exception. Abdul-Jabbar bounced back with 30 points, 17 rebounds, eight assists and three blocks in a 109\u2013102 victory. In the Lakers\u2019 four wins, he averaged 30.2 points, 11.3 rebounds, 6.5 assists and 2.0 blocks. The title ended the Celtics' streak of eight consecutive championships against the Lakers.\nFinal playing years and sixth ring (1985\u20131989).\nAbdul-Jabbar played in his 17th season in 1985\u201386, breaking the previous NBA record for seasons played of 16, held by Dolph Schayes, John Havlicek, Paul Silas, and Elvin Hayes. On November 12, 1985, he signed to a one-year extension of his contract at the same $2 million salary, while maintaining the option to retire after the 1985\u201386 season. Prior to the 1986\u201387 season, he gained , reaching close to , to compete against the growing number of 7-footers (2.1 m) in the league. The Lakers advanced to the NBA Finals in each of his final three seasons, starting with a championship over Boston in 1987. Afterwards, he signed a two-year contract with the Lakers.\nRiley guaranteed that the Lakers would be the first NBA team to win consecutive titles since the 1968\u201369 Celtics, and they defeated the Detroit Pistons for the championship in 1988. Abdul-Jabbar made only 3 of 14 shots in Game 6 of the finals, but he converted two free throws with 14 seconds remaining to extend the series to seven games. After winning the season finale, in which he had only four points and three rebounds, the 41-year-old center announced in the locker room that he would return for one more season before retiring. His points, rebounds, and minutes had dropped in his 19th season, and there were reports prior to the game that he was retiring after the contest. On his \"retirement tour\" he received standing ovations at games, both home and away, and gifts ranging from a yacht that said \"Captain Skyhook\" to framed jerseys from his career to a Persian rug. At the Forum against Seattle in his final regular season game, every Laker came onto the court wearing Abdul-Jabbar's trademark goggles. The Lakers lost to the Pistons in a four-game sweep in the 1989 finals.\nAt the time of his retirement, Abdul-Jabbar held the record for most career games played in the NBA. He was also the all-time record holder for most minutes played (57,446), most field goals made (15,837), most points (38,387), and most 1,000-point seasons (19).\nCoaching career.\nIn 1995, Abdul-Jabbar began expressing an interest in coaching and imparting knowledge from his playing days. His opportunities were limited despite the success he enjoyed during his playing days. During his playing years, Abdul-Jabbar had developed a reputation for being introverted and sullen. He was often unfriendly with the media. His sensitivity and shyness created a perception of him being aloof and surly. At the time, his mentality was that he either did not have the time or did not owe anything to anyone. Magic Johnson recalled as a kid being brushed off after asking him for an autograph. Abdul-Jabbar might freeze out a reporter if they touched him, and he once refused to stop reading the newspaper while giving an interview.\nAbdul-Jabbar had spent most of his career with a reserved attitude towards media attention (since he did not have to deal with it as a star at UCLA) before he softened up near the end of his career. Abdul-Jabbar said: \"I didn't understand that I also had affected people that way and that's what it was all about. I always saw it like they were trying to pry. I was way too suspicious and I paid a price for it.\" However, he believes it was his reputation as a \"difficult person\", alongside his attempts at trying to break into coaching while nearing the age of fifty, that affected his chances of becoming a head coach within the NBA or NCAA.\nAbdul-Jabbar worked as an assistant for the Los Angeles Clippers and the Seattle SuperSonics, helping mentor, among others, their young centers, Michael Olowokandi and Jerome James. Abdul-Jabbar was the head coach of the Oklahoma Storm of the United States Basketball League in 2002, leading the team to the league's championship that season, but he failed to land the head coaching position at Columbia University a year later. He then worked as a scout for the New York Knicks. He returned to the Lakers as a special assistant coach to Phil Jackson for six seasons (2005\u20132011). Early on, he mentored their young center, Andrew Bynum. Abdul-Jabbar also served as a volunteer coach at Alchesay High School on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation in Whiteriver, Arizona, in 1998. He moved on from coaching in 2013 after unsuccessfully lobbying for open head coach positions with UCLA and the Milwaukee Bucks.\nPlayer profile.\nOn offense, Abdul-Jabbar was a dominant low-post threat. In contrast to other low-post specialists like Wilt Chamberlain or Shaquille O'Neal, he was a slender giant, standing tall while weighing around , although he bulked to in 1986; in his early years, he used that frame for agility and speed while in later years he utilized a bigger frame for trying to guard under the basket. Abdul-Jabbar was famous for his ambidextrous skyhook shot. It contributed to his .559 career field goal percentage, which ranked eighth in NBA history at the time of his retirement, and reputation as a feared clutch shooter. He shot above 50% in every season but his last.\nAbdul-Jabbar maintained a dominant presence on defense. He was selected to the NBA All-Defensive Team eleven times. He frustrated opponents with his superior shot-blocking ability and denied an average of 2.6 shots a game. He was not an aggressive rebounder, relying more on his size as a 7-footer instead of positioning. After the pounding he endured early in his career, his rebounding average fell to between six or eight a game in his latter years. As a teammate, Abdul-Jabbar exuded natural leadership and was affectionately called \"Cap\", or \"Captain\", by his colleagues. He had an even temperament, which Riley said made him coachable.\nA strict fitness regime made Abdul-Jabbar one of the most durable players of all time. He began a year-around conditioning program at age 26. While in Los Angeles, Abdul-Jabbar started doing yoga in 1976 to improve his flexibility, and was notable for his physical fitness regimen. He said: \"There is no way I could have played as long as I did without yoga.\" Because of his metabolism, he had difficulty putting on weight. Prior to the 1979\u201380 season, he gained from 240 to after switching from free weights to Nautilus equipment. He also switched that offseason from tai chi to yoga. To reduce wear during his later years, Riley did not have him inbound the ball on made baskets, and had him wait at the opposite end of the court on free throws. In what he described as playing a \"smarter game\" to conserve energy, Abdul-Jabbar sometimes would be the last player to set up on offense by several seconds after staying behind on defense to see if the Lakers scored on a fast break. In 1981, he responded to criticism that he did not hustle: \"You have to understand I have to play 42 to 45 minutes a night, and it's like mowing a huge estate lawn. If you rush out and run around furiously, it's self-defeating. You'll be worn out just at the point when you're most needed.\" Abdul-Jabbar finished his career with then-NBA records of 20 seasons and 1,560 games played, later broken by former Celtics center Robert Parish.\nAbdul-Jabbar began wearing his trademark goggles after getting poked in the eye during preseason in 1974. He continued wearing them for years until abandoning them in the 1979 playoffs. He resumed wearing goggles in October 1980 after being accidentally poked in the right eye by Houston's Rudy Tomjanovich. After years of being jabbed in the eyes, Abdul-Jabbar developed corneal erosion syndrome, occasionally experiencing pain when his eyes dry up. He missed three games in December 1986 due to the condition.\nSkyhook.\nAbdul-Jabbar was well known for his trademark skyhook, a hook shot in which he raised the ball and released it at the highest point of his arm's arching motion. He could shoot the skyhook from up to . With his long arms and great height, he released the ball so high that it was difficult for a defender to block without committing a goaltending violation. His body being between the defender and the ball made it further difficult to block, as did extending his non-shooting arm to fend off opponents. He was stronger shooting the skyhook with his right hand than he was with his left, which he developed in his later years.\nAccording to Abdul-Jabbar, he learned the move in fifth grade after practicing with the ambidextrious Mikan Drill and soon learned to value it, as it was \"the only shot I could use that didn't get smashed back in my face\". He also watched Cliff Hagan shoot the hook with the St. Louis Hawks. To prevent his hook from being blocked from behind, he was advised by Wooden to do away with the typical sweeping motion of a hook shot, instead keeping the ball close to his body and shooting with a straighter motion. Abdul-Jabbar's hook shot improved in his junior year at UCLA, after the dunk was banned. In his final college years, he often released the ball several feet above the rim.\nLegacy.\nAbdul-Jabbar won a record six MVP awards. His 38,387 career points remained the NBA's career scoring record until February 7, 2023, when he was surpassed by LeBron James of the Lakers in Los Angeles. Abdul-Jabbar attended the game, and passed the game ball to James during the in-game ceremony after the record was broken. Abdul-Jabbar held the scoring mark for nearly 39 years, the longest span in league history. His skyhook is considered one of the most unstoppable shots ever. He won six NBA championships and two Finals MVP awards, was voted to 15 All-NBA and 11 All-Defensive Teams, and was selected to 19 All-Star teams, a record which stood until it was surpassed by James in 2024. Abdul-Jabbar was named to the NBA's 35th, 50th, and 75th anniversary teams. He averaged 24.6 points, 11.2 rebounds, 3.6 assists, and 2.6 blocks per game in his career, including three straight seasons where he averaged at least 30 points and 16 rebounds, and six times he averaged at least 27 points and 14.5 rebounds in the same season. He is ranked as the NBA's third leading all-time rebounder (17,440). He is the third all-time in registered blocks (3,189), which is impressive because this basketball statistic was not recorded until the fourth year of his career (1974). He is one of five players who have led the NBA in rebounding and blocks in the same season.\nAbdul-Jabbar combined dominance during his career peak with the longevity and sustained excellence of his later years. A pioneer in using yoga in the NBA, he also credited Bruce Lee with teaching him \"the discipline and spirituality of martial arts, which was greatly responsible for me being able to play competitively in the NBA for 20 years with very few injuries\". Abdul-Jabbar played in 95 percent of his team's regular-season games during his career, including 80 or more games in 11 of his 20 seasons. Five times he played in all 82 games. After claiming his sixth and final MVP in 1980, he continued to average above 20 points in the following six seasons, including 23 points per game in his 17th season at age 38. He earned first-team All-NBA selections that were 15 years apart and Finals MVPs 14 seasons from each other.\nAmong the most graceful basketball players ever, Abdul-Jabbar is regarded as one of the best centers ever and one of the greatest players in NBA history; he was voted the best center of all time by ESPN ahead of Wilt Chamberlain in 2007, and ranked No. 4 in \"Slam\"'s \"Top 100 Players Of All-Time\" in 2018, and No. 3 in ESPN's list of the top 74 NBA players of all time in 2020, the best center ever ahead of Bill Russell and Chamberlain. League experts and basketball legends frequently mentioned him when considering the greatest player of all time. Riley said in 1985: \"Why judge anymore? When a man has broken records, won championships, endured tremendous criticism and responsibility, why judge? Let's toast him as the greatest player ever.\" In 2023, as James was on the verge of breaking the NBA career scoring record, Abdul-Jabbar remained as Riley's choice as the greatest: \"We don't win championships without the greatest player in the history of the game, who had the greatest weapon in the history of the game. The skyhook was unstoppable. Last minute of the game, it's going to one guy\". As president of the Miami Heat, Riley had won two NBA titles with James on their roster. Isiah Thomas remarked: \"If they say the numbers don't lie, then Kareem is the greatest ever to play the game.\" In 2013, Julius Erving said: \"In terms of players all-time, Kareem is still the number one guy. He's the guy you gotta start your franchise with.\" In 2015, ESPN named Abdul-Jabbar the best center in NBA history, and ranked him No. 2 behind Michael Jordan among the greatest NBA players ever. While Jordan's shots were enthralling and considered unfathomable, Abdul-Jabbar's skyhook appeared automatic, and he himself called the shot \"unsexy\". In 2016, Abdul-Jabbar's only recognized rookie card became the most expensive basketball card ever sold (the record has since been surpassed) when it went for $501,900 at auction. In 2022, he was ranked No. 3 (first in his position) in ESPN's NBA 75th Anniversary Team list, and No. 3 (behind Jordan and James) in a similar list by \"The Athletic\".\nAbdul-Jabbar was also the first ever NBA player to sign a sneaker endorsement deal with Adidas in 1978. He went on to become the first ever player overall with a signature shoe shortly after. In 2014, the UCLA Bruins wore \"The Blueprint\" Crazy 8 against Colorado on Feb. 13, and the shoes were sold online and at an Adidas store in New Orleans\u2014during NBA All-Star weekend\u2014starting on Feb. 14.\nAwards and honors.\n Presidential Medal of Freedom (2016)\nHalls of Fame\nHigh School\nNCAA\nNBA\nAs head coach:\nAs assistant coach:\nMedia\nFilm and television.\nPlaying in Los Angeles facilitated Abdul-Jabbar's trying his hand at acting. He made his film debut in Bruce Lee's 1972 film \"Game of Death\".\nIn 1980, Abdul-Jabbar played co-pilot Roger Murdock in \"Airplane!\", spoofing the appearance of football star Elroy \"Crazylegs\" Hirsch as an airplane pilot in the 1957 drama that served as the main source of inspiration for \"Airplane!\", \"Zero Hour!.\" In \"Airplane!\", there is a scene in which a little boy invited to the cockpit looks at Abdul-Jabbar and remarks that he is in fact Abdul-Jabbar. Staying in character, Abdul-Jabbar states that he is merely Roger Murdock, an airline co-pilot; the boy nevertheless continues to insist that he believes Abdul-Jabbar is \"the greatest\", but that according to his father he does not \"work hard enough on defense\" and that he does not \"really try, except during the playoffs\". This causes Abdul-Jabbar's character to snap and break character: \"The hell I don't!\" He then grabs the boy and snarls that he has \"been hearing that crap ever since I was at UCLA\" and is on the court \"busting my buns every night.\" He instructs the boy: \"Tell your old man to drag [Bill] Walton and [Bob] Lanier up and down the court for 48 minutes.\" Later in the film, Murdock loses consciousness and collapses at the controls wearing Abdul-Jabbar's goggles and yellow Lakers shorts. In 2014, Abdul-Jabbar and \"Airplane!\" co-star Robert Hays (character Ted Striker) reprised their \"Airplane!\" roles in a parody commercial promoting Wisconsin tourism.\nAbdul-Jabbar has had numerous other television and film appearances, often playing himself. He has had roles in movies such as \"Fletch\", \"Troop Beverly Hills\" and \"Forget Paris\", and television series such as \"Full House\", \"Living Single\", \"Amen\", \"Everybody Loves Raymond\", \"Martin\", \"Diff'rent Strokes\" (his height humorously contrasted with that of diminutive child star Gary Coleman), \"The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air\", \"Scrubs\", \"21 Jump Street\", \"Emergency!\", \"Man from Atlantis\", and \"New Girl\". Abdul-Jabbar played a genie in a lamp in a 1984 episode of \"Tales from the Darkside\". He also played himself on the February 10, 1994, episode of the sketch comedy television series \"In Living Color\".\nAbdul-Jabbar appeared in the television version of Stephen King's \"The Stand\", played the Archangel of Basketball in \"Slam Dunk Ernest\", and had a brief non-speaking cameo appearance in \"BASEketball\". Abdul-Jabbar was also the co-executive producer of the 1994 TV film \"The Vernon Johns Story\". He has also made appearances on \"The Colbert Report\" in a 2006 skit called \"HipHopKetball II: The ReJazzebration Remix '06\", and in 2008 as a stage manager who is sent out on a mission to find Nazi gold. Abdul-Jabbar also voiced himself in a 2011 episode of \"The Simpsons\" titled \"Love Is a Many Strangled Thing\". He had a recurring role as himself on the NBC series \"Guys with Kids\", which aired from 2012 to 2013. On Al Jazeera English he expressed his desire to be remembered not just as a player, but also as somebody who used their mind and made other contributions.\nAbdul-Jabbar appeared in the music video for \"Good Goodbye\", a 2017 song by rock band Linkin Park featuring rappers Pusha T and Stormzy. In the video, Abdul-Jabbar plays the role of a warlord or emperor of a dunk contest where Linkin Park lead singer Chester Bennington has to dunk on several people in order to save his own life. In an interview about the video, Bennington said that he believes Abdul-Jabbar is the \"greatest [basketball] player of all-time\".\nIn February 2019, he appeared in season 12 episode 16 of \"The Big Bang Theory\", \"The D&amp;D Vortex\". In 2021, Abdul-Jabbar made a guest appearance as himself in a season 2 episode of \"Dave\". The episode he appeared in was also named after him. Abdul-Jabbar makes a cameo appearance as himself in the 2022 Netflix film \"\". In 2023, Abdul-Jabbar appeared as himself in season 7, episode 3 of the Showtime series \"Billions\".\nWriting.\nIn September 2018, Abdul-Jabbar was announced as one of the writers for the July 2019 revival of \"Veronica Mars\".\nDocumentaries.\nOn February 10, 2011, Abdul-Jabbar debuted his film \"On the Shoulders of Giants\", documenting the tumultuous journey of the famed yet often-overlooked New York Renaissance professional basketball team, at Science Park High School in Newark, New Jersey. The event was simulcast live throughout the school, city, and state. In 2015, he appeared in \"Kareem: Minority of One\", an HBO documentary on his life. In 2020, Abdul-Jabbar was the executive producer and narrator of the History channel special \"Black Patriots: Heroes of the Revolution\". He was nominated for an Emmy Award for his narration.\nReality television.\nAbdul-Jabbar participated in the 2013 ABC reality series \"Splash\", a celebrity diving competition. In April 2018, Abdul-Jabbar competed in the all-athlete season of season 26 of \"Dancing with the Stars\" and partnered with professional dancer Lindsay Arnold.\nWriting and activism.\nIn 1967, Abdul-Jabbar was the only college athlete to attend the Cleveland Summit, a meeting of prominent black athletes who convened in support of Muhammad Ali's refusal to fight in the Vietnam War.\nAbdul-Jabbar became a best-selling author and cultural critic. He published several books, mostly on African-American history. His first book, his autobiography \"Giant Steps\", was written in 1983 with co-author Peter Knobler. The book's title is an homage to jazz great John Coltrane, referring to his album \"Giant Steps\". Others include \"On the Shoulders of Giants: My Journey Through the Harlem Renaissance\", co-written with Raymond Obstfeld, and \"Brothers in Arms: The Epic Story of the 761st Tank Battalion, World War II's Forgotten Heroes\", co-written with Anthony Walton, which is a history of the first black armored unit to fight in World War II.\nIn 2015, Abdul-Jabbar made his adult fiction writing debut with the Victorian mystery novel \"Mycroft Holmes\", based around the titular character from the Sherlock Holmes stories. Two sequels followed: \"Mycroft and Sherlock\" (2018) and \"\" (2019). All three titles were co-written with Anna Waterhouse.\nA regular contributor to discussions about issues of race and religion, among other topics, in national magazines and on television, Abdul-Jabbar has written a regular column for \"Time\". He appeared on \"Meet the Press\" on January 25, 2015, to talk about a column saying that Islam should not be blamed for the actions of violent extremists, just as Christianity has not been blamed for the actions of violent extremists who profess Christianity. When asked about being Muslim, he said: \"I don't have any misgiving about my faith. I'm very concerned about the people who claim to be Muslims that are murdering people and creating all this mayhem in the world. That is not what Islam is about, and that should not be what people think of when they think about Muslims. But it's up to all of us to do something about all of it.\"\nIn November 2014, Abdul-Jabbar published an essay in \"Jacobin\" calling for just compensation for college athletes, writing that \"in the name of fairness, we must bring an end to the indentured servitude of college athletes and start paying them what they are worth.\" Commenting on Donald Trump's 2017 travel ban, he condemned it, saying: \"The absence of reason and compassion is the very definition of pure evil because it is a rejection of our sacred values, distilled from millennia of struggle.\" \nIn 2017, Abdul-Jabber spoke at an event marking Ramadan organized by the Israeli consul Sam Grundwerg at the Israeli consulate in Los Angeles, stressing the importance of Muslim-Jewish relations and cross-cultural exchange.\nIn June 2021, he published an essay in \"Jacobin\" on the negative impact on public health of those refusing to receive the COVID-19 vaccine, criticizing Kyrie Irving, among others. Abdul-Jabbar began publishing an online newsletter in 2021.\nGovernment appointments.\nCultural ambassador.\nIn January 2012, United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton announced that Abdul-Jabbar had accepted a position as a cultural ambassador for the United States. During the announcement press conference, Abdul-Jabbar commented on the historical legacy of African-Americans as representatives of U.S. culture: \"I remember when Louis Armstrong first did it back for President Kennedy, one of my heroes. So it's nice to be following in his footsteps.\" As part of this role, Abdul-Jabbar traveled to Brazil to promote education for local youths.\nPresident's Council on Fitness, Sports, and Nutrition.\nFormer President Barack Obama announced in his last days of office that he has appointed Abdul-Jabbar along with Gabrielle Douglas and Carli Lloyd to the President's Council on Fitness, Sports, and Nutrition.\nCitizens Coinage Advisory Committee.\nIn January 2017, Abdul-Jabbar was appointed to the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee by United States Secretary of the Treasury Steven Mnuchin. According to the United States Mint, Abdul-Jabbar is a keen coin collector whose interest in the life of Alexander Hamilton had led him into the hobby. He resigned in 2018 due to what the Mint described as \"increasing personal obligations\".\nPersonal life.\nAbdul-Jabbar met Habiba Abdul-Jabbar (born Janice Brown) at a Lakers game during his senior year at UCLA. They married in 1971, and together had three children: daughters Habiba and Sultana and son Kareem Jr., who played basketball at Western Kentucky after attending Valparaiso. Abdul-Jabbar and Janice divorced in 1978. He has another son, Amir, with Cheryl Pistono. Another son, Adam, made an appearance on the TV sitcom \"Full House\" with him.\nIn 1983, Abdul-Jabbar's house burned down. Many of his belongings, including his beloved jazz LP collection of about 3,000 albums, were destroyed. Many Lakers fans sent and brought him albums, which he found uplifting.\nIn 2016, Abdul-Jabbar performed a tribute to friend Muhammad Ali along with Chance the Rapper.\nReligion and name.\nAlcindor grew up in the Catholic Church, but abandoned the faith when he left his home in New York for UCLA. At age 24 in 1971, he converted to Islam and legally became Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, which means \"noble one, servant of the Almighty\". He was named by Hamaas Abdul Khaalis of the Hanafi Movement which split from the Nation of Islam. Abdul-Jabbar purchased and donated 7700 16th Street NW, a house in Washington, D.C., for Khaalis to use as the Hanafi Madh-Hab Center; a few years later, the location would become the place of the 1973 Hanafi Muslim massacre. Eventually, Kareem \"found that [he] disagreed with some of Hamaas' teachings about the Quran, and [they] parted ways.\" In 1973, Abdul-Jabbar embarked on a pilgrimage to Libya and Saudi Arabia with the goal of learning enough Arabic for self-study of the Quran, and he \"emerged from this pilgrimage with [his] beliefs clarified and [his] faith renewed\". Abdul-Jabbar was also heavily influenced by Malcolm X, a leader of the Nation of Islam. Abdul-Jabbar was invited to join the group, but he declined.\nAbdul-Jabbar has spoken about the thinking that was behind his name change when he converted to Islam. He stated that he was \"latching on to something that was part of my heritage, because many of the slaves who were brought here were Muslims. My family was brought to America by a French planter named Alcindor, who came here from Trinidad in the 18th century. My people were Yoruba, and their culture survived slavery ... My father found out about that when I was a kid, and it gave me all I needed to know that, hey, I was somebody, even if nobody else knew about it. When I was a kid, no one would believe anything positive that you could say about black people. And that's a terrible burden on black people, because they don't have an accurate idea of their history, which has been either suppressed or distorted.\" His name change further eroded his public image in the United States, mostly in white areas.\nIn 1998, Abdul-Jabbar reached a settlement after he sued Miami Dolphins running back Karim Abdul-Jabbar (now Abdul-Karim al-Jabbar, born Sharmon Shah) because he felt Karim was profiting off the name he made famous by having the Abdul-Jabbar moniker and number 33 on his Dolphins jersey. As a result, the younger Abdul-Jabbar had to change his jersey nameplate to \"Abdul\" while playing for the Dolphins. The football player had also been an athlete at UCLA.\nHealth problems.\nAbdul-Jabbar suffers from migraines, and his use of cannabis to reduce the symptoms has had legal ramifications. In November 2009, Abdul-Jabbar announced that he was suffering from a form of leukemia, Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myeloid leukemia, a cancer of the blood and bone marrow. The disease was diagnosed in December 2008, but Abdul-Jabbar said his condition could be managed by taking oral medication daily, seeing his specialist every other month, and having his blood analyzed regularly. He expressed in a 2009 press conference that he did not believe the illness would stop him from leading a normal life. Abdul-Jabbar is a spokesman for Novartis, the company that produces Gleevec, his cancer medication.\nIn February 2011, Abdul-Jabbar announced via Twitter that his leukemia was gone and he was \"100% cancer free\". A few days later, he clarified his misstatement: \"You're never really cancer-free and I should have known that. My cancer right now is at an absolute minimum.\" In April 2015, Abdul-Jabbar was admitted to hospital when he was diagnosed with cardiovascular disease. Later that week, on his 68th birthday, he underwent quadruple coronary bypass surgery at the UCLA Medical Center.\nIn 2020 Abdul-Jabbar revealed that he had been diagnosed with prostate cancer eleven years earlier.\nIn February 2023, he spoke out about his atrial fibrillation diagnosis. He partnered with Bristol Myers Squibb and Pfizer's \"No Time to Wait\" to raise awareness of the symptoms of the irregular and rapid heart rhythm condition which increase the risk of stroke. In December 2023, he was hospitalized after he fell and broke his hip while attending a concert.\nNon-athletic honors.\nIn 2011, Abdul-Jabbar was awarded the Double Helix Medal for his work in raising awareness for cancer research. Also in 2011, Abdul-Jabbar received an honorary degree from New York Institute of Technology. In 2016, Abdul-Jabbar was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by outgoing U.S. President Barack Obama. In 2020, Abdul-Jabbar was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Narrator for his work on the documentary special \"Black Patriots: Heroes of The Revolution\". After receiving an honorary degree from the same, Abdul-Jabbar was named Harvard College Class Day speaker in 2025.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16900", "revid": "34573757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16900", "title": "Kung fu (term)", "text": "Chinese martial arts\nKung fu ( or kungfu ; ) refers to the Chinese martial arts also called quanfa. In China, it refers to any study, learning, or practice that requires patience, energy, and time to complete. In its original meaning, kung fu can refer to any discipline or skill achieved through hard work and practice, not necessarily martial arts, such as the discipline of tea making called the gongfu tea ceremony. The literal equivalent of \"Chinese martial art\" in Mandarin would be \"\".\nThere are many forms of kung fu, such as Shaolin kung fu, Wing Chun, and tai chi, and they are practiced all over the world. Each form of kung fu has its own principles and techniques, but is best known for its trickery and quickness. It is only in the late twentieth century that this term was used in relation to Chinese martial arts by the Chinese community. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" defines the term \"kung-fu\" as \"a primarily unarmed Chinese martial art resembling karate\" and attributes the first use of \"kung fu\" in print to \"Punch\" magazine in 1966. This illustrates how the meaning of this term has been changed in English. The origin of this change can be attributed to the misunderstanding or mistranslation of the term through movie subtitles or dubbing.\nHistory.\nThough widely known as a Chinese martial art, several historical interpretations suggest that the origins of Kung Fu may have deep connections with ancient Indian martial traditions, particularly Kalaripayattu, one of the world\u2019s oldest fighting systems.\nThe central figure in this theory is Bodhidharma, an Indian monk believed to have traveled from the Pallava dynasty in South India to China around the 5th or 6th century CE. Historical Chinese accounts, such as the Luoyang Jialan Ji, refer to a monk named Damo (the Chinese name for Bodhidharma) who arrived at the Shaolin Monastery. While his primary role was to spread Chan (Zen) Buddhism, he is also said to have introduced physical training exercises, now believed to be precursors of Shaolin martial arts.\nBodhidharma\u2019s training methods reportedly included dynamic movements, breath control, and meditative postures designed to strengthen the body and mind of monks who struggled with long hours of meditation. These methods closely resemble Indian yogic and martial practices, especially the blend of combat and spiritual discipline found in Kalaripayattu. Some versions of the legend claim that Bodhidharma taught the monks the Eighteen Hands of Lohan, which evolved into the basis of Shaolin Kung Fu.\nThe conceptual foundations of Kung Fu, such as internal energy (Qi), spiritual harmony, and discipline through movement, have similarities to Indian yoga, Ayurveda, and martial scripture like the Dhanurveda. However, the concept of internal energy, or \"qi\" (\u6c23), is rooted in indigenous Chinese thought and appears prominently in early traditions such as Taoism and Confucianism, developing well before the introduction of Buddhism into China. These schools treated qi as both a vital force within the human body and a fundamental substance underlying the natural world. Daoist texts emphasized cultivating and harmonizing qi through breathing exercises, meditation, and internal alchemy, while Confucian thinkers described it as a moral and spiritual energy nourished by righteous living. Therefore, while parallels exist between Chinese and Indian traditions in their emphasis on breath, vitality, and disciplined practice, the Chinese notion of \"qi\" (\u6c23) developed independently within its own philosophical and cultural framework. \nAlthough modern scholars remain divided over the historical accuracy of Bodhidharma's role, a growing number of historians, cultural researchers, and martial arts schools worldwide now acknowledge the possibility of Indian influence in the early development of Kung Fu. This theory is especially supported in South Indian oral traditions, martial arts communities, and Buddhist historical narratives linking India and China, and has been explored by scholars such as Meir Shahar, Thomas A. Green, and Dr. Trilochan Beura.\nWhile the evolution of Kung Fu in China is undeniably vast and independent in its own right, its early roots may reflect a profound cross-cultural exchange, with India potentially planting the seed that later grew into the towering legacy of Chinese martial arts.\nAlthough Bodhidharma is traditionally credited in popular culture with introducing martial arts to the Shaolin Monastery, there is no historical evidence for such a connection. The earliest biography of Bodhidharma, compiled by Daoxuan in the \"Xu Gaoseng Zhuan\" (645 CE), portrays him solely as a meditation master and does not mention physical training or martial practices. The association between Bodhidharma and martial arts appears only in the 17th century with the circulation of the \"Yijin Jing\" (\"Muscle/Tendon Changing Classic\"), a text later demonstrated by historian Tang Hao to be a Ming-dynasty fabrication. Modern scholars such as John McRae and Yanagida Seizan emphasize that Bodhidharma\u2019s biography is primarily legendary, constructed to legitimize Chan lineages rather than to describe a historical figure. Research by Stanley Henning and Meir Shahar further confirms that Shaolin martial practices developed independently during the Ming dynasty, and that the claim of Bodhidharma as their founder is a retrospective myth with no basis in early Buddhist or Shaolin sources.\nOther historians such as Xu Zhen and Matsuda Ryuchi also dispute the authorship of the \"Yijin Jing.\" According to Matsuda, historical texts written about the Shaolin martial arts before the 19th century, such as Cheng Zongyou's Exposition of the Original Shaolin Staff Method or Zhang Kongzhao's Boxing Classic: Essential Boxing Methods, do not mention Bodhidharma or credit him with the creation of the Shaolin martial arts. The popular myth that Bodhidharma introduced martial arts to the Shaolin temple instead originates from the 1904\u20131907 serialization of the novel \"The Travels of Lao Ts'an\" in \"Illustrated Fiction Magazine.\"\nIn popular culture.\nReferences to the concepts and use of Chinese martial arts can be found in popular culture. Historically, the influence of Chinese martial arts can be found in books and in the performance arts specific to Asia. Recently, those influences have extended to the movies and television that targets a much wider audience. As a result, Chinese martial arts have spread beyond their national roots and have a global appeal.\nMartial arts play a prominent role in the literature genre known as \"wuxia\". This type of fiction is based on Chinese concepts of chivalry, a separate martial arts society (\u6b66\u6797; \"Wulin\") and a central theme involving martial arts. \"Wuxia\" stories can be traced as far back as the 2nd and 3rd centuries BCE, becoming popular by the Tang dynasty and evolving into novel form by the Ming dynasty. This genre is still extremely popular in much of Asia and provides a major influence for the public perception of the martial arts.\nMartial arts influences can also be found in dance, theater and especially Chinese opera, of which Beijing opera is one of the best-known examples. This popular form of drama dates back to the Tang dynasty and continues to be an example of Chinese culture. Some martial arts movements can be found in Chinese opera and some martial artists can be found as performers in Chinese operas.\nIn modern times, Chinese martial arts have spawned the genre of cinema known as the kung fu film. The films of Bruce Lee were instrumental in the initial burst of Chinese martial arts' popularity in the West in the 1970s, following a famous demonstration of \"Chinese Boxing\" to the US karate community the Long Beach International Karate Championships in 1964. Martial artists and actors such as Jackie Chan, Jet Li and Donnie Yen have continued the appeal of movies of this genre. Jackie Chan successfully brought in a sense of humor in his fighting style into his movies. Martial arts films from China are often referred to as \"kung fu movies\" (\u529f\u592b\u7247), or \"wire-fu\" if extensive wire work is performed for special effects and are still best known as part of the tradition of kung fu theater. (see also: \"wuxia\", Hong Kong action cinema).\nInfluence on early hip-hop.\nIn the 1970s, Bruce Lee was beginning to gain popularity in Hollywood for his martial arts movies. The fact that he was a non-white male who portrayed self-reliance and righteous self-discipline resonated with black audiences and made him an important figure in this community. With the release of \"Enter the Dragon\" in 1973, kung fu movies became a hit in America across all backgrounds; however, black audiences maintained the films' popularity well after the general public lost interest. Urban youth from every borough in New York City were attending movies in Manhattan's Times Square every night to watch the latest films.\nAmong these individuals were those coming from the Bronx where, during this time, hip hop was beginning to take form. One of the pioneers responsible for the development of the foundational aspects of hip-hop was DJ Kool Herc, who began creating this new form of music by taking rhythmic breakdowns of songs and looping them. From the new music came a new form of dance known as b-boying or breakdancing, a style of street dance consisting of improvised acrobatic moves. The pioneers of this dance credit kung fu as one of its influences.\nMoves such as the crouching low leg sweep and \"up rocking\" (standing combat moves) are influenced by choreographed kung fu fights. The dancers' ability to improvise these moves led way to battles, which were dance competitions between two dancers or crews judged on their creativity, skills and musicality. In a documentary, Crazy Legs, a member of breakdancing group Rock Steady Crew, described the breakdancing battle being like an old kung fu movie, \"where the one kung fu master says something along the lines of 'hun your kung fu is good, but mine is better,' then a fight erupts.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "16901", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16901", "title": "Kareem AbdulJabbar", "text": ""}
{"id": "16903", "revid": "50143660", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16903", "title": "Kuomintang", "text": "Taiwanese political party\nThe Kuomintang (KMT) is a major political party in the Republic of China (Taiwan). It was the sole ruling party of the country during its rule from 1927 to 1949 in Mainland China until its relocation to Taiwan, and in Taiwan ruled under martial law until 1987. The KMT is a centre-right to right-wing party and the largest in the Pan-Blue Coalition, one of the two main political groups in Taiwan. Its primary rival is the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), the largest party in the Pan-Green Coalition. As of 2025, the KMT is the largest single party in the Legislative Yuan and is chaired by Cheng Li-wun.\nThe party was founded by Sun Yat-sen in 1894 in Honolulu, Hawaii, as the Revive China Society. He reformed the party in 1919 in the Shanghai French Concession under its current name. From 1926 to 1928, the KMT under Chiang Kai-shek successfully unified China in the Northern Expedition against regional warlords, leading to the fall of the Beiyang government. After initially allying with the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) in the First United Front, the party under Chiang purged communist members. It was the sole ruling party of China from 1928 to 1949 but gradually lost control while fighting the Empire of Japan in the Second Sino-Japanese War and the CCP in the Chinese Civil War. In December 1949, the Kuomintang retreated to Taiwan following its defeat by the communists.\nFrom 1949 to 1987, the KMT ruled Taiwan as an authoritarian one-party state after the February 28 incident. During this period (known as the White Terror), martial law was in effect and civil liberties were curtailed as part of its anti-communism efforts. The party oversaw Taiwan's rapid economic development but experienced diplomatic setbacks, including the loss of the country's seat in the United Nations and loss of international diplomatic recognition to the CCP-led People's Republic of China (PRC) in the 1970s. In the late 1980s, party leader Chiang Ching-kuo lifted martial law and the ban on opposition parties. His successor, Lee Teng-hui, continued democratic reforms and was re-elected in 1996 through the first direct presidential election. The 2000 presidential election ended 72 years of KMT presidencies. The party later reclaimed power with the landslide victory of Ma Ying-jeou in the 2008 presidential election, then lost the presidency and its legislative majority in the 2016 election, but regained a legislative plurality in the 2024 election.\nThe party's guiding ideology is the Three Principles of the People, advocated by Sun Yat-sen and organized on a basis of democratic centralism. As the KMT supports the ROC as the only representative of China, it opposes both Chinese unification under the PRC and formal Taiwan independence. As the KMT opposes non-peaceful means to resolve the cross-strait disputes while still strongly adhering to the ROC constitution, the party favors a closer relationship with the PRC and accepts the 1992 Consensus, which defines both sides of the Taiwan Strait as \"one China\" but maintains its ambiguity to different interpretations. It seeks to maintain Taiwan's status quo rather than formal independence or unification.\nHistory.\nFounding and Sun Yat-sen era.\nThe KMT traces its ideological and organizational roots to the work of the Chinese revolutionary, Sun Yat-sen, a proponent of Chinese nationalism and democracy who founded the Revive China Society at the capital of the Republic of Hawaii, Honolulu, on 24 November 1894. On 20 August 1905, Sun joined forces with other anti-monarchist societies in Tokyo, Empire of Japan, to form the Tongmenghui, a group committed to the overthrow of the Qing dynasty and to establish a republic in China.\nThe group supported the Xinhai Revolution of 1911 and the founding of the Republic of China on 1 January 1912. Although Sun and the Tongmenghui are often depicted as the principal organizers of the Xinhai Revolution, this view is disputed by scholars who argue that the Revolution broke out in a leaderless and decentralized way and that Sun was only later elected provisional president of the new Chinese republic. However, Sun did not have military power and ceded the provisional presidency of the republic to Yuan Shikai, who arranged for the abdication of Puyi, the last Emperor, on 12 February.\nOn 25 August 1912, the Nationalist Party was established at the Huguang Guild Hall in Beijing, where the Tongmenghui and five smaller pro-revolution parties merged to contest the first national elections. Sun was chosen as the party chairman with Huang Xing as his deputy.\nThe most influential member of the party was the third ranking Song Jiaoren, who was able to mobilize mass support from gentry and merchants for the Nationalists to advocate a constitutional parliamentary democracy. The party opposed constitutional monarchists and sought to check the power of Yuan. The Nationalists won an overwhelming majority in the first National Assembly election in December 1912.\nHowever, Yuan Shikai soon began to ignore the parliament in making presidential decisions. Song Jiaoren was assassinated in Shanghai in 1913. Members of the Nationalists, led by Sun Yat-sen, suspected that Yuan was behind the plot and thus staged the Second Revolution in July 1913, a poorly planned and ill-supported armed rising to overthrow Yuan, and failed. Yuan, claiming subversiveness and betrayal, expelled adherents of the KMT from the parliament. Yuan dissolved the Nationalists, whose members had largely fled into exile in Japan, in November and dismissed the parliament early in 1914.\nYuan Shikai proclaimed himself emperor in December 1915. While exiled in Japan in 1914, Sun established the Chinese Revolutionary Party on 8 July 1914, but many of his old revolutionary comrades, including Huang Xing, Wang Jingwei, Hu Hanmin and Chen Jiongming, refused to join him or support his efforts in inciting armed uprising against Yuan. To join the Revolutionary Party, members had to take an oath of personal loyalty to Sun, which many old revolutionaries regarded as undemocratic and contrary to the spirit of the revolution. As a result, he became largely sidelined within the Republican movement during this period.\nSun returned to China in 1917 to establish a military junta at Canton to oppose the Beiyang government but was soon forced out of office and exiled to Shanghai. There, with renewed support, he resurrected the KMT on 10 October 1919, under the name Kuomintang of China () and established its headquarters in Canton in 1920.\nIn 1923, the KMT and its Canton government accepted aid from the Soviet Union after being denied recognition by the western powers. Soviet advisers\u2014the most prominent of whom was Mikhail Borodin, an agent of the Comintern\u2014arrived in China in 1923 to aid in the reorganization and consolidation of the KMT along the lines of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks), establishing a Leninist party structure that lasted into the 1990s. The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) was under Comintern instructions to cooperate with the KMT, and its members were encouraged to join while maintaining their separate party identities, forming the First United Front between the two parties. Mao Zedong and early members of the CCP also joined the KMT in 1923.\nSoviet advisers also helped the KMT to set up a political institute to train propagandists in mass mobilization techniques, and in 1923 Chiang Kai-shek, one of Sun's lieutenants from the Tongmenghui days, was sent to Moscow for several months' military and political study. At the first party congress in 1924 in Guangzhou, Guangdong, which included non-KMT delegates such as members of the CCP, they adopted Sun's political theory, which included the Three Principles of the People: nationalism, democracy and people's livelihood.\nUnder Chiang Kai-shek in mainland China.\nWhen Sun Yat-sen died in 1925, the political leadership of the KMT fell to Wang Jingwei (\"Reorganization Group\") and Hu Hanmin (\"Western Hills Group\"), respectively the left-wing and right-wing leaders of the party. However, the real power was in the hands of Chiang Kai-shek, who was in near complete control of the military as the superintendent of the Whampoa Military Academy. With their military superiority, the KMT confirmed their rule on Canton, the provincial capital of Guangdong. The Guangxi warlords pledged loyalty to the KMT. The KMT now became a rival government in opposition to the warlord Beiyang government based in Beijing.\nChiang assumed leadership of the KMT on 6 July 1926. Unlike Sun Yat-sen, whom he admired greatly and who forged all his political, economic, and revolutionary ideas primarily from what he had learned in Hawaii and indirectly through Hong Kong and Japan under the Meiji Restoration, Chiang knew relatively little about the West. He also studied in Japan, but he was firmly rooted in his ancient Han Chinese identity and was steeped in Chinese culture. As his life progressed, he became increasingly attached to ancient Chinese culture and traditions. His few trips to the West confirmed his pro-ancient Chinese outlook and he studied the ancient Chinese classics and ancient Chinese history assiduously. In 1923, after the formation of the First United Front, Sun Yat-sen sent Chiang to spend three months in Moscow studying the political and military system of the Soviet Union. Although Chiang did not follow the Soviet Communist doctrine, he, like the Communist Party, sought to destroy warlordism and foreign imperialism in China, and upon his return established the Whampoa Military Academy near Guangzhou, following the Soviet Model.\nChiang was also particularly committed to Sun's idea of \"political tutelage\". Sun believed that the only hope for a unified and better China lay in a military conquest, followed by a period of political tutelage that would culminate in the transition to democracy. Using this ideology, Chiang built himself into the dictator of the Republic of China, both in the Chinese mainland and after the national government relocated to Taiwan.\nFollowing the death of Sun Yat-sen, Chiang Kai-shek emerged as the KMT leader and launched the Northern Expedition to defeat the northern warlords and unite China under the party. With its power confirmed in the southeast, the Nationalist Government appointed Chiang Kai-shek commander-in-chief of the National Revolutionary Army (NRA), and the Northern Expedition to suppress the warlords began. Chiang had to defeat three separate warlords and two independent armies. Chiang, with Soviet supplies, conquered the southern half of China in nine months.\nA split erupted between the Chinese Communist Party and the KMT, which threatened the Northern Expedition. Wang Jing Wei, who led the KMT leftist allies, took the city of Wuhan in January 1927. With the support of the Soviet agent Mikhail Borodin, Wang declared the National Government as having moved to Wuhan. Having taken Nanjing in March, Chiang halted his campaign and prepared a violent break with Wang and his communist allies. Chiang's expulsion of the CCP and their Soviet advisers, marked by the Shanghai massacre on 12 April, led to the beginning of the Chinese Civil War. Wang finally surrendered his power to Chiang. Once this split had been healed, Chiang resumed his Northern Expedition and managed to take Shanghai.\nDuring the Nanjing incident in March 1927, the NRA stormed the consulates of the United States, the United Kingdom and Imperial Japan, looted foreign properties and almost assassinated the Japanese consul. An American, two British, one French, an Italian and a Japanese were killed. These looters also stormed and seized millions of dollars' worth of British concessions in Hankou, refusing to hand them back to the UK government. Both Nationalists and Communist soldiers within the army participated in the rioting and looting of foreign residents in Nanjing.\nNRA took Beijing in 1928. The city was the internationally recognized capital, even when it was previously controlled by warlords. This event allowed the KMT to receive widespread diplomatic recognition in the same year. The capital was moved from Beijing to Nanjing, the original capital of the Ming dynasty, and thus a symbolic purge of the final Qing elements. This period of KMT rule in China between 1927 and 1937 was relatively stable and prosperous and is still known as the Nanjing decade.\nAfter the Northern Expedition in 1928, the Nationalist government under the KMT declared that China had been exploited for decades under the unequal treaties signed between the foreign powers and the Qing dynasty. The KMT government demanded that the foreign powers renegotiate the treaties on equal terms.\nBefore the Northern Expedition, the KMT began as a heterogeneous group advocating American-inspired federalism and provincial autonomy. However, the KMT under Chiang's leadership aimed at establishing a centralized one-party state with one ideology. This was even more evident following Sun's elevation into a cult figure after his death. The control by one single party began the period of \"political tutelage\", whereby the party was to lead the government while instructing the people on how to participate in a democratic system. The topic of reorganizing the army, brought up at a military conference in 1929, sparked the Central Plains War. The cliques, some of them former warlords, demanded to retain their army and political power within their own territories. Although Chiang finally won the war, the conflicts among the cliques would have a devastating effect on the survival of the KMT. Muslim Generals in Gansu waged war against the Guominjun in favor of the KMT during the conflict in Gansu in 1927\u20131930.\nIn 1931, Japanese aggression resumed with the Mukden Incident and occupation of Manchuria, and the CCP founded the Chinese Soviet Republic (CSR) in Jiangxi while secretly recruiting within the KMT government and military. Chiang was alarmed by the expansion of communist influence; he wanted to suppress internal conflicts before confronting foreign aggression. The KMT were aided by German military advisors. The CSR was destroyed in 1934 after a series of KMT offensives. The communists abandoned bases in southeast China for Shaanxi in a military retreat called the Long March; less than 10% of the communist army survived. A new base, the Shaan-Gan-Ning Border Region, was created with Soviet aid.\nKMT secret police persecuted suspected communists and political opponents with terror. In \"The Birth of Communist China\", C.P. Fitzgerald describes China under the rule of the KMT thus: \"the Chinese people groaned under a regime Fascist in every quality except efficiency.\"\nIn 1936, Chiang was kidnapped by Zhang Xueliang in the Xi'an Incident and forced into the Second United Front, an anti-Japanese alliance with the CCP; the Second Sino-Japanese War started the following year. The alliance brought little coordination and was treated as a temporary cease fire in the civil war. The New Fourth Army incident in 1941 ended the alliance.\nJapan surrendered in 1945, and Taiwan was returned to the Republic of China on 25 October of that year. The brief period of celebration was soon shadowed by the possibility of a civil war between the KMT and CCP. The Soviet Union declared war on Japan just before it surrendered and occupied Manchuria, the north eastern part of China. The Soviet Union denied the KMT army the right to enter the region but allowed the CCP to take control of the Japanese factories and their supplies.\nFull-scale civil war between the Communists and the Nationalists erupted in 1946. The Communist Chinese armies, the People's Liberation Army (PLA), previously a minor faction, grew rapidly in influence and power due to several errors on the KMT's part. First, the KMT reduced troop levels precipitously after the Japanese surrender, leaving large numbers of able-bodied, trained fighting men who became unemployed and disgruntled with the KMT as prime recruits for the PLA.\nSecondly, the KMT government proved thoroughly unable to manage the economy, allowing the hyperinflation in China to go uncontrolled in the late 1930s. Among the most despised and ineffective efforts it undertook to contain inflation was the conversion to the gold standard for the national treasury and the Chinese gold yuan in August 1948, outlawing private ownership of gold, silver and foreign exchange, collecting all such precious metals and foreign exchange from the people and issuing the Gold Standard Scrip in exchange. As most farmland in the north were under CCP's control, the cities governed by the KMT lacked food supply and this added to the hyperinflation. The new scrip became worthless in only ten months and greatly reinforced the nationwide perception of the KMT as a corrupt or at best inept entity. Third, Chiang Kai-shek ordered his forces to defend the urbanized cities. This decision gave CCP a chance to move freely through the countryside. At first, the KMT had the edge with the aid of weapons and ammunition from the United States (US). However, with the country suffering from hyperinflation, widespread corruption and other economic ills, the KMT continued to lose popular support. Some leading officials and military leaders of the KMT hoarded material, armament and military-aid funding provided by the US. This became an issue which proved to be a hindrance of its relationship with US government. US President Harry S. Truman wrote that \"the Chiangs, the Kungs and the Soongs (were) all thieves\", having taken $750\u00a0million in US aid.\nAt the same time, the suspension of American aid and tens of thousands of deserted or decommissioned soldiers being recruited to the PLA cause tipped the balance of power quickly to the CCP side, and the overwhelming popular support for the CCP in most of the country made it all but impossible for the KMT forces to carry out successful assaults against the Communists.\nBy the end of 1949, the CCP controlled almost all of mainland China, as the KMT retreated to Taiwan with a significant amount of China's national treasures and 2 million people, including military forces and refugees. Some party members stayed in the mainland and broke away from the main KMT to found the Revolutionary Committee of the Kuomintang (also known as the Left Kuomintang), which still currently exists as one of the eight minor registered parties of the People's Republic of China.\nIn Taiwan: 1945\u2013present.\nIn 1895, Formosa (now called Taiwan), including the Penghu islands, became a Japanese colony via the Treaty of Shimonoseki following the First Sino-Japanese War.\nAfter Japan's defeat at the end of World War II in 1945, General Order No. 1 instructed Japan to surrender its troops in Taiwan to Chiang Kai-shek. On 25 October 1945, KMT general Chen Yi acted on behalf of the Allied Powers to accept Japan's surrender and proclaimed that day as Taiwan Retrocession Day.\nTensions between the local Taiwanese and mainlanders from mainland China increased in the intervening years, culminating in a flashpoint on 27 February 1947 in Taipei when a dispute between a female cigarette vendor and an anti-smuggling officer in front of Tianma Tea House triggered civil disorder and protests that would last for days. The uprising turned bloody and was shortly put down by the ROC Army in the February 28 Incident. As a result of the 28 February Incident in 1947, Taiwanese people endured what is called the \"White Terror\", a KMT-led political repression that resulted in the death or disappearance of over 30,000 Taiwanese intellectuals, activists, and people suspected of opposition to the KMT.\nFollowing the establishment of the People's Republic of China (PRC) on 1 October 1949, the commanders of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) believed that Kinmen and Matsu had to be taken before a final assault on Taiwan. The KMT fought the Battle of Guningtou on 25\u201327 October 1949 and stopped the PLA invasion. The KMT headquarters were set up on 10 December 1949 at No. 11 Zhongshan South Road. In 1950, Chiang took office in Taipei under the Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion. The provision declared martial law in Taiwan and halted some democratic processes, including presidential and parliamentary elections, until the mainland could be recovered from the CCP. The KMT estimated it would take 3 years to defeat the Communists. The slogan was \"prepare in the first year, start fighting in the second, and conquer in the third year.\" Chiang also initiated the Project National Glory to retake back the mainland in 1965, but was eventually dropped in July 1972 after many unsuccessful attempts. However, various factors, including international pressure, are believed to have prevented the KMT from militarily engaging the CCP full-scale. The KMT backed Muslim insurgents formerly belonging to the National Revolutionary Army during the KMT Islamic insurgency in 1950\u20131958 in mainland China. A cold war with a couple of minor military conflicts was resulted in the early years. The various government bodies previously in Nanjing, that were re-established in Taipei as the KMT-controlled government, actively claimed sovereignty over all China. The Republic of China in Taiwan retained China's seat in the United Nations until 1971 as well as recognition by the United States until 1979.\nIn response to widespread corruption, factionalism, and bureaucratic inefficiency that had plagued the Kuomintang and were viewed as key contributors to its defeat in the Chinese Civil War, Chiang Kai-shek initiated a sweeping modernization campaign known as the Party Reform Program between 1950 and 1952. The reform aimed to consolidate party discipline and centralize authority under Chiang's leadership. The campaign was led by the newly established Central Reform Committee, which sought to eliminate defeatism, factionalism, bureaucratism, and dependency within the party ranks. It also emphasized institutionalization, organizational cohesion, and the transformation of party culture. At the KMT's National Congress held in October 1952, Chiang declared the reform a success. As a result, the party charter was amended to redefine the Kuomintang as a revolutionary democratic party, drawing its social base from youth, intellectuals, and the working and agricultural classes, while positioning patriotic revolutionaries among these classes as the core of party membership. The program also marginalized rival factions such as the CC Clique, paving the way for the rise of figures like Chen Cheng and later Chiang Ching-kuo, who would dominate party leadership in the decades to come.\nUntil the 1970s, the KMT successfully pushed ahead with land reforms, developed the economy, implemented a democratic system in a lower level of the government, improved relations between Taiwan and the mainland and created the Taiwan economic miracle. However, the KMT controlled the government under a one-party authoritarian state until reforms in the late 1970s through the 1990s. The ROC in Taiwan was once referred to synonymously with the KMT and known simply as Nationalist China after its ruling party. In the 1970s, the KMT began to allow for \"supplemental elections\" in Taiwan to fill the seats of the aging representatives in the National Assembly.\nAlthough opposition parties were not permitted, the pro-democracy movement \"Tangwai\" (\"outside the KMT\") created the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) on 28 September 1986. Outside observers of Taiwanese politics expected the KMT to clamp down and crush the illegal opposition party, though this did not occur, and instead the party's formation marked the beginning of Taiwan's democratization.\nMartial law ceased in 1987 and the President Lee Teng-hui terminated the Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion in 1991. All parties started to be allowed to compete at all levels of elections, including the presidential election. Lee Teng-hui, the ROC's first democratically elected president and the leader of the KMT during the 1990s, announced his advocacy of \"special state-to-state relations\" with the PRC. The PRC associated this idea with Taiwan independence.\nThe KMT faced a split in 1993 that led to the formation of the New Party in August 1993, alleged to be a result of Lee's \"corruptive ruling style\". The New Party has, since the purging of Lee, largely reintegrated into the KMT. A much more serious split in the party occurred as a result of the 2000 presidential election. Upset at the choice of Lien Chan as the party's presidential nominee, former party Secretary-General James Soong launched an independent bid, which resulted in the expulsion of Soong and his supporters and the formation of the People First Party (PFP) on 31 March 2000. The KMT candidate placed third behind Soong in the elections. After the election, Lee's strong relationship with the opponent became apparent. To prevent defections to the PFP, Lien moved the party away from Lee's pro-independence policies and became more favorable toward Chinese unification. This shift led to Lee's expulsion from the party and the formation of the Taiwan Solidarity Union (TSU) by Lee supporters on 24 July 2001.\nPrior to this, the party's voters had defected to both the PFP and TSU, and the KMT did poorly in the December 2001 legislative elections and lost its position as the largest party in the Legislative Yuan. However, the party did well in the 2002 local government mayoral and council election with Ma Ying-jeou, its candidate for Taipei mayor, winning reelection by a landslide and its candidate for Kaohsiung mayor narrowly losing but doing surprisingly well. Since 2002, the KMT and PFP have coordinated electoral strategies. In 2004, the KMT and PFP ran a joint presidential ticket, with Lien running for president and Soong running for vice-president.\nThe loss of the presidential election of 2004 to DPP President Chen Shui-bian by merely over 30,000 votes was a bitter disappointment to party members, leading to large scale rallies for several weeks protesting alleged electoral fraud and the \"odd circumstances\" of the shooting of President Chen. However, the fortunes of the party were greatly improved when the KMT did well in the legislative elections held in December 2004 by maintaining its support in southern Taiwan achieving a majority for the Pan-Blue Coalition.\nSoon after the election, there appeared to be a falling out with the KMT's junior partner, the People First Party and talk of a merger seemed to have ended. This split appeared to widen in early 2005, as the leader of the PFP, James Soong appeared to be reconciling with President Chen Shui-Bian and the Democratic Progressive Party. Many PFP members including legislators and municipal leaders have since defected to the KMT, and the PFP is seen as a fading party.\nIn 2005, Ma Ying-jeou became KMT chairman defeating speaker Wang Jin-pyng in the first public election for KMT chairmanship. The KMT won a decisive victory in the 3-in-1 local elections of December 2005, replacing the DPP as the largest party at the local level. This was seen as a major victory for the party ahead of legislative elections in 2007. There were elections for the two municipalities of the ROC, Taipei and Kaohsiung in December 2006. The KMT won a clear victory in Taipei, but lost to the DPP in the southern city of Kaohsiung by the slim margin of 1,100 votes.\nOn 13 February 2007, Ma was indicted by the Taiwan High Prosecutors Office on charges of allegedly embezzling approximately NT$11\u00a0million (US$339,000), regarding the issue of \"special expenses\" while he was mayor of Taipei. Shortly after the indictment, he submitted his resignation as KMT chairman at the same press conference at which he formally announced his candidacy for ROC president. Ma argued that it was customary for officials to use the special expense fund for personal expenses undertaken in the course of their official duties. In December 2007, Ma was acquitted of all charges and immediately filed suit against the prosecutors. In 2008, the KMT won a landslide victory in the Republic of China presidential election on 22 March 2008. The KMT fielded former Taipei mayor and former KMT chairman Ma Ying-jeou to run against the DPP's Frank Hsieh. Ma won by a margin of 17% against Hsieh. Ma took office on 20 May 2008, with vice-presidential candidate Vincent Siew, and ended 8 years of the DPP presidency. The KMT also won a landslide victory in the 2008 legislative elections, winning 81 of 113 seats, or 71.7% of seats in the Legislative Yuan. These two elections gave the KMT firm control of both the executive and legislative yuans.\nOn 25 June 2009, President Ma launched his bid to regain the KMT leadership and registered as the sole candidate for the chairmanship election. On 26 July, Ma won 93.9% of the vote, becoming the new chairman of the KMT, taking office on 17 October 2009. This officially allowed Ma to be able to meet with Xi Jinping, the General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, and other PRC delegates, as he was able to represent the KMT as leader of a Chinese political party rather than as head-of-state of a political entity unrecognized by the PRC.\nOn 29 November 2014, the KMT suffered a heavy loss in the local election to the DPP, winning only 6 municipalities and counties, down from 14 in the previous election in 2009 and 2010. Ma Ying-jeou subsequently resigned from the party chairmanship on 3 December and replaced by acting Chairman Wu Den-yih. Chairmanship election was held on 17 January 2015 and Eric Chu was elected to become the new chairman. He was inaugurated on 19 February. In September 2021, Kuomintang elected its former leader (in office 2015\u20132016), veteran politician Eric Chu, as its new leader to replace Johnny Chiang (in office 2020\u20132021). In January 2024, no party won a majority in Taiwan's legislative election for the first time since 2004, meaning 51 seats for the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), 52 seats for the Kuomintang (KMT), and the Taiwan People's Party (TPP) secured eight seats.\nCurrent issues and challenges.\nParty assets.\nUpon arriving in Taiwan the KMT occupied assets previously owned by the Japanese and forced local businesses to make contributions directly to the KMT. Some of this real estate and other assets was distributed to party loyalists, but most of it remained with the party, as did the profits generated by the properties.\nAs the ruling party on Taiwan, the KMT amassed a vast business empire of banks, investment companies, petrochemical firms, and television and radio stations, thought to have made it the world's richest political party, with assets once estimated to be around US$2\u201310\u00a0billion. Although this war chest appeared to help the KMT until the mid-1990s, it later led to accusations of corruption (often referred to as \"black gold\").\nAfter 2000, the KMT's financial holdings appeared to be more of a liability than a benefit, and the KMT started to divest itself of its assets. However, the transactions were not disclosed and the whereabouts of the money earned from selling assets (if it has gone anywhere) is unknown. There were accusations in the 2004 presidential election that the KMT retained assets that were illegally acquired. During the 2000\u20132008 DPP presidency, a law was proposed by the DPP in the Legislative Yuan to recover illegally acquired party assets and return them to the government. However, due to the DPP's lack of control of the legislative chamber at the time, it never materialized.\nThe KMT also acknowledged that part of its assets were acquired through extra-legal means and thus promised to \"retro-endow\" them to the government. However, the quantity of the assets which should be classified as illegal are still under heated debate. DPP, in its capacity as ruling party from 2000 to 2008, claimed that there is much more that the KMT has yet to acknowledge. Also, the KMT actively sold assets under its title to quench its recent financial difficulties, which the DPP argues is illegal. Former KMT chairman Ma Ying-Jeou's position is that the KMT will sell some of its properties at below market rates rather than return them to the government and that the details of these transactions will not be publicly disclosed.\nIn 2006, the KMT sold its headquarters at 11 Zhongshan South Road in Taipei to Evergreen Group for NT$2.3\u00a0billion (US$96\u00a0million). The KMT moved into a smaller building on Bade Road in the eastern part of the city.\nIn July 2014, the KMT reported total assets of NT$26.8\u00a0billion (US$892.4\u00a0million) and interest earnings of NT$981.52\u00a0million for the year of 2013, making it one of the richest political parties in the world.\nIn August 2016, the Ill-gotten Party Assets Settlement Committee was set up by the ruling DPP government to investigate KMT party assets acquired during the martial law period and recover those that were determined to be illegally acquired.\nSupporter base.\nSupport for the KMT in Taiwan encompasses a wide range of social groups but is largely determined by age. KMT support is concentrated in northern Taiwan in urban areas, where it draws its backing from big businesses due to its policy of maintaining commercial links with mainland China. As of 2020, only 3% of KMT members are under 40 years of age.\nThe KMT also has some support in the labor sector because of the many labor benefits and insurance implemented while the KMT was in power. The KMT traditionally has strong cooperation with military officers and veterans, teachers, and government workers. Among ethnic groups in Taiwan, the KMT has stronger support among mainlanders and their descendants for ideological and ethnic reasons and among some Taiwanese indigenous peoples who do not agree with the Pan-Green political pandering. The support for the KMT generally tend to be stronger in majority-Hakka and Mandarin-speaking counties of Taiwan, in contrast to the Hokkien-majority southwestern counties that tend to support the Democratic Progressive Party.\nHostility between indigenous communities and (Taiwanese) Hoklo and the indigenous communities' robust KMT networks both contribute to the indigenous tendency to vote for the KMT and their skepticism towards the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP). Indigenous peoples have criticized politicians for abusing the \"indigenization\" movement for political gains, such as indigenous opposition to the DPP's \"rectification\" by recognizing the Taroko for political reasons, with the majority of mountain townships voting for Ma Ying-jeou. In 2005 the Kuomintang displayed a massive photo of the anti-Japanese Seediq leader Mona Rudao at its headquarters in honor of the 60th anniversary of Taiwan's retrocession from Japan to the Republic of China.\nOn social issues, the KMT does not take an official position on same-sex marriage, though most members of legislative committees, mayors of cities, and the 2020 presidential candidate Han Kuo-yu oppose it. The party does, however, have a small faction that supports same-sex marriage, consisting mainly of young people and residents of the Taipei metropolitan area. The opposition to same-sex marriage comes mostly from Christian groups, who wield significant political influence within the KMT. The party also support transnational marriages between mainland Chinese and Taiwanese in an attempt to preserve Chinese culture in Taiwan, although not without controversies over assimilation and espionage.\nOrganization.\nLeadership.\nThe Kuomintang's constitution designated Sun Yat-sen as party president. After his death, the Kuomintang opted to keep that language in its constitution to honor his memory forever, further designating him as \"Permanent Prime Minister\" and Chiang Kai-Shek as \"Permanent President\". The party has since been headed by a director-general (1927\u20131975) and a chairman (since 1975), positions which officially discharge the functions of the president.\nLegislative Yuan leader (Caucus leader).\n\uff0c\u653f\u7b56\u59d4\u54e1\u6703\u79d8\u66f8\u9577\u5373\u9ee8\u5718\u9818\u8896\nParty organization and structure.\nThe KMT is being led by a Central Committee with a commitment to a Leninist principle of democratic centralism:\nParty charter.\nThe Kuomintang Party Charter was adopted on January 28, 1924. The current charter has 51 articles and includes contents of General Principles, Party Membership, Organization, The National President, The Director-General, The National Congress, The Central Committee, District and Sub-District Party Headquarters, Cadres and Tenure, Discipline, Awards and Punishment, Funding, and Supplementary Provisions. The most recent version was made at the Twentieth National Congress on July 28, 2019. \nIdeology in mainland China.\nChinese nationalism.\nThe KMT was a nationalist revolutionary party that had been supported by the Soviet Union. It was organized on the Leninist principle of democratic centralism.\nThe KMT had several influences upon its ideology by revolutionary thinking. The KMT and Chiang Kai-shek used the words feudal and counterrevolutionary as synonyms for evil and backwardness, and they proudly proclaimed themselves to be revolutionaries. Chiang called the warlords feudalists, and he also called for feudalism and counterrevolutionaries to be stamped out by the KMT. Chiang showed extreme rage when he was called a warlord, because of the word's negative and feudal connotations. Ma Bufang was forced to defend himself against the accusations, and stated to the news media that his army was a part of \"National army, people's power\".\nChiang Kai-shek, the head of the KMT, warned the Soviet Union and other foreign countries about interfering in Chinese affairs. He was personally angry at the way China was treated by foreigners, mainly by the Soviet Union, Britain, and the United States. He and his New Life Movement called for the crushing of Soviet, Western, American and other foreign influences in China. Chen Lifu, a CC Clique member in the KMT, said \"Communism originated from Soviet imperialism, which has encroached on our country.\" It was also noted that \"the white bear of the North Pole is known for its viciousness and cruelty\".\nKMT leaders across China adopted nationalist rhetoric. The Chinese Muslim general Ma Bufang of Qinghai presented himself as a Chinese nationalist to the people of China who was fighting against Western imperialism to deflect criticism by opponents that his government was feudal and oppressed minorities like Tibetans and Buddhist Mongols. He used his Chinese nationalist credentials to his advantage to keep himself in power.\nFascist influences.\nThe Blue Shirts Society, a ultranationalist paramilitary organization within the KMT that modeled itself after Mussolini's blackshirts, was anti-foreign and anti-communist, and it stated that its agenda was to expel foreign (Japanese and Western) imperialists from China, crush Communism, and eliminate feudalism. In addition to being anticommunist, some KMT members, like Chiang Kai-shek's right-hand man Dai Li were anti-American, and wanted to expel American influence. Close Sino-German ties also promoted cooperation between Nazi Germany and Nationalist government. The Kuomintang sought to build a one-party ideological state in China, called \"Dang Guo\", to solidify its rule and ideological supremacy.\nThe New Life Movement was a government-led civic movement in 1930s China initiated by Chiang Kai-shek to promote cultural reform and Neo-Confucian social morality and to ultimately unite China under a centralised ideology following the emergence of ideological challenges to the status quo. The Movement attempted to counter threats of Western and Japanese imperialism through a resurrection of traditional Chinese morality, which it held to be superior to modern Western values. As such the Movement was based upon Confucianism, mixed with Christianity, nationalism and authoritarianism that have some similarities to fascism. It rejected individualism and liberalism, while also opposing socialism and communism. Some historians regard this movement as imitating Nazism and being a neo-nationalistic movement used to elevate Chiang's control of everyday lives. Frederic Wakeman suggested that the New Life Movement was \"Confucian fascism\".\nAccording to Stanley Payne, Chiang's KMT was \"normally classified as a multi-class populist or 'nation-building' party but not a fitting candidate for fascism (except by old-line Communists).\" He also stated that, \"Lloyd Eastman has called the Blue Shirts, whose members admired European fascism and were influenced by it, a Chinese fascist organization. This is probably an exaggeration. The Blue Shirts certainly exhibited some of the characteristics of fascism, as did many nationalist organizations around the world, but it is not clear that the group possessed the full qualities of an intrinsic fascist movement...The Blue Shirts probably had some affinity with and for fascism, a common feature of nationalisms in crisis during the 1930s, but it is doubtful that they represented any clear-cut Asian variant of fascism.\" The Sino-German relationship also rapidly deteriorated as Germany failed to pursue a d\u00e9tente between China and Japan, which led to the outbreak of the Second Sino-Japanese War. China later declared war on fascist countries, including Germany, Italy, and Japan, as part of the Declarations of war during World War II and Chiang, the head of the KMT, became the most powerful \"anti-fascist\" leader in Asia.\nIdeology of the New Guangxi Clique.\nThe KMT branch in Guangxi province, led by the New Guangxi Clique of Bai Chongxi and Li Zongren, implemented anti-imperialist, anti-religious, and anti-foreign policies. During the Northern Expedition, in 1926 in Guangxi, Muslim General Bai Chongxi led his troops in destroying most of the Buddhist temples and smashing idols, turning the temples into schools and KMT headquarters. Bai led an anti-foreign wave in Guangxi, attacking American, European, and other foreigners and missionaries, and generally making the province unsafe for non-natives. Westerners fled from the province, and some Chinese Christians were also attacked as imperialist agents.\nThe leaders clashed with Chiang Kai-shek, which led to the Central Plains War where Chiang defeated the clique.\nSocialism and anti-capitalist agitation.\nThe KMT had a left wing and a right wing, the left being more radical in its pro-Soviet policies, but both wings equally persecuted merchants, accusing them of being counterrevolutionaries and reactionaries. The right wing under Chiang Kai-shek prevailed, and continued radical policies against private merchants and industrialists, even as they denounced communism.\nOne of the Three Principles of the People of the KMT, M\u00ednsh\u0113ng, was defined as socialism by Sun Yat-sen. He defined this principle of saying in his last days \"it's socialism and it's communism\". The concept may be understood as social welfare as well. Sun understood it as an industrial economy and equality of land holdings for the Chinese peasant farmers. Here he was influenced by the American thinker Henry George (see Georgism), the land value tax in Taiwan is a legacy thereof. He divided livelihood into four areas: food, clothing, housing, and transportation; and planned out how an ideal (Chinese) government can take care of these for its people.\nThe KMT was referred to having a socialist ideology. \"Equalization of land rights\" was a clause included by Sun in the original Tongmenhui. The KMT's revolutionary ideology in the 1920s incorporated unique Chinese Socialism as part of its ideology.\nThe Soviet Union trained KMT revolutionaries in the Moscow Sun Yat-sen University. In the West and in the Soviet Union, Chiang was known as the \"Red General\". Movie theaters in the Soviet Union showed newsreels and clips of Chiang, at Moscow Sun Yat-sen University Portraits of Chiang were hung on the walls, and in the Soviet May Day Parades that year, Chiang's portrait was to be carried along with the portraits of Karl Marx, Lenin, Stalin, and other socialist leaders.\nThe KMT attempted to levy taxes upon merchants in Canton, and the merchants resisted by raising an army, the Merchant's volunteer corps. Sun initiated this anti-merchant policy, and Chiang Kai-shek enforced it, Chiang led his army of Whampoa Military Academy graduates to defeat the merchant's army. Chiang was assisted by Soviet advisors, who supplied him with weapons, while the merchants were supplied with weapons from the Western countries.\nThe KMT was accused of leading a \"Red Revolution\" in Canton. The merchants were conservative and reactionary, and their Volunteer Corp leader Chen Lianbao was a prominent comprador trader.\nThe merchants were supported by the Western powers, who led an international flotilla to support them against the KMT. The KMT seized many of Western-supplied weapons from the merchants, using them to equip their troops. A KMT General executed several merchants, and the KMT formed a Soviet-inspired Revolutionary Committee. The British Communist Party sent a letter to Sun, congratulating him on his military successes.\nIn 1948, the KMT again attacked the merchants of Shanghai. Chiang Kai-shek sent his son Chiang Ching-kuo to restore economic order. Ching-kuo copied Soviet methods, which he learned during his stay there, to start a social revolution by attacking middle-class merchants. He also enforced low prices on all goods to raise support from the proletariat.\nAs riots broke out and savings were ruined, bankrupting shop owners, Ching-kuo began to attack the wealthy, seizing assets and placing them under arrest. The son of the gangster Du Yuesheng was arrested by him. Ching-kuo ordered KMT agents to raid the Yangtze Development Corporation's warehouses, which was privately owned by H.H. Kung and his family. H.H. Kung's wife was Soong Ai-ling, the sister of Soong Mei-ling who was Ching-kuo's stepmother. H.H. Kung's son David was arrested, the Kung's responded by blackmailing the Chiang's, threatening to release information about them, eventually he was freed after negotiations, and Ching-kuo resigned, ending the terror on the Shanghainese merchants.\nThe KMT also promotes government-owned corporations. KMT founder Sun Yat-sen, was heavily influenced by the economic ideas of Henry George, who believed that the rents extracted from natural monopolies or the usage of land belonged to the public. Sun argued for Georgism and emphasized the importance of a mixed economy, which he termed \"The Principle of Minsheng\" in his Three Principles of the People.\n\"The railroads, public utilities, canals, and forests should be nationalized, and all income from the land and mines should be in the hands of the State. With this money in hand, the State can therefore finance the social welfare programs.\"\nThe KMT Muslim Governor of Ningxia, Ma Hongkui, promoted state-owned monopolies. His government had a company, Fu Ning Company, which had a monopoly over commerce and industry in Ningxia.\nCorporations such as CSBC Corporation, Taiwan, CPC Corporation and Aerospace Industrial Development Corporation are owned by the state in the Republic of China.\nMarxists also existed in the KMT. They viewed revolution in different terms than the CCP, claiming that China already went past its feudal stage and was in a stagnation period rather than in another mode of production. These Marxists in the KMT opposed the CCP ideology. The Left Kuomintang who disagreed with Chiang Kai-shek formed the Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang when the KMT was on the edge of defeat in the civil war and later joined the government of the CCP.\nConfucianism and religion in its ideology.\nThe KMT used traditional Chinese religious ceremonies. According to the KMT, the souls of party martyrs were sent to heaven. Chiang Kai-shek believed that these martyrs still witnessed events on Earth.\nThe KMT backed the New Life Movement, which promoted Confucianism, and it was also against westernization. KMT leaders also opposed the May Fourth Movement. Chiang Kai-shek, as a nationalist, and Confucianist, was against the iconoclasm of the May Fourth Movement. He viewed some western ideas as foreign, as a Chinese nationalist, and that the introduction of western ideas and literature that the May Fourth Movement wanted was not welcome. He and Sun Yat-sen criticized these May Fourth intellectuals for corrupting morals of youth.\nThe KMT also incorporated Confucianism in its jurisprudence. It pardoned Shi Jianqiao for murdering Sun Chuanfang, because she did it in revenge since Sun executed her father Shi Congbin, which was an example of filial piety to one's parents in Confucianism. The KMT encouraged filial revenge killings and extended pardons to those who performed them.\nIn response to the Cultural Revolution, Chiang Kai-shek promoted a Chinese Cultural Renaissance movement which followed in the steps of the New Life Movement, promoting Confucian values.\nEducation.\nThe KMT purged China's education system of Western ideas, introducing Confucianism into the curriculum. Education came under the total control of the state, which meant, in effect, the KMT, via the Ministry of Education. Military and political classes on KMT's \"Three Principles of the People\" were added. Textbooks, exams, degrees and educational instructors were all controlled by the state, as were all universities.\nSoviet-style military.\nChiang Ching-kuo, appointed as KMT director of Secret Police in 1950, was educated in the Soviet Union, and initiated Soviet style military organization in the Republic of China Armed Forces, reorganizing and Sovietizing the political officer corps, surveillance, and KMT activities were propagated throughout the whole of the armed forces. Opposed to this was Sun Li-jen, who was educated at the American Virginia Military Institute. Chiang Ching-kuo then arrested Sun Li-jen, charging him of conspiring with the American CIA of plotting to overthrow Chiang Kai-shek and the KMT, Sun was placed under house arrest in 1955.\nAnti-communism.\nBefore the founding of the People's Republic of China, the Kuomintang, also known as the Chinese Nationalist Party, led by Chiang Kai-shek, was ruling China and strongly opposed the Chinese Communist Party as it was funded and militarily backed by the COMINTERN (Soviet Union) and pursuing a communist revolution to overthrow the Republic of China . On 12 April 1927, Chiang Kai-shek purged the communists in what was known as the Shanghai massacre which led to the Chinese Civil War. The Chinese Nationalist government then led 5 military campaigns in order to wipe out Chinese Soviet Republic, a Soviet-puppet state established by the Chinese Communist Party. Initially, the Kuomintang was successful, eventually forcing the Chinese Communist Party to escape on a long march until a full-scale invasion of China by Japan forced both the Nationalists and the Communists into an alliance. After the war, the two parties were thrown back into a civil war. The Kuomintang were defeated in the mainland and escaped in exile to Taiwan while the rest of mainland China became Communist in 1949.\nPolicy on ethnic minorities.\nFormer KMT leader Chiang Kai-shek considered all the minority peoples of China as descendants of the Yellow Emperor, the semi-mythical initiator of the Chinese civilization. Chiang considered all ethnic minorities in China to belong to the \"Zhonghua minzu\" (Chinese nation) and he introduced this into KMT ideology, which was propagated into the educational system of the Republic of China, and the Constitution of the ROC considered Chiang's ideology to be true. In Taiwan, the president performs a ritual honoring the Yellow Emperor, while facing west, in the direction of the Chinese mainland.\nThe KMT retained the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission for dealing with Mongolian and Tibetan affairs. A Muslim, Ma Fuxiang, was appointed as its chairman.\nThe KMT was known for sponsoring Muslim students to study abroad at Muslim universities like Al-Azhar University and it established schools especially for Muslims, Muslim KMT warlords like Ma Fuxiang promoted education for Muslims. KMT Muslim Warlord Ma Bufang built a girls' school for Muslim girls in Linxia City which taught modern secular education.\nTibetans and Mongols refused to allow other ethnic groups like Kazakhs to participate in the Kokonur ceremony in Qinghai, but KMT Muslim General Ma Bufang allowed them to participate.\nChinese Muslims were among the most hardline KMT members. Ma Chengxiang was a Muslim KMT member, and he refused to surrender to the Communists.\nThe KMT incited anti-Yan Xishan and Feng Yuxiang sentiments among Hui people and Mongols, encouraging for them to topple their rule during the Central Plains War.\nMasud Sabri, a Uyghur was appointed as Governor of Xinjiang by the KMT, as was the Tatar Burhan Shahidi and the Uyghur Yulbars Khan.\nThe Muslim General Ma Bufang also put KMT symbols on his mansion, the Ma Bufang Mansion along with a portrait of party founder Sun Yat-sen arranged with the KMT flag and the Republic of China flag.\nGeneral Ma Bufang and other high ranking Muslim Generals attended the Kokonuur Lake Ceremony where the God of the Lake was worshipped, and during the ritual, the Chinese national anthem was sung, all participants bowed to a Portrait of KMT founder Sun Yat-sen, and the God of the Lake was also bowed to, and offerings were given to him by the participants, which included the Muslims. This cult of personality around the KMT leader and the KMT was standard in all meetings. Sun Yat-sen's portrait was bowed to three times by KMT party members. Sun's portrait was arranged with two flags crossed under, the KMT flag and the flag of the Republic of China.\nThe KMT also hosted conferences of important Muslims like Bai Chongxi, Ma Fuxiang, and Ma Liang. Ma Bufang stressed \"racial harmony\" as a goal when he was Governor of Qinghai.\nIn 1939, Isa Yusuf Alptekin and Ma Fuliang were sent on a mission by the KMT to the Middle Eastern countries such as Egypt, Turkey and Syria to gain support for the Chinese War against Japan, they also visited Afghanistan in 1940 and contacted Muhammad Amin Bughra, they asked him to come to Chongqing, the capital of the Nationalist Government. Bughra was arrested by the British government in 1942 for spying, and the KMT arranged for Bughra's release. He and Isa Yusuf worked as editors of KMT Muslim publications. Ma Tianying () (1900\u20131982) led the 1939 mission which had 5 other people including Isa and Fuliang.\nAnti-separatism.\nThe KMT, being anti-separatist, claims sovereignty over Outer Mongolia and Tuva as well as the territories of the modern People's Republic and Republic of China.\nKMT Muslim General Ma Bufang waged war on the invading Tibetans during the Sino-Tibetan War with his Muslim army, and he repeatedly crushed Tibetan revolts during bloody battles in Qinghai provinces. Ma Bufang was fully supported by President Chiang Kai-shek, who ordered him to prepare his Muslim army to invade Tibet several times and threatened aerial bombardment on the Tibetans. With support from the KMT, Ma Bufang repeatedly attacked the Tibetan area of Golog seven times during the KMT Pacification of Qinghai, eliminating thousands of Tibetans.\nGeneral Ma Fuxiang, the chairman of the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission stated that Mongolia and Tibet were an integral part of the Republic of China, arguing:\nOur Party [the Guomindang] takes the development of the weak and small and resistance to the strong and violent as our sole and most urgent task. This is even more true for those groups which are not of our kind [Ch. fei wo zulei zhe]. Now the people of Mongolia and Tibet are closely related to us, and we have great affection for one another: our common existence and common honor already have a history of over a thousand years. [...] Mongolia and Tibet's life and death are China's life and death. China absolutely cannot cause Mongolia and Tibet to break away from China's territory, and Mongolia and Tibet cannot reject China to become independent. At this time, there is not a single nation on earth except China that will sincerely develop Mongolia and Tibet.\nMa Bufang also crushed Mongol separatist movements, abducting the Genghis Khan Shrine and attacking Tibetan Buddhist Temples like Labrang, and keeping a tight control over them through the Kokonur God ceremony.\nIdeology in Taiwan.\nAnti-communism.\nOn 28 February 1947, the Kuomintang cracked down on an anti-government uprising in Taiwan known as the February 28 incident and the government began the White Terror in Taiwan in order to purge communist spies and prevent Chinese communist subversion. While in Taiwan, the Republic of China government under the Kuomintang remained anti-communist and attempted to recover the mainland from the Communist forces. During the Cold War, Taiwan was referred to as Free China while the China on the mainland was known as Red China or Communist China in the West, to mark the ideological difference between the capitalist 'Free World' and the communist nations. The ROC government under the Kuomintang also actively supported anti-communist efforts in Southeast Asia and around the world. This effort did not cease until the death of Chiang Kai-shek in 1975. The Kuomintang continued to be anti-communist during the period of Chiang Ching-kuo. Contacts between Kuomintang and Chinese Communist Party have started since 1990s to re-establish Cross-Strait relations. Although relations has improved with the PRC since the 1992 Consensus, with both sides having a common opposition to Taiwanese nationalism, it continues to be opposed to communism, as anti-communism is written under Article 2 of Kuomintang's party charter.\nThree Principles of the People.\nSun Yat-sen was not just the founder of the Republic of China, but also the founder of the Kuomintang. Sun Yat-sen's political ideology was based on building a free and democratic China founded on Three Principles of the People, namely Chinese nationalism, democracy, and people's economic livelihood. Although the Kuomintang lost control over mainland China in 1949, the Republic of China under Kuomintang rule was able to achieve the political ideal of a democratic Republic of China on the island of Taiwan based on the Three Principles of the People after its retreat to Taiwan. The Three Principles of the People is not just written in the ROC Constitution, but also in Article 1, 5, 7, 9, 37, 42, 43 of Kuomintang's party charter.\nChinese democracy.\nThe Kuomintang advocates a free and democratic China under the Republic of China founded on Three Principles of the People. In fact, during the 1980s, Chiang Ching-kuo advocated Grand Alliance for China's Reunification under the Three Principles of the People. Since then, a democracy promotion banner for Grand Alliance for China's Reunification under the Three Principles of the People continues to exist in Kinmen today as a display to mainland China that the Republic of China's unification principle should be based on Chinese democracy. Today, the Kuomintang continues to view the Republic of China as the free, democratic and legitimate China.\nCross-Strait relations.\nA Chinese nationalist party, the Kuomintang strongly adheres to the defense of the Republic of China and upholding the Constitution of the Republic of China. It is strongly opposed to formal Taiwanese independence and holds that the ROC is the sole legitimate representative of all of China. It favors a closer relationship with the PRC and the CCP, though it also opposes Chinese unification under the \"One country, two systems\" framework of the PRC. It opposes any non-peaceful means to resolve the cross-strait disputes. The party also accepts the 1992 Consensus, which defines both sides of the Taiwan Strait as \"one China\" but maintains its ambiguity to different interpretations. Although the KMT's long-term goal is to unify China under the ROC, the party advocates maintaining the status quo of Taiwan.\nChinese conservatism.\nIn modern Taiwanese politics, the Kuomintang is seen as a centre-right to right-wing political party. The Kuomintang believes in the values associated with conservatism. The Kuomintang has a strong tradition of defending the established institutions of the Republic of China, such as defending Constitution of the Republic of China, defending the five branches of government (modeled on Sun Yat-sen's political philosophy of Three Principles of the People), espousing the One-China policy as a vital component for the Republic of China (ROC)'s international security and economic development, as opposed to Taiwanization. The Kuomintang claims to have a strong tradition of fighting to defend, preserve and revive traditional Chinese culture and religious freedom as well as advocating for Confucian values, economic liberalism and anti-communism. The KMT still sees the Republic of China in Taiwan as presenting the true cultural China which has preserved Chinese culture, as compared to the People's Republic of China which had experienced Chinese cultural destruction during the Cultural Revolution.\nSome Kuomintang conservatives see traditional social or family values as being threatened by liberal values and oppose same-sex marriage, but some KMT member of the Legislative Yuan, including Chiang Wan-an, Ko Chih-en, Chen Yi-min, Hsu Shu-hua, etc., voted in favor of the No. 748 Same-Sex Marriage Case, in 2019. Many KMT politicians are also typically against the abolishment of capital punishment, arguing the need to maintain deterrence against harsh crimes.\nConservative KMT policies may also be characterized by a focus on maintaining the traditions and doctrine of Confucian thought, namely reinforcing the morals of paternalism and patriarchy in Taiwan's society, but the KMT has a more liberal stance on women's rights and gender equality compared to mainstream conservatives in other advanced countries in East Asia, such as Japan's Liberal Democratic Party. In terms of education policy, KMT policies advocate increasing more Classical Chinese content in Chinese education and Chinese history content in order to reinforce Chinese cultural identity, as opposed to de-sinicization attempts by advocates of Taiwan independence who typically decrease Classical Chinese and Chinese history content in schools in order to achieve Taiwanization. The party also support transnational marriages between mainland Chinese and Taiwanese in an attempt to preserve Chinese culture in Taiwan, although not without controversies over assimilation and espionage.\nParties affiliated with the Kuomintang.\nMalaysian Chinese Association.\nThe Malaysian Chinese Association (MCA) was initially pro-ROC and mainly consisted of KMT members who joined as an alternative and were also in opposition to the Malayan Communist Party, supporting the KMT in China by funding them with the intention of reclaiming the Chinese mainland from the communists.\nTibet Improvement Party.\nThe Tibet Improvement Party was founded by Pandatsang Rapga, a pro-ROC and pro-KMT Khampa revolutionary, who worked against the 14th Dalai Lama's Tibetan Government in Lhasa. Rapga borrowed Sun Yat-sen's Three Principles of the People doctrine and translated his political theories into the Tibetan language, hailing it as the best hope for Asian peoples against imperialism. Rapga stated that \"the Sanmin Zhuyi was intended for all peoples under the domination of foreigners, for all those who had been deprived of the rights of man. But it was conceived especially for the Asians. It is for this reason that I translated it. At that time, a lot of new ideas were spreading in Tibet,\" during an interview in 1975 by Heather Stoddard. He wanted to destroy the feudal government in Lhasa, in addition to modernizing and secularizing Tibetan society. The ultimate goal of the party was the overthrow of the Dalai Lama's regime, and the creation of a Tibetan Republic which would be an autonomous Republic within the ROC. Chiang Kai-shek and the KMT funded the party and their efforts to build an army to battle the Dalai Lama's government. The KMT was extensively involved in the Kham region, recruiting the Khampa people to both oppose the Dalai Lama's Tibetan government, fight the Communist Red Army, and crush the influence of local Chinese warlords who did not obey the central government.\nVietnamese Nationalist Party.\nThe KMT assisted the Vi\u1ec7t Nam Qu\u1ed1c D\u00e2n \u0110\u1ea3ng party which translates literally into Chinese (; ) as the Vietnamese Nationalist Party. When it was established, it was based on the Chinese KMT and was pro-Chinese. The Chinese KMT helped the party, known as the VNQDD, set up headquarters in Canton and Yunnan, to aid their anti-imperialist struggle against the French occupiers of Indochina and against the Vietnamese Communist Party. It was the first revolutionary nationalist party to be established in Vietnam, before the communist party. The KMT assisted VNQDD with funds and military training.\nThe VNQDD was founded with KMT aid in 1925, they were against Ho Chi Minh's Viet Nam Revolutionary Youth League. When the VNQDD fled to China after the failed uprising against the French, they settled in Yunnan and Canton, in two different branches. The VNQDD existed as a party in exile in China for 15 years, receiving help, militarily and financially, and organizationally from the Chinese KMT. The two VNQDD parties merged into a single organization, the Canton branch removed the word \"revolutionary\" from the party name. Lu Han, a KMT official in Nanjing, who was originally from Yunnan, was contacted by the VNQDD, and the KMT Central Executive Committee and Military made direct contact with VNQDD for the first time, the party was reestablished in Nanjing with KMT help.\nThe Chinese KMT used the VNQDD for its own interests in south China and Indo China. General Zhang Fakui (Chang Fa-kuei), who based himself in Guangxi, established the Vi\u1ec7t Nam C\u00e1ch m\u1ec7nh \u0110\u1ed3ng minh H\u1ed9i meaning \"Viet Nam Revolutionary League\" in 1942, which was assisted by the VNQDD to serve the KMT's aims. The Chinese Yunnan provincial army, under the KMT, occupied northern Vietnam after the Japanese surrender in 1945, the VNQDD tagging alone, opposing Ho Chi Minh's communist party. The Viet Nam Revolutionary League was a union of various Vietnamese nationalist groups, run by the pro Chinese VNQDD. Its stated goal was for unity with China under the Three Principles of the People, created by KMT founder Sun and opposition to Japanese and French Imperialists. The Revolutionary League was controlled by Nguy\u1ec5n H\u1ea3i Th\u1ea7n. General Zhang shrewdly blocked the Communists of Vietnam, and Ho Chi Minh from entering the league, as his main goal was Chinese influence in Indo China. The KMT utilized these Vietnamese nationalists during World War II against Japanese forces.\nA KMT left-winger, General Chang Fa-kuei, worked with Nguy\u1ec5n H\u1ea3i Th\u1ea7n, a VNQDD member, against French Imperialists and Communists in Indo China. General Chang Fa-kuei planned to lead a Chinese army invasion of Tonkin in Indochina to free Vietnam from French control, and to get Chiang Kai-shek's support. The VNQDD opposed the government of Ngo Dinh Diem during the Vietnam War.\nThe party dissolved after the Fall of Saigon in 1977 and was later re-founded in 1991 as the People's Action Party of Vietnam (\u0110\u1ea3ng Nh\u00e2n d\u00e2n H\u00e0nh \u0111\u1ed9ng Vi\u1ec7t Nam).\nRyukyu Guomindang.\nThe Ryukyu Guomindang (\u7409\u7403\u56fd\u6c11\u515a) was established on 30 November 1958. Tsugumasa Kiyuna headed its predecessor party, the Ryukyuan separatist Ryukyu Revolutionary Party (\u7409\u7403\u9769\u547d\u515a) which was backed by the Kuomintang in Taiwan.\nHong Kong Pro-ROC camp.\nThe pro-ROC camp is a political alignment in Hong Kong. It pledges allegiance to the Republic of China. One of these members, the 123 Democratic Alliance, dissolved in 2000 due to the lack of financial support from the Taiwanese government after the 2000 presidential election.\nSponsored organizations.\nMa Fuxiang founded Islamic organizations sponsored by the KMT, including the China Islamic Association ().\nKMT Muslim General Bai Chongxi was Chairman of the Chinese Islamic National Salvation Federation. The Muslim Chengda school and Yuehua publication were supported by the Nationalist Government, and they supported the KMT.\nThe Chinese Muslim Association was also sponsored by the KMT, and it evacuated from the mainland to Taiwan with the party. The Chinese Muslim Association owns the Taipei Grand Mosque which was built with funds from the KMT.\nThe Yihewani (Ikhwan al Muslimun a.k.a. Muslim brotherhood) was the predominant Muslim sect backed by the KMT. Other Muslim sects, like the Xidaotang were also supported by the KMT. The Chinese Muslim brotherhood became a Chinese nationalist organization and supported KMT rule. Brotherhood Imams like Hu Songshan ordered Muslims to pray for the Nationalist Government, salute KMT flags during prayer, and listen to nationalist sermons.\nElection results.\nPresidential elections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLanguage notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16904", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16904", "title": "KMT (disambiguation)", "text": "KMT often refers to Kuomintang, a political party in Taiwan.\nKMT or kmt may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16905", "revid": "43969826", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16905", "title": "Kabbalah", "text": "Type of Jewish mysticism\nKabbalah or Qabalah ( ; , ; lit.\u2009'act of receiving, acceptation') is an esoteric method, discipline and school of thought in Jewish mysticism. It forms the foundation of mystical religious interpretations within Judaism. A traditional Kabbalist is called a Mekubbal ().\nJewish Kabbalists originally developed transmissions of the primary texts of Kabbalah within the realm of Jewish tradition and often use classical Jewish scriptures to explain and demonstrate its mystical teachings. Kabbalists hold these teachings to define the inner meaning of both the Hebrew Bible and traditional rabbinic literature and their formerly concealed transmitted dimension, as well as to explain the significance of Jewish religious observances.\nKabbalah emerged from earlier forms of Jewish mysticism in 12th- to 13th-century Occitania, specifically in Languedoc, among Hakhmei Provence (re: \"Bahir\"). Following the movement of Jews from Southern France and Spain, it was found in the Rhineland school of Judah the Pious, al-Andalus (re: \"Zohar\") and was reinterpreted during the Jewish mystical renaissance in 16th-century Ottoman Palestine. The , the foundational text of Kabbalah, was authored in the late 13th century, likely by Moses de Le\u00f3n. Isaac Luria (16th century) is considered the father of contemporary Kabbalah; Lurianic Kabbalah was popularised in the form of Hasidic Judaism from the 18th century onwards. During the 20th century, academic interest in Kabbalistic texts led primarily by the Jewish historian Gershom Scholem has inspired the development of historical research on Kabbalah in the field of Judaic studies.\nThough minor works contribute to an understanding of the Kabbalah as an evolving tradition, the primary texts of the major lineage in medieval Jewish tradition are the and . The early Hekhalot literature is acknowledged as ancestral to the sensibilities of this later flowering of the Kabbalah and more especially the is acknowledged as the antecedent from which all these books draw many of their formal inspirations. The document has striking similarities to a possible antecedent from the Lesser Hekhalot, the \"Alphabet of Rabbi Akiva,\" which in turn seems to recall a style of responsa by students that arose in the classroom of Joshua ben-Levi in Tractate Shabbat. The \"Sefer Yetzirah\" is a brief document of only a few pages that was written many centuries before the high and late medieval works (sometime between 200-600CE), detailing an alphanumeric vision of cosmology and may be understood as a kind of prelude to the major phase of Kabbalah.\nHistory of Jewish mysticism.\nThe history of Jewish mysticism encompasses various forms of esoteric and spiritual practices aimed at understanding the divine and the hidden aspects of existence. This mystical tradition has evolved significantly over millennia, influencing and being influenced by different historical, cultural, and religious contexts. Among the most prominent forms of Jewish mysticism is Kabbalah, which emerged in the 12th century and has since become a central component of Jewish mystical thought. Other notable early forms include prophetic and apocalyptic mysticism, which are evident in biblical and post-biblical texts.\nThe roots of Jewish mysticism can be traced back to the biblical era, with prophetic figures such as Elijah and Ezekiel experiencing divine visions and encounters. This tradition continued into the apocalyptic period, where texts like 1 Enoch and the Book of Daniel introduced complex angelology and eschatological themes. The Hekhalot and Merkabah literature, dating from the 2nd century to the early medieval period, further developed these mystical themes, focusing on visionary ascents to the heavenly palaces and the divine chariot.\nThe medieval period saw the formalization of Kabbalah, particularly in Southern France/Occitania and Spain. Foundational texts such as the \"Bahir\" and the \"Zohar\" were composed during this time, laying the groundwork for later developments. The Kabbalistic teachings of this era delved deeply into the nature of the divine, the structure of the universe, and the process of creation. Notable Kabbalists like Moses de Le\u00f3n played crucial roles in disseminating these teachings, which were characterized by their profound symbolic and allegorical interpretations of the Torah.\nIn the early modern period, Lurianic Kabbalah, founded by Isaac Luria in the 16th century, introduced new metaphysical concepts such as \"Tzimtzum\" (divine contraction) and \"Tikkun\" (cosmic repair), which have had a lasting impact on Jewish thought. The 18th century saw the rise of Hasidism, a movement that integrated Kabbalistic ideas into a popular, revivalist context, emphasizing personal mystical experience and the presence of the divine in everyday life.\nTraditions.\nAccording to the , a foundational text for kabbalistic thought, Torah study can proceed along four levels of interpretation (exegesis). These four levels are called from their initial letters (PRDS , 'orchard'):\nKabbalah is considered by its followers as a necessary part of the study of Torah \u2013 the study of Torah (the Tanakh and rabbinic literature) being an inherent duty of observant Jews.\nModern academic-historical study of Jewish mysticism reserves the term \"kabbalah\" to designate the particular, distinctive doctrines that textually emerged fully expressed in the Middle Ages, as distinct from the earlier Merkabah mystical concepts and methods. According to this descriptive categorization, both versions of Kabbalistic theory, the medieval-Zoharic and the early-modern Lurianic Kabbalah together comprise the Theosophical tradition in Kabbalah, while the Meditative-Ecstatic Kabbalah incorporates a parallel inter-related Medieval tradition. A third tradition, related but more shunned, involves the magical aims of Practical Kabbalah. Moshe Idel, for example, writes that these 3 basic models can be discerned operating and competing throughout the whole history of Jewish mysticism, beyond the particular Kabbalistic background of the Middle Ages. They can be readily distinguished by their basic intent with respect to God:\nAccording to Kabbalistic belief, early kabbalistic knowledge was transmitted orally by the Patriarchs, prophets, and sages, eventually to be \"interwoven\" into Jewish religious writings and culture. According to this view, early kabbalah was, in around the 10th century BCE, an open knowledge practiced by over a million people in ancient Israel. Foreign conquests drove the Jewish spiritual leadership of the time (the Sanhedrin) to hide the knowledge and make it secret, fearing that it might be misused if it fell into the wrong hands.\nIt is hard to clarify with any degree of certainty the exact concepts within kabbalah. There are several different schools of thought with very different outlooks; however, all are accepted as correct. Modern halakhic authorities have tried to narrow the scope and diversity within kabbalah, by restricting study to certain texts, notably and the teachings of Isaac Luria as passed down through Hayyim ben Joseph Vital. However, even this qualification does little to limit the scope of understanding and expression, as included in those works are commentaries on Abulafian writings, , Albotonian writings, and the , which is known to the kabbalistic elect and which, as described more recently by Gershom Scholem, combined ecstatic with theosophical mysticism. It is therefore important to bear in mind when discussing things such as the and their interactions that one is dealing with highly abstract concepts that at best can only be understood intuitively.\nJewish and non-Jewish Kabbalah.\nFrom the Renaissance onwards Jewish Kabbalah texts entered non-Jewish culture, where they were studied and translated by Christian Hebraists and Hermetic occultists. The syncretic traditions of Christian Cabala and Hermetic Qabalah developed independently of Judaic Kabbalah, reading the Jewish texts as universalist ancient wisdom preserved from the Gnostic traditions of antiquity. Both adapted the Jewish concepts freely from their Jewish understanding, to merge with multiple other theologies, religious traditions and magical associations. With the decline of Christian Cabala in the Age of Reason, Hermetic Qabalah continued as a central underground tradition in Western esotericism. Through these non-Jewish associations with magic, alchemy and divination, Kabbalah acquired some popular occult connotations forbidden within Judaism, where Jewish Practical Kabbalah was a minor, permitted tradition restricted for a few elite. Today, many publications on Kabbalah belong to the non-Jewish New Age and occult traditions of Cabala, rather than giving an accurate picture of Judaic Kabbalah. Instead, academic and traditional Jewish publications now translate and study Judaic Kabbalah for wide readership.\nConcepts.\nThe definition of Kabbalah varies according to the tradition and aims of those following it. According to its earliest and original usage in ancient Hebrew it means 'reception' or 'tradition', and in this context it tends to refer to any sacred writing composed after (or otherwise outside of) the five books of the Torah. After the Talmud is written, it refers to the Oral Law (both in the sense of the 'Talmud' itself and in the sense of continuing dialog and thought devoted to the scripture in every generation). In the much later writings of Eleazar of Worms (c. 1350), it refers to theurgy or the conjuring of demons and angels by the invocation of their secret names. The understanding of the word Kabbalah undergoes a transformation of its meaning in medieval Judaism, in the books which are now primarily referred to as 'the Kabbalah': the \"Bahir\", the \"Zohar\", \"Etz Hayim\" etc. In these books the word Kabbalah is used in manifold new senses. During this major phase it refers to the continuity of revelation in every generation, on the one hand, while also suggesting the necessity of revelation to remain concealed and secret or esoteric in every period by formal requirements native to sacred truth. When the term Kabbalah is used to refer to a canon of secret mystical books by medieval Jews, these aforementioned books and other works in their constellation are the books and the literary sensibility to which the term refers. Even later the word is adapted or appropriated in Western esotericism (Christian Kabbalah and Hermetic Qabalah), where it influences the tenor and aesthetics of European occultism practiced by gentiles or non-Jews. But above all, Jewish Kabbalah is a set of sacred and magical teachings meant to explain the relationship between the unchanging, eternal God\u2014the mysterious \"Ein Sof\" (, 'The Infinite')\u2014and the mortal, finite universe (God's creation).\nConcealed and revealed God.\nThe nature of the divine prompted kabbalists to envision two aspects to God: (a) God in essence, absolutely transcendent, unknowable, limitless divine simplicity beyond revelation, and (b) God in manifestation, the revealed persona of God through which he creates, sustains, and relates to humankind. Kabbalists speak of the first as \"Ein/Ayn Sof\" (\u05d0\u05d9\u05df \u05e1\u05d5\u05e3 \"the infinite/endless\", literally \"there is no end\"). Of the impersonal \"Ein Sof,\" nothing can be grasped. However, the second aspect of divine emanations, accessible to human perception, dynamically interacting throughout spiritual and physical existence, reveal the divine immanently, and are bound up in the life of man. Kabbalists believe that these two aspects are not contradictory but complement one another, emanations mystically revealing the concealed mystery from within the Godhead.\nAs a term describing the Infinite Godhead beyond Creation, Kabbalists viewed the \"Ein Sof\" itself as too sublime to be referred to directly in the Torah. It is not a Holy Name in Judaism, as no name could contain a revelation of the Ein Sof. Even terming it \"No End\" is an inadequate representation of its true nature, the description only bearing its designation in relation to Creation. However, the Torah does narrate God speaking in the first person, most memorably the first word of the Ten Commandments, a reference without any description or name to the simple Divine essence (termed also \"Atzmus Ein Sof\" \u2013 Essence of the Infinite) beyond even the duality of Infinitude/Finitude. In contrast, the term Ein Sof describes the Godhead as Infinite lifeforce first cause, continuously keeping all Creation in existence. The Zohar reads the first words of Genesis, \"BeReishit Bara Elohim \u2013 In the beginning God created\", as \"\"With\" (the level of) \"Reishit (Beginning)\" (the Ein Sof) \"created Elohim\" (God's manifestation in creation)\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At the very beginning the King made engravings in the supernal purity. A spark of blackness emerged in the sealed within the sealed, from the mystery of the Ayn Sof, a mist within matter, implanted in a ring, no white, no black, no red, no yellow, no colour at all. When He measured with the standard of measure, He made colours to provide light. Within the spark, in the innermost part, emerged a source, from which the colours are painted below; it is sealed among the sealed things of the mystery of Ayn Sof. It penetrated, yet did not penetrate its air. It was not known at all until, from the pressure of its penetration, a single point shone, sealed, supernal. Beyond this point nothing is known, so it is called \"reishit\" (beginning): the first word of all ...\nThe structure of emanations has been described in various ways: Sephirot (divine attributes) and Partzufim (divine \"faces\"), Ohr (spiritual light and flow), Names of God and the supernal Torah, Olamot (Spiritual Worlds), a Divine Tree and Archetypal Man, Angelic Chariot and Palaces, male and female, enclothed layers of reality, inwardly holy vitality and external Kelipot shells, 613 channels (\"limbs\" of the King) and the divine Souls of Man. These symbols are used to describe various levels and aspects of Divine manifestation, from the \"Pnimi\" (inner) dimensions to the \"Hitzoni\" (outer). It is solely in relation to the emanations, certainly not the Ein Sof Ground of all Being, that Kabbalah uses anthropomorphic symbolism to relate psychologically to divinity. Kabbalists debated the validity of anthropomorphic symbolism, between its disclosure as mystical allusion, versus its instrumental use as allegorical metaphor; in the language of the Zohar, symbolism \"touches yet does not touch\" its point.\nSephirot.\nThe \"Sephirot\" (also spelled \"sefirot\"; singular \"sefirah\") are the ten emanations and attributes of God with which he continually sustains the existence of the universe. These emanations are viewed as parts of God's divine nature, which reveal themselves in different ways. The Zohar and other Kabbalistic texts elaborate on the emergence of the sephirot from a state of concealed potential in the \"Ein Sof\" until their manifestation in the mundane world. In particular, Moses ben Jacob Cordovero (known as \"the Ramak\"), describes how God emanated the myriad details of finite reality out of the absolute unity of Divine light via the ten sephirot, or vessels.\nTen sephirot as process of creation.\nAccording to Lurianic cosmology, the \"sephirot\" correspond to various levels of creation (ten \"sephirot\" in each of the Four Worlds, and four worlds within each of the larger four worlds, each containing ten \"sephirot\", which themselves contain ten \"sephirot\", to an infinite number of possibilities), and are emanated from the Creator for the purpose of creating the universe. The \"sephirot\" are considered revelations of the Creator's will (\"ratzon\"), and they should not be understood as ten different \"gods\" but as ten different ways the one God reveals his will through the Emanations. It is not God who changes but the ability to perceive God that changes.\nTen Sephirot as process of ethics.\nDivine creation by means of the Ten Sephirot is an ethical process. They represent the different aspects of Morality. Loving-Kindness is a possible moral justification found in Chessed, and Gevurah is the Moral Justification of Justice and both are mediated by Mercy which is Rachamim. However, these pillars of morality become immoral once they become extremes. When Loving-Kindness becomes extreme it can lead to sexual depravity and lack of Justice to the wicked. When Justice becomes extreme, it can lead to torture and the Murder of innocents and unfair punishment.\n\"Righteous\" humans (\"tzadikim\" plural of Tzadik) ascend these ethical qualities of the ten \"sephirot\" by doing righteous actions. If there were no righteous humans, the blessings of God would become completely hidden, and creation would cease to exist. While real human actions are the \"Foundation\" (\"Yesod\") of this universe (\"Malchut\"), these actions must accompany the conscious intention of compassion. Compassionate actions are often impossible without faith (\"Emunah\"), meaning to trust that God always supports compassionate actions even when God seems hidden. Ultimately, it is necessary to show compassion toward oneself too in order to share compassion toward others. This \"selfish\" enjoyment of God's blessings but only in order to empower oneself to assist others is an important aspect of \"Restriction\", and is considered a kind of golden mean in kabbalah, corresponding to the \"sefirah\" of Adornment (Tiferet) being part of the \"Middle Column\".\nMoses ben Jacob Cordovero, wrote \"Tomer Devorah\" (\"Palm Tree of Deborah\"), in which he presents an ethical teaching of Judaism in the kabbalistic context of the ten \"sephirot\". \"Tomer Devorah\" has become also a foundational Musar text.\nPartzufim.\nThe most esoteric Idrot sections of the classic Zohar make reference to hypostatic male and female \"Partzufim\" (Divine Personas) displacing the Sephirot, manifestations of God in particular Anthropomorphic symbolic personalities based on Biblical esoteric exegesis and midrashic narratives. Lurianic Kabbalah places these at the centre of our existence, rather than earlier Kabbalah's Sephirot, which Luria saw as broken in Divine crisis. In light of contemporary cognitive perspectives, the Partzuf symbols could be seen as representing Jungian archetypes of the collective unconscious, reflecting a psychologised progression from youth to sage in therapeutic healing back to the infinite Ein Sof/Unconscious.\nDescending spiritual worlds.\nMedieval Kabbalists believed that all things are linked to God through these emanations, making all levels in creation part of one great, gradually descending chain of being. Through this any lower creation reflects its particular roots in supernal divinity. Kabbalists agreed with the divine transcendence described by Jewish philosophy, but as only referring to the \"Ein Sof\" unknowable Godhead. They reinterpreted the theistic philosophical concept of creation from nothing, replacing God's creative act with panentheistic continual self-emanation by the mystical Ayin Nothingness/No-thing sustaining all spiritual and physical realms as successively more corporeal garments, veils and condensations of divine immanence. The innumerable levels of descent divide into Four comprehensive spiritual worlds, \"Atziluth\" (\"Closeness\" \u2013 Divine Wisdom), \"Beriah\" (\"Creation\" \u2013 Divine Understanding), \"Yetzirah\" (\"Formation\" \u2013 Divine Emotions), \"Assiah\" (\"Action\" \u2013 Divine Activity), with a preceding Fifth World \"Adam Kadmon\" (\"Primordial Man\" \u2013 Divine Will) sometimes excluded due to its sublimity. Together the whole spiritual heavens form the Divine Persona/Anthropos.\nHasidic thought extends the divine immanence of Kabbalah by holding that God is all that really exists, all else being completely undifferentiated from God's perspective. This view can be defined as acosmic monistic panentheism. According to this philosophy, God's existence is higher than anything that this world can express, yet he includes all things of this world within his divine reality in perfect unity, so that the creation effected no change in him at all. This paradox as seen from dual human and divine perspectives is dealt with at length in Chabad texts.\nOrigin of evil.\nAmong problems considered in the Hebrew Kabbalah is the theological issue of the nature and origin of evil. In the views of some Kabbalists this conceives \"evil\" as a \"quality of God\", asserting that negativity enters into the essence of the Absolute. In this view it is conceived that the Absolute needs evil to \"be what it is\", i.e., to exist. Foundational texts of Medieval Kabbalism conceived evil as a demonic parallel to the holy, called the \"Sitra Achra\" (the \"Other Side\"), and the \"qlippoth\" (the \"shells/husks\") that cover and conceal the holy, are nurtured from it, and yet also protect it by limiting its revelation. Scholem termed this element of the Spanish Kabbalah a \"Jewish gnostic\" motif, in the sense of dual powers in the divine realm of manifestation. In a radical notion, the root of evil is found within the 10 holy Sephirot, through an imbalance of Gevurah, the power of \"Strength/Judgement/Severity\".\nGevurah is necessary for Creation to exist as it counterposes Chesed (\"loving-kindness\"), restricting the unlimited divine bounty within suitable vessels, so forming the Worlds. However, if man sins (actualising impure judgement within his soul), the supernal Judgement is reciprocally empowered over the Kindness, introducing disharmony among the Sephirot in the divine realm and exile from God throughout Creation. The demonic realm, though illusory in its holy origin, becomes the real apparent realm of impurity in lower Creation. In the Zohar, the sin of Adam and Eve (who embodied Adam Kadmon below) took place in the spiritual realms. Their sin was that they separated the Tree of knowledge (10 sefirot within Malkuth, representing Divine immanence), from the Tree of life within it (10 sefirot within Tiferet, representing Divine transcendence). This introduced the false perception of duality into lower creation, an external Tree of Death nurtured from holiness, and an Adam Belial of impurity. In Lurianic Kabbalah, evil originates from a primordial shattering of the sephirot of God's Persona before creation of the stable spiritual worlds, mystically represented by the 8 Kings of Edom (the derivative of Gevurah) \"who died\" before any king reigned in Israel from Genesis 36. In the divine view from above within Kabbalah, emphasised in Hasidic Panentheism, the appearance of duality and pluralism below dissolves into the absolute Monism of God, psychologising evil. Though impure below, what appears as evil derives from a divine blessing too high to be contained openly. The mystical task of the righteous in the Zohar is to reveal this concealed Divine Oneness and absolute good, to \"convert bitterness into sweetness, darkness into light\".\nRole of Man.\nKabbalistic doctrine gives man the central role in Creation, as his soul and body correspond to the supernal divine manifestations. In the Christian Kabbalah this scheme was universalised to describe \"harmonia mundi\", the harmony of Creation within man. In Judaism, it gave a profound spiritualisation of Jewish practice. While the kabbalistic scheme gave a radically innovative, though conceptually continuous, development of mainstream Midrashic and Talmudic rabbinic notions, kabbalistic thought underscored and invigorated conservative Jewish observance. The esoteric teachings of kabbalah gave the traditional mitzvot observances the central role in spiritual creation, whether the practitioner was learned in this knowledge or not. Accompanying normative Jewish observance and worship with elite mystical kavanot intentions gave them theurgic power, but sincere observance by common folk, especially in the Hasidic popularisation of kabbalah, could replace esoteric abilities. Many kabbalists were also leading legal figures in Judaism, such as Nachmanides and Joseph Karo.\nMedieval kabbalah elaborates particular reasons for each Biblical mitzvah, and their role in harmonising the supernal divine flow, uniting masculine and feminine forces on High. With this, the feminine Divine presence in this world is drawn from exile to the Holy One Above. The 613 mitzvot are embodied in the organs and soul of man. Lurianic Kabbalah incorporates this in the more inclusive scheme of Jewish messianic rectification of exiled divinity. Jewish mysticism, in contrast to Divine transcendence rationalist human-centred reasons for Jewish observance, gave Divine-immanent providential cosmic significance to the daily events in the worldly life of man in general, and the spiritual role of Jewish observance in particular.\nLevels of the soul.\nThe Kabbalah posits that the human soul has three elements: the \"nefesh\", \"ru'ach\", and \"neshamah\". The \"nefesh\" is found in all humans, and enters the physical body at birth. It is the source of one's physical and psychological nature. The next two parts of the soul are not implanted at birth, but can be developed over time; their development depends on the actions and beliefs of the individual. They are said to only fully exist in people awakened spiritually. A common way of explaining the three parts of the soul is as follows:\nReincarnation.\nReincarnation, the transmigration of the soul after death, was introduced into Judaism as a central esoteric tenet of Kabbalah from the Medieval period onwards, called Gilgul neshamot (\"cycles of the soul\"). The concept does not appear overtly in the Hebrew Bible or classic rabbinic literature, and was rejected by various Medieval Jewish philosophers. However, the Kabbalists explained a number of scriptural passages in reference to Gilgulim. The concept became central to the later Kabbalah of Isaac Luria, who systemised it as the personal parallel to the cosmic process of rectification. Through Lurianic Kabbalah and Hasidic Judaism, reincarnation entered popular Jewish culture as a literary motif.\nTzimtzum, Shevirah and Tikkun.\n\"Tzimtzum\" (Constriction/Concentration) is the primordial cosmic act whereby God \"contracted\" His infinite light, leaving a \"void\" into which the light of existence was poured. This allowed the emergence of independent existence that would not become nullified by the pristine Infinite Light, reconciling the unity of the \"Ein Sof\" with the plurality of creation. This changed the first creative act into one of withdrawal/exile, the antithesis of the ultimate Divine Will. In contrast, a new emanation after the Tzimtzum shone into the vacuum to begin creation, but led to an initial instability called \"Tohu\" (Chaos), leading to a new crisis of \"Shevirah\" (Shattering) of the sephirot vessels. The shards of the broken vessels fell down into the lower realms, animated by remnants of their divine light, causing primordial exile within the Divine Persona before the creation of man. Exile and enclothement of higher divinity within lower realms throughout existence requires man to complete the \"Tikkun olam\" (Rectification) process. Rectification Above corresponds to the reorganization of the independent sephirot into relating \"Partzufim\" (Divine Personas), previously referred to obliquely in the Zohar. From the catastrophe stems the possibility of self-aware Creation, and also the \"Kelipot\" (Impure Shells) of previous Medieval kabbalah. The metaphorical anthropomorphism of the partzufim accentuates the sexual unifications of the redemption process, while Gilgul reincarnation emerges from the scheme. Uniquely, Lurianism gave formerly private mysticism the urgency of Messianic social involvement.\nAccording to interpretations of Luria, the catastrophe stemmed from the \"unwillingness\" of the residue imprint after the Tzimtzum to relate to the new vitality that began creation. The process was arranged to shed and harmonise the Divine Infinity with the latent potential of evil. The creation of Adam would have redeemed existence, but his sin caused new shevirah of Divine vitality, requiring the Giving of the Torah to begin Messianic rectification. Historical and individual history becomes the narrative of reclaiming exiled Divine sparks.\nLinguistic mysticism and the mystical Torah.\nKabbalistic thought extended Biblical and Midrashic notions that God enacted Creation through the Hebrew language and through the Torah into a full linguistic mysticism. In this, every Hebrew letter, word, number, even accent on words of the Hebrew Bible contain Jewish mystical meanings, describing the spiritual dimensions within exoteric ideas, and it teaches the hermeneutic methods of interpretation for ascertaining these meanings. Names of God in Judaism have further prominence, though infinite meaning turns the whole Torah into a Divine name. As the Hebrew name of things is the channel of their lifeforce, parallel to the sephirot, so concepts such as \"holiness\" and \"mitzvot\" embody ontological Divine immanence, as God can be known in manifestation as well as transcendence. The infinite potential of meaning in the Torah, as in the \"Ein Sof\", is reflected in the symbol of the two trees of the Garden of Eden; the Torah of the Tree of Knowledge is the external, finite Halachic Torah, enclothed within which the mystics perceive the unlimited infinite plurality of meanings of the Torah of the Tree of Life. In Lurianic terms, each of the 600,000 root souls of Israel find their own interpretation in Torah, as \"God, the Torah and Israel are all One\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The reapers of the Field are the Comrades, masters of this wisdom, because \"Malkhut\" is called the Apple Field, and She grows sprouts of secrets and new meanings of Torah. Those who constantly create new interpretations of Torah are the ones who reap Her.\nAs early as the 1st century BCE Jews believed that the Torah and other canonical texts contained encoded messages and hidden meanings. Gematria is one method for discovering its hidden meanings. In this system, each Hebrew letter also represents a number. By converting letters to numbers, Kabbalists were able to find a hidden meaning in each word. This method of interpretation was used extensively by various schools.\nIn contemporary interpretation of kabbalah, Sanford Drob makes cognitive sense of this linguistic mythos by relating it to postmodern philosophical concepts described by Jacques Derrida and others, where all reality embodies narrative texts with infinite plurality of meanings brought by the reader. In this dialogue, kabbalah survives the nihilism of Deconstruction by incorporating its own Lurianic \"Shevirah\", and by the dialectical paradox where man and God imply each other.\nCognition, mysticism, or values.\nKabbalists as mystics.\nThe founder of the academic study of Jewish mysticism, Gershom Scholem, privileged an intellectual view of the nature of Kabbalistic symbols as dialectic Theosophical speculation. In contrast, contemporary scholarship of Moshe Idel and Elliot R. Wolfson has opened a phenomenological understanding of the mystical nature of Kabbalistic experience, based on a close reading of the historical texts. Wolfson has shown that among the closed elite circles of mystical activity, medieval Theosophical Kabbalists held that an intellectual view of their symbols was secondary to the experiential. In the context of medieval Jewish philosophical debates on the role of imagination in Biblical prophecy, and essentialist versus instrumental kabbalistic debates about the relation of sephirot to God, they saw contemplation on the sephirot as a vehicle for prophecy. Judaism's ban on physical iconography, along with anthropomorphic metaphors for Divinity in the Hebrew Bible and midrash, enabled their internal visualisation of the Divine sephirot Anthropos in imagination. Disclosure of the aniconic in iconic internal psychology, involved sublimatory revelation of Kabbalah's sexual unifications. Previous academic distinction between \"Theosophical\" versus Abulafian \"Ecstatic-Prophetic Kabbalah\" overstated their division of aims, which revolved around visual versus verbal/auditory views of prophecy. In addition, throughout the history of Judaic Kabbalah, the greatest mystics claimed to receive new teachings from Elijah the Prophet, the souls of earlier sages (a purpose of Lurianic meditation prostrated on the graves of Talmudic Tannaim, Amoraim and Kabbalists), the soul of the mishnah, ascents during sleep, heavenly messengers, etc. A tradition of parapsychology abilities, psychic knowledge, and theurgic intercessions in heaven for the community is recounted in the hagiographic works \"Praises of the Ari\", \"Praises of the Besht\", and in many other Kabbalistic and Hasidic tales. Kabbalistic and Hasidic texts are concerned to apply themselves from exegesis and theory to spiritual practice, including prophetic drawing of new mystical revelations in Torah. The mythological symbols Kabbalah uses to answer philosophical questions, themselves invite mystical contemplation, intuitive apprehension and psychological engagement.\nParadoxical coincidence of opposites.\nIn bringing Theosophical Kabbalah into contemporary intellectual understanding, using the tools of modern and postmodern philosophy and psychology, Sanford Drob shows philosophically how every symbol of the Kabbalah embodies the simultaneous dialectical paradox of mystical \"Coincidentia oppositorum\", the conjoining of two opposite dualities. Thus the Infinite Ein Sof is above the duality of \"Yesh/Ayin Being/Non-Being\" transcending Existence/Nothingness (\"Becoming\" into Existence through the souls of Man who are the inner dimension of all spiritual and physical worlds, yet simultaneously the Infinite Divine generative lifesource beyond Creation that continuously keeps everything spiritual and physical in existence); Sephirot bridge the philosophical problem of the One and the Many; Man is both Divine (Adam Kadmon) and human (invited to project human psychology onto Divinity to understand it); Tzimtzum is both illusion and real from Divine and human perspectives; evil and good imply each other (Kelipah draws from Divinity, good arises only from overcoming evil); Existence is simultaneously partial (Tzimtzum), broken (Shevirah), and whole (Tikun) from different perspectives; God experiences Himself as Other through Man, Man embodies and completes (Tikun) the Divine Persona Above. In Kabbalah's reciprocal Panentheism, Theism and Atheism/Humanism represent two incomplete poles of a mutual dialectic that imply and include each other's partial validity. This was expressed by the Chabad Hasidic thinker Aaron of Staroselye, that the truth of any concept is revealed only in its opposite.\nMetaphysics or axiology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They wish to convey here that if arms were a disgrace to the hero, it would not have used them as a parable for words of Torah. Instead, they are an adornment for him, so the verse used them for its parable, saying that he should have words of Torah and wisdom in hand, like the sword on the hero\u2019s thigh, girded and accessible to him whenever he wishes to unsheathe it and use it to overpower his fellow\u2014this is his glory and splendor. This is the idea wherever they expound a midrashic parable or allegory; they believe that both \"\u201cthe internal and external\u201d are true\"\u2014\u200a\nBy expressing itself using symbols and myth that transcend single interpretations, Theosophical Kabbalah incorporates aspects of philosophy, Jewish theology, psychology and unconscious depth psychology, mysticism and meditation, Jewish exegesis, theurgy, and ethics, as well as overlapping with theory from magical elements. Its symbols can be read as questions which are their own existentialist answers (the Hebrew sephirah Chokmah-Wisdom, the beginning of Existence, is read etymologically by Kabbalists as the question \"Koach Mah?\" the \"Power of What?\"). Alternative listings of the Sephirot start with either Keter (Unconscious Will/Volition), or Chokmah (Wisdom), a philosophical duality between a Rational or Supra-Rational Creation, between whether the Mitzvot Judaic observances have reasons or transcend reasons in Divine Will, between whether study or good deeds is superior, and whether the symbols of Kabbalah should be read as primarily metaphysical intellectual cognition or Axiology values. Messianic redemption requires both ethical Tikkun olam and contemplative Kavanah. Sanford Drob sees every attempt to limit Kabbalah to one fixed dogmatic interpretation as necessarily bringing its own Deconstruction (Lurianic Kabbalah incorporates its own Shevirah self shattering; the Ein Sof transcends all of its infinite expressions; the infinite mystical Torah of the Tree of Life has no/infinite interpretations). The infinite axiology of the Ein Sof One, expressed through the Plural Many, overcomes the dangers of nihilism, or the antinomian mystical breaking of Jewish observance alluded to throughout Kabbalistic and Hasidic mysticisms.\nPrimary texts.\nLike the rest of the rabbinic literature, the texts of kabbalah were once part of an ongoing oral tradition, though, over the centuries, much of the oral tradition has been written down.\nJewish forms of esotericism existed over 2,000 years ago. Ben Sira (born c.\u2009170 BCE) warns against it, saying: \"You shall have no business with secret things\". Nonetheless, mystical studies were undertaken and resulted in mystical literature, the first being the Apocalyptic literature of the second and first pre-Christian centuries and which contained elements that carried over to later kabbalah.\nThroughout the centuries since, many texts have been produced, among them the ancient descriptions of \"Sefer Yetzirah\", the \"Heichalot\" mystical ascent literature, the \"Bahir\", \"Sefer Raziel HaMalakh\" and the \"Zohar\", the main text of Kabbalistic exegesis. Classic mystical Bible commentaries are included in fuller versions of the \"Mikraot Gedolot\" (Main Commentators). Cordoveran systemisation is presented in \"Pardes Rimonim\", philosophical articulation in the works of the Maharal, and Lurianic rectification in \"Etz Chayim\". Subsequent interpretation of Lurianic Kabbalah was made in the writings of Shalom Sharabi, in \"Nefesh HaChaim\" and the 20th-century \"Sulam\". Hasidism interpreted kabbalistic structures to their correspondence in inward perception. The Hasidic development of kabbalah incorporates a successive stage of Jewish mysticism from historical kabbalistic metaphysics.\nScholarship.\nThe first modern-academic historians of Judaism, the \"Wissenschaft des Judentums\" school of the 19th century, framed Judaism in solely rational terms in the emancipatory Haskalah spirit of their age. They opposed kabbalah and restricted its significance from Jewish historiography. In the mid-20th century, it was left to Gershom Scholem to overturn their stance, establishing the flourishing present-day academic investigation of Jewish mysticism, and making Heichalot, Kabbalistic and Hasidic texts the objects of scholarly critical-historical study. In Scholem's opinion, the mythical and mystical components of Judaism were at least as important as the rational ones, and he thought that they, rather than the exoteric Halakha or intellectualist Jewish philosophy, were the living subterranean stream in historical Jewish development that periodically broke out to renew the Jewish spirit and social life of the community. Scholem's magisterial \"Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism\" (1941) among his other seminal works, remains the major historical standard survey covering all main historical periods of Jewish mysticism. \nThough the work has sometimes been subject to criticism of various particularities , and proposals of a hermeneutical revision in emphasis were introduced, the encompassing sweep and depth of historical analysis in \"Major Trends\" remains without equal almost one hundred years later despite voluminous clarifying scholarship on the subject produced in the meantime expanding and deepening thd terrain.\nThe Hebrew University of Jerusalem has been a centre of this research, including Scholem and Isaiah Tishby, and more recently Joseph Dan, Yehuda Liebes, Rachel Elior, and Moshe Idel. Scholars across the eras of Jewish mysticism in America and Britain have included Alexander Altmann, Arthur Green, Lawrence Fine, Elliot Wolfson, Daniel Matt, Louis Jacobs and Ada Rapoport-Albert.\nMoshe Idel has opened up research on the Ecstatic Kabbalah alongside the theosophical, and has called for new multi-disciplinary approaches, beyond the philological and historical that have dominated until now, to include phenomenology, psychology, anthropology and comparative studies.\nClaims for authority.\nScholem provides a map of how authority is determined within the tradition in the document \"Revelation &amp; Tradition as Religious Categories\", first sent as the postscript to a letter from Jerusalem to Berlin in the early hours of 1933. The letter is addressed to Walter Benjamin. This postscript was published with minimal alterations as a chapter in Scholem\u2019s anthology of miscellaneous, longer articles some forty years later. The document resists summary encapsulation but, taken according to its own terms (and especially considering the context of its composition), it can scarcely be argued with even by rigorous atheists outside the tradition. This explanation is intended for the modern reader, ensconced in a secular world (in point of fact, it is literally intended for the reader Walter Benjamin).\nA version of the above-mentioned diagram for the attainment of authority within the tradition appears in a more open and less precise form in the first lecture of \"Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism,\" and an account in yet another work explains that the Kabbalists themselves expressively describe the nomination of authority as proceeding from conversations with the Prophet Elijah.\nScholem writes: \u201cSince the beginnings of Rabbinical Judaism the Prophet Elijah has been a figure profoundly identified with the central preoccupations of Jewry: it is he who carries the divine message from generation to generation, he who at the end of time will reconcile all the conflicting opinions, traditions, and doctrines manifested in Judaism. Men of true piety meet him in the market place no less than in visions. Since he was conceived as the vigilant custodian of the Jewish religious ideal, the Messianic guardian and guarantor of the tradition, it was impossible to suppose that he would ever reveal or communicate anything that was in fundamental contradiction with the tradition. Thus by its very nature the interpretation of mystical experience as a revelation of the Prophet Elijah tended far more to confirm than to question the traditional authority [of the Torah and its acknowledged library of commentaries].\u201d\nMethods of Calling Upon Authority\nThe entire frame and character of composition in early Kabbalah, prior to the late-phase in Safed, appeals to an argument of authority grounded in the antiquity of authority, by speaking in ancient voices and mimicking ancient texts from a contemporary present in the high and late Middle Ages.As a result the foundational works in the main phase of Kabbalah as a literature, from Bahir to the Zohar, pseudepigraphically claim, or are ascribed, ancient authorship. For example, \"Sefer Raziel HaMalach\", an astro-magical text partly based on a magical manual of late antiquity, \"Sefer ha-Razim\", was, according to the Kabbalists, transmitted by the angel Raziel to Adam after he was evicted from Eden. Another famous work, the early \"Sefer Yetzirah\", is dated back to the patriarch Abraham. Most (in fact, to our knowledge, all) of the earliest extant versions of the Sefer Yetzirah do not internally claim authorship by Abraham, but this attribution grows up as a tradition or rumor following the text. This tendency toward pseudepigraphy has its roots in apocalyptic literature, which claims that esoteric knowledge such as magic, divination and astrology was transmitted to humans in the mythic past by the two angels, Aza and Azaz'el (in other places, Azaz'el and Uzaz'el) who fell from heaven (see Genesis 6:4). This tendency relates to a phase so early that it can scarcely be called Kabbalah, according to the trend in historiography, but relates to the twin traditions referred to as the way of the chariot and the account of creation. The book of Enoch (in which conversations between angels and sn antediluvian patriarch are recorded), for example, may be almost as old as our extant version of the Book of Daniel if ascriptions of the Aramaic Fragment of Enoch are found to be reliable. \nAs well as ascribing ancient origins to texts, and reception of Oral Torah transmission, the greatest and most innovative Kabbalists claimed mystical reception of direct personal divine revelations, by heavenly mentors such as Elijah the Prophet, the souls of Talmudic sages, prophetic revelation, soul ascents on high, etc. On this basis Arthur Green speculates, that while the \"Zohar\" was written by a circle of Kabbalists in medieval Spain, they may have believed they were channeling the souls and direct revelations from the earlier mystic circle of Shimon bar Yochai in 2nd century Galilee depicted in the Zohar's narrative. Academics have compared the Zohar mystic circle of Spain with the romanticised wandering mystic circle of Galilee described in the text. Similarly, Isaac Luria gathered his disciples at the traditional Idra assembly location, placing each in the seat of their former reincarnations as students of Shimon bar Yochai.\nCriticism.\nDistinction between Jews and non-Jews.\nOne point of view is represented by the Hasidic work \"Tanya\" (1797), in order to argue that Jews have a different character of soul: while a non-Jew, according to the author Shneur Zalman of Liadi (1745\u20131812), can achieve a high level of spirituality, similar to an angel, his soul is still fundamentally different in character, from a Jewish one. A similar view is found in \"Kuzari\", an early medieval philosophical book by Yehuda Halevi (1075\u20131141). Another rabbi, Abraham Yehudah Khein (1878\u20131957), believed that spiritually elevated Gentiles have essentially Jewish souls, \"who just lack the formal conversion to Judaism\", and that unspiritual Jews are \"Jewish merely by their birth documents\".\nDavid Halperin argues that the collapse of Kabbalah's influence among Western European Jews over the course of the 17th and 18th century was a result of the cognitive dissonance they experienced between the negative perception of Gentiles found in some exponents of Kabbalah, and their own positive dealings with non-Jews, which were rapidly expanding and improving during this period due to the influence of the Enlightenment. Pinchas Elijah Hurwitz, a Lithuanian-Galician Kabbalist of the 18th century and a moderate proponent of the Haskalah, called for brotherly love and solidarity between all nations, and believed that Kabbalah can empower everyone, Jews and Gentiles alike, with prophetic abilities.\nThe works of Abraham Cohen de Herrera (1570\u20131635) are full of references to Gentile mystical philosophers. Such approach was particularly common among the Renaissance and post-Renaissance Italian Jews. Late medieval and Renaissance Italian Kabbalists, such as Yohanan Alemanno, David Messer Leon and Abraham Yagel, adhered to humanistic ideals and incorporated teachings of various Christian and pagan mystics.\nA prime representative of this humanist stream in Kabbalah was Elijah Benamozegh, who explicitly praised Christianity, Islam, Zoroastrianism, Hinduism, as well as a whole range of ancient pagan mystical systems. He believed that Kabbalah can reconcile the differences between the world's religions, which represent different facets and stages of the universal human spirituality. In his writings, Benamozegh interprets the New Testament, Hadith, Vedas, Avesta and pagan mysteries according to the Kabbalistic theosophy.\nE. R. Wolfson provides numerous examples from the 17th to the 20th centuries, which would challenge the view of Halperin as well as the notion that \"modern Judaism\" has rejected or dismissed this \"outdated aspect\" of the religion and, he argues, there are still Kabbalists today who harbor this view. He argues that, while it is accurate to say that many Jews do and would find this distinction offensive, it is inaccurate to say that the idea has been totally rejected in all circles. As Wolfson has argued, it is an ethical demand on the part of scholars to continue to be vigilant with regard to this matter and in this way the tradition can be refined from within.\nMedieval views.\nThe idea that there are ten divine \"sephirot\" could evolve over time into the idea that \"God is One being, yet in that One being there are Ten\" which opens up a debate about what the \"correct beliefs\" in God should be, according to Judaism. The early Kabbalists debated the relationship of the Sephirot to God, adopting a range of essentialist versus instrumental views. Modern Kabbalah, based on the 16th century systemisations of Cordovero and Isaac Luria, takes an intermediate position: the instrumental vessels of the sephirot are created, but their inner light is from the undifferentiated Ohr Ein Sof essence.\nMaimonides (12th century), celebrated by followers for his Jewish rationalism, rejected many of the pre-Kabbalistic Hekalot texts, particularly \"Shi'ur Qomah\" whose starkly anthropomorphic vision of God he considered heretical. Maimonides, a centrally important medieval sage of Judaism, lived at the time of the first emergence of Kabbalah. Modern scholarship views the systemisation and publication of their historic oral doctrine by Kabbalists, as a move to rebut the threat on Judaic observance by the populance misreading Maimonides' ideal of philosophical contemplation over ritual performance in his philosophical \"Guide for the Perplexed\". They objected to Maimonides equating the Talmudic Maaseh Breishit and Maaseh Merkavah secrets of the Torah with Aristotelean physics and metaphysics in that work and in his legal Mishneh Torah, teaching that their own Theosophy, centred on an esoteric metaphysics of traditional Jewish practice, is the Torah's true inner meaning.\nThe Kabbalist medieval rabbinic sage Nachmanides (13th century), classic debater against Maimonidean rationalism, provides background to many kabbalistic ideas. An entire book entitled \"Gevuras Aryeh\" was authored by Yaakov Yehuda Aryeh Leib Frenkel and originally published in 1915, specifically to explain and elaborate on the kabbalistic concepts addressed by Nachmanides in his classic commentary to the Five books of Moses.\nAbraham Maimonides (in the spirit of his father Maimonides, Saadiah Gaon, and other predecessors) explains at length in his \"Mil\u1e25amot HaShem\" that God is in no way literally within time or space nor physically outside time or space, since time and space simply do not apply to his being whatsoever, emphasizing the Monotheist Oneness of Divine transcendence unlike any worldly conception. Kabbalah's Panentheism expressed by Moses Cordovero and Hasidic thought, agrees that God's essence transcends all expression, but holds in contrast that existence is a manifestation of God's Being, descending immanently through spiritual and physical condensations of the divine light. By incorporating the pluralist many within God, God's Oneness is deepened to exclude the true existence of anything but God. In Hasidic Panentheism, the world is acosmic from the Divine view, yet real from its own perspective.\nAround the 1230s, Rabbi Meir ben Simon of Narbonne wrote an epistle (included in his \"Mil\u1e25emet Mitzvah\") against his contemporaries, the early Kabbalists, characterizing them as blasphemers who even approach heresy. He particularly singled out the Sefer Bahir, rejecting the attribution of its authorship to the \"tanna\" R. Ne\u1e25unya ben ha-Kanah and describing some of its content as truly heretical.\nLeon of Modena, a 17th-century Venetian critic of Kabbalah, wrote that if we were to accept the Kabbalah, then the Christian trinity would be compatible with Judaism, as the Trinity seems to resemble the kabbalistic doctrine of the \"sephirot\". This was in response to the belief that some European Jews of the period addressed individual \"sephirot\" in their prayers, although the practice was apparently uncommon. Apologists explained that Jews may have been praying \"for\" and not necessarily \"to\" the aspects of Godliness represented by the \"sephirot\". In contrast to Christianity, Kabbalists declare that one prays only \"to Him (God's Essence, male solely by metaphor in Hebrew's gendered grammar), not to his attributes (sephirot or any other Divine manifestations or forms of incarnation)\". Kabbalists directed their prayers to God's essence through the channels of particular sephirot using kavanot Divine names intentions. To pray to a manifestation of God introduces false division among the sephirot, disrupting their absolute unity, dependence and dissolving into the transcendent Ein Sof; the sephirot descend throughout Creation, only appearing from man's perception of God, where God manifests by any variety of numbers.\nYaakov Emden (1697\u20131776), himself an Orthodox Kabbalist who venerated the Zohar, concerned to battle Sabbatean misuse of Kabbalah, wrote the \"Mitpa\u1e25ath Sfarim\" (\"Veil of the Books\"), an astute critique of the Zohar in which he concludes that certain parts of the Zohar contain heretical teaching and therefore could not have been written by Shimon bar Yochai.\nVilna Gaon (1720\u20131797) held the Zohar and Luria in deep reverence, critically emending classic Judaic texts from historically accumulated errors by his acute acumen and scholarly belief in the perfect unity of Kabbalah revelation and Rabbinic Judaism. Though a Lurianic Kabbalist, his commentaries sometimes chose Zoharic interpretation over Luria when he felt the matter lent itself to a more exoteric view. Although proficient in mathematics and sciences and recommending their necessity for understanding Talmud, he had no use for canonical medieval Jewish philosophy, declaring that Maimonides had been \"misled by the accursed philosophy\" in denying belief in the external occult matters of demons, incantations and amulets.\nViews of Kabbalists regarding Jewish philosophy varied from those who appreciated Maimonidean and other classic medieval philosophical works, integrating them with Kabbalah and seeing profound human philosophical and Divine kabbalistic wisdoms as compatible, to those who polemicised against religious philosophy during times when it became overly rationalist and dogmatic. A dictum commonly cited by Kabbalists, \"Kabbalah begins where Philosophy ends\", can be read as either appreciation or polemic. Moses of Burgos (late 13th century) declared, \"these philosophers whose wisdom you are praising end where we begin\". Moses Cordovero appreciated the influence of Maimonides in his quasi-rational systemisation. From its inception, the Theosophical Kabbalah became permeated by terminology adapted from philosophy and given new mystical meanings, such as its early integration with the Neoplatonism of Ibn Gabirol and use of Aristotelian terms of Form over Matter.\nOrthodox Judaism.\nPinchas Giller and Adin Steinsaltz write that Kabbalah is best described as the inner part of traditional Jewish religion, the official metaphysics of Judaism, that was essential to normative Judaism until fairly recently. With the decline of Jewish life in medieval Spain, it displaced rationalist Jewish philosophy until the modern rise of Haskalah enlightenment, receiving a revival in our postmodern age. While Judaism always maintained a minority tradition of religious rationalist criticism of Kabbalah, Gershom Scholem writes that Lurianic Kabbalah was the last theology that was near predominant in Jewish life. While Lurianism represented the elite of esoteric Kabbalism, its mythic-messianic divine drama and personalisation of reincarnation captured the popular imagination in Jewish folklore and in the Sabbatean and Hasidic social movements. Giller notes that the former Zoharic-Cordoverian classic Kabbalah represented a common exoteric popular view of Kabbalah, as depicted in early modern Musar literature.\nIn contemporary Orthodox Judaism there is dispute as to the status of the Zohar's and Isaac Luria's (the Arizal) Kabbalistic teachings. While a portion of Modern Orthodox, followers of the Dor De'ah movement, and many students of the Rambam reject Arizal's Kabbalistic teachings, as well as deny that the \"Zohar\" is authoritative or from Shimon bar Yohai, all three of these groups accept the existence and validity of the Talmudic \"Maaseh Breishit and Maaseh Merkavah\" mysticism. Their disagreement concerns whether the Kabbalistic teachings promulgated today are accurate representations of those esoteric teachings to which the Talmud refers. The mainstream Haredi (Hasidic, Lithuanian, Oriental) and Religious Zionist Jewish movements revere Luria and the Kabbalah, but one can find both rabbis who sympathize with such a view, while disagreeing with it, as well as rabbis who consider such a view heresy. The Haredi Eliyahu Dessler and Gedaliah Nadel maintained that it is acceptable to believe that the Zohar was not written by Shimon bar Yochai and that it had a late authorship. Yechiel Yaakov Weinberg mentioned the possibility of Christian influence in the Kabbalah with the \"Kabbalistic vision of the Messiah as the redeemer of all mankind\" being \"the Jewish counterpart to Christ.\"\nModern Orthodox Judaism, representing an inclination to rationalism, embrace of academic scholarship, and the individual's autonomy to define Judaism, embodies a diversity of views regarding Kabbalah from a Neo-Hasidic spirituality to Maimonist anti-Kabbalism. German Neo-Orthodoxy, the movement pioneered by Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch, also proposed more nuanced views on Kabbalah, arguably stressing its ethical, rather than external-theurgic dimension. Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch did utilise the Zohar in his monumental legal work, Horeb. In a book to help define central theological issues in Modern Orthodoxy, Michael J. Harris writes that the relationship between Modern Orthodoxy and mysticism has been under-discussed. He sees a deficiency of spirituality in Modern Orthodoxy, as well as the dangers in a fundamentalist adoption of Kabbalah. He suggests the development of neo-Kabbalistic adaptions of Jewish mysticism compatible with rationalism, offering a variety of precedent models from past thinkers ranging from the mystical inclusivism of Abraham Isaac Kook to a compartmentalisation between Halakha and mysticism.\nYi\u1e25yeh Qafe\u1e25, a 20th-century Yemenite Jewish leader and Chief Rabbi of Yemen, spearheaded the Dor De'ah (\"generation of knowledge\") movement to counteract the influence of the Zohar and modern Kabbalah. He authored critiques of mysticism in general and Lurianic Kabbalah in particular; his magnum opus was Mil\u1e25amoth ha-Shem (\"Wars of Hashem\") against what he perceived as neo-platonic and gnostic influences on Judaism with the publication and distribution of the Zohar since the 13th Century. Rabbi Yi\u1e25yah founded yeshivot, rabbinical schools, and synagogues that featured a rationalist approach to Judaism based on the Talmud and works of Saadia Gaon and Maimonides (Rambam). In recent years, rationalists holding similar views as those of the Dor De'ah movement have described themselves as \"talmide ha-Rambam\" (disciples of Maimonides) rather than as being aligned with Dor De'ah, and are more theologically aligned with the rationalism of Modern Orthodox Judaism than with Orthodox \u1e24asidic or \u1e24aredi communities.\nYeshayahu Leibowitz (1903\u20131994), an ultra-rationalist Modern Orthodox philosopher, referred to Kabbalah \"a collection of \"pagan superstitions\" and \"idol worship\" in remarks given in 1990.\nConservative, Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism.\nKabbalah tended to be rejected by most Jews in the Conservative and Reform movements, though its influences were not eliminated. While it was generally not studied as a discipline, the Kabbalistic \"Kabbalat Shabbat\" service remained part of liberal liturgy, as did the \"Yedid Nefesh\" prayer. Nevertheless, in the 1960s, Saul Lieberman of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America is reputed to have introduced a lecture by Scholem on Kabbalah with a statement that Kabbalah itself was \"nonsense\", but the academic study of Kabbalah was \"scholarship\". This view became popular among many Jews, who viewed the subject as worthy of study, but who did not accept Kabbalah as teaching literal truths.\nAccording to Bradley Shavit Artson (Dean of the Conservative Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Many western Jews insisted that their future and their freedom required shedding what they perceived as parochial orientalism. They fashioned a Judaism that was decorous and strictly rational (according to 19th-century European standards), denigrating Kabbalah as backward, superstitious, and marginal.\nHowever, in the late 20th century and early 21st century there has been a revival in interest in Kabbalah in all branches of liberal Judaism. The Kabbalistic 12th-century prayer \"Anim Zemirot\" was restored to the new Conservative \"Sim Shalom\" \"siddur\", as was the \"B'rikh Shmeh\" passage from the Zohar, and the mystical \"Ushpizin\" service welcoming to the \"Sukkah\" the spirits of Jewish forebears. \"Anim Zemirot\" and the 16th-century mystical poem \"Lekhah Dodi\" reappeared in the Reform Siddur \"Gates of Prayer\" in 1975. All rabbinical seminaries now teach several courses in Kabbalah\u2014in Conservative Judaism, both the Jewish Theological Seminary of America and the Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies of the American Jewish University in Los Angeles have full-time instructors in Kabbalah and \"Hasidut\", Eitan Fishbane and Pinchas Giller, respectively. In Reform Judaism, Sharon Koren teaches at the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion. Reform rabbis like Herbert Weiner and Lawrence Kushner have renewed interest in Kabbalah among Reform Jews. At the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College, Joel Hecker is the full-time instructor teaching courses in Kabbalah and Hasidut.\nAccording to Artson:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Reconstructionist movement, under the leadership of Arthur Green in the 1980s and 1990s, and with the influence of Zalman Schachter Shalomi, brought a strong openness to Kabbalah and hasidic elements that then came to play prominent roles in the Kol ha-Neshamah siddur series.\nAntinomian Kabbalah.\nAntinomian strands of Kabbalah reject or invert normal religious principles as a way of attempting purification. In these frameworks, transgression or sin itself is viewed as a spiritual necessity, capable of unleashing hidden divine sparks trapped in impure realms. The most prominent antinomian movements within Judaism were the Sabbateans and the Frankists. Followers of Sabbatai Zevi believed that the coming of the messiah rendered Jewish commandments obsolete, with some sects engaging in ritualistic violations of the Law. Many of his adherents continued to view his actions as part of a hidden divine plan. In the 18th century, Jacob Frank pushed this theology further, advocating explicitly for \"redemption through sin,\" such as ritualized orgies and incest. Eventually, the Frankists were encouraged to mass convert into Catholicism. These movements were widely condemned as heretical but demonstrate the extent to which mystical ideas could support radical or subversive, reinterpretations of Jewish life.\nContemporary study.\nTeaching of classic esoteric kabbalah texts and practice remained traditional until recent times, passed on in Judaism from master to disciple, or studied by leading rabbinic scholars. This changed in the 20th century, through conscious reform and the secular openness of knowledge. In contemporary times kabbalah is studied in four very different, though sometimes overlapping, ways.\nThe traditional method, employed among Jews since the 16th century, continues in learned study circles. Its prerequisite is to either be born Jewish or be a convert and to join a group of kabbalists under the tutelage of a rabbi, since the 18th century more likely a Hasidic one, though others exist among Sephardi-Mizrachi, and Lithuanian rabbinic scholars. Beyond elite, historical esoteric kabbalah, the public-communally studied texts of Hasidic thought explain kabbalistic concepts for wide spiritual application, through their own concern with popular psychological perception of Divine Panentheism.\nA second, new universalist form, is the method of modern-style Jewish organisations and writers, who seek to disseminate kabbalah to every man, woman and child regardless of race or class, especially since the Western interest in mysticism from the 1960s. These derive from various cross-denominational Jewish interests in kabbalah, and range from considered theology to popularised forms that often adopt New Age terminology and beliefs for wider communication. These groups highlight or interpret kabbalah through non-particularist, universalist aspects.\nA third way is non-Jewish organisations, mystery schools, initiation bodies, fraternities and secret societies, the most popular of which are Freemasonry, Rosicrucianism and the Golden Dawn, although hundreds of similar societies claim a kabbalistic lineage. These derive from syncretic combinations of Jewish kabbalah with Christian, occultist or contemporary New Age spirituality. As a separate spiritual tradition in Western esotericism since the Renaissance, with different aims from its Jewish origin, the non-Jewish traditions differ significantly and do not give an accurate representation of the Jewish spiritual understanding (or vice versa).\nFourthly, since the mid-20th century, historical-critical scholarly investigation of all eras of Jewish mysticism has flourished into an established department of university Jewish studies. Where the first academic historians of Judaism in the 19th century opposed and marginalised kabbalah, Gershom Scholem and his successors repositioned the historiography of Jewish mysticism as a central, vital component of Judaic renewal through history. Cross-disciplinary academic revisions of Scholem's and others' theories are regularly published for a wide readership.\nUniversalist Jewish organisations.\nIn recent decades, Kabbalah has seen a resurgence of interest, with several modern groups and individuals exploring its profound teachings. These contemporary interpretations of Kabbalah offer a fresh perspective on this ancient mystical tradition, often bridging the gap between traditional wisdom and modern thought. Some of these interpretations emphasize universalist and philosophical approaches, seeking to enrich secular disciplines through the lens of Kabbalistic insights. Others have gained attention for their unique blends of spirituality and popular culture, attracting followers from diverse backgrounds. These modern expressions of Kabbalah showcase its enduring appeal and relevance in today's world.\n\"Bnei Baruch\" is a group of Kabbalah students, based in Israel. Study materials are available in over 25 languages for free online or at printing cost. Michael Laitman established Bnei Baruch in 1991, following the passing of his teacher, Ashlag's son Rav Baruch Ashlag. Laitman named his group Bnei Baruch (sons of Baruch) to commemorate the memory of his mentor. The teaching strongly suggests restricting one's studies to 'authentic sources', kabbalists of the direct lineage of master to disciple.\nThe \"Kabbalah Centre\" was founded in the United States in 1965 as The National Research Institute of Kabbalah by Philip Berg and Rav Yehuda Tzvi Brandwein, disciple of Yehuda Ashlag's. Later Philip Berg and his wife re-established the organisation as the worldwide Kabbalah Centre. The organization's leaders \"vehemently reject\" Orthodox Jewish identity.\nThe \"Kabbalah Society\", run by Warren Kenton, an organisation based instead on pre-Lurianic Medieval Kabbalah presented in universalist style. In contrast, traditional kabbalists read earlier kabbalah through later Lurianism and the systemisations of 16th-century Safed.\n\"The New Kabbalah\", website and books by Sanford L. Drob, is a scholarly intellectual investigation of the Lurianic symbolism in the perspective of modern and postmodern intellectual thought. It seeks a \"new kabbalah\" rooted in the historical tradition through its academic study, but universalised through dialogue with modern philosophy and psychology. This approach seeks to enrich the secular disciplines, while uncovering intellectual insights formerly implicit in kabbalah's essential myth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By being equipped with the nonlinear concepts of dialectical, psychoanalytic, and deconstructive thought we can begin to make sense of the kabbalistic symbols in our own time. So equipped, we are today probably in a better position to understand the philosophical aspects of the kabbalah than were the kabbalists themselves.\nThe Kabbalah of Information is described in the 2018 book \"From Infinity to Man: The Fundamental Ideas of Kabbalah Within the Framework of Information Theory and Quantum Physics\" written by Ukrainian-born professor and businessman Eduard Shyfrin. The main tenet of the teaching is \"In the beginning He created information\", rephrasing the famous saying of Nahmanides, \"In the beginning He created primordial matter and He didn't create anything else, just shaped it and formed it.\"\nHasidic.\nSince the 18th century, Jewish mystical development has continued in Hasidic Judaism, turning kabbalah into a social revival with texts that internalise mystical thought. Among different schools, Chabad-Lubavitch and Breslav with related organisations, give outward looking spiritual resources and textual learning for secular Jews. The Intellectual Hasidism of Chabad most emphasises the spread and understanding of kabbalah through its explanation in Hasidic thought, articulating the Divine meaning within kabbalah through human rational analogies, uniting the spiritual and material, esoteric and exoteric in their Divine source:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hasidic thought instructs in the predominance of spiritual form over physical matter, the advantage of matter when it is purified, and the advantage of form when integrated with matter. The two are to be unified so one cannot detect where either begins or ends, for \"the Divine beginning is implanted in the end and the end in the beginning\" (Sefer Yetzira 1:7). The One God created both for one purpose\u00a0\u2013 to reveal the holy light of His hidden power. Only both united complete the perfection desired by the Creator.\nNeo-Hasidic.\nFrom the early 20th century, Neo-Hasidism expressed a modernist or non-Orthodox Jewish interest in Jewish mysticism, becoming influential among Modern Orthodox, Conservative, Reform and Reconstructionalist Jewish denominations from the 1960s, and organised through the Jewish Renewal and Chavurah movements. The writings and teachings of Zalman Schachter-Shalomi, Arthur Green, Lawrence Kushner, Herbert Weiner and others, has sought a critically selective, non-fundamentalist neo- Kabbalistic and Hasidic study and mystical spirituality among modernist Jews. The contemporary proliferation of scholarship by Jewish mysticism academia has contributed to critical adaptions of Jewish mysticism. Arthur Green's translations from the religious writings of Hillel Zeitlin conceive the latter to be a precursor of contemporary Neo-Hasidism. Reform rabbi Herbert Weiner's \"Nine and a Half Mystics: The Kabbala Today\" (1969), a travelogue among Kabbalists and Hasidim, brought perceptive insights into Jewish mysticism to many Reform Jews. Leading Reform philosopher Eugene Borowitz described the Orthodox Hasidic Adin Steinsaltz (\"The Thirteen Petalled Rose\") and Aryeh Kaplan as major presenters of Kabbalistic spirituality for modernists today.\nRav Kook.\nThe writings of Abraham Isaac Kook (1864\u20131935), first chief rabbi of Mandate Palestine and visionary, incorporate kabbalistic themes through his own poetic language and concern with human and divine unity. His influence is in the Religious Zionist community, who follow his aim that the legal and imaginative aspects of Judaism should interfuse:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Due to the alienation from the \"secret of God\" [i.e. Kabbalah], the higher qualities of the depths of Godly life are reduced to trivia that do not penetrate the depth of the soul. When this happens, the most mighty force is missing from the soul of nation and individual, and Exile finds favor essentially... We should not negate any conception based on rectitude and awe of Heaven of any form\u2014only the aspect of such an approach that desires to negate the mysteries and their great influence on the spirit of the nation. This is a tragedy that we must combat with counsel and understanding, with holiness and courage.\nCathar and Mandaean parallels.\nIn several important areas of his history of the Kabbalah, Gershom Scholem investigates and considers the evidence of an interactivity of influence between the medieval Kabbalists of Provence and the Cathar heresy which was also prevalent in the region at the same time that the earliest works of medieval Kabbalah were written. In \"Jewish Influence on Christian Reform Movements\", Louis I. Newman concluded, \"Point by point, parallels can be found between Catharist views and the Kabbalah, and it may well be that at times there was an exchange of opinions between Jewish and Gentile mystics.\" Earlier in the same book, Newman observed:\n\u2026that the powerful Jewish culture in Languedoc, which had acquired sufficient strength to assume an aggressive, propagandist policy, created a milieu wherefrom movements of religious independence arose readily and spontaneously. Contact and association between Christian princes and their Jewish officials and friends stimulated the state of mind which facilitated the banishment of orthodoxy, the clearing away of the debris of Catholic theology. Unwilling to receive Jewish thought, the princes and laity turned towards Catharism, then being preached in their domains.\nNathaniel Deutsch writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nR.J. Zwi Werblowsky suggests Mandaeism has more commonality with Kabbalah than with Merkabah mysticism, such as cosmogony and sexual imagery. The Thousand and Twelve Questions, Scroll of Exalted Kingship, and Alma Ri\u0161aia Rba associate the alphabet with the creation of the world, a concept found in Sefer Yetzirah and the Bahir.\nMandaean names for uthras (angels or guardians) have been found in Jewish magical texts. Abatur appears to be inscribed inside a Jewish incantation bowl in a variant form as \"Abi\u1e6dur\". Pt\u1e25i\u02bel (), apparently a variant of the Mandaic Ptahil, is found in Sefer HaRazim, listed among other angels who stand on the ninth step of the second firmament.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n\u00a0This article\u00a0incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16907", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16907", "title": "Kaang", "text": "Kaang may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16908", "revid": "43286508", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16908", "title": "Kadiogo Province", "text": "Kadiogo is a province of Burkina Faso, located in its Centre Region. Its area is of 2,805\u00a0km2, containing six departments and a population of 3,032,668 (2019). Its capital is also the state capital, Ouagadougou. It features the central plateau of the country. It is highly urbanized and is both the most populated and the most densely populated province.\nDepartments.\nKadiogo is divided into seven departments:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16910", "revid": "50128823", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16910", "title": "Kagoshima", "text": ", is the capital city of Kagoshima Prefecture, Japan. As of 2024[ [update]], the city had an estimated population of 583,966 in 285,992 households, and a population density of 1100 persons per km2. The total area of the city is .\nEtymology.\nWhile the kanji used to spell (\u9e7f\u5150\u5cf6) literally mean \"deer child island\", or \"island of the fawn\", the source etymology is not clear, and may refer to \"cliff\" or \"sailor\" in the local dialect.\nLocal names for the city include , , and .\nHistory.\nKagoshima is located in ancient Satsuma Province and was the center of the territory of the Shimazu clan from the late Kamakura period. Kagoshima City developed political and commercial port city in the Edo period (1603\u20131868) when it became the seat of the Shimazu's Satsuma Domain, which was one of the most powerful and wealthiest domains in the country throughout the period, and though international trade was banned for much of this period, the city remained quite active and prosperous. Satsuma Domain also had control over the semi-independent vassal kingdom of Ry\u016bky\u016b; Ry\u016bky\u016ban traders and emissaries frequented the city, and a special Ryukyuan embassy building was established to help administer relations between the two polities and to house visitors and emissaries. Kagoshima was also a significant center of Christian activity in Japan prior to the imposition of bans against that religion in the late 16th and early 17th centuries. The domain was also a center of anti-Tokugawa shogunate sentiment. During the Bakumatsu period, Kagoshima was bombarded by the British Royal Navy in 1863 to punish the \"daimy\u014d\" of Satsuma Domain for the murder of Namamugi Incident on the T\u014dkaid\u014d highway the previous year and its refusal to pay an indemnity in compensation. Many of the leaders of the Meiji restoration and the Boshin War were from Satsuma.\nJapan's Industrial Revolution is said to have started here, stimulated by the young students' train station. Nineteen young men of Satsuma broke the shogunate's ban on foreign travel, traveling to various industrial locations in the United Kingdom before returning to share the benefits of the best of Western science and technology. A statue was erected outside the train station as a tribute to them.\nKagoshima was also the birthplace of T\u014dg\u014d Heihachir\u014d. After naval studies in England between 1871 and 1878, Togo's role as Chief Admiral of the Grand Fleet of the Imperial Japanese Navy in the Russo-Japanese War made him a legend in Japanese military history, and earned him the nickname 'Nelson of the Orient' in Britain. He led the Grand Fleet to two startling victories in 1904 and 1905, completely destroying Russia as a naval power in the East, and thereby contributing to the failed revolution in Russia in 1905.\nThe Japanese diplomat Sadomitsu Sakoguchi revolutionized Kagoshima's environmental economic plan with his dissertation on water pollution and orange harvesting.\nIn 1912, the first tram line was established in Kagoshima.\nThe 1914 eruption of the volcano across the bay from the city spread ash throughout the municipality, but relatively little disruption ensued.\nWorld War II.\nOn the night of June 17, 1945, the 314th bombardment wing of the Army Air Corps (120 B-29s) dropped 809.6 tons of incendiary and cluster bombs destroying of Kagoshima (44.1 percent of the built-up area). Kagoshima was targeted because of its largely expanded naval port as well as its position as a railway terminus. A single B-29 was lost to unknown circumstances. Area bombing was chosen over precision bombing because of the cloudy weather over Japan during the middle of June. The planes were forced to navigate and bomb entirely by radar. Japanese intelligence predicted that the Allied Forces would assault Kagoshima and the Ariake Bay areas of southern Kyushu to gain naval and air bases to strike Tokyo.\nAs a municipality.\nThe municipality was officially founded on April 1, 1889. It was merged with Taniyama City to inaugurate new Kagoshima City on April 29, 1967. The city was designed a core city with increased local autonomy on April 1, 1996.\nOn November 1, 2004, Yoshida Town, Sakurajima Town, Kiire Town, Matsumoto Town and K\u014driyama Town were merged into Kagoshima City.\nGeography.\nLocated at the southwestern tip of the island of Ky\u016bsh\u016b, Kagoshima is the largest city in the prefecture by some margin. It has been nicknamed the \"Naples of the Eastern world\" for its bay location (Aira Caldera), hot climate, and emblematic stratovolcano, Sakurajima. It is situated about 280 kilometers south of Fukuoka City and about 180 kilometers south of Kumamoto City. The city covers the northeastern part of the Satsuma Peninsula and the entire area of Sakurajima. Most of the plains are occupied by commercial, residential, and industrial areas, with almost no cultivated areas. Many of the slopes and mountain areas near the city have been developed into residential areas, with many housing complexes and new towns. However, road development has not kept up with the city's growth, and all major roads are heavily congested in the mornings and evenings. Kagoshima is constantly bombarded by ash from the eruptions of Sakurajima and is at risk of a major volcanic disaster; the residents have developed methods to cope with this including school-children wearing helmets to protect from volcanic debris.\nNeighboring municipalities.\nKagoshima Prefecture\nClimate.\nKagoshima has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfa\"), possessing the highest year average temperature and winter average temperature in mainland Japan. It is marked by mild, relatively dry winters; warm, humid springs; hot, humid summers; and mild, relatively dry autumns.\nDemographics.\nAs of 1 January 2020, Kagoshima City has an http:// of 595,049 and a population density of 1,087 persons per km2. The total area is . According to the http:// by the Kagoshima Prefecture Department of Planning and Promotion, the population of the prefecture at large was 1,680,319. The city's total area nearly doubled between 2003 and 2005 as a result of five towns: the towns of K\u014driyama and Matsumoto (both from Hioki District) the town of Kiire (from Ibusuki District) and the towns of Sakurajima and Yoshida (both from Kagoshima District). All areas were merged into Kagoshima City on 1 November 2004.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSakurajima.\n is a settlement on Sakurajima island that was previously a municipally distinct town located in Kagoshima District, Kagoshima Prefecture, Japan. As of 2003, the town had an estimated population of 4,504 and a density of 139.88 persons per km2. The total area was 32.20\u00a0km2.\nGovernment.\nKagoshima has a mayor-council form of government with a directly elected mayor and a unicameral city council of 45 members. Kagoshma contributes 17 members to the Kagoshima Prefectural Assembly. In terms of national politics, the city is divided between the Kagoshima 1st district and Kagoshima 2nd district of the lower house of the Diet of Japan.\nEconomy.\nKagoshima is a regional commercial center, with an economy centered on light manufacturing, tourism and commercial fishing.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nKagoshima has 79 public elementary schools, 38 public junior high schools, two public high schools and one combined junior/senior high school operated by the city government and 11 public high schools operated by the Kagoshima Prefectural Board of Education. There is one combined national elementary/middle school. There are also 14 private high schools. The prefecture also operates seven special education schools for the handicapped.\nTransportation.\nAirport.\nKagoshima Airport in Kirishima ( NE of Kagoshima)\nRailways.\n - Kyushu Shinkansen\n Kagoshima-Ch\u016b\u014d \n - Kagoshima Main Line\nJA Satsuma-Matsumoto - Kami-Ijuin - Kagoshima-Ch\u016b\u014d - Kagoshima\n - Nipp\u014d Main Line\n\u25a0 Ry\u016bgamizu - Kagoshima\n - Ibusuki Makurazaki Line\n\u25a0 Kagoshima-Ch\u016b\u014d - K\u014drimoto - Minami-Kagoshima - Usuki - Taniyama - Jigenji - Sakanoue - Goino - Hirakawa - Sesekushi - Nakamy\u014d - Kiire - Maenohama - Nukumi\nSister cities.\nKagoshima is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLocal attractions.\nSports.\nKagoshima was one of the host cities of the official 1998 Women's Volleyball World Championship. Kagoshima is home to Kagoshima United. They play their home games at Kagoshima Kamoike Stadium.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16911", "revid": "51064385", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16911", "title": "Kajang", "text": "City in Selangor, Malaysia\nKajang is a town in Hulu Langat District, Selangor, Malaysia, located southeast of Kuala Lumpur. Kajang, along with much of Hulu Langat District, is governed by the Kajang Municipal Council. Kajang town is located on the eastern banks of the Langat River. It is surrounded by Cheras, Semenyih, Bangi, Putrajaya and Serdang.\nAccording to the 2020 census, the local authority area (which includes Kajang, Cheras, Balakong, Bangi, Semenyih and Pekan Hulu Langat) has a population of 1.05 million people, making it the second largest city in Malaysia.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Kajang\" is believed to have originated from the language of Temuan tribes (Orang Asli) who populated the Langat valley in the 17th-18th centuries. In their language \"kajang\" referred to their art of weaving screwpine or pandanus leaves, which were prevalent in much of the country. A similar theory stated that settlers from the neighboring domain of Sungai Ujong (Negeri Sembilan) once constructed huts (\"pondok\") in the area with thatched roof made from folded (\"lipat kajang\") screwpine leaves.\nIt is also believed that the name \"kajang\" may have originated from the Buginese word \"berkajang\", meaning \"camp\" or \"accommodation\".\nGeography and development.\nKajang is about 22 km (14 miles), about a half hour's drive, from Kuala Lumpur's central business district, primarily through Jalan Cheras and the Grand Saga Expressway; both routes are part of the Malaysia Federal Route 1 system. By railway, it is about 40 minutes' ride from KL Sentral on the MRT Kajang line.\nThe first planned township built and developed just outside Kajang is Bandar Baru Bangi which was first developed in 1974 by the Selangor state government. As a \"satellite town\" to Kajang proper, some government offices including the district land office begin operating out of the township. The Kajang bus and taxi terminal called \"Hentian Kajang\" is also located at the eastern end of the township. \nMore townships were developed closer to Kajang town in recent years, such as Taman Prima Saujana, Sungai Chua and Taman Kajang Perdana (Kajang Highlands). High-end developments in Kajang include Twin Palms, Sri Banyan, Country Heights, Jade Hills, Saujana Impian, TTDI Grove, Tropicana Heights and Prima Paramount. Areas surrounding these townships are accessible via the SILK Expressway, Kajang-Seremban Expressway, Grand Saga Expressway and the North\u2013South Expressway Southern Route.\nGeographical definition.\nSome adjacent areas in the neighbouring Sepang region including Kampung Sungai Merab, Desa Pinggiran Putra and Kampung Dato Abu Bakar Baginda, though rarely regarded as part of Kajang, are included in Kajang's postal code of 43000 due to their proximity to Kajang than to Sepang town itself. \nThe townships in Bandar Seri Putra and Bukit Mahkota, while closer to Bangi Lama (Bangi old town) also use the postal code of Kajang. Bangi Lama, Bandar Seri Putra and Bukit Mahkota are located in Mukim Kajang.\nHistory.\nOrang Asli tribes had already established settlements in what is now Kajang as early as the 16th century, however the first recorded settlement was found in 1709 by additional Orang Asli settlers who relocated from the Klang valley. Kajang town in its present form was founded in the 1870s, in the aftermath of the Klang War. In its early days, it was settled by Mandailings and Minangkabau people from Sumatra in the then-Dutch East Indies, followed by Chinese tin miners.\nAs with other towns in Selangor, Kajang as a modern town owes its rise in particular to tin mines and plantations which were opened around the 1890s. A famous coffee estates was \"Inch Kenneth Estate\" managed by the Kindersley brothers, who were among the first to plant rubber in the country on a commercial basis.During the Japanese invasion, Kajang was bombed on 12 January 1942, a day after the fall of Kuala Lumpur. The bombs, meant for the railway station, missed its target, and hit a nearby church instead.\nIn 1948, a Communist insurgency against British forces and their allies across Malaya began, which led to the Malayan Emergency with fighting soon spreading to Kajang. Guerrilla leader Lau Yew died in combat just outside Kajang in July 1948; British forces photographed his corpse and printed the image onto leaflets to distribute around Kajang.\nKajang was granted municipal status on 1 January 1997. Previously it was under the jurisdiction of the Hulu Langat District Council (\"Majlis Daerah Hulu Langat\", MDHL). Kajang was the administrative centre of the Hulu Langat region until it was relocated to Bandar Baru Bangi in 1992.\nDemographics.\nIn the 2020 census, the Kajang Municipal Council is home to 1.05 million people, making it Malaysia's second most populous local authority after Kuala Lumpur. Over 350,000 people reside in Kajang town itself and its immediate suburbs.\nKajang's main population centres are Sg. Sekamat, Taman Saujana Impian, Sg. Kantan, Sg. Jelok, Sg. Ramal, Sungai Chua, Jalan Reko, Jalan Bukit, Taman Jenaris, Taman Prima Saujana, Taman Kantan Permai, Taman Kajang Perdana, Taman Sri Ramal, Taman Bukit Mewah, Kajang Prima, Bandar Teknologi Kajang, Hillpark and Bandar Baru Bangi.\nLandmarks.\nThe city centre of Kajang is the colonial quarter near the Stadium Kajang MRT station, including the streets of Jalan Mendaling, Jalan Stadium, Jalan Sulaiman and Jalan Raja Haroun. The buildings in the area were constructed around the 1900s to 1930s. The architecture of these shophouses are a combination of traditional Chinese and European designs. The ground floor was used mostly for commercial activities and the upper floor as the family living quarters.One of Kajang's landmarks is Kajang Stadium which is situated in the heart of the town. The stadium can accommodate up to 5,000 people and is used throughout the year for the community soccer competitions.\nAnother landmark is the Kajang Jamek Mosque, which is recognisable by its bright yellow facade.\nTransportation.\nCar.\nKajang is served by a network of tolled expressways and federal highways.\nFederal Route 1, the premier north\u2013south federal route of Peninsular Malaysia, runs through downtown Kajang as Jalan Cheras from Cheras until Sungai Jernih and Stadium Kajang and then southwards as Jalan Semenyih from Stadium Kajang until Semenyih, Beranang and neighbouring Seremban, Negeri Sembilan with the rest of the route terminating in Johor Bahru, Johor - the route's southern terminus. On Federal Route 1, Kajang is 22\u00a0km from Kuala Lumpur, 8\u00a0km from Semenyih and 43\u00a0km from Seremban.\nA stretch of Federal Route 1 is concurrent with the Cheras-Kajang toll road (aka the \"Grand Saga Expressway\") between Taman Connaught and Bukit Dukung. The SILK Expressway starts in Serdang, which then runs through Balakong and then forms a beltway around downtown Kajang before ending near Bandar Baru Bangi. It is the main ring road for Kajang.\nPLUS Expressway exit 210 (Kajang Interchange) serves the vicinity of Kajang and Bangi. It also links the expressway to SILK Expressway and SKVE Expressway as well as B11 which runs concurrently with SILK and SKVE from SKVE's Serdang Interchange at Seri Kembangan until SILK's Sungai Chua Interchange at Kajang, before being detoured out of SILK after the interchange. B11 continues on its own separate route until its terminus at Stadium Kajang just before the intersection with Jalan Cheras, Jalan Semenyih and Jalan Reko\nFrom Ampang Jaya, one can reach Kajang with state routes B62 and B52.\nPublic transport.\nKajang railway station is the principal rail station of Kajang. It is an interchange station between the MRT Kajang Line, KTM Seremban Line and KTM ETS. The station is the southern terminal of the MRT line.\nKajang station, though so named, does not directly serve downtown Kajang; Stadium Kajang MRT is located in the actual downtown area, along with Sungai Jernih MRT.\nBukit Dukung MRT directly serves the Sungai Sekamat area and the northern parts of Kajang.\nFood and tourism.\nKajang is famous for its \"satay\", a form of skewered barbecued meat. Informally, Kajang is known as the \"Satay Town.\"\nGovernment and infrastructure.\nThe Malaysia Prison Complex (\"Kompleks Penjara Kajang\"), Prison Department of Malaysia is headquartered in Kajang.\nShopping.\nKajang has multiple shopping complexes, amongst them is the Billion Shopping Center formerly in Kajang town, which now has relocated to Bandar Teknologi Kajang. Other shopping centres located in Kajang are Plaza Metro Kajang, Metro Point and Kompleks Kota Kajang. Metro Avenue is a new shopping district located opposite SMJK Yu Hua Kajang and Kajang High School.\nFacilities and amenities.\nKajang Hospital is the primary public hospital in the city.\nPrivate medical centres function 24 hours and include facilities such as \"Poliklinik MUC @Metro Point\", \"Klinik Mediviron Prima Saujana\", \"Kajang Plaza Medical Centre\" (KPMC) and \"KPJ Kajang Specialist Hospital\".\nThe Hulu Langat District Police Headquarters are located in the town centre, across the Highway 1 junction from the Post Office. Federal government agencies with their branch in Kajang include the National Registration Department, Immigration Department, Transportation Department, and Hulu Langat Education Office.\nEducation.\nTertiary.\nKajang is home to institutions of higher learning, which includes:\nPolitics.\nKajang is a state seat in the Selangor State Legislative Assembly and one of three state seats within the Bangi parliamentary seat in the Dewan Rakyat of the Parliament besides Balakong and Sungai Ramal. Bangi has been represented by Member of Parliament (MP) Syahredzan Johan of Pakatan Harapan (PH) since 2022 and Kajang has been represented by Member of the Legislative Assembly (MLA) David Cheong Kian Young of PH since 2023.\nBefore that, Kajang was one of the state seats within the Hulu Langat parliamentary seat in the Dewan Rakyat of the Parliament besides Semenyih and Dusun Tua.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nstyle=\"width:100%\" class=\"wraplinks\""}
{"id": "16912", "revid": "43940844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16912", "title": "Carl Benz", "text": "German designer and engineer (1844\u20131929)\nCarl (or Karl) Friedrich Benz (; born Karl Friedrich Michael Vaillant; 25 November 1844 \u2013 4 April 1929) was a German engine designer and automotive engineer. His Benz Patent-Motorwagen from 1885 is considered the first practical, modern automobile and the first car to be put into series production. He received a patent for the motorcar in 1886, the same year he first publicly drove the Benz Patent-Motorwagen.\nHis company Benz &amp; Cie., based in Mannheim, was the world's first automobile plant and largest of its day. In 1926, it merged with Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft to form Daimler-Benz, which produces the Mercedes-Benz among other brands.\nFor his achievements, Benz is widely regarded as \"the father of the car\", and as the \"father of the automobile industry\".\nEarly life.\nCarl Benz was born Karl Friedrich Michael Vaillant on 25 November 1844 in M\u00fchlburg, now a borough of Karlsruhe, Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, which is part of modern Germany. His parents were Josephine Vaillant and a locomotive driver, Johann Georg Benz, whom she married a few months later. According to German law, the child acquired the name \"Benz\" by legal marriage of his parents. When he was two years old, his father died of pneumonia, and his name was changed to Karl Friedrich Benz in remembrance of his father.\nDespite living in near poverty, his mother strove to give him a good education. Benz attended the local school in Karlsruhe and was a prodigious student. In 1853, at the age of nine, he started at the scientifically oriented Lyceum. Next he studied at Karlsruhe's polytechnical school under the instruction of Ferdinand Redtenbacher.\nBenz had originally focused his studies on locksmithing, but he eventually followed his father's steps toward locomotive engineering. On 30 September 1860, at age 15, he passed the entrance exam for mechanical engineering for the Karlsruhe polytechnical school, which he subsequently attended. Benz graduated on 9 July 1864, aged 19.\nFollowing his formal education, Benz had seven years of professional training in several companies, but did not fit well in any of them. The training started in Karlsruhe with two years of varied jobs in a mechanical engineering company.\nHe then moved to Mannheim to work as a draftsman and designer in a scales factory. In 1868, he went to Pforzheim to work for the bridge building company \"Gebr\u00fcder Benckiser Eisenwerke und Maschinenfabrik\". He later went to Vienna for a short period to work at an iron construction company.\nBenz's first factory and early inventions (1871\u20131882).\nIn 1871, Benz joined August Ritter, in launching the Iron Foundry and Mechanical Workshop in Mannheim, later renamed Factory for Machines for Sheet-metal Working.\nThe enterprise's first year went very badly. Ritter turned out to be unreliable, and the business's tools were impounded. The difficulty was overcome when Benz's fianc\u00e9e, Bertha Ringer, bought out Ritter's share in the company, using her dowry.\nOn 20 July 1872, Benz and Bertha Ringer married. They had five children: Eugen (1873), Richard (1874), Clara (1877), Thilde (1882), and Ellen (1890).\nDespite the business misfortunes, Benz led in the development of new engines in the early factory he and his wife owned. To get more revenue, in 1878 he began to work on new patents. First, he concentrated on creating a reliable petrol two-stroke engine. Benz finished his two-stroke engine on 31 December 1879, and was granted a patent for it on 28 June 1880.\nWhile designing what would become the production standard for his two-stroke engine, Benz patented the speed regulation system, the ignition using sparks with battery, the spark plug, the carburetor, the clutch, the gear shift, and the water radiator.\nBenz's Gasmotoren-Fabrik Mannheim (1882\u20131883).\nProblems arose again when the banks at Mannheim demanded that the Benz's enterprise be incorporated due to the high production costs it maintained. They were forced to improvise an association with photographer Emil B\u00fchler and his brother (a cheese merchant), to get additional bank support. The company became the joint-stock company \"Gasmotoren Fabrik Mannheim\" in 1882.\nAfter all the necessary incorporation agreements, Benz was unhappy because he was left with merely five percent of the shares and a modest position as director. Worst of all, his ideas weren't considered when designing new products, so he withdrew from that corporation just one year later, in 1883.\nBenz and Cie. and the Benz Patent-Motorwagen.\nBenz's lifelong hobby brought him to a bicycle repair shop in Mannheim owned by Max Rose and Friedrich Wilhelm E\u00dflinger. In 1883, the three founded a new company producing industrial machines: Benz &amp; Companie Rheinische Gasmotoren-Fabrik, usually referred to as Benz &amp; Cie. Quickly growing to twenty-five employees, it soon began to produce static gas engines as well.\nThe success of the company gave Benz the opportunity to indulge in his old passion of designing a \"horseless carriage\". Based on his experience with, and fondness for, bicycles, he used similar technology when he created an automobile. It featured wire wheels (unlike carriages' wooden ones) with a four-stroke engine of his own design between the rear wheels, with a very advanced coil ignition and evaporative cooling rather than a radiator. Power was transmitted by means of two roller chains to the rear axle. Benz finished his creation in 1885 and named it \"Benz Patent-Motorwagen\".\nThe Motorwagen was patented on 29 January 1886 as DRP-37435: \"automobile fueled by gas\". The 1885 version was difficult to control, leading to a collision with a wall during a public demonstration. The first successful tests on public roads were carried out in the early summer of 1886. Benz first publicly drove the car on 3 July 1886 in Mannheim at a top speed of 16 km/h (10 mph). The next year Benz created the Motorwagen Model 2, which had several modifications, and in 1889, the definitive Model 3 with wooden wheels was introduced, showing at the Paris Expo the same year.\nBenz began to sell the vehicle (advertising it as \"Benz Patent-Motorwagen\") in the late summer of 1888, making it the first commercially available automobile in history. The second customer of the Motorwagen was a Parisian bicycle manufacturer Emile Roger, who had already been building Benz engines under license from Benz for several years. Roger added the Benz automobiles (many built in France) to the line he carried in Paris and initially most were sold there.\nThe early 1888 version of the Motorwagen had only two gears and could not climb hills unaided. This limitation was rectified after Bertha Benz drove one of the vehicles a great distance and suggested to her husband the addition of a third gear for climbing hills. In the course of this trip she also invented brake pads.\nBertha Benz's long-distance drive.\nThe world's first long distance automobile trip was undertaken by Bertha Benz using a Model 3. On the morning of 5 August 1888 Bertha \u2013 supposedly without the knowledge of her husband \u2013 took the vehicle on a trip from Mannheim to Pforzheim to visit her mother, taking her sons Eugen and Richard with her. In addition to having to locate pharmacies along the way to refuel, she repaired various technical and mechanical problems. One of these included the invention of brake lining; after some longer downhill slopes she ordered a shoemaker to nail leather onto the brake blocks. Bertha Benz and sons finally arrived at nightfall, announcing the achievement to Karl by telegram. It had been her intention to demonstrate the feasibility of using the Benz Motorwagen for travel and to generate publicity in the manner now referred to as live marketing. Today, the event is celebrated every two years in Germany with an antique automobile rally.\nIn 2008, the Bertha Benz Memorial Route was officially approved as a route of the industrial heritage of mankind, because it follows Bertha Benz's tracks of the world's first long-distance journey by automobile in 1888. The public can now follow the of signposted route from Mannheim via Heidelberg to Pforzheim (Black Forest) and back. The return trip \u2013 which didn't go through Heidelberg \u2013 was along a different, slightly shorter route, as shown on the maps of the Bertha Benz Memorial Route.\nBenz's Model 3 made its wide-scale debut to the world in the 1889 World's Fair in Paris; about twenty-five Motorwagens were built between 1886 and 1893.\nBenz and Cie. expansion.\nThe great demand for static internal combustion engines forced Benz to enlarge the factory in Mannheim, and in 1886 a new building located on Waldhofstrasse (operating until 1908) was added. \"Benz &amp; Cie.\" had grown in the interim from 50 employees in 1889 to 430 in 1899.\nDuring the last years of the nineteenth century, \"Benz\" was the largest automobile company in the world with 572 units produced in 1899.\nBecause of its size, in 1899, \"Benz &amp; Cie.\" became a joint-stock company with the arrival of Friedrich von Fischer and Julius Gan\u00df, who came aboard as members of the Board of Management. Gan\u00df worked in the commercialization department, which is somewhat similar to marketing in contemporary corporations.\nThe new directors recommended that Benz should create a less expensive automobile suitable for mass production. From 1893 to 1900 Benz sold the four wheel, two seat \"Victoria\", a two-passenger automobile with a engine, which could reach the top speed of and had a pivotal front axle operated by a roller-chained tiller for steering. The model was successful with 85 units sold in 1893, and was produced in a four-seated version with face-to-face seat benches called the \"Vis-\u00e0-Vis\".\nFrom 1894 to 1902, Benz produced over 1,200 of what some consider the first mass-produced car, the Velocipede, later known as the Benz Velo. The early Velo had a 1L engine, and later a engine. giving a top speed of .\nThe \"Velo\" participated in the world's first automobile race, the 1894 Paris to Rouen, where \u00c9mile Roger finished 14th, after covering the in 10 hours 01-minute at an average speed of .\nIn 1895, Benz designed the first truck with an internal combustion engine in history. Benz also built the first motor buses in history in 1895, for the \"Netphener\" bus company.\nIn 1896, Benz was granted a patent for his design of the first flat engine. It had horizontally opposed pistons, a design in which the corresponding pistons reach top dead centre simultaneously, thus balancing each other with respect to momentum. Many flat engines, particularly those with four or fewer cylinders, are arranged as \"boxer engines\", \"boxermotor\" in German, and also are known as \"horizontally opposed engines\". This design is still used by Porsche, Subaru, and some high performance engines used in racing cars. In motorcycles, the most famous boxer engine is found in BMW Motorrad, though the boxer engine design was used in many other models, including Victoria, Harley-Davidson XA, Z\u00fcndapp, Wooler, Douglas Dragonfly, Ratier, Universal, IMZ-Ural, Dnepr, Gnome et Rh\u00f4ne, Chang Jiang, Marusho, and the Honda Gold Wing.\nAlthough Gottlieb Daimler died in March 1900\u2014and there is no evidence that Benz and Daimler knew each other nor that they knew about each other's early achievements\u2014eventually, competition with Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft (DMG) in Stuttgart began to challenge the leadership of Benz &amp; Cie. In October 1900, the main designer of DMG, Wilhelm Maybach, built the engine that would later be used in the \"Mercedes-35hp\" of 1902. The engine was built to the specifications of Emil Jellinek under a contract for him to purchase thirty-six vehicles with the engine, and for him to become a dealer of the special series. Jellinek stipulated the new engine be named Daimler-\"Mercedes\" (for his daughter). Maybach would quit DMG in 1907, but he designed the model and all of the important changes. After testing, the first was delivered to Jellinek on 22 December 1900. Jellinek continued to make suggestions for changes to the model and obtained good results racing the automobile in the next few years, encouraging DMG to engage in commercial production of automobiles, which they did in 1902.\nBenz countered with \"Parsifal\", introduced in 1903 with a vertical twin engine that achieved a top speed of . Then, without consulting Benz, the other directors hired some French designers.\nFrance was a country with an extensive automobile industry based on Maybach's creations. Because of this action, after difficult discussions, Benz announced his retirement from design management on 24 January 1903, although he remained as director on the Board of Management through its merger with DMG in 1926 and, remained on the board of the new Daimler-Benz corporation until his death in 1929.\nBenz's sons Eugen and Richard left Benz &amp; Cie. in 1903, but Richard returned to the company in 1904 as the designer of passenger vehicles.\nThat year, sales of Benz &amp; Cie. reached 3,480 automobiles, and the company remained the leading manufacturer of automobiles.\nAlong with continuing as a director of Benz &amp; Cie., Benz founded another company, \"C.\u00a0Benz S\u00f6hne\", (with his son Eugen and closely held within the family), a privately held company for manufacturing automobiles. The brand name used the first initial of Benz's first name, \"Carl\".\nBlitzen Benz.\nIn 1909, the \"Blitzen Benz\" was built in Mannheim by Benz &amp; Cie. The bird-beaked vehicle had a 21.5-liter (1312ci), engine, and on 9 November 1909 in the hands of Victor H\u00e9mery of France, the land speed racer at Brooklands, set a record of , said to be \"faster than any plane, train, or automobile\" at the time, a record that was not exceeded for ten years by any other vehicle. It was transported to several countries, including the United States, to establish multiple records of this achievement.\nBenz S\u00f6hne, 1906\u20131923.\nCarl Benz, Bertha Benz, and their son, Eugen, moved east of Mannheim to live in nearby Ladenburg, and solely with their own capital, founded the private company, C.\u00a0Benz Sons (German: \"Benz S\u00f6hne\") in 1906, producing automobiles and gas engines. The latter type was replaced by petrol engines because of lack of demand.\nThis company never issued stocks publicly, building its own line of automobiles independently from Benz &amp; Cie., which was located in Mannheim. The \"Benz Sons\" automobiles were of good quality and became popular in London as taxis.\nIn 1912, Benz liquidated all of his shares in Benz Sons and left the family-held company in Ladenburg to Eugen and Richard, but he remained as a director of Benz &amp; Cie.\nDuring a birthday celebration for him in his home town of Karlsruhe on 25 November 1914, the seventy-year-old Benz was awarded an honorary doctorate by his alma mater, the \"Karlsruhe University\", thereby becoming\u2014Dr.\u00a0Ing. h.\u00a0c.\u00a0 Benz.\nAlmost from the very beginning of the production of automobiles, participation in sports car racing became a major method to gain publicity for manufacturers. At first, the production models were raced and the Benz \"Velo\" participated in the first automobile race: Paris to Rouen 1894. Later, investment in developing racecars for motorsports produced returns through sales generated by the association of the name of the automobile with the winners. Unique race vehicles were built at the time such as the first mid-engine and aerodynamically designed, \"Tropfenwagen\", a \"teardrop\" body introduced at the 1923 European Grand Prix at Monza.\nIn the last production year of the \"Benz Sons\" company, 1923, three hundred and fifty units were built. During the following year, 1924, Benz built two additional 8/25\u00a0hp units of the automobile manufactured by this company, tailored for his personal use, which he never sold; they are still preserved.\nToward Daimler-Benz and the first Mercedes-Benz in 1926.\nThe German economic crisis worsened. In 1923 \"Benz &amp; Cie.\" produced only 1,382 units in Mannheim, and \"DMG\" made only 1,020 in Stuttgart. The average cost of an automobile was 25\u00a0million marks because of rapid inflation. Negotiations between the two companies resumed and in 1924 they signed an \"Agreement of Mutual Interest\" valid until the year 2000. Both enterprises standardized design, production, purchasing, sales, and advertising\u2014marketing their automobile models jointly\u2014although keeping their respective brands.\nOn 28 June 1926, Benz &amp; Cie. and DMG finally merged as the Daimler-Benz company, baptizing all of its automobiles as Mercedes-Benz, honoring the most important model of the DMG automobiles, the 1902 Mercedes 35 hp, along with the Benz name. The name of Mercedes 35 hp had been chosen for ten-year-old Merc\u00e9d\u00e8s Jellinek, the daughter of Emil Jellinek who had set the specifications for the new model. Between 1900 and 1909 he was a member of DMG's board of management, however had resigned long before the merger.\nBenz was a member of the new \"Daimler-Benz\" board of management for the remainder of his life. A new logo was created in 1926, consisting of a three pointed star (representing Daimler's motto: \"engines for land, air, and water\") surrounded by traditional laurels from the Benz logo, and the brand of all of its automobiles was labeled \"Mercedes-Benz\". Model names would follow the brand name in the same convention as today.\nThe next year, 1927, the number of units sold tripled to 7,918 and the diesel line was launched for truck production. In 1928, the \"Mercedes-Benz SSK\" was presented.\nOn 4 April 1929, Benz died at his home in Ladenburg at the age of 84 from a bronchial inflammation. Until her death on 5 May 1944, Bertha Benz continued to reside in their last home. Members of the family resided in the home for thirty more years. The Benz home has now been designated as historic and is used as a scientific meeting facility for a nonprofit foundation, the \"Gottlieb Daimler and Karl Benz Foundation\". \nLegacy.\nThe Carl-Benz-Gymnasium Ladenburg in Ladenburg, where he lived until his death, is named in his honor, as are the Automuseum Dr. Carl Benz in Ladenburg and the Carl-Benz-Stadion of football club SV Waldhof Mannheim.\nIn 1984, Benz was inducted into the Automotive Hall of Fame, and into the European Automotive Hall of Fame. In 2022, he was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 2011, a dramatized television film about the life of Carl and Bertha Benz was made named \"Carl &amp; Bertha\", which premiered on 11 May and was aired by Das Erste on 23 May. A trailer of the film and a \"making of\" special were released on YouTube.\nReferences.\nSpecific\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral"}
{"id": "16913", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16913", "title": "Ceiba pentandra", "text": "Kapok tree cultivated for seed fibre\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCeiba pentandra is a tropical tree of the order Malvales and the family Malvaceae (previously placed in the family Bombacaceae), native to Central America, the Caribbean, and the northern half of South America; some authors also consider it native in western and central Africa. It is widely introduced in other tropical regions including South and Southeast Asia, where it is cultivated.\nThe tree and the cotton-like fluff obtained from its seed pods are commonly known in English as kapok, a Malay-derived name which originally applied to the related species \"Bombax ceiba\", a native of tropical Asia. In Spanish-speaking countries the tree is commonly known as \"ceiba\" and in French-speaking countries as fromager. The tree is cultivated for its cottonlike seed fibre, particularly in south-east Asia, and is also known as the Java cotton, Java kapok, silk-cotton or samauma.\nCharacteristics.\nThe tree grows up to a maximum verified height of tall as confirmed by laser measurement, but with unverified claims of specimens up to tall. These very large trees are in the Neotropics or tropical Africa. In Southeast Asia \"C. pentandra\" often only reaches . Trunks can often be up to in diameter above the extensive buttress roots. The very largest individuals, however, can be thick or more above the buttresses.\nThe buttress roots can be clearly seen in photographs extending up the trunk of some specimens and extending out from the trunk as much as and then continuing below ground to a total length of \nThe trunk and many of the larger branches are often crowded with large simple thorns. These major branches, usually 4 to 6 in number, can be up to thick and form a crown of foliage as much as in width. The palmately divided leaves are composed of 5\u20139 (\u201315) leaflets, the leaflets long and broad.\nThe tree is briefly deciduous, and it is during this leafless period that it flowers, with umbels of large flowers ranging from creamy white to red. After blooming, the trees produce several hundred pods containing seeds surrounded by a fluffy, yellowish fibre that is a mix of lignin and cellulose.\nOrigin and distribution.\n\"Ceiba pentandra\" originated in the American tropics. Although it is generally thought to have been introduced to Africa by humans, there is no historical evidence of this, and there is strong ecological, botanical and cytological evidence that the tree is native to western and central Africa. The dispersal mechanism by which the tree may have crossed the Atlantic Ocean is uncertain, but the fruits float, and could have been transported by ocean currents. Domesticated in West Africa, \"Ceiba pentandra\" is possibly native from Cape Verde eastwards to Chad and southwards to Angola. It has been introduced from there to East Africa and Asia.\nTaxonomy.\n\"Ceiba pentandra\" is generally considered monotypic with no infraspecific taxa, though some authors have divided it into three genetic varieties:\nUses.\nThe commercial tree is most heavily cultivated in the rainforests of Asia, notably in Java (hence one of its common names), the Philippines, Malaysia, and Hainan Island in China, as well as in South America.\nThe flowers are an important source of nectar and pollen for honey bees and bats. Bats are the primary pollinators of the night-blooming flowers.\nKapok fibre.\nNative tribes along the Amazon River harvest the fibre to wrap around their blowgun darts. The fibres create a seal that allows the pressure to force the dart through the tube.\nThe fibre is light, very buoyant, resilient, resistant to water, but very flammable. The process of harvesting and separating the fibre is labour-intensive and menial. It is difficult to spin, but is used as an alternative to down as filling in mattresses, pillows, upholstery, zafus, and stuffed toys such as teddy bears, and for insulation. It was previously popularly used in life jackets and similar devices, until synthetic materials largely replaced the fibre.\nTraditional medicinal uses.\n\"Ceiba pentandra\" bark decoction has been used as a diuretic, as an aphrodisiac, and to treat headache, as well as type II diabetes. It is used as an additive in some versions of the psychedelic drink Ayahuasca.\nSeed oil.\nA vegetable oil can be pressed from the seeds. The oil has a yellow colour and a pleasant, mild odour and taste, resembling cottonseed oil. It becomes rancid quickly when exposed to air. Kapok oil is produced in India, Indonesia and Malaysia. It has an iodine value of 85\u2013100; this makes it a nondrying oil, which means that it does not dry out significantly when exposed to air. The oil has some potential as a biofuel and in paint preparation.\nReligion and folklore.\nThe tree is a sacred symbol in Maya mythology.\nThe Ceiba is an important tree in Cuban culture. It is a sacred tree in Palo, Arar\u00e1 and Santer\u00eda. Following from its religious connection to the Orishas of Santer\u00eda, many rituals and customs surround the tree: offerings are placed or buried near the trunks, the trees are circumambulated, and the trees are generally not tampered with out of respect. Unrelated to Santer\u00eda, the ceiba also features in folklore, and is associated with g\u00fcijes.\nAccording to the folklore of Trinidad and Tobago, the Castle of the Devil is a huge \"C. pentandra\" growing deep in the forest in which Bazil, the demon of death, was imprisoned by a carpenter. The carpenter tricked the devil into entering the tree in which he carved seven rooms, one above the other, into the trunk. Folklore claims that Bazil still resides in that tree.\nMost masks from Burkina Faso, especially those of Bobo and Mossi people, are carved from \"C. pentandra\" timber.\n\"C. pentandra\" is known as the /Kankantri among the Afro-Surinamese community, particularly those that subscribe to the Winti religion. The important role of the Kankantrie among the Afro-Surinamese as a holy residence for spirits has been documented for centuries. Despite the efforts of the Dutch to convert African slaves in Suriname to Christianity, many black Surinamese people continue to hold the tree in high regard. Cutting the tree is avoided even in modern-day Suriname, and often paired with a ritual in cases where cutting the tree is unavoidable.\nSymbolism.\n\"Ceiba pentandra\" is the national emblem of Guatemala, Puerto Rico, and Equatorial Guinea. It appears on the coat of arms and flag of Equatorial Guinea.\nThe Cotton Tree was a landmark in downtown Freetown, Sierra Leone, and is considered a symbol of freedom for the former slaves that immigrated there. The roughly 40-metre tall tree snapped near the base, and fell in a storm on 24 May 2023.\nSaigon, the former name of Ho Chi Minh City, may be derived from \"S\u00e0i\" (Sino-Vietnamese \"palisade\" etc.) and the Vietnamese name for the Kapok tree \"(b\u00f4ng) g\u00f2n\", although, in this instance, the tree intended to be named may well be, not the New World \"Ceiba pentandra\", but the Old World \"Bombax ceiba\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16914", "revid": "30911873", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16914", "title": "Kyushu", "text": "Island and region of Japan\n is the third-largest and most southerly of Japan's four main islands. In the past, it has been known as , and . The historical regional name referred to Kyushu and its surrounding islands. Kyushu has a land area of and a population of 14,311,224 in 2018.\nThere is a theory that Kyushu was in ancient times home to its own independent dynasty, where a unique, southern-influenced culture and tradition distinct from that of Honshu flourished.\nIn the 8th-century Taih\u014d Code reforms, Dazaifu was established as a special administrative term for the region.\nGeography.\nThe island is mountainous, and Japan's largest active volcano, Mount Aso at , is on Kyushu. There are many other signs of tectonic activity, including numerous areas of hot springs. The most famous of these are in Beppu, on the east shore, and around Mt. Aso in central Kyushu. The island is separated from Honshu by the Kanmon Straits. Being the nearest island to the Asian continent, historically it is the gateway to Japan.\nThe total area is which makes it the 37th largest island in the world. It is slightly larger than Taiwan's total area of . The highest elevation is on Mount Kuj\u016b.\nThe name \"Ky\u016bsh\u016b\" comes from the nine ancient provinces of Saikaid\u014d situated on the island: Chikuzen, Chikugo, Hizen, Higo, Buzen, Bungo, Hy\u016bga, \u014csumi, and Satsuma.\nToday's is a politically defined region that consists of the seven prefectures on the island of Kyushu (which also includes the former Tsushima and Iki as part of Nagasaki), plus Okinawa Prefecture to the south:\nPopulation.\nKyushu has 10.3percent of the population of Japan. Most of Kyushu's population is concentrated along the northwest, in the cities of Fukuoka and Kitakyushu, with population corridors stretching southwest into Sasebo and Nagasaki and south into Kumamoto and Kagoshima. Except for Oita and Miyazaki, the eastern seaboard shows a general decline in population.\nPolitically, Kyushu is described as a stronghold of the Liberal Democratic Party.\nPer Japanese census data, the Kyushu region's population with Ryukyu Islands (Okinawa and Kagoshima Prefectures) has experienced a large decline since around 2000. However, the population decline in total is mild because of the relatively high birth rate of Ryukyuans both within the Ryukyuan lands (Okinawa and Kagoshima) and throughout the Kyushu region. In addition, the other prefectures in Kyushu also have exceptionally high TFRs compared to the rest of Japan. \nEnvironment and agriculture.\nParts of Kyushu have a subtropical climate, particularly Miyazaki Prefecture and Kagoshima Prefecture. Major agricultural products are rice, tea, tobacco, sweet potatoes, and soy; silk is also widely produced.\nBesides the volcanic area of the south, there are significant mud hot springs in the northern part of the island, around Beppu. The springs are the site of occurrence of certain extremophile microorganisms, which are capable of surviving in extremely hot environments.\nThere are two World Natural Heritage sites in Kyushu: Yakushima (registered in 1993) and Amami-\u014cshima Island, Tokunoshima Island, northern part of Okinawa Island, and Iriomote Island (registered in 2021).\nEconomy.\nKyushu's economy accounts for approximately 10% of Japan's total economic output, making it comparable to countries such as Iran, Norway, Austria, the United Arab Emirates, and Thailand. It is the fourth largest economic region in Japan, following the three major metropolitan areas of Tokyo, Osaka, and Nagoya.\nKyushu's economy has a well-balanced industrial structure, ranging from primary industries such as agriculture, to secondary industries such as manufacturing, and tertiary industries such as retail, services, and tourism. Agricultural output in the region amounts to 1.8 trillion yen (20% share of the national total), and the region is a major domestic production center for the automobile and semiconductor industries. Kyushu also has a thriving healthcare industry, including medical and nursing care, and numerous research and manufacturing facilities in the fields of hydrogen, solar power, and other renewable energies. Furthermore, Fukuoka City, Kitakyushu City and Okinawa Prefecture have been designated as National Strategic Special Zones, which are expected to have an economic ripple effect on the entire Kyushu region through the creation of innovation in industry and the promotion of new entrepreneurship and start-ups.\nKyushu is a region with strong economic ties to Asia. For example, Asia accounted for 420 (77.9%) of the 539 overseas expansion cases of Kyushu-Yamaguchi companies from 2010 to 2019, and Asia accounted for 61.1% of Kyushu-Yamaguchi's total exports in 2019, 7.4 percentage points higher than the nation as a whole. As the logistics node between Japan and Asia, the ports of Hakata and Kitakyushu handle a large number of international containers. In addition, the number of cruise ship calls in 2019 was 772, with Kyushu accounting for 26.9% of the nation's total.\nKyushu is noted for various types of porcelain, including Arita, Imari, Satsuma, and Karatsu. Heavy industry is concentrated in the north around Fukuoka, Kitakyushu, Nagasaki, and Oita and includes chemicals, automobiles, semiconductors, metal processing, shipbuilding, etc. The island of Tanegashima hosts the Tanegashima Space Center, which is the largest rocket-launch complex in Japan.\nTransportation.\nKyushu is linked to the larger island of Honshu by the Kanmon Railway Tunnel, which carries the non-Shinkansen trains of the Kyushu Railway Company, and the newer Shin-Kanmon Tunnel carrying the San'y\u014d Shinkansen. Railways on the island are operated by the Kyushu Railway Company and West Japan Railway Company, as well as a variety of smaller companies such as Amagi Railway and Nishitetsu Railway. Kyushu Shinkansen trains operate between major cities on the island, such as Fukuoka and Kagoshima, with an additional route between Takeo-Onsen and Nagasaki which has been in operation since September 2022. Kyushu is also known for its scenic train services, such as the Limited Express Yufuin no Mori and Limited Express Kawasemi Yamasemi.\nThe Kanmon Bridge and Kanmon Roadway Tunnel also connect the island with Honshu, allowing for vehicular transport between the two. The Kyushu Expressway spans the length of the island, linking the Higashikyushu Expressway and Ibusuki Skyline, connecting major cities such as Fukuoka and Kumamoto along the way. There are also many quiet country roads, including popular tourist routes such as the Nichinan coast road and the Aso Panorama Line in Kumamoto Prefecture. Bus services are available and cover 2,400 routes within Kyushu's cities, connecting many other destinations.\nSeveral passenger and car ferry services connect both northern and southern Kyushu with main port cities on the main island of Honshu (Kobe, Osaka, Tokyo) and Shikoku.\nThe island's main larger airport is served by Fukuoka Airport which provides most domestic and internationals flights. There are also smaller airports across island including Kumamoto Airport, Miyazaki Airport, Oita Airport, Saga Airport, Nagasaki Airport Kitakyushu Airport and Kagoshima Airport.\nEducation.\nMajor universities and colleges in Kyushu:\nCulture.\nKyushu has maintained the strongest economic and cultural ties with Okinawa (Ryukyu) from ancient times to the present. Traces of Okinawan culture can be seen throughout Kyushu, and vice versa. Okinawan musical scales are often found in local folk songs, and there are many similarities in cuisine and language. Kyushu is also home to a unique traditional instrument called the \"gottan\", which resembles the \"sanshin\" and \"shamisen\". The region boasts a rich tradition of craftsmanship, with numerous traditional crafts such as Hakata-ori (\u535a\u591a\u7e54), Beppu bamboo crafts(\u5225\u5e9c\u7af9\u7d30\u5de5), Kurume Kasuri (\u4e45\u7559\u7c73\u7d63), and Sathuma Kiriko.\nPeople.\nPeople in Kyushu are known for being conservative even within Japan. In particular, men from Kyushu are often referred to as \"Kyushu danji\" (\u4e5d\u5dde\u7537\u5150), evoking an image of being wild and strong. It is said that this term has existed since ancient times, originally used to inspire and encourage soldiers. Being from Kyushu is a source of great pride for its people. Thanks to this cultural spirit, Kyushu has preserved a rich variety of unique traditional cultures that continue to thrive today.\nFood.\nThe main features of Kyushu cuisine are the use of fresh ingredients nurtured by the region's geography, which is surrounded by the sea and blessed with rich nature, along with distinctive seasonings such as sweet soy sauce (Kyushu soy sauce) and barley miso, which differ from those used in Honshu.\nEach region has its own culinary characteristics: seafood-based dishes are prominent in the north, while meat dishes are more common in the south.\nSweets.\nConfectionery in Kyushu tends to use more sugar compared to other regions of Japan. This is because Kyushu has historically had close ties with Okinawa (Ryukyu), a major producer of sugar. As a result, many traditional sweets from Kyushu incorporate characteristics of Ryukyuan culture.\nMusical instruments.\nIn Kyushu, there exists a traditional stringed instrument known as the \"gottan (\u30b4\u30c3\u30bf\u30f3)\", which developed independently within the region's unique cultural and geographic context. The instrument is considered to be a midpoint between the \"shamisen\" of mainland Japan and the \"sanshin\" of Okinawa, incorporating characteristics of both. Structurally, it resembles the sanshin more closely\u2014for example, it lacks the \"sawari\", a buzzing mechanism found in the shamisen. This absence, along with its simplified wooden box construction and single string, aligns it with the more minimalistic design typical of southern instruments.\nMusically, the \"gottan\" is sometimes used to perform melodies that reflect the Ryukyuan pentatonic scale, suggesting a subtle but notable influence from Okinawan musical traditions. While it remains a distinct and localized folk instrument of Kyushu, its sound and structure reveal traces of a broader cultural exchange within the southern Japanese archipelago, embodying a hybrid identity between the mainland and the Ryukyus.\nSports.\nHistorically some Kyushu-based sports team has competed in the top Japanese division of baseball (NPB), football (soccer) (J.League), basketball (B.League) or even rugby union (League One). Currently the major teams competing in Kyushu's major cities include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16915", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16915", "title": "KAB-500KR", "text": "Aerial bomb\nThe KAB-500Kr (Correctable air bomb - 500\u00a0kg) is an electro-optical TV-guided fire and forget bomb developed by the Soviet Air Force in the 1980s. It remains in service with the CIS and various export customers.\nThe seeker employs a gimballed daylight television imaging sensor under a wide angle glass dome. Unlike the earlier US GBU-8 HOBOS and AGM-65 Maverick which employed contrast lock technology, the -Kr series guidance system employs Scene Matching Area Correlation technology more akin to the US Navy DAMASK seeker or Tomahawk DSMAC. This results in the ability to attack low contrast targets by exploiting the contrast of nearby terrain features or objects.\nThe bomb is 305\u00a0cm (10\u00a0ft) long and weighs , of which is a hardened, armor-piercing warhead capable of penetrating up to 1.5\u00a0metres (5\u00a0ft) of reinforced concrete. The weapon's seeker can lock onto a target at ranges of up to , depending on visibility. The KAB-500-OD variant is equipped with a fuel-air explosive warhead. The technology of KAB-500Kr is also used for larger bombs, such as KAB-1500Kr based on the 1500\u00a0kg class FAB-1500 iron bomb.\nThere is also the training bomb KAB-500Kr-U.\nThe KAB-500S-E is a version with satellite guidance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16916", "revid": "4462876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16916", "title": "KAB-500L", "text": "Soviet/Russian laser-guided bomb\nThe KAB-500L is a laser-guided bomb developed by the Soviet Air Force, entering service in 1975. It remains in service with the CIS and post-Soviet Russian Aerospace Forces.\nThe KAB-500L is long and weighs . Its warhead makes up of the total weight, of which roughly 50% is blast-effect high explosive. Russian sources credit it with a CEP of . The technology of the KAB-500L is also used for larger bombs, such as the KAB-1500L family.\nIt is also deployed by the Indian Air Force. The primary launch platform is Su-30MKI. This bomb is also used by Royal Malaysian Air Force on its Sukhoi Su-30MKM.\nKAB-500S-E.\nKAB-500S-E is a Precision-Guided Munition (PGM) whose guidance system is based on GLONASS. The weapon can be dropped from aircraft flying at an altitude from 500 metres to 5000 metres and with an airspeed of 500\u20131150\u00a0km/h. The CEP is 7\u201312 metres. These bombs were used for the first time in the Russian military intervention in the Syrian Civil War in September 2015.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16917", "revid": "1310110830", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16917", "title": "Kamov Ka-50", "text": "Attack helicopter\nThe Kamov Ka-50 \"Black Shark\" (, English: kitefin shark, literally: black shark), NATO reporting name Hokum\u00a0A, is a Soviet/Russian single-seat attack helicopter with the distinctive coaxial rotor system of the Kamov design bureau. It was designed in the 1980s and adopted for service in the Russian army in 1995. The Ka-50 is manufactured by the Progress company in Arsenyev. It is used as a heavily armed scout helicopter and has a rescue ejection system, rare for helicopters.\nDuring the late 1990s, Kamov and Israel Aerospace Industries developed a tandem-seat cockpit version, the Kamov Ka-50-2 \"Erdogan\" (, ), to compete in Turkey's attack helicopter competition. Kamov also designed another two-seat variant, the Kamov Ka-52 \"Alligator\" (, NATO reporting name: Hokum\u00a0B). The Ka-52's unit cost is US$16\u00a0million as of 2023.\nDevelopment.\nThe Ka-50 is the production version of the V-80Sh-1 prototype. Production of the attack helicopter was ordered by the Soviet Council of Ministers on 14 December 1987. Development of the helicopter was first reported in the West in 1984, while the first photograph appeared in 1989. During operational testing from 1985 to 1986, the workload on the pilot was found to be similar to that of a fighter-bomber pilot, such that the pilot could perform both flying and navigation duties.\nLike other Kamov helicopters, it features Kamov's characteristic coaxial contra-rotating rotor system, which removes the need for the entire tail rotor assembly and improves the aircraft's aerobatic qualities\u2014it can perform loops, rolls and \"the funnel\" (circle-strafing), where the aircraft maintains a line-of-sight to the target while flying circles of varying altitude and airspeed around it. The omission of the tail rotor is a qualitative advantage, because the torque-countering tail rotor can use up to 30% of engine power. The Ka-50's entire transmission presents a comparatively small target to ground fire.\nFor improved pilot survivability the Ka-50 is fitted with a NPP Zvezda (transl. Star) K-37-800 ejection seat, which is a rare feature for a helicopter. Before the rocket in the ejection seat deploys, the rotor blades are blown away by explosive charges in the rotor disc and the canopy is jettisoned.\nFollowing initial flight testing and system tests, the Council ordered the first batch of helicopters in 1990. The attack helicopter was first described publicly as the \"Ka-50\" in March 1992 at a symposium in the United Kingdom. The helicopter was unveiled at the Mosaeroshow '92 at Zhukovskiy in August 1992. The following month, the second production example made its foreign debut at the Farnborough Airshow, where it was displayed with an image of a werewolf on its rudder\u2014gaining the popular nickname \"Werewolf\". The fifth prototype, painted black, played the title role in the movie \"\u0427\u0451\u0440\u043d\u0430\u044f \u0430\u043a\u0443\u043b\u0430\" (Black Shark), which made the Ka-50 known by its current nickname.\nIn November 1993, four production helicopters were flown to the Army Aviation Combat Training Centre at Torzhok to begin field trials. The president of the Russian Federation authorized the fielding of the Ka-50 with the Russian Ground Forces (army) on 28 August 1995. The collapse of the Soviet Union led to a severe drop in defense procurement. This resulted in only a dozen Ka-50s delivered, instead of the planned several hundred to replace the Mil Mi-24.\nThe single-seat configuration was considered undesirable by NATO. The first two Ka-50 prototypes had false windows painted on them, which successfully misled the first western reports of the aircraft in the mid-1980s, to the point of some analysts even concluding that its primary mission was as an air superiority aircraft for hunting and killing NATO attack helicopters, an alarming but expected Soviet move by NATO planners following the recent J-CATCH program evaluation.\nThe Ka-50 and its modifications have been chosen as the special forces' support helicopter, while the Mil Mi-28 has become the main army's gunship. The production of Ka-50 was recommenced in 2006. In 2009, the Russian Air Force received three units built from incomplete airframes dating from the mid-1990s.\nKa-50N \"Night Shark\" and Ka-50Sh.\nFrom the time the Ka-50 was ordered in 1987, it was known that the limited night-time capability of the original version would have to be upgraded to meet night attack requirements. Initially, Ka-50N was meant to be fitted with the Merkury Low-Light TV (LLTV) system. Due to lack of funding, the system was late and experienced reliability and capability issues. As a result, focus shifted to forward looking infrared (FLIR) systems. Kamov drafted a design in 1993 that included the Shkval-N sighting system with an infrared sensor. Many variants were tried. On some, the original Shkval was supplemented by a thermal imaging system, while others saw a complete replacement by the Samshit day-and-night system (also used on Ka-52). Some of the imagers included in the trials were manufactured by the French SAGEM and Thomson companies. Kamov was forced to consider foreign analogues as a temporary replacement for domestic imaging systems because of their slow development.\nTrials led to two \"final\" versions: Ka-50N \"Night Shark\" (, \"velvet belly lanternshark\") and Ka-50Sh (, \"ball\"; because of the spherical FLIR turret). The first Ka-50Sh, which was the eighth pre-production aircraft, Bort 018, first flew on 4 March 1997. The Kamov company and Black Shark logos were displayed on the endplate fins and the vertical tail. It featured the Samshit-50 system installed within a 640\u00a0mm (25\u00a0in) diameter sphere under the nose. Shkval system was moved to the nose cone area. Neither of the Ka-50 night-attack versions has entered full production.\nKa-50-2 \"Erdogan\".\nIn 1997, Israel Aerospace Industries (IAI) in cooperation with the Kamov bureau entered the Ka-50-2 \"Erdo\u011fan\" in a Turkish design competition for a $4\u00a0billion contract for 145 (later changed to 50) combat helicopters.\nThe Ka-50-2 is a tandem cockpit variant of the Ka-50. It featured a modern, Israeli-made \"glass cockpit\" avionics and a turret-mounted folding (for landing clearance) 30\u00a0mm cannon instead of the fixed cannon on the Ka-50. It features combat-proven avionics and advanced anti-tank guided missiles for a high level of combat effectiveness. It is equipped with IAI's flexible modular avionics suite, which can be readily tailored to meet the TLF's operational requirements and provides growth potential.\nIAI and Kamov performed flights of the variant with IAI's Core Avionics. These flights demonstrated the helicopter's \"glass cockpit\" with multifunctional displays and Control and Display Unit (CDU) driven by centralized mission computers. Also tested were its flight navigation and the operation of the Helicopter Multi-Mission Optronic Stabilized Payload (HMOSP) targeting system. The demonstration flights included night mission capability demonstrations using Night Vision Goggles (NVG) and the day/night targeting system.\nTurkey initially selected an improved version of the Bell AH-1 SuperCobra over the Erdogan, Eurocopter Tiger, AH-64 Apache, Denel Rooivalk, and A129 Mangusta. In the end, the contract was awarded to the A129 in 2007.\nKa-52 \"Alligator\".\nIn the early 1980s, while comparative tests of the V-80 (Ka-50 prototype) and the Mi-28 were being conducted, the Kamov design team came up with a proposal to develop a dedicated helicopter to conduct battlefield reconnaissance, provide target designation, support and coordinate group attack helicopter operations based on the Ka-60. However, the economic hardships that hit the nation in the late 1980s hampered this new development program. This prompted Kamov's Designer General to choose a modified version of Ka-50 on which to install the reconnaissance and target designation system. The modified \"Black Shark\" required a second crew member to operate the optotronics/radar reconnaissance suite. Kamov decided to use side-by-side seating arrangement, due to the verified improvements in co-operation between the crew members. This twin-seat version was designated Ka-52.\nIn comparison to the original Ka-50, the Ka-52 has a new radome with a nose-mounted radar system for targeting giving the Ka-52 a rounder nose profile. A day-and-night TV/thermal sighting system is fitted in a spherical turret under the nose (some examples have an additional mast radar for aerial targets and a second sighting system above the cockpit). The Ka-52 has the side-mounted cannon of the original Ka-50. It features six wing-mounted hardpoints compared to four on the Ka-50. To keep the weight and performance on par with that of the Ka-50, the armor and the capacity of the cannon magazine/feed were reduced. Also some flight parameters deteriorated: rate of climb dropped from 10 to 8\u00a0m/s and maximum positive load factor became 3.0 g. Most of the problems were solved by installing the new VK-2500 engine. The Ka-52 is approved for day, night and adverse weather conditions.\nManufacturing of the first Ka-52 airframe began in mid-1996. Series production was started in autumn 2008. As of September\u00a02010[ [update]], the 696th Instructor and Research Helicopter Regiment, based at Torzhok (air base), is operating eight helicopters, in varying degrees of capability and/or modification, for research and development. In December 2010, four new, series-production Ka-52s were delivered to the Air Base of the 344th Centre for Combat Training and Aircrew Conversion.\nThe first phase of the official tests (\u0413\u0421\u0418) was completed in December 2008 and after that permission was given for the production of an experimental batch for phase 2 (\u0413\u0421\u0418, including fire tests and the search for targets)\nSerial production of the Ka-52 began at the Progress Arsenyev Aviation Company plant in Arsenyev, Primorsky Krai by end of the 2008. After the completion of the state trials, the Ka-52 entered service in May 2011 with first operational units joining the Russian Air Force the same month. Under previous State Defense Procurement Plans, the Russian Armed Forces was to receive 2 experimental and 24 serial Ka-52s by 2012. The second long-term contract signed in 2011 worth 120 billion rubles is to provide the Russian Aerospace Forces with 146 Ka-52 helicopters in total until 2020. In February 2018, the Russian Ministry of Defence expressed an interest to purchase 114 Ka-52s of a new version within the new State Armament Program for 2018\u20132027.\nKa-52 \"Nile Crocodile\".\nIn 2015, Egypt signed a deal for the purchase of 46 Ka-52 helicopters, with a stated completion year of 2020. Russian Helicopters started producing its first export models in early 2017, the overall production was doubled in order to meet new demands. The first batch of 3 Ka-52 attack helicopters was delivered to Egypt in July 2017, with a second batch of another 3 helicopters being delivered in August. By year-end 2017, Egypt had received 19 Ka-52s, but these early units came with issues related to power, night vision, navigation systems, and other avionics equipment. On 6 December 2018, it was announced at the Egypt Defence Expo (EDEX) that Ka-52s had officially entered service with the Egyptian Air Force.\nEgypt's helicopter is a modified version of the basic Ka-52 Alligator that serves in the Russian Aerospace Forces. Unlike the basic model, the Egyptian Ka-52 utilizes anti-corrosion materials and has a reinforced fuselage structure. It received new landing gear and wheels, designed for the increased takeoff weight of the helicopter. The Egyptian model features updated avionics and a new cooling system for operating in hot climate. Dmitry Rogozin, Deputy Prime Minister of Russia on defense and space industry, proposed to name it the \"Nile Crocodile\".\nThe helicopter is equipped with the new OES-52 electro-optical observation and laser targeting system, replacing the standard GOES-451 mounted under the nose. The new optronic system began development in 2011 as a collaboration between Kamov and Sagem, and is based on the French company's STRIX sighting System. The OES-52 provides greater range of target detection and recognition.\nThe helicopter features the Arbalet-52 dual-band coherent pulse radar, which has an Earth mapping range of 32\u00a0km and a detection range of 25\u00a0km for ground targets and 15\u00a0km for aerial targets.\nThe \"Nile Crocodiles\" use President-S airborne defense systems for protection against guided missiles. The system includes both radar and laser warning receivers, MAW sensors, chaff/flare dispensers, in addition to ECM and DIRCM jammers. Egyptian Ka-52s feature two new DIRCM sets installed on either side of the fuselage, which are different from the standard L370-5 sets. Moreover, the laser-warning system present on the Russian variants of the Ka-52 has been removed, and a L-150 Pastel radar warning receiver has been installed instead.\nEgypt plans to arm its Ka-52s with Russian anti-tank guided missiles. The Air Force has chosen two types of missiles; namely the laser-guided Vikhr and the radar-guided Ataka beam-riding missiles.\nKa-52K \"Katran\".\nThe \"Mistral\"-class amphibious assault ships, ordered by the Russian Defense Ministry, were to contain rotary-wing assets, formed into aviation groups. Each of these groups was planned to include eight attack and eight assault/transport helicopters. The Ka-52K \"Katran\" (, 'mud shark'), a navalised derivative of the Ka-52, has been selected as the new ship-borne attack type for the Russian Naval Aviation. Its features include folding rotor blades, folding wings, and reinforced landing gear. Since its wings are shorter than those of the land-based variants, the Ka-52K only has four weapons pylons, instead of six on the land-based Ka-52. There are plans to install a new radar in the Ka-52K, with longer range compared to the Ka-52's radar. The Ka-52K will also be able to use Kh-35 and Kh-38 missiles. However, they haven't yet been integrated in the helicopter's mission suite. Russian Naval Aviation will need at least 40 Ka-52Ks, the first of which was tentatively slated to enter squadron service by early 2015, coinciding with the delivery of the first carrier.\nHowever, following the Russian annexation of Crimea the sale of the Mistrals was cancelled and they have since been sold to Egypt. Later, Egypt bought 46 Ka-52s, with deliveries lasting from 2017 to 2019. These helicopters have been deployed on the Mistrals originally built for Russia; however, Egyptian Ka-52s are regular land-based variants, not Ka-52Ks.\nStill, the first of four Ka-52Ks ordered for the Russian Navy flew on 7 March 2015; the Navy also had an option for a further 28 helicopters. As of 2017, 4 pre-series Ka-52Ks were operated and used for testing by the Russian Navy. After a period of uncertainty, the Ka-52K's future with the Russian Navy now appears clearer. In July 2020, the keel was laid for two new Project 23900 amphibious assault ships in the Zalyv Shipbuilding yard. Each ship will be able to carry up to 18 helicopters, including Ka-52Ks. The Ka-52K has passed all tests and was ready for serial production as of September 2020.\nAccording to the SCMP, China is considering the purchase of 36 Ka-52Ks to be used aboard the Type 075 helicopter carrier, which would fulfil the role of a heavy attack helicopter. These helicopters are necessary to equip the carrier with powerful attack weapons, which it currently lacks.\nKa-52M.\nThe new version announced by the Russian Ministry of Defence in 2018 eventually crystalized into the Ka-52M; 114 helicopters of this new version are to be acquired. Additionally, older Ka-52s are to be upgraded to Ka-52M standard. The contract for the first 30 Ka-52Ms was signed in August 2021. A new contract was signed in August 2022. Upgrades embodied in the Ka-52M include a modernized GOES-451M electro-optical targeting turret with an increased range, stronger undercarriage wheels, and improved cockpit ergonomics, with better adaptation to the use of night-vision goggles. The LMUR missile is added to the helicopter's armament options. Several new radar types are being considered for the Ka-52M. A new self-protection system will also be fitted to the Ka-52M, replacing the current L370-5 Vitebsk. Lastly, the Ka-52M is adapted to work within a new battlefield command and control system. The Russian military received its first 10 modified Ka-52M helicopters on 9 January 2023. The state defense order for the helicopters was doubled in 2023.\nDesign.\nThe Ka-50 and its two-seat version Ka-52 are high-performance combat helicopters with day and night capability, high survivability and fire power, to defeat air targets and heavily armoured tanks armed with air defence weapons. It was designed to be small, fast and agile to improve survivability and lethality.\nManeuvering.\nThe hovering ceiling is 4,000 m and vertical rate of climb 10\u00a0m/s at an altitude of 2,500 m. Having a coaxial rotor with blades of polymer results in low inertia both relative to vertical and lateral axes, at 50%\u201375% as compared to a single rotor helicopter with tail rotor. No tail rotor also means it can perform flat turns at all speeds. A maximum vertical load of 3.5 g combined with low inertia makes the Ka-50 highly agile.\nNavigation systems.\nFlight systems include an inertial navigation system (INS), autopilot and head-up display (HUD). Sensors include forward-looking infrared (FLIR) and terrain-following radar.\nThe Kamov Ka-50 is also fitted with an electronic radio and sighting-piloting-navigating system allowing flights at day and night in VFR and IFR weather conditions. The novelty of this avionics is based on the system of precise target designation with digital coded communication system, which ensures the exchange of information (precise enemy coordinates) between helicopters flying far apart from each other as well as with ground command posts. The Ka-52 is also equipped with a \"Phazotron\" cockpit radio-locator, allowing flights in adverse meteorological conditions and at night. The necessary information acquired by this radio-locator is transferred to the cockpit's multi-functional display screen. For conducting a fight, both pilots are equipped with range-finders built-in their helmets and they can use night vision eyepieces for night flights.\nProtection and survivability.\nFor its own protection, Ka-50 is fitted with a radar warning receiver, electronic warfare system and chaff and flare dispensers. Aerodynamic cases at wings' ends each contain two dispensers, which in turn have 32 x 26\u00a0mm countermeasures each. The whole system works on principle of evaluated response based on infrared or electronic impulse irradiation. Extensive all-round armour in the cockpit protects the pilot against 12.7\u00a0mm armour-piercing bullets and 23\u00a0mm projectile fragments. The rotor blades are rated to withstand several hits of ground-based automatic weapons.\nOther survivability features include armour protection for vital aircraft systems, and crash-absorbing landing gear and seats. Also, not having a tail rotor can improve survivability, since the tail boom isn't load-bearing; during testing, a Ka-50 lost its tail, but still managed to return to base without a problem.\nIt is the world's first operational helicopter with a rescue ejection system allowing the pilot to escape at all altitudes and speeds. The rotor blades detach using explosive bolts prior to ejection to prevent damage to the crew. The K-37-800 rocket-assisted ejection system is manufactured by NPP Zvezda.\nArmament.\nThe aircraft has one Shipunov 2A42 autocannon with selective fire, and a dual-feed, giving it a cyclic rate of fire between 200 and 800 rounds per minute. It is mounted near centre of gravity for accuracy, and carries 460 high-fragmentation, explosive incendiary, or armour-piercing rounds. The type of ammunition is selected by the pilot during flight. The integrated 30\u00a0mm cannon is semi-rigidly fixed on the helicopter's side, movable only slightly in elevation and azimuth. Semi-rigid mounting improves the cannon's accuracy, giving the 30\u00a0mm a longer practical range and better hit ratio at medium ranges than with a free-turning turret mount.\nThe fire control system automatically shares all target information in real time, allowing one helicopter to engage a target spotted by another aircraft, and the system can also input target information from ground-based forward scouts with personnel-carried target designation gear.\nWeapons can be carried on four external hardpoints under the stub wings, plus two on the wingtips, a total of more than 2,000\u00a0kg (depending on the mix). The pylons can be tilted up to 10 degrees downward. Fuel tanks may be mounted on a suspension point, whenever necessary.\nAnti-tank armament comprises twelve Vikhr laser-guided anti-tank missiles (transl. Vortex or whirlwind), with a maximum range of some 8\u00a0km. The laser guidance is reported to be virtually jam-proof and the system features automatic guidance to target, enabling evasive action immediately after missile launch, alternatively it can also use Ataka laser-guided anti-tank missiles. Before firing laser-guided missiles it often must hover a few hundred feet off the ground to direct a laser at a target, leaving itself briefly exposed.\nKa-50/52 can also carry several rocket pods, including the S-13 and S-8 rockets. The \"dumb\" rockets could be upgraded to laser guided with the proposed Ugroza system.\nOperational history.\nSecond Chechen War.\nThe Ka-50 took part in the Russian Army's operations against separatists in the Chechen Republic during the Second Chechen War. In December 2000, a pair of production Ka-50s arrived in the area. With the Ka-50s was a Ka-29 to provide reconnaissance and target designation. On 6 January 2001, the Ka-50 used live weapons against a real enemy for the first time. On 9 January, at the entry into a mountain gorge in the area of a settlement named Komsomolskoye, a single Ka-50 accompanied by an Mi-24 used S-8 unguided rockets to destroy a warehouse full of ammunition belonging to Chechen insurgents. On 6 February, in the forest-covered mountain area to the south of the village of Tsentoroj, a strike group composed of two Ka-50s and the sole Ka-29 discovered and, from a range of 3\u00a0km, destroyed a fortified camp of insurgents using two \"9K121 Vikhr\" guided missiles. On 14 February, a similar strike group carried out a \"hunting\" mission in the area of Oak-Yurt and Hatun. In difficult conditions, pilots found and destroyed eight targets. These missions tested the type's airframe, as well as its on-board systems and armament. Its successful performance in difficult, mountainous terrain confirmed the usefulness of the many advanced features of the Ka-50's design, and its power and maneuverability.\nSyrian Civil War.\nKa-52 helicopters were spotted being deployed in support of the Russian military intervention in the Syrian Civil War in 2015, various sources stating they were involved in defense of the Russian base in Latakia, providing escort for search and rescue helicopters, and supporting Russian special forces.\nOn 5 May 2018, a Ka-52 crashed near Mayadin due to a technical failure, according to some sources.\nThe Ka-52 was briefly used in Syria during the Fall of the Assad regime in December 2024.\nRusso-Ukrainian War.\nOn 24 February 2022, during the initial stages of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, at least one Russian Ka-52 helicopter was damaged but was able to land on its own. On 2 March, a Russian Ka-52 was hit by a surface-to-air missile and crash landed. On 12 March, Ukrainian forces reported that Ka-52 tail number \"RF-13409\" had been shot down in Novomykolaivka near Kherson. Ukraine officials claimed on 16 March 2022 that Ka-52 number \"RF-13411\" was shot down at an undisclosed location in Ukraine, providing footage of the airframe wreckage. Footage appeared on social media on 5 April 2022 that appeared to show a hovering Ka-52 shot down by a Ukrainian Stugna-P anti-tank guided missile. On 15 April, Ukrainian forces claimed to have shot down another Ka-52 and published footage of the wreckage; the crew were reported to have died. On 1 May footage appeared of another Ka-52 shot down using a Stugna-P anti-tank guided missile. On 4 June, Ukrainian forces of the 128th Mountain Brigade reported the downing of a Russian Ka-52 in the north. According to Ukrainian officials, the helicopter was shot down by MANPADS. On 27 June, another helicopter was hit by a British-made Martlet MANPADS, forcing it to land. On 15 August, Ukrainian forces damaged a Russian Ka-52 helicopter flying in Donetsk Oblast.\nReportedly, a few Ka-52s have suffered from wing vibration under heavy-load attack missions. This was observed months after the invasion. It has been suggested that this may be due to causes such as fatigue, inadequate design, lack of maintenance, and poor management. Ukrainian military intelligence claimed that the Ka-52 can be \"disabled with a 7.62mm machine gun\" despite a claimed ability to withstand 12.7mm rounds.\nKa-52s have been heavily used by Russian forces to defend against the 2023 Ukrainian counteroffensive. They have been successful, due in part to a shortage of Ukrainian short-range air defence, or SHORAD, weapons. Due to the unique design of the coaxial main rotors, the helicopter can withstand the destruction of the tail. A video released on 19 June 2023 shows a Ka-52 losing its tail. The UK MOD has noted the movement of additional Ka-52s to an airfield near Berdiansk, \"In the constant contest between aviation measures and counter-measures, it is likely that Russia has gained a temporary advantage in southern Ukraine, especially with attack helicopters employing longer-range missiles against ground targets\".\nAs of late July 2023, the UK MoD claimed that Russia has lost 40 Ka-52s since the start of the Russian invasion. At the same time the UK MoD said on 27 July 2023: \"One of the single most influential Russian weapon systems in the sector is the Ka-52 HOKUM attack helicopter\". With the LMUR missile, the Ka-52 has an attack range of 15\u00a0km, putting it beyond the range of Ukrainian air defences.\nOn 7 August 2023, a Russian Ka-52 was reported shot down over Robotyne, making it the 40th lost during the current invasion according to Oryx. Oryx only counts losses confirmed through open sources.\nOn 17 August 2023, Ukrainian military claimed to have shot down two Ka-52s in one day. One was downed near Robotyne with a MANPAD by the 47th Mechanized Brigade, a second was claimed by the Ukrainian Air Force near Bakhmut. Ukraine has reported that the missile system used to shoot down a Ka-52 near Robotyne was the RBS-70. While a Ka-52 has countermeasures for infra-red and laser guided missiles, it appears to lack radar jamming. It has to rely flying with helicopters like the Mi-28s that have radar jamming technology. Despite sanctions Russia has continued to manufacture Ka-52s.\nAdditionally five Ka-52s have been destroyed by Ukrainian tactical missiles on 18 October on the grounds of Berdiansk airport, as reported by Oryx (via satellite imaging). A Ka-52 was shot down during the Wagner Group rebellion. Another Ka-52 was able to decoy a missile fired from a Wagner operated 9K35 Strela-10 by use of flares.\nOn 19 July 2024, a Ka-52 was purportedly shot down by a BM-27 Uragan rocket according to Russian telegram source, both crew were killed, but the location and date of the downing have not been released. This followed a similar event where a rocket narrowly missed an Ka-52 per cockpit footage.\nOn 7 August 2024 during the Ukrainian incursion into Kursk, a Ka-52 was destroyed along with the two-man crew. The Ukrainians are concerned about the ability of the aircraft to carry 9K121 Vikhr air-to-surface missiles, as they are able to penetrate tank armour. The Ka-52 \"can carry up to 12 units, allowing it to attack targets from 5 to 11 kilometres.\"\nUkrainian forces have shot down a Ka-52 attack helicopter using a Swedish-made RBS-70 man-portable anti-air missile in the Kursk region. As of 7 September 2024, 61 Ka-52s have been destroyed during the conflict.\nOn 23 March 2025, in an operation carried out by the Ukrainian special operations forces, two KA-52s along with two Mi-8s were destroyed by HIMARS at a forward deployment point in Ivnyansky Raion, Belgorod Oblast. \nRussia downs several Ukrainian kamikaze drones with KA-52's 30mm cannon and Igla-V missiles.https://https://https://\nOryx, a Dutch open source website, visually confirmed 64 Ka-52s were destroyed or damaged as of 24 March 2025 (of which, 51 destroyed and 13 damaged).\nOther.\nIt has participated in a number of exercises, including \"Boundary 2004\" at the Edelweiss training center in Kyrgyzstan during August 2004. The \"Shark\" demonstrated its advantages by operating at a high altitude and an air temperature of more than 30\u00a0\u00b0C. A Ka-50 provided cover for the landing of troops and then worked on the ground targets using its cannons and rockets.\nIndia issued a request for proposal for 22 attack helicopters for the Indian Air Force in May 2008. The Ka-50, the Mil Mi-28, and the Eurocopter Tiger were the front-runners for this order as of October 2008. The tender though was eventually cancelled and later India announced a new tender, with revised conditions. Russia again offered the Mi-28N and Ka-52.\nThe Russian Air Force has accepted 12 Ka-52 helicopters for operational service in 2011, and the total number of completed Ka-52s was already 65 units. 20 Ka-52 aircraft were located at the 575th Airbase Chernigovsky District, Eastern Military District. 16 were at 393rd \"Sevastopol\" Airbase Korenovsk, Southern Military District, 12 were transferred to newly formed 15th Army Aviation Brigade of the Western Military District at the airport of Ostrov, 8 \u2013 Torzhok 344th Centre for Combat Training and Flight Personnel Training. Five test aircraft are owned by JSC \"Kamov\"; two machines were lost in accidents. The Ka-52 was displayed to the international community at the 2013 Paris Air Show.\nIn 2013, the AAC \"Progress\" has completed the contract with the Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, signed in 2009, and would begin the next long-term contract for supplying 143 Ka-52, worth about 120 billion rubles (\u2248US$3.5 bln).\nIn June 2015, Sergei Kornev, the head of Rosoboronexport's delegation, said that Russia has signed its first contracts on the export of Ka-52 Alligator attack helicopters. \"We have the Ka-52 in its export model and we have contracts for it, and it's already being spun because it has a good, firm future\" he said at the airshow outside Paris. Kornev did not specify the volume of contracts or with whom they were signed.\nThe Algerian Air Force is negotiating a sale for 12 Ka-52Es as of 2022. In September 2015, the Ka-52 was presented at A\u00efn Oussera Air Base.\nNorth Macedonia reportedly bought two Ka-52s (or Ka-50s) from Russia in June 2001 for its North Macedonia Air Brigade. However, the Ministry of Defense of Macedonia denied this report.\nSpecifications (Ka-50).\n\"Data from\" Manufacturer sources Donald, naval-technology.com, Federation of American ScientistsGeneral characteristics* Crew: 1\nPerformance* Endurance: * g limits: * Roll rate: \nArmament\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16919", "revid": "26110720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16919", "title": "Kenny Dalglish", "text": "Scottish footballer and manager (born 1951)\nSir Kenneth Mathieson Dalglish (born 4 March 1951) is a Scottish former football player and manager. He is regarded as one of the greatest players of all time as well as one of Celtic's, Liverpool's and Scotland's greatest ever players. During his career, he made 338 appearances for Celtic and 515 for Liverpool, playing as a forward, and earned a record 102 caps for the Scotland national team, scoring 30 goals, also a joint record. Dalglish won the Ballon d'Or Silver Award in 1983, the PFA Players' Player of the Year in 1983, and the FWA Footballer of the Year in 1979 and 1983. In 2009, \"FourFourTwo\" magazine named Dalglish the greatest striker in post-war British football, and he has been inducted into both the Scottish and English Football Halls of Fame. He is highly regarded by Liverpool fans, who still affectionately refer to him as \"King Kenny\", and in 2006 voted him top of the fans' poll \"100 Players Who Shook the Kop\".\nDalglish began his career with Celtic in 1971, going on to win four Scottish league championships, four Scottish Cups and one Scottish League Cup with the club. In 1977, Liverpool manager Bob Paisley paid a British transfer record of \u00a3440,000 to take Dalglish to Liverpool. His years at Liverpool were among the club's most successful periods, as he won six English league championships, the FA Cup, four League Cups, five FA Charity Shields, three European Cups and one European Super Cup. In international football, Dalglish made 102 appearances and scored 30 goals for Scotland between 1971 and 1986, becoming their most capped player and joint-leading goal scorer (with Denis Law). He was chosen for Scotland's FIFA World Cup squads in 1974, 1978, 1982 and 1986, playing in all of those tournaments except the last, due to injury.\nDalglish became player-manager of Liverpool in 1985 after the resignation of Joe Fagan, winning a further three First Divisions, two FA Cups and four FA Charity Shields, before resigning in 1991. Eight months later, Dalglish made a return to football management with Blackburn Rovers, whom he led from the Second Division to win the Premier League in 1995. Soon afterwards, he stepped down as manager to become director of football at the club, before leaving altogether in 1996. In January 1997, Dalglish took over as manager at Newcastle United. Newcastle finished as runners-up in the Premier League during his first season, but they only finished 13th in 1997\u201398, which led to his dismissal the following season. Dalglish went on to be appointed director of football at Celtic in 1999, and later briefly manager. He won the Scottish League Cup in 2000 before his departure from the club that year.\nBetween 2000 and 2010, Dalglish focused on charitable concerns, founding The Marina Dalglish Appeal with his wife to raise money for cancer care. In January 2011, Dalglish returned to Liverpool for a spell as caretaker manager after the dismissal of Roy Hodgson, becoming the permanent manager in May 2011. Despite winning the League Cup, which was the club's first trophy since 2006, earning them a place in the UEFA Europa League, and reaching the FA Cup Final, Liverpool only finished 8th in the Premier League, and Dalglish was dismissed in May 2012. In October 2013, Dalglish returned to Liverpool as a non-executive director, and Anfield's Centenary Stand was renamed after him in October 2018.\nEarly life.\nThe son of an engineer, Dalglish was born in Dalmarnock in the east end of Glasgow and was brought up in Milton in the north of the city. When he was 14 the family moved to a newly built tower block in Ibrox overlooking the home ground of Rangers, the club he had grown up supporting.\nDalglish attended Miltonbank Primary School in Milton and started out as a goalkeeper. He then attended High Possil Senior Secondary School, where he won the inter-schools five-a-side and the inter-year five-a-side competitions. He won the Scottish Cup playing for Glasgow Schoolboys and Glasgow Schools, and was then selected for the Scottish schoolboys team that went undefeated in a Home Nations Victory Shield tournament. In 1966, Dalglish had unsuccessful trials at West Ham United and Liverpool.\nClub career.\nCeltic.\nDalglish signed a professional contract with Celtic in May 1967. The club's assistant manager Sean Fallon went to see Dalglish and his parents at their home, which had Rangers-related pictures on the walls. In his first season, Dalglish was loaned out to Cumbernauld United, for whom he scored 37 goals. During this time he also worked as an apprentice joiner. Celtic manager Jock Stein wanted Dalglish to spend a second season at Cumbernauld, but the youngster wanted to turn professional. Dalglish got his wish and became a regular in the reserve team known as the Quality Street Gang, due to it containing a large number of highly rated players, including future Scottish internationals Danny McGrain, George Connelly, Lou Macari and David Hay. Dalglish made his first-team competitive debut for Celtic in a Scottish League Cup quarter-final tie against Hamilton Academical on 25 September 1968, coming on as a second-half substitute in a 4\u20132 win.\nHe spent the 1968\u201369 season playing for the reserves, though scored just four goals in 17 games. The following season he changed his position, moving into midfield, and enjoyed a good season as he helped the reserve team to the league and cup double, scoring 19 goals in 31 games. Stein put Dalglish in the starting XI for the first team in a league match against Raith Rovers on 4 October 1969. Celtic won 7\u20131 but Dalglish did not score, nor did he score in the next three first-team games he played in during the 1969\u201370 season.\nDalglish continued his goal-scoring form in the reserves into the next season, scoring 23 goals. A highlight of his season came in the Reserve Cup Final against Rangers; Dalglish scored one goal in a 4\u20131 win in the first leg, then in the second leg scored a hat-trick in a 6\u20131 win to clinch the cup. Still not a first-team regular, Dalglish was in the stands when the Ibrox disaster occurred at an Old Firm match in January 1971, when 66 Rangers fans died. On 17 May 1971, he played for Celtic against Kilmarnock in a testimonial match for the Rugby Park club's long serving midfielder Frank Beattie, and scored six goals in a 7\u20132 win for Celtic.\nThe 1971\u201372 season saw Dalglish finally establish himself in the Celtic first team. He scored his first competitive goal for the first team on 14 August 1971, Celtic's second goal with a penalty kick in a 2\u20130 win over Rangers at Ibrox Stadium. He went on to score 29 goals in 53 games that season, including a hat-trick against Dundee and braces against Kilmarnock and Motherwell and helped Celtic win their seventh consecutive league title. Dalglish also played in Celtic's 6\u20131 win over Hibernian in the 1972 Scottish Cup Final. In 1972\u201373 Dalglish was Celtic's leading scorer, with 39 goals in all competitions, and the club won the league championship once again. Celtic won a league and cup double in 1973\u201374 and reached the semi-finals of the European Cup. The ties against Atl\u00e9tico Madrid were acrimonious, and Dalglish described the first leg in Glasgow where the Spanish side had three players sent off as \"without doubt the worst game I have ever played in as far as violence is concerned.\" Dalglish won a further Scottish Cup winner's medal in 1975, providing the cross for Paul Wilson's opening goal in a 3\u20131 win over Airdrieonians in what transpired to be captain Billy McNeill's last match before retiring from playing football.\nDalglish was made Celtic captain in the 1975\u201376 season, during which the club failed to win a trophy for the first time in 12 years. Jock Stein had been badly injured in a car crash and missed most of that season while recovering from his injuries. Celtic won another league and cup double in 1976\u201377, with Dalglish scoring 27 goals in all competitions. On 10 August 1977, after making 320 appearances and scoring 167 goals for Celtic, Dalglish was signed by Liverpool manager Bob Paisley for a British transfer fee record of \u00a3440,000 (\u00a3 today). The deal was unpopular with the Celtic fans, and Dalglish was booed by the crowd when he returned to Celtic Park in August 1978 to play in a testimonial match for Stein.\nLiverpool.\nDalglish was signed to replace Kevin Keegan and quickly settled into his new club. He made his debut on 13 August 1977 in the season opener at Wembley, in the 1977 FA Charity Shield against Manchester United. He scored his first goal for Liverpool in his league debut a week later on 20 August, against Middlesbrough. Dalglish also scored three days later on his Anfield debut in a 2\u20130 victory over Newcastle United, and he scored Liverpool's sixth goal when they beat Keegan's Hamburg 6\u20130 in the second leg of the 1977 European Super Cup. By the end of his first season with Liverpool, Dalglish had played 62 times and scored 31 goals, including the winning goal in the 1978 European Cup Final at Wembley against Bruges.\nIn his second season, Dalglish recorded a personal best of 21 league goals for the club and was also named Football Writers' Association Footballer of the Year. He did not miss a league game for Liverpool until the 1980\u201381 season, when he appeared in 34 out of 42 league games and scored only eight goals as Liverpool finished fifth in the league, but still won the European Cup and Football League Cup. He recovered his goal-scoring form the following season, and was an ever-present player in the league once again, scoring 13 goals as Liverpool became league champions for the 13th time, and the third time since Dalglish's arrival. It was also around this time that he began to form a potent strike partnership with Ian Rush; Dalglish began to play just off Rush, \"running riot in the extra space afforded to him in the hole\". Dalglish was voted PFA Players' Player of the Year for the 1982\u201383 season, during which he scored 18 league goals as Liverpool retained their title. From 1983 Dalglish became less prolific as a goal-scorer, though he remained a regular player.\nAfter becoming player-manager on the retirement of Joe Fagan in the 1985 close season and in the aftermath of the Heysel Stadium disaster, Dalglish selected himself for just 21 First Division games in 1985\u201386 as Liverpool won the double, but he started the FA Cup final win over Everton. On the last day of the league season, his goal in a 1\u20130 away win over Chelsea gave Liverpool their 16th league title. Dalglish had a personally better campaign in the 1986\u201387 season, scoring six goals in 18 league appearances, but by then he was committed to giving younger players priority for a first-team place.\nWith the sale of Ian Rush to Juventus in 1987, Dalglish formed a new striker partnership of new signings John Aldridge and Peter Beardsley for the 1987\u201388 season, and he played only twice in a league campaign which saw Liverpool gain their 17th title. Dalglish did not play in Liverpool's 1988\u201389 campaign, and he made his final league appearance on 5 May 1990 as a substitute against Derby. At 39, he was one of the oldest players ever to play for Liverpool. His final goal had come three years earlier, in a 3\u20130 home league win over Nottingham Forest on 18 April 1987.\nInternational career.\nTommy Docherty gave Dalglish his debut for the Scottish national side as a substitute in the 1\u20130 Euro 1972 qualifier victory over Belgium on 10 November 1971 at Pittodrie. Dalglish scored his first goal for Scotland a year later on 15 November 1972 in the 2\u20130 World Cup qualifier win over Denmark at Hampden Park. Scotland would go on to qualify for the final tournament and he was part of Scotland's 1974 World Cup squad in West Germany. He started in all three games as Scotland were eliminated during the group stages despite not losing any of their three games.\nIn 1976, Dalglish scored the winning goal for Scotland at Hampden Park against England, by nutmegging Ray Clemence. A year later Dalglish scored against the same opponents and goalkeeper at Wembley, in another 2\u20131 win. Dalglish went on to play in both the 1978 World Cup in Argentina where he started in all of Scotland's games \u2013 scoring against eventual runners-up the Netherlands in a famous 3\u20132 win \u2013 and the 1982 World Cup in Spain, scoring against New Zealand. On both occasions Scotland failed to get past the group stage. Dalglish was selected for the 22-man squad travelling to Mexico for the 1986 World Cup, but had to withdraw due to injury.\nIn total, Dalglish played 102 times for Scotland (a national record) and he scored 30 goals (also a national record, which matched that set by Denis Law). He became the first, and as of 2024 only, player to win 100 caps for Scotland in a friendly match against Romania on 26 March 1986 at Hampden Park. He was presented with the milestone cap by Franz Beckenbauer prior to kick off. His final appearance for Scotland, after 15 years as a full international, was on 12 November 1986 at Hampden in a Euro 1988 qualifying game against Luxembourg, which Scotland won 3\u20130. His 30th and final international goal had been two years earlier, on 14 November 1984, in a 3\u20131 win over Spain in a World Cup qualifier, also at Hampden Park.\nManagerial career.\nLiverpool.\nAfter the Heysel Stadium disaster in 1985 and Joe Fagan's subsequent resignation as manager, Dalglish became player-manager of Liverpool. In his first season in charge in 1985\u201386, he guided the club to its first \"double\". Liverpool achieved this by winning the League Championship by two points over Everton (Dalglish himself scored the winner in a 1\u20130 victory over Chelsea at Stamford Bridge to secure the title on the final day of the season), and the FA Cup by beating Everton in the final.\nThe 1986\u201387 season was trophyless for Liverpool. They lost 2\u20131 to Arsenal in the League Cup final at Wembley. Before the 1987\u201388 season, Dalglish signed two new players: striker Peter Beardsley from Newcastle and winger John Barnes from Watford. He had already purchased goalscorer John Aldridge from Oxford United (a replacement for Ian Rush, who was moving to Italy) in the spring of 1987 and early into the new campaign, bought Oxford United midfielder Ray Houghton. The new-look Liverpool side shaped by Dalglish topped the league for almost the entire season, and had a run of 37 matches unbeaten in all competitions (including 29 in the league; 22 wins and 7 draws) from the beginning of the season to 21 February 1988, when they lost to Everton in the league. Liverpool were crowned champions with four games left to play, having suffered just two defeats from 40 games. However, Dalglish's side lost the 1988 FA Cup Final to underdogs Wimbledon.\nIn the summer of 1988, Dalglish re-signed Ian Rush. Liverpool beat Everton 3\u20132 after extra time in the second all-Merseyside FA Cup final in 1989, but was deprived of a second double in the final game of the season, when Arsenal secured a last-minute goal to take the title from Liverpool. \nIn the 1989\u201390 season Liverpool won their third league title under Dalglish. They missed out on the double and a third successive FA Cup final appearance when they lost 4\u20133 in extra-time to Crystal Palace in an FA Cup semi-final at Villa Park. At the end of the season Dalglish received his third Manager of the Year award. \nMidway in the 1990\u201391 season, Dalglish resigned as manager of Liverpool on 22 February 1991, two days after a 4\u20134 draw with rivals Everton in an FA Cup fifth round tie at Goodison Park, in which Liverpool surrendered the lead four times. Daglish's resignation shocked the football community. Explaining his choice in a press conference, he said \"I've been in the front line for 20 years, and it's just really a result of 20 years' active involvement in football at a very high and successful level, and Kenny Dalglish is a person that has pushed himself to the limit. It's a decision that many people will find difficult to understand, a decision that only I could have made. And it would have been wrong to mislead people that everything was fine with me.\" Johan Cruyff, echoing Dalglish, has noted \"There is a time when you have been under pressure for 15 years when the stress begins to tell.\" Dalglish had been under immense stress, brought upon by the Heysel and Hillsborough disasters. At the time of Dalglish's departure, the club were three points ahead in the league and still in contention for the FA Cup. Seeing out the remainder of the season under Graeme Souness, Liverpool would be knocked out 1-0 by Everton in a FA Cup second replay and finish second in the league to Arsenal.\nHillsborough disaster.\nDalglish was the manager of Liverpool at the time of the Hillsborough disaster on 15 April 1989. The disaster claimed 94 lives on the day, with the final death toll reaching 97. Dalglish attended many of the funerals of the victims, including four in one day. His presence in the aftermath of the disaster has been described as \"colossal and heroic\". Dalglish broke a twenty-year silence about the disaster in March 2009, expressing regret that the police and the FA did not consider delaying the kick-off of the match. During the Hillsborough Memorial Service on 15 April 2011, Liverpool MP Steve Rotheram announced he would submit an early day motion to have Dalglish knighted, \"not only for his outstanding playing and managerial career, but also the charity work he has done with his wife, Marina, for breast cancer support and what he did after Hillsborough. It is common knowledge it affected him deeply\".\nBlackburn Rovers.\nDalglish returned to management in October 1991 at Second Division Blackburn Rovers who had recently been purchased by multi-millionaire Jack Walker. By the turn of 1992 they were top of the Second Division, and then suffered a dip in form before recovering to qualify for the playoffs, during which Dalglish led Blackburn into the new Premier League by beating Leicester City 1\u20130 in the Second Division play-off final at Wembley. The resulting promotion meant that Blackburn were back in the top flight of English football for the first time since 1966. In the 1992 pre-season, Dalglish signed Southampton's Alan Shearer for a British record fee of \u00a33.5\u00a0million. Despite a serious injury which ruled Shearer out for half the season, Dalglish achieved fourth position with the team in the first year of the new Premier League. The following year, Dalglish failed in an attempt to sign Roy Keane. Blackburn finished two positions higher the following season, as runners-up to Manchester United. By this time, Dalglish had added England internationals Tim Flowers and David Batty to his squad.\nAt the start of the 1994\u201395 season Dalglish paid a record \u00a35\u00a0million for Chris Sutton, with whom Shearer formed an effective strike partnership. By the last game of the season, both Blackburn and Manchester United were in contention for the title. Blackburn had to travel to Liverpool, and Manchester United faced West Ham United in London. Blackburn lost 2\u20131, but still won the title since United failed to win in London. The title meant that Dalglish was only the fourth football manager in history to lead two different clubs to top-flight league championships in England, after Tom Watson, Herbert Chapman and Brian Clough. Dalglish became director of football at Blackburn in June 1995. He left the club at the start of the 1996\u201397 season after a disappointing campaign under his replacement and former assistant manager, Ray Harford.\nFollowing his departure from Blackburn Dalglish was appointed for a brief spell as an \"international talent scout\" at his boyhood club Rangers. He was reported as having played a central role in the signing of Chile international Sebasti\u00e1n Rozental.\nNewcastle United.\nIn January 1997, Dalglish was appointed manager of Premier League side Newcastle United on a three-and-a-half-year contract, taking over from Kevin Keegan. Dalglish guided the club from fourth position to a runner-up spot in May and a place in the new format of the following season's UEFA Champions League. He then broke up the team which had finished second two years running, selling popular players like Peter Beardsley, Lee Clark, Les Ferdinand and David Ginola and replacing them with ageing stars like John Barnes (34), Ian Rush (36) and Stuart Pearce (35), as well as virtual unknowns like Des Hamilton and Garry Brady. He also made some good long-term signings like Gary Speed and Shay Given. The 1997\u201398 campaign saw Newcastle finish in only 13th place and, despite Dalglish achieving some notable successes during the season (including a 3\u20132 UEFA Champions League win over Barcelona and an FA Cup final appearance against Arsenal), he was dismissed by Freddie Shepherd after two draws in the opening two games of the subsequent 1998\u201399 season, and replaced by former Chelsea manager Ruud Gullit. One commentator from \"The Independent\" has since written, \"His 20 months at Newcastle United are the only part of Kenny Dalglish's career that came anywhere near failure\".\nCeltic.\nIn June 1999 he was appointed director of football operations at Celtic, with his former Liverpool player John Barnes appointed as head coach. Barnes was dismissed in February 2000 and Dalglish took charge of the first team on a temporary basis. He guided them to the Scottish League Cup final, where they beat Aberdeen 2\u20130 at Hampden Park. Dalglish was dismissed in June 2000, after the appointment of Martin O'Neill as manager. After a brief legal battle, Dalglish accepted a settlement of \u00a3600,000 from Celtic.\nReturn to Liverpool.\nIn April 2009 Liverpool manager Rafael Ben\u00edtez invited Dalglish to take up a role at the club's youth academy. The appointment was confirmed in July 2009, and Dalglish was also made the club's ambassador. Following Ben\u00edtez's departure from Liverpool in June 2010, Dalglish was asked to help find a replacement, and in July Fulham's Roy Hodgson was appointed manager.\nA poor run of results at the start of the 2010\u201311 season led to Liverpool fans calling for Dalglish's return as manager as early as October 2010, and with no subsequent improvement in Liverpool's results up to the end of the year (during which time the club was bought by New England Sports Ventures), Hodgson left Liverpool and Dalglish was appointed caretaker manager on 8 January 2011. Dalglish's first game in charge was on 9 January 2011 at Old Trafford against Manchester United in the 3rd round of the FA Cup, which Liverpool lost 1\u20130. Dalglish's first league game in charge was against Blackpool on 12 January 2011; Liverpool lost 2\u20131. After the game, Dalglish admitted that Liverpool faced \"a big challenge\".\nShortly after his appointment, Dalglish indicated he would like the job on a permanent basis if it was offered to him, and on 19 January the Liverpool chairman Tom Werner stated that the club's owners would favour this option. On 22 January 2011, Dalglish led Liverpool to their first win since his return, against Wolves at Molineux. After signing Andy Carroll from Newcastle for a British record transfer fee of \u00a335\u00a0million and Luis Su\u00e1rez from Ajax for \u00a322.8\u00a0million at the end of January (in the wake of Fernando Torres's sale to Chelsea for \u00a350\u00a0million), some journalists noted that Dalglish had begun to assert his authority at the club. Following a 1\u20130 victory against Chelsea at Stamford Bridge in February 2011, described by Alan Smith as \"a quite brilliant display in terms of discipline and spirit\" and a \"defensive masterplan\" by David Pleat, Henry Winter wrote, \"it can only be a matter of time before he [Dalglish] is confirmed as long-term manager\".\nOn 12 May 2011, Liverpool announced that Dalglish had been given a three-year contract. His first official match in charge was 2\u20130 defeat to Harry Redknapp's Spurs at Anfield. Dalglish's second stint in charge at Anfield proved controversial at times. The Scot defended Luis Su\u00e1rez in the wake of the striker's eight-match ban for racially abusing Manchester United defender Patrice Evra when the teams met in October 2011. After the Uruguayan's apparent refusal to shake Evra's hand in the return fixture in February 2012, an apology from both player and manager came only after the intervention of the owners.\nIn February 2012, Dalglish led Liverpool to their first trophy in six years, with victory in the 2011\u201312 Football League Cup. In the same season he also led Liverpool to the 2012 FA Cup Final where they lost 2\u20131 to Chelsea. Despite the success in domestic cups, Liverpool finished eighth in the league, their worst showing in the league since 1994, failing to qualify for the Champions League for a third straight season. Following the end of the season, Liverpool dismissed Dalglish on 16 May 2012.\nIn October 2013, Dalglish returned to Liverpool as a non-executive director.\nOn 13 October 2017, Anfield's Centenary Stand was officially renamed the Sir Kenny Dalglish Stand in recognition of his unique contribution to the club.\nPersonal life.\nDalglish has been married to Marina since 26 November 1974. The couple have four children, including Kelly and Paul. Kelly has worked as a football presenter for BBC Radio 5 Live and Sky Sports. Paul followed in his father's footsteps as a footballer. Marina was diagnosed with breast cancer in March 2003, but was treated at Aintree University Hospital in Liverpool and recovered. She later launched a charity to fund new cancer treatment equipment for UK hospitals. Dalglish advised author Jilly Cooper on her 2023 novel \"Tackle!\"\nRecognition.\nDalglish was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the 1985 New Year Honours for services to football. He was appointed a Knight Bachelor in the 2018 Birthday Honours for services to football, charity and the City of Liverpool. He dedicated the award to former Celtic and Liverpool coaches Jock Stein, Bill Shankly and Bob Paisley stating that he was \"Humbled\" and \"A wee bit embarrassed\".\nIn 2002, Celtic supporters voted for what they considered to be the greatest Celtic XI of all time. Dalglish was voted into the team, which was; Simpson, McGrain, Gemmell, Murdoch, McNeill, Auld, Johnstone, P. McStay, Dalglish, Larsson and Lennox. He was an inaugural inductee to the English Football Hall of Fame the same year, and later also an inaugural inductee to the Scottish Football Hall of Fame in 2004. He is highly regarded by Liverpool fans, who still affectionately refer to him as \"King Kenny\", as do supporters of the Scotland National team from the 70s and 80s when he was a world-class player. In 2006 Liverpool fans voted him top of the fans' poll \"100 Players Who Shook the Kop\". In 2009, \"FourFourTwo\" magazine named Dalglish the greatest striker in post-war British football.\nOn 19 December 2023, Dalglish won the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Lifetime Achievement Award.\nCharitable work.\nIn 2005, Dalglish and his wife founded the charity the Marina Dalglish Appeal to raise money to help treat cancer. Dalglish has participated in a number of events to raise money for the charity, including a replay of the 1986 FA Cup Final. In June 2007 a Centre for Oncology at Aintree University Hospital was opened, after the charity had raised \u00a31.5\u00a0million. In 2012, the foundation made a \u00a32 million donation to The Walton Centre which allowed the purchase of a new MRI scanner.\nDalglish often competes in the annual Gary Player Invitational Tournament, a charity golfing event which raises money for children's causes around the world.\nOn 1 July 2011, Dalglish was awarded an honorary degree by the University of Ulster, for services to football and charity.\nCareer statistics.\nClub.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHonours.\nPlayer.\nCeltic\nLiverpool\nScotland\nIndividual\nManager.\nLiverpool\nBlackburn Rovers\nNewcastle United\nCeltic\nIndividual\nIn popular culture.\nIn 2025, a sports drama documentary film on Dalglish titled \"Kenny Dalglish\" directed by Asif Kapadia will premiere at the Rome Festival in October. It is narrated by Dalglish himself and draws from archival footage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16920", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16920", "title": "Knowledge representation and reasoning", "text": "Field of artificial intelligence\nKnowledge representation (KR) aims to model information in a structured manner to formally represent it as knowledge in knowledge-based systems whereas knowledge representation and reasoning (KRR, KR&amp;R, or KR\u00b2) also aims to understand, reason, and interpret knowledge. KRR is widely used in the field of artificial intelligence (AI) with the goal to represent information about the world in a form that a computer system can use to solve complex tasks, such as diagnosing a medical condition or having a natural-language dialog. KR incorporates findings from psychology about how humans solve problems and represent knowledge, in order to design formalisms that make complex systems easier to design and build. KRR also incorporates findings from logic to automate various kinds of \"reasoning\".\nTraditional KRR focuses more on the declarative representation of knowledge. Related knowledge representation formalisms mainly include vocabularies, thesaurus, semantic networks, axiom systems, frames, rules, logic programs, and ontologies. Examples of automated reasoning engines include inference engines, theorem provers, model generators, and classifiers.\nIn a broader sense, parameterized models in machine learning \u2014 including neural network architectures such as convolutional neural networks and transformers \u2014 can also be regarded as a family of knowledge representation formalisms. The question of which formalism is most appropriate for knowledge-based systems has long been a subject of extensive debate. For instance, Frank van Harmelen et al. discussed the suitability of logic as a knowledge representation formalism and reviewed arguments presented by anti-logicists. Paul Smolensky criticized the limitations of symbolic formalisms and explored the possibilities of integrating it with connectionist approaches.\nMore recently, Heng Zhang et al. have demonstrated that all universal (or equally expressive and natural) knowledge representation formalisms are recursively isomorphic. This finding indicates a theoretical equivalence among mainstream knowledge representation formalisms with respect to their capacity for supporting artificial general intelligence (AGI). They further argue that while diverse technical approaches may draw insights from one another via recursive isomorphisms, the fundamental challenges remain inherently shared.\nHistory.\nThe earliest work in computerized knowledge representation was focused on general problem-solvers such as the General Problem Solver (GPS) system developed by Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon in 1959 and the Advice Taker proposed by John McCarthy also in 1959. GPS featured data structures for planning and decomposition. The system would begin with a goal. It would then decompose that goal into sub-goals and then set out to construct strategies that could accomplish each subgoal. The Advisor Taker, on the other hand, proposed the use of the predicate calculus to implement common sense reasoning.\nMany of the early approaches to knowledge representation in Artificial Intelligence (AI) used graph representations and semantic networks, similar to knowledge graphs today. In such approaches, problem solving was a form of graph traversal or path-finding, as in the A* search algorithm. Typical applications included robot plan-formation and game-playing.\nOther researchers focused on developing automated theorem-provers for first-order logic, motivated by the use of mathematical logic to formalise mathematics and to automate the proof of mathematical theorems. A major step in this direction was the development of the resolution method by John Alan Robinson.\nIn the meanwhile, John McCarthy and Pat Hayes developed the situation calculus as a logical representation of common sense knowledge about the laws of cause and effect. Cordell Green, in turn, showed how to do robot plan-formation by applying resolution to the situation calculus. He also showed how to use resolution for question-answering and automatic programming.\nIn contrast, researchers at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) rejected the resolution uniform proof procedure paradigm and advocated the procedural embedding of knowledge instead. The resulting conflict between the use of logical representations and the use of procedural representations was resolved in the early 1970s with the development of logic programming and Prolog, using SLD resolution to treat Horn clauses as goal-reduction procedures.\nThe early development of logic programming was largely a European phenomenon. In North America, AI researchers such as Ed Feigenbaum and Frederick Hayes-Roth advocated the representation of domain-specific knowledge rather than general-purpose reasoning.\nThese efforts led to the cognitive revolution in psychology and to the phase of AI focused on knowledge representation that resulted in expert systems in the 1970s and 80s, production systems, frame languages, etc. Rather than general problem solvers, AI changed its focus to expert systems that could match human competence on a specific task, such as medical diagnosis.\nExpert systems gave us the terminology still in use today where AI systems are divided into a \"knowledge base\", which includes facts and rules about a problem domain, and an \"inference engine\", which applies the knowledge in the knowledge base to answer questions and solve problems in the domain. In these early systems the facts in the knowledge base tended to be a fairly flat structure, essentially assertions about the values of variables used by the rules.\nMeanwhile, Marvin Minsky developed the concept of frame in the mid-1970s. A frame is similar to an object class: It is an abstract description of a category describing things in the world, problems, and potential solutions. Frames were originally used on systems geared toward human interaction, e.g. understanding natural language and the social settings in which various default expectations such as ordering food in a restaurant narrow the search space and allow the system to choose appropriate responses to dynamic situations.\nIt was not long before the frame communities and the rule-based researchers realized that there was a synergy between their approaches. Frames were good for representing the real world, described as classes, subclasses, slots (data values) with various constraints on possible values. Rules were good for representing and utilizing complex logic such as the process to make a medical diagnosis. Integrated systems were developed that combined frames and rules. One of the most powerful and well known was the 1983 Knowledge Engineering Environment (KEE) from Intellicorp. KEE had a complete rule engine with forward and backward chaining. It also had a complete frame-based knowledge base with triggers, slots (data values), inheritance, and message passing. Although message passing originated in the object-oriented community rather than AI it was quickly embraced by AI researchers as well in environments such as KEE and in the operating systems for Lisp machines from Symbolics, Xerox, and Texas Instruments.\nThe integration of frames, rules, and object-oriented programming was significantly driven by commercial ventures such as KEE and Symbolics spun off from various research projects. At the same time, there was another strain of research that was less commercially focused and was driven by mathematical logic and automated theorem proving. One of the most influential languages in this research was the KL-ONE language of the mid-'80s. KL-ONE was a frame language that had a rigorous semantics, formal definitions for concepts such as an Is-A relation. KL-ONE and languages that were influenced by it such as Loom had an automated reasoning engine that was based on formal logic rather than on IF-THEN rules. This reasoner is called the classifier. A classifier can analyze a set of declarations and infer new assertions, for example, redefine a class to be a subclass or superclass of some other class that wasn't formally specified. In this way the classifier can function as an inference engine, deducing new facts from an existing knowledge base. The classifier can also provide consistency checking on a knowledge base (which in the case of KL-ONE languages is also referred to as an Ontology).\nAnother area of knowledge representation research was the problem of common-sense reasoning. One of the first realizations learned from trying to make software that can function with human natural language was that humans regularly draw on an extensive foundation of knowledge about the real world that we simply take for granted but that is not at all obvious to an artificial agent, such as basic principles of common-sense physics, causality, intentions, etc. An example is the frame problem, that in an event driven logic there need to be axioms that state things maintain position from one moment to the next unless they are moved by some external force. In order to make a true artificial intelligence agent that can converse with humans using natural language and can process basic statements and questions about the world, it is essential to represent this kind of knowledge. In addition to McCarthy and Hayes' situation calculus, one of the most ambitious programs to tackle this problem was Doug Lenat's Cyc project. Cyc established its own Frame language and had large numbers of analysts document various areas of common-sense reasoning in that language. The knowledge recorded in Cyc included common-sense models of time, causality, physics, intentions, and many others.\nThe starting point for knowledge representation is the \"knowledge representation hypothesis\" first formalized by Brian C. Smith in 1985:\nAny mechanically embodied intelligent process will be comprisedof structural ingredients that a) we as external observers naturally take to represent a propositional account of the knowledge that the overall process exhibits, and b) independent of such external semantic attribution, play a formal but causal and essential role in engendering the behavior that manifests that knowledge.\nOne of the most active areas of knowledge representation research is the Semantic Web. The Semantic Web seeks to add a layer of semantics (meaning) on top of the current Internet. Rather than indexing web sites and pages via keywords, the Semantic Web creates large ontologies of concepts. Searching for a concept will be more effective than traditional text only searches. Frame languages and automatic classification play a big part in the vision for the future Semantic Web. The automatic classification gives developers technology to provide order on a constantly evolving network of knowledge. Defining ontologies that are static and incapable of evolving on the fly would be very limiting for Internet-based systems. The classifier technology provides the ability to deal with the dynamic environment of the Internet.\nRecent projects funded primarily by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) have integrated frame languages and classifiers with markup languages based on XML. The Resource Description Framework (RDF) provides the basic capability to define classes, subclasses, and properties of objects. The Web Ontology Language (OWL) provides additional levels of semantics and enables integration with classification engines.\nOverview.\nKnowledge-representation is a field of artificial intelligence that focuses on designing computer representations that capture information about the world that can be used for solving complex problems.\nThe justification for knowledge representation is that conventional procedural code is not the best formalism to use to solve complex problems. Knowledge representation makes complex software easier to define and maintain than procedural code and can be used in expert systems.\nFor example, talking to experts in terms of business rules rather than code lessens the semantic gap between users and developers and makes development of complex systems more practical.\nKnowledge representation goes hand in hand with automated reasoning because one of the main purposes of explicitly representing knowledge is to be able to reason about that knowledge, to make inferences, assert new knowledge, etc. Virtually all knowledge representation languages have a reasoning or inference engine as part of the system.\nA key trade-off in the design of knowledge representation formalisms is that between expressivity and tractability. First Order Logic (FOL), with its high expressive power and ability to formalise much of mathematics, is a standard for comparing the expressibility of knowledge representation languages.\nArguably, FOL has two drawbacks as a knowledge representation formalism in its own right, namely ease of use and efficiency of implementation. Firstly, because of its high expressive power, FOL allows many ways of expressing the same information, and this can make it hard for users to formalise or even to understand knowledge expressed in complex, mathematically-oriented ways. Secondly, because of its complex proof procedures, it can be difficult for users to understand complex proofs and explanations, and it can be hard for implementations to be efficient. As a consequence, unrestricted FOL can be intimidating for many software developers.\nOne of the key discoveries of AI research in the 1970s was that languages that do not have the full expressive power of FOL can still provide close to the same expressive power of FOL, but can be easier for both the average developer and for the computer to understand. Many of the early AI knowledge representation formalisms, from databases to semantic nets to production systems, can be viewed as making various design decisions about how to balance expressive power with naturalness of expression and efficiency. In particular, this balancing act was a driving motivation for the development of IF-THEN rules in rule-based expert systems. \nA similar balancing act was also a motivation for the development of logic programming (LP) and the logic programming language Prolog. Logic programs have a rule-based syntax, which is easily confused with the IF-THEN syntax of production rules. But logic programs have a well-defined logical semantics, whereas production systems do not.\nThe earliest form of logic programming was based on the Horn clause subset of FOL. But later extensions of LP included the negation as failure inference rule, which turns LP into a non-monotonic logic for default reasoning. The resulting extended semantics of LP is a variation of the standard semantics of Horn clauses and FOL, and is a form of database semantics, which includes the unique name assumption and a form of closed world assumption. These assumptions are much harder to state and reason with explicitly using the standard semantics of FOL.\nIn a key 1993 paper on the topic, Randall Davis of MIT outlined five distinct roles to analyze a knowledge representation framework:\nKnowledge representation and reasoning are a key enabling technology for the Semantic Web. Languages based on the Frame model with automatic classification provide a layer of semantics on top of the existing Internet. Rather than searching via text strings as is typical today, it will be possible to define logical queries and find pages that map to those queries. The automated reasoning component in these systems is an engine known as the classifier. Classifiers focus on the subsumption relations in a knowledge base rather than rules. A classifier can infer new classes and dynamically change the ontology as new information becomes available. This capability is ideal for the ever-changing and evolving information space of the Internet.\nThe Semantic Web integrates concepts from knowledge representation and reasoning with markup languages based on XML. The Resource Description Framework (RDF) provides the basic capabilities to define knowledge-based objects on the Internet with basic features such as Is-A relations and object properties. The Web Ontology Language (OWL) adds additional semantics and integrates with automatic classification reasoners.\nCharacteristics.\nIn 1985, Ron Brachman categorized the core issues for knowledge representation as follows:\nOntology engineering.\nIn the early years of knowledge-based systems the knowledge-bases were fairly small. The knowledge-bases that were meant to actually solve real problems rather than do proof of concept demonstrations needed to focus on well defined problems. So for example, not just medical diagnosis as a whole topic, but medical diagnosis of certain kinds of diseases.\nAs knowledge-based technology scaled up, the need for larger knowledge bases and for modular knowledge bases that could communicate and integrate with each other became apparent. This gave rise to the discipline of ontology engineering, designing and building large knowledge bases that could be used by multiple projects. One of the leading research projects in this area was the Cyc project. Cyc was an attempt to build a huge encyclopedic knowledge base that would contain not just expert knowledge but common-sense knowledge. In designing an artificial intelligence agent, it was soon realized that representing common-sense knowledge, knowledge that humans simply take for granted, was essential to make an AI that could interact with humans using natural language. Cyc was meant to address this problem. The language they defined was known as CycL.\nAfter CycL, a number of ontology languages have been developed. Most are declarative languages, and are either frame languages, or are based on first-order logic. Modularity\u2014the ability to define boundaries around specific domains and problem spaces\u2014is essential for these languages because as stated by Tom Gruber, \"Every ontology is a treaty\u2013a social agreement among people with common motive in sharing.\" There are always many competing and differing views that make any general-purpose ontology impossible. A general-purpose ontology would have to be applicable in any domain and different areas of knowledge need to be unified.\nThere is a long history of work attempting to build ontologies for a variety of task domains, e.g., an ontology for liquids, the lumped element model widely used in representing electronic circuits (e.g.), as well as ontologies for time, belief, and even programming itself. Each of these offers a way to see some part of the world.\nThe lumped element model, for instance, suggests that we think of circuits in terms of components with connections between them, with signals flowing instantaneously along the connections. This is a useful view, but not the only possible one. A different ontology arises if we need to attend to the electrodynamics in the device: Here signals propagate at finite speed and an object (like a resistor) that was previously viewed as a single component with an I/O behavior may now have to be thought of as an extended medium through which an electromagnetic wave flows.\nOntologies can of course be written down in a wide variety of languages and notations (e.g., logic, LISP, etc.); the essential information is not the form of that language but the content, i.e., the set of concepts offered as a way of thinking about the world. Simply put, the important part is notions like connections and components, not the choice between writing them as predicates or LISP constructs.\nThe commitment made selecting one or another ontology can produce a sharply different view of the task at hand. Consider the difference that arises in selecting the lumped element view of a circuit rather than the electrodynamic view of the same device. As a second example, medical diagnosis viewed in terms of rules (e.g., MYCIN) looks substantially different from the same task viewed in terms of frames (e.g., INTERNIST). Where MYCIN sees the medical world as made up of empirical associations connecting symptom to disease, INTERNIST sees a set of prototypes, in particular prototypical diseases, to be matched against the case at hand.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16921", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16921", "title": "Knowledge Aided Retrieval in Activity Context", "text": "System to profile different categories of terrorist attacks\nKnowledge Aided Retrieval in Activity Context (KARNAC) is a system being developed in the United States for use in profiling different categories of terrorist attacks to determine the components of possible future terrorist incidents.\nInformation for KARNAC is generally to be derived from structured, semi-structured and unstructured databases. This would include information derived from gun registrations, driver's licenses, residential and criminal records, as well as the Internet, newspapers and county records. For example, the system might raise an alert if someone attempted to buy components for bomb making, hired a car and rented a hotel room near the White House.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16923", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16923", "title": "Kernow", "text": "Kernow may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16924", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16924", "title": "K56flex", "text": ""}
{"id": "16925", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16925", "title": "K56Plus", "text": ""}
{"id": "16926", "revid": "45925219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16926", "title": "Kabaddi", "text": "Contact team sport popular in South Asia\nKabaddi (, ) is a contact team sport played between two teams of seven players. It is one of the traditional games of India. In the game, a raider enters the opposing half of the court to tag the defenders and attempt to return within 30 seconds without being tackled. Points are awarded for successful tags, while defenders earn a point for tackling the raider. Tagged or tackled players are temporarily out but can re-enter when their team scores. Raids alternate between teams throughout the game.\nIt is popular in South Asia and nearby Asian countries. Although accounts of kabaddi are found in ancient India, the game was popularised as a competitive sport in the 20th century. It is the national sport of Bangladesh. It is the third most popular and viewed sport in India after cricket and football. It is the state game of the Indian states of Punjab, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha, Andrapradesh, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, and Uttar Pradesh.\nThere are two major forms: \"Punjabi kabaddi\", also called \"circle style\", consists of the traditional forms of the sport that are played outdoors on a circular field, and the \"standard/rectangular style\", which is played indoors on a rectangular court, and is played in major professional leagues and international competitions such as the Asian Games.\nName.\nThis game is known by numerous names in different parts of the Indian subcontinent, such as: \"kabaddi \"or \"chedugudu\" in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana; \"kabaddi\" in Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala; \"kabaddi\", \"komonti\" or \"ha-du-du\" in West Bengal and Bangladesh; \"baibalaa\" in Maldives, \"kauddi-kauddi\" in Sindh, \"kabaddi\" in the Punjab region; \"hu-tu-tu\" in Western India, \"ha-do-do\" in Eastern India; \"chadakudu\" in South India; \"kapardi\" in Nepal; \"kabadi\" or \"sadugudu\" in Tamil Nadu; and \"chakgudu\" in Sri Lanka.\nEtymology.\nThe raider is required to execute each raid on a single breath; in order to prove that they are not inhaling, they are required to repeatedly chant the word \"kabaddi\", in a process referred to as a cant. The term kabaddi is from a Tamil word composed of \"Kai\" and \"Pidi\", meaning \"to hold hands\".\nHistory.\nAncient era.\nRonojoy Sen speculates in his book \"Nation At Play\" that kabaddi originated during the Vedic period (between 1500 BC and 500 BC). There are accounts of both Siddhartha Gautama and Lord Krishna having played an ancient form of the sport.\nAccording to the sport's origins, kabaddi is a sport developed centered on Jallikattu. A player going to the opposition is treated like a bull. It is like taming a bull without touching it, as it is mentioned in Sangam Literature that the game called Sadugudu was practised since ages.\nThere are also accounts of kabaddi having been played in Iran 2,000 years ago.\nModern era.\nModern kabaddi is a synthesis of the game played in various forms under different names in the Indian subcontinent. India has been first credited with having helped to popularise kabaddi as a competitive sport, with the first organised competitions occurring in the 1920s, their introduction to the programme of the National Games of India in 1938, the establishment of the All-India Kabaddi Federation in 1950, and it being played as a demonstration sport at the inaugural 1951 Asian Games in New Delhi. These developments helped to formalise the sport, which had traditionally been played on muddy surfaces in villages, for legitimate international competition.\nThe first framework of rules for the sport was prepared in Maharashtra in the 1920s, with English sports serving as a model for this formalisation. One of the earliest modern tournaments of the sport, the All India Kabaddi Tournament in 1923, was played according to these amended rules. After being demonstrated again at the 1982 Asian Games in Delhi, kabaddi was added to the Asian Games programme beginning in 1990.\nThe advent of the Pro Kabaddi League (PKL) in 2014 revolutionised the standard style of the sport, with various rule changes being made; for example, whereas previously raids had no time limit other than the breathing capacity of the raider, the PKL rules introduced the concept of a standard 30-second time limit for every raid.\nVariations.\nStandard style.\nIn the international team version of kabaddi, two teams of seven members each occupy opposite halves of a court of in the case of men and in the case of women. Each has five supplementary players held in reserve for substitution. The game is played with 20-minute halves with a 5-minute half time break in which the teams exchange sides. During each play, known as a \"raid\", a player from the attacking side, known as the \"raider\", runs into the opposing team's side of the court and attempts to tag as many of the seven defending players as possible. The raider must cross the baulk line into the defending team's territory, and then return to their half of the field without being tackled. (If an attacker touches a defender and hasn't yet reached the baulk line, they do not need to reach the baulk line to score points and may return to their half of the court.) While raiding, the raider must loudly chant \"kabaddi\", confirming to referees that their raid is done on a single breath without inhaling. Each raid has a 30-second time limit.\nA point is scored for each defender tagged; tags can be made with any part of the raider's body and touching any part of the defender's body. If the raider steps beyond the bonus line marked in the defending team's territory when there are six or more players, they earn an additional point known as a bonus point (the bonus point is only scored if the raider's trailing foot is in the air while they step over the line). If the raider is successfully stopped (tackled), the opposite team earns a point instead. All players tagged or tackled are taken out of the game, but one is \"revived\" for each point a team scores from a subsequent tag or tackle. However, bonus points do not revive players. In addition, players who step out of the boundary are out. However, the boundary of the field can vary mid-raid; there are two strips on either side of the court known as \"lobby areas\" which only become part of the field of play in raids where the raider touches an opponent.\nA raid where no points are scored by the raider is referred to as an \"empty raid\". By contrast, a play where the raider scores three or more points is referred to as a \"super raid\". If a team gets all seven players on the opposing team out (\"All Out\"), they earn two additional points and then all the opposition players are placed back in the game.\nIn the event of a tie, PKL rules stipulate (for playoff matches) that each team is to perform five raids on the other team, with no time limits involved, no players being dismissed or revived, and the baulk line being simultaneously treated as a bonus line.\nStyles of Indian kabaddi.\nThere are four major forms of Indian kabaddi recognised by some amateur federation.\nBeach kabaddi.\nThe Beach kabaddi variant is played in two 15-minute halves by two teams of four players who are not allowed to wear shoes and is played on levelled ground of sand either on seas shore or river banks. It is played at an international level in competitions such as the Asian Beach Games.\nIndoor kabaddi.\nThe Indoor kabaddi variant is played in two 15-minute halves by two teams of five players and is a shorter variant of standard style kabaddi. It is played at an international level in competitions such as the Asian Indoor and Martial Arts Games.\nGovernance.\nInternational kabaddi organisations.\nAn international governing body called the International Kabaddi Federation (IKF) has been established for the sport.\nAnother kabaddi organisation named the World Kabaddi Federation was founded in 2003 and formally incorporated in 2005.\nA different organisation called World Kabaddi was founded in 2018. It held its own Kabaddi World Cup competition in 2019 in Malacca, Malaysia, followed by its 2025 Kabaddi World Cup event in March 2025 in West Midlands, England.\nMajor competitions.\nInternational competitions.\nIKF Kabaddi World Cup.\nThe Kabaddi World Cup is an outdoor international standard style kabaddi competition conducted by the IKF, contested by national teams.\nIn 2024, it announced a plan to hold a 2025 Kabaddi World Cup in India in January 2025. The IKF men's competition has been previously contested in 2004, 2007 and 2016. All three of these tournaments were held in India and were won by India, and all had Iran as runner-up. To clinch the title in 2016, India defeated Iran by 38\u201329 in the final of the championship game.\nThe IKF has also held one women's World Cup event. It was held in 2012 in India. It was also won by India.\nJunior Kabaddi World Cup.\nThe inaugural Kabaddi World Cup organised by the IKF was held in Kish island, Iran, 11\u201314 November 2019. It featured 13 teams. Iran won the tournament by defeating Kenya in the final, 42\u201322. Team India did not participate in this tournament.\nAsian Games.\nKabaddi was played as a demonstration event at the First Asian Games in 1951, and again in 1982, before becoming a medal event for the first time in 1990.\nThe Indian national team won every men's and women's kabaddi competition in the Asian Games from 2002 through 2014. At the 2018 Asian Games, Iran became the first country other than India to win gold medals in kabaddi, with India's men's team winning bronze, and India's women's team being beaten by Iran to win silver.\nAsian Kabaddi Championship.\nAKC's tenth season was played in Gorgan, Iran, in 2017 in which India won its tenth gold by defeating Pakistan in the finals.\nEuropean Kabaddi Championship.\nThe first edition of European Kabaddi Championship was held in Scotland in 2019. The final match was between Poland and Holland, Poland won the tournament. Final score was Poland 47\u201327 Holland. The second edition was held in Cyprus in 2021 which was organised by the World Kabaddi Federation. Poland retained their title by beating hosts Cyprus in the final, 29\u201315. Italy was set to host the third edition in 2022, but it was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic, eventually happening in 2023. Poland beat England in the final to retain their title.\nKabaddi Masters.\nThe inaugural edition of the Kabaddi Masters was held in Dubai, 22\u201330 June 2018. It was the first kabaddi tournament to be held in the UAE. It featured 6 teams. India won the tournament by defeating Iran in the final with a scoreline of 44\u201326, with the Indian Defense outperforming the Iran Defense.\nDomestic competitions.\nPro Kabaddi League.\nThe Pro Kabaddi League was established in 2014. The league modeled its business upon that of the Indian Premier League of Twenty20 cricket, with a large focus on marketing, the backing of local broadcaster Star Sports. The Pro Kabaddi League quickly became a ratings success on Indian television; the 2014 season was watched by at least 435 million viewers over the course of the season, and the inaugural championship match was seen by 98.6 million viewers.\nBengal Warriors, Bengaluru Bulls, Patna Pirates, Tamil Thalaivas, UP Yoddhas, Gujrat Giants, Haryana Steelers, Puneri Paltan, U Mumba, Jaipur Pink Panthers, Dabang Delhi KC, and Telugu Titans are the 12 teams that play in the Pro Kabaddi League.\nThe organisers of the Pro Kabaddi League change the sport's rules and its presentation to make it more suitable for a television audience. All players in the league must be strictly under in weight. When the raider scores 10 or more raid points in a single match, it is called a super 10, and they earn an extra point. If the defender successfully manages to tackle the five raiders in a single game, it is a high 5, and the team will be awarded one extra point.https://\nAdditional rules are used in the Pro Kabaddi League to encourage scoring: when a defensive side has three or fewer players remaining, tackles are worth two points instead of one. Furthermore, if a team performs two empty raids in a row, the next raider must score a point (\"do-or-die raid\"), or else they will be declared out and the opposing team will score a point.\nIndo International Premier Kabaddi League.\nThe inaugural edition of the IIPKL was on 13 May 2019 at Pune, India. The title for the inaugural season was won by the Bangalore Rhinos.\nSuper Kabaddi League.\nIn May 2018, the Super Kabaddi League was first held in Pakistan, as part of a larger push to promote renewed interest in the sport in Pakistan.\nYuva Kabaddi Series.\nYuva Kabaddi Series (YKS) is a franchise-based junior-category kabaddi tournament in India. It is for players who are under 23 years old and below . The inaugural Yuva Kabaddi Series was conducted in Jaipur in June 2022, and was broadcast on OTT platform FanCode. It is the second-largest kabaddi tournament in India, and the largest tournament in India in terms of number of matches played per year.\nFour seasonal editions are held every year. Three tournaments were conducted in 2022: Summer Edition in Jaipur, Monsoon Edition at Ranchi, and Winter Edition at Pondicherry; and two in 2023: the KMP YKS in Maharashtra (which was won by Ahmednagar) and Summer Edition Mysore. For the first time in the history of Indian kabaddi, players from the North East will be playing in a tournament of this stature.\nEach edition is contested over several rounds, with teams eliminated in each round, and the Summit Round acting as the playoffs of the tournament and leading to the final. Several players who started off in YKS have gone on to play at higher levels of kabaddi competition, such as the Pro Kabaddi League (through the New Young Player initiative) and the Junior Kabaddi World Cup.\nYuva Kabaddi Series was founded by uMumba CEO Suhail Chandhok and Vikas Kumar Gautam.\nPopularity.\nIndian subcontinent.\nKabaddi is a popular sport in the Indian subcontinent. The governing federation for kabaddi in India is the Amateur Kabaddi Federation of India (AKFI), which was founded in 1973 and compiled a standard set of rules. Kabaddi is the second-most popular sport in India, with the Pro Kabaddi League being watched by hundreds of millions of people each year. The governing body for kabaddi in Pakistan is Pakistan Kabaddi Federation.\nIn Bangladesh, Kabaddi is known with a different name called \"Ha-du-du\". Ha-du-du has no definite rules and is played with different rules in different areas. Kabaddi is the national sport of Bangladesh, given official status in 1972. The Amateur Kabaddi Federation of Bangladesh was formed in 1973.\nNepal.\nKabaddi is among the national sports of Nepal. Kabaddi is played and taught in most primary schools beginning in about the third grade in most Nepali schools. \nFrom 2025, Nepal Kabaddi League has begun as the fourth sports franchise league ever been established after Cricket, Football and Volleyball. It is the benchmark in the history of sports in Nepal which has been organised by Astrionix Management.\nThe inaugural season features top international players from Thailand, Kenya, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka.\nThe women's national Kabaddi team of Nepal won the https:// in the 19th Asian Games.\nInternationally.\nKabaddi was also played by the British Army for fun, to keep fit and as an enticement to recruit soldiers from the British Asian community. Kabaddi was brought to the United Kingdom by its South Asian diaspora (Bangladeshi, Indian, Pakistani, Nepali and Sri Lankan immigrants.)\nIn the 21st century, South Korea is one of the fastest-rising nations in international kabaddi, having beaten India in the opening match of the 2016 Kabaddi World Cup.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16927", "revid": "1261736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16927", "title": "Kereem Abdul Jabar", "text": ""}
{"id": "16928", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16928", "title": "Kerameikos", "text": "Kerameikos (, ) also known by its Latinized form Ceramicus, is an area of Athens, Greece, located to the northwest of the Acropolis, which includes an extensive area both within and outside the ancient city walls, on both sides of the Dipylon Gate and by the banks of the Eridanos River. It was the potters' quarter of the city, from which the English word \"ceramic\" is derived, and was also the site of an important cemetery and numerous funerary sculptures erected along the Sacred Way, a road from Athens to Eleusis.\nHistory and description.\nThe area took its name from the city square or d\u0113mos (\u03b4\u1fc6\u03bc\u03bf\u03c2) of the Kerameis (\u039a\u03b5\u03c1\u03b1\u03bc\u03b5\u1fd6\u03c2, potters), which in turn derived its name from the word \u03ba\u03ad\u03c1\u03b1\u03bc\u03bf\u03c2 (\"k\u00e9ramos\", \"pottery clay\", from which the English word \"ceramic\" is derived). The \"Inner Kerameikos\" was the former \"potters' quarter\" within the city and \"Outer Kerameikos\" covers the cemetery and also the \"D\u0113m\u00f3sion S\u0113ma\" (\u03b4\u03b7\u03bc\u03cc\u03c3\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd \u03c3\u1fc6\u03bc\u03b1, public graveyard) just outside the city walls, where Pericles delivered his funeral oration in 431 BC. The cemetery was also where the \u0397iera Hodos (the Sacred Way, i.e. the road to Eleusis) began, along which the procession moved for the Eleusinian Mysteries. The quarter was located there because of the abundance of clay mud carried over by the Eridanos River.\nThe area has undergone a number of archaeological excavations in recent years, though the excavated area covers only a small portion of the ancient \"d\u0113mos\". It was originally an area of marshland along the banks of the Eridanos river which was used as a cemetery as long ago as the 3rd millennium BC. It became the site of an organised cemetery from about 1200 BC; numerous cist graves and burial offerings from the period have been discovered by archaeologists. Houses were constructed on the higher drier ground to the south. During the Archaic period increasingly large and complex grave mounds and monuments were built along the south bank of the Eridanos, lining the Sacred Way.\nThe building of the new city wall in 478 BC, following the in 480 BC, fundamentally changed the appearance of the area. At the suggestion of Themistocles, all of the funerary sculptures were built into the city wall and two large city gates facing north-west were erected in the Kerameikos. The Sacred Way ran through the Sacred Gate, on the southern side, to Eleusis. On the northern side a wide road, the Dromos, ran through the double-arched Dipylon Gate (also known as the Thriasian Gate) and on to the Platonic Academy a few miles away. State graves were built on either side of the Dipylon Gate, for the interment of prominent personages such as notable warriors and statesmen, including Pericles and Cleisthenes.\nAfter the construction of the city wall, the Sacred Way and a forking street known as the Street of the Tombs again became lined with imposing sepulchral monuments belonging to the families of rich Athenians, dating to before the late 4th century BC. The construction of such lavish mausolea was banned by decree in 317 BC, following which only small columns or inscribed square marble blocks were permitted as grave stones. The Roman occupation of Athens led to a resurgence of monument-building, although little is left of them today.\nDuring the Classical period an important public building, the Pompeion, stood inside the walls in the area between the two gates. This served a key function in the procession (\"pomp\u0113\", \u03c0\u03bf\u03bc\u03c0\u03ae) in honour of Athena during the Panathenaic Festival. It consisted of a large courtyard surrounded by columns and banquet rooms, where the nobility of Athens would eat the sacrificial meat for the festival. According to ancient Greek sources, a hecatomb (a sacrifice of 100 cows) was carried out for the festival and the people received the meat in the Kerameikos, possibly in the Dipylon courtyard; excavators have found heaps of bones in front of the city wall.\nThe Pompeion and many other buildings in the vicinity of the Sacred Gate were razed to the ground by the marauding army of the Roman dictator Sulla, during his sacking of Athens in 86 BC; an episode that Plutarch described as a bloodbath. During the 2nd century AD, a storehouse was constructed on the site of the Pompeion, but it was destroyed during the invasion of the Heruli in 267 AD. The ruins became the site of potters' workshops until about 500 AD, when two parallel colonnades were built behind the city gates, overrunning the old city walls. A new Festival Gate was constructed to the east with three entrances leading into the city. This was in turn destroyed in raids by the invading Avars and Slavs at the end of the 6th century, and the Kerameikos fell into obscurity. It was not rediscovered until a Greek worker dug up a stele in April 1863.\nArchaeology.\nArchaeological excavations in the Kerameikos began in 1870 under the auspices of the Greek Archaeological Society. They have continued from 1913 to the present day under the German Archaeological Institute at Athens.\nLatest findings in the Kerameikos include the excavation of a 2.1 m tall Kouros, unearthed by the German Archaeological Institute at Athens under the direction of Professor Wolf-Dietrich Niemeier. This Kouros is the larger twin of the one now kept in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, and both were made by the same anonymous sculptor called the Dipylon Master.\nDuring the construction of Kerameikos metro station for the expanded Athens Metro, a plague pit and approximately 1,000 tombs from the 4th and 5th centuries BC were discovered. In 1992, Greek archaeologist Efi Baziatopoulou-Valavani excavated these sites. The plague pit is located in the northwestern corner of the cemetery and is 6.5 meters long and 1.6 meters deep, containing 89 individuals' remains. The remains found belonged to adult males and females, as well as eight children. Many consider this pit to contain victims from the Plague of Athens, which was prevalent from 430 to 428 BC, followed by a recurrence from 427 to 426 BC.\nPottery found within the grave was used to date the burial to between 430 and 426 BC based on the styles common during that time. The burial is considered to be related to the Athenian plague not only because of the dating of the burial, but also because of the nature of the burial. The chaos caused by the Plague of Athens, as described by Thucydides, matches with the disordered nature of the pit. The pit is further thought to be a state burial, conducted for victims whose families could not afford proper burials.\nBodies were found in five successive layers within the pit, with more care shown on the bottom levels and increasingly little care shown as the burial continued upwards. Bodies were thrown in haphazardly, their positions dictated by the shape of the pit. There was soil placed between the bodies only on the lower levels, and most of the offerings were also found on the lower levels of the burial. The eight children\u2019s bodies were found on the upper-most level, and were covered with large shards of pottery.\nOfferings for the dead consisted of roughly 30 small vases. Examples of the ceramics found within the pit include choes, a pelike, and numerous lekythoi. All of these pieces are common in quality and use. The excavator, Baziatopoulou, further remarks that the offerings are surprisingly few considering the number of dead buried within the pit. She then notes that this is especially true when taking into account the probable loss of one or more upper levels from prior intrusions into the burial, which would have brought the total persons buried up to approximately 150. The offerings found were scattered on the lower levels of the pit, suggesting diminishing care as the burial continued upwards.\nThe eight children found buried within the pit are an exception to the pattern of diminishing care as the burial progressed. Found on the upper levels, these children were not thrown in the pit haphazardly but were instead placed with care and covered with shards of pottery. These are the only ceramics found in the pit that are outside of the lower levels, and this caused Biazatopoulou to comment that the children \u201cseem to have been treated with special care.\u201d Notably, one of the children\u2019s faces was reconstructed by professor Manolis Papagrigorakis and the child is now known as Myrtis.\nThe skeletal remains found within the pit were submitted to Greek orthodontics professor Manolis Papagrigorakis for examination. Upon analyzing dental pulp from the remains, he concluded that three subjects contained the bacterium \"Salmonella enterica\" serovar typhi, which results in typhoid fever. The pathogen responsible for the Athenian plague is much disputed, and this DNA evidence has caused scholars to view typhoid fever as a likely culprit. These are the only remains in connection with the Athenian plague to be analyzed.\nLarge areas adjacent to those already excavated remain in to be explored, as they lie under the fabric of modern-day Athens. Expropriation of these areas has been delayed until funding is secured.\nMuseum.\nThe area is enclosed and visitable through an entrance on the last block of Ermou Street, close to the intersection with Peiraios Street. The Kerameikos Museum is housed there, in a small neoclassical building that houses the most extensive collection of burial-related artifacts in Greece, varying from large-scale marble sculpture to funerary urns, stelae, jewelry, toys etc. The original burial monument sculptures are displayed within the museum, having been replaced by plaster replicas \"in situ\".\nThe museum incorporates inner and outer courtyards, where the larger sculptures are kept. Down the hill from the museum, visitors can wander among the Outer Kerameikos ruins, the Demosion Sema, the banks of the Eridanos where some water still flows, the remains of the Pompeion and the Dipylon Gate, and walk the first blocks of the Sacred Way towards Eleusis and of the Panathenaic Way towards the Acropolis. The bulk of the area lies about 7\u201310 meters below modern street level, having in the past been inundated by centuries' worth of sediment accumulation from the floods of the Eridanos.\nMetro station.\nAs of spring 2007, Kerameikos is the name given to the metro station which belongs to Line 3 of the Athens Metro, adjacent to the Technopolis of Gazi.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16929", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16929", "title": "Kung Fu-tzu", "text": ""}
{"id": "16930", "revid": "42627321", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16930", "title": "Kabir Bedi", "text": "Indian film actor (born 1946)\nKabir Bedi (born 16 January 1946) is an Indian actor. His career has spanned three continents covering India, the United States and especially Italy among other Western countries in three media: film, television and theatre. He is noted for his role as Emperor Shah Jahan in \"\" and the villainous Sanjay Verma in the 1980s blockbuster \"Khoon Bhari Maang\". He is best known in Italy and Europe for playing the pirate \"Sandokan\" in the popular Italian TV miniseries and for his role as the villainous Gobinda in the 1983 James Bond film \"Octopussy\". Bedi is based in India and lives in Mumbai.\nEarly life and education.\nKabir Bedi was born in Lahore in the Punjab Province of British India (now in Punjab, Pakistan) on 16 January 1946. His father, Baba Pyare Lal Singh Bedi, was a Punjabi Sikh author, philosopher and a direct descendent of Guru Nanak. His mother, Freda Bedi, was an English woman born in Derby, who became famous as the first Western woman to take ordination in Tibetan Buddhism. He was educated at Sherwood College in Nainital, Uttarakhand, and St. Stephen's College in Delhi.\nCareer.\nBedi began his career in Indian theatre and then moved on to Hindi films. He remains one of the first international actors from India who started out in Hindi films, worked in Hollywood films and became a star in Europe.\nStage acting.\nAs a stage actor, Bedi has performed Shakespeare's \"Othello\" as well as portrayed a historical Indian king in \"Tughlaq\", and a self-destructive alcoholic in \"The Vultures\". In London he starred in \"The Far Pavilions\", the West End musical adaptation of M. M. Kaye's novel, at the Shaftesbury Theatre.\nIn 2011 Bedi played Emperor Shah Jahan in \"Taj\", a play written by John Murrell, a Canadian playwright for the Luminato Festival in Toronto. In 2013, this play was recommissioned and went on an eight-week multi-city tour of Canada.\nFilm career.\nIn the James Bond film \"Octopussy\", Bedi played the villain's aide Gobinda.\nHe has acted in over 60 Indian films. In the historical epic \"\", he starred as the Emperor Shah Jahan. Other starring Hindi film roles include Raj Khosla's \"Kacche Dhaage\", Rakesh Roshan's \"Khoon Bhari Maang\" and Farah Khan's \"Main Hoon Na\".\nBedi shot a movie with Hrithik Roshan (\"Kites\"), Govinda (\"Showman\"), and Akshay Kumar (\"Blue\"). He acted in the Tamil film \"Aravaan\", directed by Vasanthabalan.\nBedi played roles in Columbia Pictures' \"The Beast of War\", a film on the Russian war in Afghanistan, directed by Kevin Reynolds, as well as the acclaimed Italian film \"Andata Ritorno\", by Marco Ponti, winner of the David di Donatello Award.\nIn 2017, he acted in the Telugu historical movie \"Gautamiputra Satakarni\", as Nahapana, an important ruler of the Western Kshatrapas.\nTelevision career.\nBedi has appeared on American television, in Hallmark's African epic \"Forbidden Territory\", and Ken Follett's \"On Wings of Eagles\" and \"Red Eagle\". He played Friar Sands in \"The Lost Empire\", for NBC. He also acted in \"Dynasty\", \"Murder, She Wrote\", \"Magnum, P.I.\", \"Hunter\", \"Knight Rider\" and \"\".\nIn Europe, his greatest success was \"Sandokan\", the saga of a romantic Southeast Asian pirate during British colonial times, an Italian-German-French TV series which broke viewership records across Europe. He recently starred in a prime-time Italian television series, \"Un Medico in Famiglia\", on RAI TV.\nFor over a year, Bedi starred in \"The Bold and the Beautiful\", the second most-watched television show in the world, seen by over a billion people in 149 countries.\nHe had his own cinematic talk show on Indian TV, \"Director's Cut\", a 13-part special series interviewing the country's leading directors. His success on television continued in 2013 with award-winning prime-time shows \"Guns and Glory: The Indian Soldier\" and \"Vandemataram\", for India's news channels Headlines Today and Aaj Tak.\nIn the Indian Biblical television series \"Bible Ki Kahaniya\", Bedi played both the young and aged Abraham.\nRadio career.\nIn 2007, he starred in \"Chat\", a radio show aired by RAI Radio2, in the role of Sandokan. In 2012, he did a series of Radio One programmes titled \"Women of Gold\" and \"Men of Steel\" in honour of industry champions in India. In 2017 he did another series in English for Radio One, \"Ten on Ten\", celebrating the top ten innovations out of India. He also did the year-end special series, \"Best of 2017\".\nWriting.\nBedi is a regular contributor to Indian publications including the \"Times of India\" and \"Tehelka\" on political and social issues affecting the country. He is also seen debating such topics on Indian national television.\nCharity.\nIn February 2017, Bedi was announced as the new 'brand ambassador' for international development organisation, Sightsavers, saying on his appointment, \"Today there is immense awareness and attempt towards eye health and care in India and Sightsavers have shown way to people at large in the country with their achievements in the area of eye care.\"\nBedi is the honorary brand ambassador for Italian Charity Care and Share Italia, which educates and looks after street children, from school to university, in Andhra Pradesh and Telegana.\nAwards and achievements.\nSince 1982, Bedi has been a voting member of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (who are responsible for presenting the Oscar awards). He is also a voting member of the Screen Actors Guild.\nHe has won numerous film, advertising and popularity awards across Europe and India.\nBy decree of the President of the Italian Republic of 2 June 2010, Bedi was officially knighted. He received the highest ranking civilian honour of the Italian Republic and was bestowed the title of \"Cavaliere\" (Knight) of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic. He has recently received Honorary Degree from Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology (KIIT) University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India.\nPersonal life.\nBedi married four times and had three children, Pooja, Siddharth (deceased) and Adam. He was married to Protima Bedi, an Odissi dancer. Their daughter Pooja Bedi is a magazine / newspaper columnist and former actress. Siddharth, who attended Carnegie Mellon University, was diagnosed with schizophrenia and died by suicide in 1997 at the age of 26.\nAs his marriage to Protima began to break down, he started a relationship with Parveen Babi. They never married. He later married British-born fashion designer Susan Humphreys. Their son, Adam Bedi, is an international model who made his Hindi film debut with the thriller \"Hello? Kaun Hai!\". This marriage ended in divorce.\nIn the early 1990s, Bedi married TV and radio presenter Nikki Bedi. They had no children and divorced in 2005. After that, Bedi started a relationship with British-born Parveen Dusanj, whom he married a day before his 70th birthday.\nBedi was ordained as a Buddhist monk in Myanmar when he was about 10 years old. He has been practising Buddhism for many years. He supports the anti-government struggle in Myanmar, and he is an official ambassador of the Burma Campaign UK. He is the brand ambassador for Rotary International South Asia for its Teach Programme and the Total Literacy Mission in India and South Asia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16931", "revid": "39374154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16931", "title": "Kaber", "text": "Kaber may refer to:\nPlace.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16932", "revid": "1934512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16932", "title": "Kamov Ka-25", "text": "Naval helicopter developed for the USSR\nThe Kamov Ka-25 (NATO reporting name \"Hormone\") is a naval helicopter, developed for the Soviet Navy in the USSR from 1958.\nDesign and development.\nIn the late 1950s there was an urgent demand for anti-submarine helicopters for deployment on new ships equipped with helicopter platforms entering service with the Soviet Navy. Kamov's compact design was chosen for production in 1958. To speed the development of the new anti-submarine helicopter Kamov designed and built a prototype to prove the cabin and dynamic components layout; designated Ka-20, this demonstrator was not equipped with mission equipment, corrosion protection or shipboard operational equipment. The Ka-20 was displayed at the 1961 Tushino Aviation Day display.\nDefinitive prototypes of the Ka-25 incorporated mission equipment and corrosion protection for the structure. The rotor system introduced aluminium alloy blades pressurised with nitrogen for crack detection, lubricated hinges, hydraulic powered controls, alcohol de-icing and automatic blade folding. Power was supplied by two free-turbine engines sat atop the cabin, with electrically de-iced inlets, plain lateral exhausts with no infrared countermeasures, driving the main gearbox directly and a cooling fan for the gearbox and hydraulic oil coolers aft of the main gearbox. Construction was of stressed skin duralumin throughout with flush-riveting, as well as some bonding and honeycomb sandwich panels. The 1.5m \u00d7 1.25m \u00d7 3.94m cabin had a sliding door to port flight deck forward of the cabin and fuel tanks underfloor filled using a pressure refueling nozzle on the port side. A short boom at the rear of the cabin had a central fin and twin toed-in fins at the ends of the tailplane mainly for use during auto-rotation. The undercarriage consisted of two noncastoring mainwheels with sprag brakes attached to the fuselage by parallel 'V' struts with a single angled shock absorber to dissipate landing loads, and two castoring nosewheels on straight shock absorbing legs attached directly to the fuselage either side of the cockpit which folded rearwards to reduce interference with the RADAR, all wheels were fitted with emergency rapid inflation flotation collars. Flying controls all act on the co-axial rotors with pitch, roll and collective similar to a conventional single rotor helicopter. Yaw was through differential collective which has a secondary effect of torque, an automatic mixer box ensured that total lift on the rotors remained constant during yaw maneuvers, to improve handling during deck landings. Optional extras included fold up seats for 12 passengers, rescue hoist, external auxiliary fuel tanks or containers for cameras, flares, smoke floats or beacons.\nOperators.\nFormer operators\nSpecifications (Ka-25BSh).\n\"Data from\" General characteristics* Crew: 4\nPerformance\nArmament\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16933", "revid": "44127043", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16933", "title": "Kainite", "text": "Evaporite mineral\nKainite ( or ) (KMg(SO4)Cl\u00b73H2O) is an evaporite mineral in the class of \"Sulfates (selenates, etc.) with additional anions, with H2O\" according to the Nickel\u2013Strunz classification. It is a hydrated potassium-magnesium sulfate-chloride, naturally occurring in irregular granular masses or as crystalline coatings in cavities or fissures. This mineral is dull and soft, and is colored white, yellowish, grey, reddish, or blue to violet. Its name is derived from Greek [kainos] (\"(hitherto) unknown\"), as it was the first mineral discovered that contained both sulfate and chloride as anions. Kainite forms monoclinic crystals.\nProperties.\nKainite is of bitter taste and soluble in water. On recrystallization picromerite is deposited from the solution.\nGenesis and occurrence.\nKainite was discovered in the Stassfurt salt mines in today's Saxony-Anhalt, Germany in 1865 by the mine official Sch\u00f6ne and was first described by Carl Friedrich Jacob Zincken.\nKainite is a typical secondary mineral that forms through metamorphosis in marine deposits of potassium carbonate, and is also occasionally formed through resublimation from volcanic vapours. It is often accompanied by anhydrite, carnallite, halite, and kieserite.\nKainite is only found in comparatively few places, among them in salt mines in central and northern Germany, Bad Ischl (Austria), on Pasquasia in Sicily, in Whitby (UK), and in the Carlsbad Potash District in New Mexico, in volcanic deposits in Kamchatka and in Iceland, and in salt lakes in western China. It has also been identified in Gusev Crater on Mars.\nIt can also be produced from bittern remaining after removal of table salt from seawater.\nUses.\nKainite is used as a source of potassium and magnesium compounds, as a fertilizer, and as gritting salt.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16934", "revid": "51028419", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16934", "title": "KAIST", "text": "South Korean public research university\nKAIST (originally the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology) is a national research university located in Daedeok Innopolis, Daejeon, South Korea. KAIST was established by the Korean government in 1971 as the nation's first public, research-oriented science and engineering institution. KAIST has been internationally accredited in business education, and hosts the Secretariat of the Association of Asia-Pacific Business Schools (AAPBS). KAIST has 10,504 full-time students and 1,342 faculty researchers (as of the Fall 2019 Semester) and had a total budget of US$765 million in 2013, of which US$459 million was from research contracts.\nIn 2007, KAIST partnered with international institutions and adopted dual degree programs for its students. Its partner institutions include the Technical University of Denmark, Carnegie Mellon University, the Georgia Institute of Technology, Technische Universit\u00e4t Berlin, and the Technical University of Munich.\nHistory.\nThe institute was founded in 1971 as the Korea Advanced Institute of Science (KAIS) by a loan of US$6 million (US$38 million 2019) from the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and supported by President Park Chung-Hee. The institute's academic scheme was mainly designed by Frederick E. Terman, then vice president of Stanford University, and Dr. KunMo Chung, a professor at the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn. The institute's two main functions were to train advanced scientists and engineers and develop a structure of graduate education in the country. Research studies had begun by 1973 and undergraduates studied for bachelor's degrees by 1984.\nIn 1981, the government merged the Korean Advanced Institute of Science and the Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) to form the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, or KAIST, under the leadership of physics professor Choochon Lee. Due to differing research philosophies, KIST and KAIST split in 1989. In the same year KAIST and the Korea Institute of Technology (KIT) combined and moved from Seoul to the Daedeok Science Town in Daejeon. \nThe first act of President Suh upon his inauguration in July 2006 was to lay out the KAIST Development Plan. The 'KAIST Development Five-Year Plan' was finalized on February 5, 2007, by KAIST Steering Committee. The goals of KAIST set by Suh were to become one of the best science and technology universities in the world, and to become one of the top-10 universities by 2011. In January 2008, the university dropped its full name, \"Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology\", and changed its official name to only \"KAIST\".\nAcademics.\nAcademics.\nAdmission to KAIST is based on overall grades, grades on math and science courses, recommendation letters from teachers, study plan, personal statements, and other data, and does not rely on a standardized test conducted by the university. In 2014, the acceptance rate for local students was 14.9%, and for international students at 13.2%.\nFull scholarships are given to all students including international students in the bachelor, master and doctorate courses. Doctoral students are given military-exemption benefits from South Korea's compulsory military service. Up to 80% of courses taught in KAIST are conducted in English.\nUndergraduate students can join the school through an \u201copen major system\u201d that allows students to take classes for three terms and then choose a discipline that suits their aptitude, and undergraduates are allowed to change their major anytime. KAIST has also produced many doctorates through the integrated master's and doctoral program and early-completion system. Students must publish papers in internationally renowned academic journals for graduation.\nStudents.\nKAIST produced 69,388 alumni from 1975 to 2021, with 19,457 bachelor's, 35,513 master's, and 14,418 doctorate degree holders. As of Spring 2021, 10,793 students were enrolled in KAIST with 3,605 bachelor's, 3,069 master's, 1,354 joint M.S.-Ph.D.'s, and 2,765 doctoral students. More than 70 percent of KAIST undergraduates come from specialized science high schools. 817 international students from 81 countries are studying at KAIST (as of spring semester 2021), making it one of the most ethnically diverse universities in the country.\nOrganization.\nKAIST is organized into 6 colleges, 2 schools and 33 departments/divisions.\nKAIST also has three affiliated institutes including the Korea Institute of Advanced Study (KIAS), National NanoFab Center (NNFC), and Korea Science Academy (KSA).\nCampus.\nKAIST has two campuses in Daejeon and one campus in Seoul. The university is mainly located in the Daedeok Science Town in the city of Daejeon, 150 kilometers south of the capital Seoul. Daedeok is also home to some 50 public and private research institutes, universities such as CNU and high-tech venture capital companies.\nMost lectures, research activities, and housing services are located in the Daejeon main campus. It has a total of 29 dormitories. Twenty-three dormitories for male students and four dormitories for female students are located on the outskirts of the campus, and two apartments for married students are located outside the campus.\nThe Seoul campus is the home to the College of Business and the Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI (GSAI). The graduate schools of finance, management and information &amp; media management are located there. The total area of the Seoul campus is .\nThe Munji campus, the former campus of Information and Communications University until its merger with KAIST, is located ca. away from the main campus. It has two dormitories, one for undergraduate students and the other for graduate students. The Institute for Basic Science (IBS) Center for Axion and Precision Physics Research is located here doing particle and nuclear physics related to dark matter and the Rare Isotope Science Project has the Superconducting Radio Frequency test facility.\nMain library.\nThe KAIST main library was established in 1971 as KAIS library, and it went through a merge and separation process with KIST library. It merged with KIT in March 1990. A contemporary 5 story building was constructed as the main library, and it is being operated with an annex library. The library uses the American LC Classification Schedule. The library underwent expansion and remodeling, which finished in 2018, to include conference rooms, collaboration rooms, and media rooms.\nEvent.\nKAIST's Seokrim Taeulje is a festival held by KAIST for three days every spring semester. The festival preparation committee under the undergraduate student council will be in charge of planning and execution, various food booths and experience booths will be opened, and stage events such as club performances and a song festival will be held. Also called the Cherry Blossom Festival, students eat strawberries on the lawn.http://\nResearch.\nKI consists of five institutes and three centers: KI for BioCentury, KI for Information Technology Convergence, KI for Robotics, KI for NanoCentury, KI for Health Science and Technology, Saudi Aramco-KAIST CO2 Management Center, Fourth Industrial Revolution Intelligence Center, and Center for Epidemic Preparedness. Each KI is operated as an independent research center at the level of a college, receiving support in terms of finance and facilities. In terms of ownership of intellectual property rights, KAIST holds 2,694 domestic patents and 723 international patents so far.\nElectric vehicles.\nResearchers at KAIST have developed the Online Electric Vehicle (OLEV), a technique of powering vehicles through cables underneath the surface of the road via non-contact magnetic charging (a power source is placed underneath the road surface and power is wirelessly picked up on the vehicle itself). In July 2009 the researchers successfully supplied up to 60% power to a bus over a gap of from a power line embedded in the ground using power supply and pick up technology developed in-house.\nControversy.\nSuicides.\nIn 2011, a punitive tuition system was introduced to KAIST, which charged students for tuition only if their grade-point average dropped below 3.0 on a 4.0 scale. This change, along with a new system mandating English-only classes, led to 11 members of KAIST committing suicide from 2011 to 2016. The university has since reversed the punitive tuition system.\nDevelopment of autonomous arms.\nIn February 2018, the Korea Times published an article which stated that KAIST was starting an AI weapons research project together with the Korean arms manufacturer Hanwha. The allegations were of developing lethal autonomous weapons with Hanwha. This has led to researchers from 30 countries boycotting KAIST, which has denied existence of the program.\nChina tech leaks.\nIn February 2024, a KAIST professor was found guilty by an appellate court of leaking autonomous vehicle technologies to China between 2017 and 2020, leading to a two year prison sentence. Despite a lower court having sentenced the professor to two years in prison with a three-year suspended sentence in 2021, KAIST did not take any disciplinary action, instead offering only a public apology and a promise to improve its transparency\nRankings and reputation.\nOverall rankings.\nKAIST was ranked 56th worldwide in the QS WUR 2024, 91st worldwide in the THE WUR 2023, 282nd in the USNWR Rankings 2022-2023, and 201-300th in ARWU 2022.\nKAIST was the 111th best-ranked university worldwide in 2022 in terms of aggregate performance across THE, QS, and ARWU, as reported by ARTU.\nBefore THE and QS started publishing separate rankings in 2010, the jointly published THE\u2013QS World University Rankings ranked KAIST globally at 160th (2004), 143rd (2005), 198th (2006), 132nd (2007), 95th (2008), and 69th (2009).\nIn 2019 Thomson Reuters named KAIST the 34th most innovative university in the world and the 2nd most innovative university in the Asia-Pacific region.\nKAIST was ranked 61-70th worldwide in the THE World Reputation Rankings 2022.\nSubject/Area rankings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2009 THE-QS World University Rankings (in 2010 Times Higher Education World University Rankings and QS World University Rankings parted ways to produce separate rankings) for Engineering &amp; IT, the university was placed 21st in the world and 1st in Korea.\nIn 2009, KAIST's department of industrial design has also been listed in the top 30 Design Schools by Business Week.\nYoung University rankings.\nTimes Higher Education ranked KAIST the 3rd best university in the world under the age of 50 years in its 2015 league table.\nGraduate Employability rankings.\nKAIST graduates ranked 67th worldwide in the Times Higher Education's Global University Employability Ranking 2022, and 77th worldwide in the QS Graduate Employability Rankings 2022.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16936", "revid": "895250816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16936", "title": "Kabyle", "text": "See also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16938", "revid": "44973744", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16938", "title": "Kaolinite", "text": "Phyllosilicate clay mineral\nKaolinite ( ; also called kaolin) is a clay mineral, with the chemical composition Al2Si2O5(OH)4. It is a layered silicate mineral, with one \"tetrahedral\" sheet of silicate tetrahedra () linked to one \"octahedral\" sheet of aluminate octahedrons () through oxygen atoms on one side, and another such sheet through hydrogen bonds on the other side.\nKaolinite is a soft, earthy, usually white, mineral (dioctahedral phyllosilicate clay), produced by the chemical weathering of aluminium silicate minerals like feldspar. It has a low shrink\u2013swell capacity and a low cation-exchange capacity (1\u201315 meq/100\u00a0g).\nRocks that are rich in kaolinite, and halloysite, are known as kaolin () or china clay. In many parts of the world kaolin is colored pink-orange-red by iron oxide, giving it a distinct rust hue. Lower concentrations of iron oxide yield the white, yellow, or light orange colors of kaolin. Alternating lighter and darker layers are sometimes found, as at Providence Canyon State Park in Georgia, United States.\nKaolin is an important raw material in many industries and applications. Commercial grades of kaolin are supplied and transported as powder, lumps, semi-dried noodle or slurry. Global production of kaolin in 2021 was estimated to be 45 million tonnes, with a total market value of US $4.24 billion.\nNames.\nThe English name \"kaolin\" was borrowed in 1727 from Fran\u00e7ois Xavier d'Entrecolles's 1712 French reports on the manufacture of Jingdezhen porcelain. D'Entrecolles was transcribing the Chinese term , now romanized as in pinyin, taken from the name of the village of Gaoling (\"High Ridge\") near Ehu in Fuliang County, now part of Jiangxi Province's Jingdezhen Prefecture. The area around the village had become the main source of Jingdezhen's kaolin over the course of the Qing dynasty. The mineralogical suffix \"-ite\" was later added to generalize the name to cover nearly identical minerals from other locations.\nKaolinite is also occasionally discussed under the archaic names lithomarge and lithomarga from Latin , a combination of (\uff0c, \"stone\") and (\"marl\"). In more proper modern use, lithomarge now refers specifically to a compacted and massive form of kaolin.\nChemistry.\nNotation.\nThe chemical formula for kaolinite as written in mineralogy is , however, in ceramics applications the same formula is typically written in terms of oxides, thus giving .\nStructure.\nCompared with other clay minerals, kaolinite is chemically and structurally simple. It is described as a 1:1 or \"TO\" clay mineral because its crystals consist of stacked \"TO\" layers. Each \"TO\" layer consists of a tetrahedral (\"T\") sheet composed of silicon and oxygen ions bonded to an octahedral (\"O\") sheet composed of oxygen, aluminium, and hydroxyl ions. The \"T\" sheet is so called because each silicon ion is surrounded by four oxygen ions forming a tetrahedron. The \"O\" sheet is so called because each aluminium ion is surrounded by six oxygen or hydroxyl ions arranged at the corners of an octahedron. The two sheets in each layer are strongly bonded together via shared oxygen ions, while layers are bonded via hydrogen bonding between oxygen on the outer face of the \"T\" sheet of one layer and hydroxyl on the outer face of the \"O\" sheet of the next layer.\nA kaolinite layer has no net electrical charge and so there are no large cations (such as calcium, sodium, or potassium) between layers as with most other clay minerals. This accounts for kaolinite's relatively low ion exchange capacity. The close hydrogen bonding between layers also hinders water molecules from infiltrating between layers, accounting for kaolinite's nonswelling character.\nWhen moistened, the tiny platelike crystals of kaolinite acquire a layer of water molecules that cause crystals to adhere to each other and give kaolin clay its cohesiveness. The bonds are weak enough to allow the plates to slip past each other when the clay is being molded, but strong enough to hold the plates in place and allow the molded clay to retain its shape. When the clay is dried, most of the water molecules are removed, and the plates hydrogen bond directly to each other, so that the dried clay is rigid but still fragile. If the clay is moistened again, it will once more become plastic.\nStructural transformations.\nKaolinite group clays undergo a series of phase transformations upon thermal treatment in air at atmospheric pressure.\nMilling.\nHigh-energy milling of kaolin results in the formation of a mechanochemically amorphized phase similar to metakaolin, although the properties of this solid are quite different. The high-energy milling process is highly inefficient and consumes a large amount of energy.\nDrying.\nBelow 100\u00a0\u00b0C, exposure to low humidity air will result in the slow evaporation of any liquid water in the kaolin. At low moisture content the mass can be described \"leather dry\", and at near 0% moisture it is referred to as \"bone dry\".\nAbove 100\u00a0\u00b0C any remaining free water is lost. Above around 400\u00a0\u00b0C hydroxyl ions (OH\u2212) are lost from the kaolinite crystal structure in the form of water: the material cannot now be plasticised by absorbing water. This is irreversible, as are subsequent transformations; this is referred to as \"calcination\".\nMetakaolin.\nEndothermic dehydration of kaolinite begins at 550\u2013600\u00a0\u00b0C producing disordered metakaolin, but continuous hydroxyl loss is observed up to . Although historically there was much disagreement concerning the nature of the metakaolin phase, extensive research has led to a general consensus that metakaolin is not a simple mixture of amorphous silica () and alumina (), but rather a complex amorphous structure that retains some longer-range order (but not strictly crystalline) due to stacking of its hexagonal layers.\nSpinel.\nFurther heating to 925\u2013950\u00a0\u00b0C converts metakaolin to an aluminium-silicon spinel which is sometimes also referred to as a gamma-alumina type structure:\nPlatelet mullite.\nUpon calcination above 1050\u00a0\u00b0C, the spinel phase nucleates and transforms to platelet mullite and highly crystalline cristobalite:\nNeedle mullite.\nFinally, at 1400\u00a0\u00b0C the \"needle\" form of mullite appears, offering substantial increases in structural strength and heat resistance. This is a structural but not chemical transformation. See stoneware for more information on this form.\nOccurrence.\nKaolinite is one of the most common minerals; it is mined, as kaolin, in Australia, Brazil, Bulgaria, China, Czech Republic, France, Germany, India, Iran, Malaysia, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Tanzania, Thailand, United Kingdom, United States and Vietnam.\nMantles of kaolinite are common in Western and Northern Europe. The ages of these mantles are Mesozoic to Early Cenozoic.\nKaolinite clay occurs in abundance in soils that have formed from the chemical weathering of rocks in hot, moist climates; for example in tropical rainforest areas. Comparing soils along a gradient towards progressively cooler or drier climates, the proportion of kaolinite decreases, while the proportion of other clay minerals such as illite (in cooler climates) or smectite (in drier climates) increases. Such climatically related differences in clay mineral content are often used to infer changes in climates in the geological past, where ancient soils have been buried and preserved.\nIn the National Institute of Agronomic Studies and Research (INERA) classification system, soils in which the clay fraction is predominantly kaolinite are called \"kaolisol\" (from kaolin and soil).\nIn the United States, the main kaolin deposits are found in central Georgia, on a stretch of the Atlantic Seaboard fall line between Augusta and Macon. This area of thirteen counties is called the \"white gold\" belt; Sandersville is known as the \"Kaolin Capital of the World\" due to its abundance of kaolin. In the late 1800s, an active kaolin surface-mining industry existed in the extreme southeast corner of Pennsylvania, near the towns of Landenberg and Kaolin, and in what is present-day White Clay Creek Preserve. The product was brought by train to Newark, Delaware, on the Newark-Pomeroy line, along which can still be seen many open-pit clay mines. The deposits were formed between the late Cretaceous and early Paleogene, about 100 to 45 million years ago, in sediments derived from weathered igneous and metakaolin rocks. Kaolin production in the United States during 2011 was 5.5 million tons.\nDuring the Paleocene\u2013Eocene Thermal Maximum sediments deposited in the Espluga Freda area of Spain were enriched with kaolinite from a detrital source due to denudation.\nSynthesis and genesis.\nDifficulties are encountered when trying to explain kaolinite formation under atmospheric conditions by extrapolation of thermodynamic data from the more successful high-temperature syntheses. La Iglesia and Van Oosterwijk-Gastuche (1978) thought that the conditions under which kaolinite will nucleate can be deduced from stability diagrams, based as they are on dissolution data. Because of a lack of convincing results in their own experiments, La Iglesia and Van Oosterwijk-Gastuche (1978) had to conclude, however, that there were other, still unknown, factors involved in the low-temperature nucleation of kaolinite. Because of the observed very slow crystallization rates of kaolinite from solution at room temperature Fripiat and Herbillon (1971) postulated the existence of high activation energies in the low-temperature nucleation of kaolinite.\nAt high temperatures, equilibrium thermodynamic models appear to be satisfactory for the description of kaolinite dissolution and nucleation, because the thermal energy suffices to overcome the energy barriers involved in the nucleation process. The importance of syntheses at ambient temperature and atmospheric pressure towards the understanding of the mechanism involved in the nucleation of clay minerals lies in overcoming these energy barriers. As indicated by Caill\u00e8re and H\u00e9nin (1960) the processes involved will have to be studied in well-defined experiments, because it is virtually impossible to isolate the factors involved by mere deduction from complex natural physico-chemical systems such as the soil environment.\nFripiat and Herbillon (1971), in a review on the formation of kaolinite, raised the fundamental question how a disordered material (i.e., the amorphous fraction of tropical soils) could ever be transformed into a corresponding ordered structure. This transformation seems to take place in soils without major changes in the environment, in a relatively short period of time, and at ambient temperature (and pressure).\nLow-temperature synthesis of clay minerals (with kaolinite as an example) has several aspects. In the first place the silicic acid to be supplied to the growing crystal must be in a monomeric form, i.e., silica should be present in very dilute solution (Caill\u00e8re et al., 1957; Caill\u00e8re and H\u00e9nin, 1960; Wey and Siffert, 1962; Millot, 1970). In order to prevent the formation of amorphous silica gels precipitating from supersaturated solutions without reacting with the aluminium or magnesium cations to form crystalline silicates, the silicic acid must be present in concentrations below the maximum solubility of amorphous silica. The principle behind this prerequisite can be found in structural chemistry: \"Since the polysilicate ions are not of uniform size, they cannot arrange themselves along with the metal ions into a regular crystal lattice.\" (Iler, 1955, p.\u00a0182)\nThe second aspect of the low-temperature synthesis of kaolinite is that the aluminium cations must be hexacoordinated with respect to oxygen (Caill\u00e8re and H\u00e9nin, 1947; Caill\u00e8re et al., 1953; H\u00e9nin and Robichet, 1955). Gastuche et al. (1962) and Caill\u00e8re and H\u00e9nin (1962) have concluded that kaolinite can only ever be formed when the aluminium hydroxide is in the form of gibbsite. Otherwise, the precipitate formed will be a \"mixed alumino-silicic gel\" (as Millot, 1970, p.\u00a0343 put it). If it were the only requirement, large amounts of kaolinite could be harvested simply by adding gibbsite powder to a silica solution. Undoubtedly a marked degree of adsorption of the silica in solution by the gibbsite surfaces will take place, but, as stated before, mere adsorption does not create the layer lattice typical of kaolinite crystals.\nThe third aspect is that these two initial components must be incorporated into one mixed crystal with a layer structure. From the following equation (as given by Gastuche and DeKimpe, 1962) for kaolinite formation\nit can be seen that five molecules of water must be removed from the reaction for every molecule of kaolinite formed. Field evidence illustrating the importance of the removal of water from the kaolinite reaction has been supplied by Gastuche and DeKimpe (1962). While studying soil formation on a basaltic rock in Kivu (Za\u00efre), they noted how the occurrence of kaolinite depended on the of the area involved. A clear distinction was found between areas with good drainage (i.e., areas with a marked difference between wet and dry seasons) and those areas with poor drainage (i.e., perennially swampy areas). Kaolinite was only found in the areas with distinct seasonal alternations between wet and dry. The possible significance of alternating wet and dry conditions on the transition of allophane into kaolinite has been stressed by Tamura and Jackson (1953). The role of alternations between wetting and drying on the formation of kaolinite has also been noted by Moore (1964).\nLaboratory syntheses.\nSyntheses of kaolinite at high temperatures (more than ) are relatively well known. There are for example the syntheses of Van Nieuwenberg and Pieters (1929); Noll (1934); Noll (1936); Norton (1939); Roy and Osborn (1954); Roy (1961); Hawkins and Roy (1962); Tomura et al. (1985); Satokawa et al. (1994) and Huertas et al. (1999).\nRelatively few low-temperature syntheses have become known (cf. Brindley and DeKimpe (1961); DeKimpe (1969); Bogatyrev et al. (1997)).\nLaboratory syntheses of kaolinite at room temperature and atmospheric pressure have been described by DeKimpe et al. (1961). From those tests the role of periodicity becomes convincingly clear. DeKimpe et al. (1961) had used daily additions of alumina (as ) and silica (in the form of ethyl silicate) during at least two months. In addition, adjustments of the pH took place every day by way of adding either hydrochloric acid or sodium hydroxide. Such daily additions of Si and Al to the solution in combination with the daily titrations with hydrochloric acid or sodium hydroxide during at least 60 days will have introduced the necessary element of periodicity. Only now the actual role of what has been described as the \"aging\" (\"Alterung\") of amorphous alumino-silicates (as for example Harder, 1978 had noted) can be fully understood. As such, time is not bringing about any change in a closed system at equilibrium; but a series of alternations of periodically changing conditions (by definition, taking place in an open system) will bring about the low-temperature formation of more and more of the stable phase kaolinite instead of (ill-defined) amorphous alumino-silicates.\nApplications.\nMain.\nIn 2009, up to 70% of kaolin was used in the production of paper. Following reduced demand from the paper industry, resulting from both competing minerals and the effect of digital media, in 2016 the market share was reported to be: paper, 36%; ceramics, 31%; paint, 7% and other, 26%. According to the USGS, in 2021 the global production of kaolin was estimated to be around 45 million tonnes.\nProduction output.\nGlobal production of kaolin by country in 2012 was estimated to be:\nTypical properties.\nSome selected typical properties of various ceramic grade kaolins are:\nSafety.\nKaolin is generally recognized as safe, but may cause mild irritation of the skin or mucous membranes. Kaolin products may also contain traces of crystalline silica, a known carcinogen if inhaled.\nIn the US, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the legal limit (permissible exposure limit) for kaolin exposure in the workplace as 15\u00a0mg/m3 total exposure and 5\u00a0mg/m3 respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a recommended exposure limit (REL) of 10\u00a0mg/m3 total exposure TWA 5\u00a0mg/m3 respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16940", "revid": "438626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16940", "title": "Knights Templars", "text": ""}
{"id": "16941", "revid": "50813229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16941", "title": "Kawasaki Ki-56", "text": "Japanese light transport aircraft\nThe Kawasaki Ki-56 (, Type 1 Freight Transport) was a Japanese, two-engine light transport aircraft used during World War II. It was known to the Allies by the reporting name Thalia. One-hundred twenty-one were built between 1940-43.\nDesign and development.\nThe Kawasaki Ki-56 was derived from the Lockheed Model 14 Super Electra aircraft that the \"Kawasaki Kokuki Kogyo Kabushiki Kaisha\" (The Kawasaki Aircraft Engineering Company Limited) had built under licence. In September 1939, Kawasaki was asked by the Koku Hombu to design an improved version as Ki-56. A number was also built by Tachikawa Hikoki K.K.\nOperational history.\nThe Japanese invasion of Sumatra in the Dutch East Indies campaign began with a paratroop drop from Ki-56 transports on Airfield P1 and the oil refineries near Palembang. Royal Air Force Hawker Hurricane fighters flying from P1 to locate the Japanese invasion fleet passed the incoming Ki-56s but thought them to be friendly Lockheed Hudsons (also developed from the Lockheed Model 14) returning from a raid. The defending anti-aircraft gunners at P1 were equally fooled, until parachutes began to open. Once the AA guns opened fire, one transport was shot down, another force-landed, and others veered off course. The paratroop drop was effective, and the airfield and oil installations were overrun.\nSpecifications (Ki-56).\n\"Data from\" \"Encyclopedia of Military Aircraft\"; \"Japanese Aircraft of the Pacific War\"General characteristics* Crew: 4 (pilot, co-pilot, navigator, &amp; radio operator)* Aspect ratio: * Propellers: 3-bladed constant-speed propellers\nPerformance* Endurance: * g limits: * Roll rate: * Time to altitude: 12 min 38 s to\nSee also.\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16942", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16942", "title": "MV Wilhelm Gustloff", "text": "German military transport ship which sank in 1945; former cruise ship\nMV \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" was a German military transport ship, sunk on 30 January 1945 by in the Baltic Sea while evacuating civilians and military personnel from East Prussia and the German-occupied Baltic states, and German military personnel from Gotenhafen (Gdynia), as the Red Army advanced. By one estimate, 9,343 people died, making it the largest loss of life in a single ship sinking in history.\nOriginally constructed as a cruise ship for the Nazi Strength Through Joy (\"Kraft durch Freude\") organization in 1937, \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" was requisitioned by the \"Kriegsmarine\" (German navy) in 1939. She served as a hospital ship from 1939 to 1940, and then as a floating barracks for naval personnel in Gotenhafen until 1945, when she was fitted with anti-aircraft guns and used to transport evacuees.\nConstruction and naming.\n\"Wilhelm Gustloff\" was the first purpose-built cruise ship for the German Labour Front (\"Deutsche Arbeitsfront\", DAF) and used by subsidiary organisation Strength Through Joy (\"Kraft durch Freude\", KdF). She was designed to provide recreational and cultural activities for German functionaries and workers, including concerts, cruises, and other holiday trips, and to serve as a public relations tool that would present \"a more acceptable image of the Third Reich\". \nThe ship was constructed by the Blohm &amp; Voss shipyards. Measuring long by wide, with a capacity of \u00a0gross register tons\u00a0(GRT), she was launched on 5 May 1937.\nOriginally intended to be named \"Adolf Hitler\", the ship was instead named after Wilhelm Gustloff, leader of the Nazi Party's Swiss branch, who had been assassinated by a Jewish medical student in 1936. Hitler himself decided on the name change after sitting next to Gustloff's widow during his memorial service. After completing sea trials in the North Sea from 15 to 16 March 1938, she was handed over to the Strength Through Joy organisation.\nUse as cruise ship.\nThe ship made her unofficial maiden voyage between 24 and 27 March 1938 carrying Austrians in an attempt to convince them to vote for the annexation of Austria by Germany. On 29 March she departed on her second voyage carrying workers and their families from the Blohm &amp; Voss shipyard on a three-day cruise.\nRescue of \"Pegaway\".\nFor her third voyage, \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" left Hamburg on 1 April 1938 under the command of Carl L\u00fcbbe to join the KdF ships \"Der Deutsche\", \"Oceania\" and \"Sierra Cordoba\" on a group cruise of the North Sea. A storm developed on 3 April with winds up to that forced the four ships apart. Meanwhile, the 1,836 gross ton British coal freighter \"Pegaway\", which had departed Tyne on 2 April for Hamburg, was also caught up in the storm. Cargo and machinery were washed from \"Pegaway\"'s decks and the ship soon lost maneuverability. By 4 April, it was taking on water and slowly sinking.\nAt 4 am, Captain G. W. Ward of \"Pegaway\" issued an SOS when the ship was northwest of the island of Terschelling, off the coast of the Netherlands. The closest of the ships that answered the distress call was \"Wilhelm Gustloff\", which reached \"Pegaway\" at 6 am. She launched her Lifeboat No. 1, with a crew of twelve under the command of Second Officer Meyer. The oar-powered lifeboat was unable to come aside \"Pegaway\" in the heavy seas and looked in danger of needing to be rescued itself. Lifeboat No. 6, with a crew of ten under the command of Third Officer Sch\u00fcrmann, was then lowered. As it was motor-powered, it was better able to handle the waves.\nAfter first assisting their shipmates in Lifeboat No. 1 to head back towards \"Wilhelm Gustloff\", Sch\u00fcrmann was able to reach \"Pegaway\". One by one, the 19 men on \"Pegaway\" jumped into the sea and were hauled onto Lifeboat No. 6, with both them and the crew of the lifeboat back at \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" by 7:45 am. A Dutch tugboat soon arrived but was unable to save \"Pegaway\", which soon rolled to port and sank. Lifeboat No. 1 had been so badly damaged by the waves that after its crew had climbed up via ladders to the safety of their ship that it was set adrift, to later be washed up on the shores of Terschelling on 2 May.\nAnschluss and further civilian usage.\nOn 8 April 1938 \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" departed Hamburg for England, where she anchored over offshore from Tilbury so as to remain in international waters. This allowed her to act as a floating polling station for German and Austrian citizens living in England who wished to vote on the approaching plebiscite on Germany's unification with Austria. During 10 April, 1,172 Germans and 806 Austrians were carried from the docks at Tilbury to the ship where 1,968 votes were cast in favour of the union and ten against. Once the voting was complete, \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" left Tilbury, reaching Hamburg on 12 April.\nAfter undertaking a further voyage on 14 to 19 April 1938, the ship went on an \"Osterfahrt\" (Easter Voyage) before her actual official maiden voyage, which was undertaken from 21 April to 6 May 1938, when she joined \"Der Deutsche\", \"Oceania\" and \"Sierra Cordoba\" on a group cruise to the Madeira Islands. On the second day of her voyage, the 58-year-old Captain L\u00fcbbe died on the bridge from a heart attack. He was replaced by First Officer Friedrich Petersen, who commanded \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" for the remainder of the cruise. Petersen relinquished his command; he would later serve as captain on the ship's final voyage.\nWilhelm Gustloff remained as flagship of the KdF cruise fleet, her last civilian role, until the spring of 1939, when all large ships were requisitioned for wartime use. From 14 March 1938 until 26 August 1939, the ship had carried over 80,000 passengers on a total of 60 voyages.\nCondor Legion.\nBetween 20 May and 2 June 1939, \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" was temporarily repurposed by the German navy. Along with seven other ships in the KdF fleet, she transported the Condor Legion back to Germany from Spain following the victory of the Nationalist forces under General Francisco Franco in the Spanish Civil War.\nMilitary career.\nFrom September 1939 to November 1940, \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" served as a hospital ship, officially designated \"Lazarettschiff\" D.\nOn 20 November 1940, medical equipment was removed from the ship, and she was repainted from the hospital ship colors of white with a green stripe to standard naval grey.\nAs a consequence of the Allied blockade of the German coastline, she was used as a barracks ship for approximately 1,000 U-boat trainees of the 2nd Submarine Training Division (2. \"Unterseeboot-Lehrdivision\") in the port of Gdynia, which had been occupied by Germany and renamed \"Gotenhafen\", located near Danzig (Gda\u0144sk). \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" sat in dock there for over four years.\nIn 1942, was used as a stand-in for in the German film version of the disaster. Filmed in Gotenhafen, the 2nd Submarine Training Division acted as extras in the movie. \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" continued to serve as a barracks until 1945, when she was hastily repurposed for Operation Hannibal.\nOperation Hannibal \u2013 evacuation.\nOperation Hannibal was the naval evacuation of German troops and civilians from East Prussia and the German-occupied Baltic states as the Red Army advanced from the east. \"Wilhelm Gustloff\"'s final voyage was to evacuate civilians, German military personnel, and technicians from Courland, East Prussia, and Danzig-West Prussia. Many had worked at advanced weapon bases in the Baltic from Gotenhafen to Kiel.\nThe ship's complement and passenger lists cited 6,050 people on board, but these did not include the many individuals who boarded the ship without being listed in the official embarkation records. Heinz Sch\u00f6n, a German archivist and \"Gustloff\" survivor, researched the sinking during the 1980s and 1990s. He concluded that the ship was carrying a crew of 173 (naval armed forces auxiliaries); 918 officers, NCOs, and men of the 2 \"Unterseeboot-Lehrdivision\"; 373 female naval auxiliary helpers; 162 wounded soldiers; and 8,956 civilians, for a total of 10,582 passengers and crew. The passengers, besides civilians, included Gestapo personnel, members of the Organisation Todt, and Nazi officials with their families. The ship was overcrowded, and due to the high temperature and humidity inside, many passengers defied orders not to remove their life jackets. Besides ethnic Germans, the people on board included Lithuanians, Latvians, Poles, Estonians, and Croatians, some of whom had been victims of Nazi aggression.\nThe ship left Gotenhafen at 12:30 pm on 30 January 1945, accompanied by two torpedo boats and another evacuation transport, \"Hansa\". \"Hansa\" and one torpedo boat were soon disabled by mechanical problems, leaving \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" with just one torpedo boat escort, \"L\u00f6we\" (ex-). The ship had four captains on board (the \"Wilhelm Gustloff\"'s captain, two merchant marine captains, and the captain of the U-boat complement housed on the vessel); this resulted in heated arguments about how to guard the ship against Soviet submarines. Against the advice of the U-boat commander, Lieutenant Commander Wilhelm Zahn (an experienced submariner who argued for a course in shallow waters close to shore and without lights), \"Wilhelm Gustloff\"'s captain, Friedrich Petersen, turned the ship into deep waters. Upon being informed by radio of an oncoming German minesweeper convoy, Petersen ordered that the ship's red and green navigation lights should be turned on so as to avoid a collision in the dark, making \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" easy to spot.\nAs \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" had been fitted with anti-aircraft guns, and the Germans did not mark her as a hospital ship, no notification of her operating in a hospital capacity had been given. Since she was transporting military personnel, she did not have any protection as a hospital ship under international accords.\nSinking.\n\"Wilhelm Gustloff\" was soon sighted by the , under the command of Captain Alexander Marinesko. The submarine sensor on board the escorting torpedo boat had frozen, rendering it inoperable, as had her anti-aircraft guns, leaving the vessels defenseless. Marinesko followed the ships to their starboard (seaward) side for two hours before making a move, surfacing his submarine and steering it around \"Wilhelm Gustloff\"'s stern, to attack it from the port side closer to shore, from where the attack would be less expected. At around 9:00 pm (CET), Marinesko ordered his crew to launch four torpedoes at \"Wilhelm Gustloff\"'s port side, about offshore, between Gro\u00dfendorf and Leba.\nThe three torpedoes that were fired successfully all struck \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" on her port side. The first struck the ship's bow; this caused the ship's watertight doors to lock before the sleeping off-duty crew could escape. The second hit the accommodations for the women's naval auxiliary, located in the ship's drained swimming pool. It dislodged the pool tiles at high velocity, which caused high casualties; only three of the 373 women quartered there survived. The third torpedo scored a direct hit on the engine room located , disabling all power and communications.\nReportedly, only nine lifeboats could be lowered; the rest had frozen in their davits and had to be freed with tools. About twenty minutes after the torpedoes' impact, \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" suddenly listed so dramatically to port that the lifeboats lowered on the high starboard side crashed into the ship's tilting side, sending their occupants into the sea.\nMany deaths were caused either directly by the torpedoes or by drowning in the inrushing water. Some fatalities were due to the initial stampede caused by panicked passengers on the stairs and decks, while others were caused by passengers jumping overboard into freezing waters. The water temperature in the Baltic Sea in late January is usually around ; however, this was a particularly cold night, with an air temperature of and ice floes covering the surface. The majority of those who died were victims of hypothermia.\nLess than forty minutes after being struck, \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" was lying on her side. She sank bow-first ten minutes later, in of water.\nGerman forces were able to rescue 1,252 people: the torpedo boat rescued 564; the torpedo boat \"L\u00f6we\", 472; the minesweeper \"M387\", 98; the minesweeper \"M375\", 43; the minesweeper \"M341\", 37; the steamer \"G\u00f6ttingen\", 28; the torpedo recovery boat (\"Torpedofangboot\") \"TF19\", 7; the freighter \"Gotenland\", two; and the patrol boat (\"Vorpostenboot\") \"V1703\", one baby. Thirteen of the survivors died later. All four captains on \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" survived her sinking; an official naval inquiry was initiated only against Lieutenant Commander Zahn. His degree of responsibility was never resolved, however, because of Nazi Germany's collapse in 1945.\nLosses.\nThe figures from Heinz Sch\u00f6n's research make the loss in the \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" sinking to be \"9,343 men, women and children\". His more recent research is backed up by estimates arrived at by a different method. An \"Unsolved History\" episode that aired in March 2003, on the Discovery Channel, undertook a computer analysis of the sinking. Using \"Maritime Exodus\" software, it estimated that 9,600 people died of the more than 10,600 on board, by taking into account passenger density based on witness reports, and a simulation of escape routes and survivability with the timeline of the sinking.\nAftermath.\nMany ships were sunk during the war by the Allies and by the Axis powers. However, based on the latest estimates of passenger numbers and those known to be saved, the sinking of \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" remains by far the largest loss of life in maritime history resulting from the sinking of a single vessel.\nAbout 1,000 German naval officers and men were aboard and died in the sinking of \"Wilhelm Gustloff\". Women aboard the ship at the time of the sinking were inaccurately described by Soviet propaganda as \"SS personnel from the German concentration camps\". There were, however, 373 female naval auxiliaries amongst the passengers, only three of whom survived.\nOn the night of 9\u201310 February, just eleven days after the sinking, \"S-13\" sank another German ship, , killing about 4,500 people.\nBefore sinking \"Wilhelm Gustloff\", Captain Marinesko had been facing a court martial due to his alcohol problems and for being caught in a brothel while he and his crew were off duty. Marinesko was deemed by the Soviet government as \"not suitable to be a hero\". Instead of being awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union for the sinking, he was awarded the lesser Order of the Red Banner and downgraded to lieutenant, preventing him from receiving any further commands. He was dishonorably discharged from the Soviet Navy in October 1945.\nIn 1960, Marinesko was reinstated to his original rank of captain third class and granted a full pension; in 1963, he was given the traditional ceremony due a captain upon the successful return from a mission. He died three weeks later at the age of 50 from cancer. In 1990, Marinesko was posthumously named a Hero of the Soviet Union by Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev.\nAuthor G\u00fcnter Grass, who wrote the 2002 novel \"Crabwalk\" about the sinking, said in an interview published by \"The New York Times\" in April 2003 that among his many reasons for writing the novel \"was to take the subject away from the extreme Right... They said the tragedy of \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" was a war crime. It wasn't. It was terrible, but it was a result of war, a terrible result of war.\"\nWreckage.\n\"Wilhelm Gustloff\" rests at , about offshore, east of \u0141eba and west of W\u0142adys\u0142awowo (the former Leba and Gro\u00dfendorf, respectively). It is noted as \"Shipwreck\" on Polish nautical charts and classified as a war grave. It is one of the largest shipwrecks on the Baltic Sea floor and has attracted much interest from treasure hunters searching for the lost Amber Room. In order to protect the peace of victims of the war grave, as well as the wreck itself and the surrounding environment, the Polish Maritime Office in Gdynia has forbidden diving, anchoring and fishing within a radius of the wreck.\nIn 2006, a bell recovered from the wreck and subsequently used as a decoration in a Polish seafood restaurant, was lent to the privately funded \"Forced Paths\" exhibition in Berlin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16946", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16946", "title": "Kellogg-Briand", "text": ""}
{"id": "16947", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16947", "title": "Kerberos (protocol)", "text": "Computer authentication protocol\nKerberos () is a computer-network authentication protocol that works on the basis of \"tickets\" to allow nodes communicating over a non-secure network to prove their identity to one another in a secure manner. Its designers aimed it primarily at a client\u2013server model, and it provides mutual authentication\u2014both the user and the server verify each other's identity. Kerberos protocol messages are protected against eavesdropping and replay attacks.\nKerberos builds on symmetric-key cryptography and requires a trusted third party, and optionally may use public-key cryptography during certain phases of authentication. Kerberos uses UDP port 88 by default.\nThe protocol was named after the character \"Kerberos\" (or \"Cerberus\") from Greek mythology, the ferocious three-headed guard dog of Hades.\nHistory and development.\nThe Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) developed Kerberos in 1988 to protect network services provided by Project Athena. Its first version was primarily designed by Steve Miller and Clifford Neuman based on the earlier Needham\u2013Schroeder symmetric-key protocol. Kerberos versions 1 through 3 were experimental and not released outside of MIT.\nKerberos version 4, the first public version, was released on January 24, 1989. Since Kerberos 4 was developed in the United States, and since it used the Data Encryption Standard (DES) encryption algorithm, U.S. export control restrictions prevented it from being exported to other countries. MIT created an exportable version of Kerberos 4 with all encryption code removed, called \"Bones\". Eric Young of Australia's Bond University reimplemented DES into Bones, in a version called \"eBones\", which could be freely used in any country. Sweden's Royal Institute of Technology released another reimplementation called KTH-KRB.\nNeuman and John Kohl published version 5 in 1993 with the intention of overcoming existing limitations and security problems. Version\u00a05 appeared as http://, which was then made obsolete by http:// in 2005.\nIn 2005, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) Kerberos working group updated specifications. Updates included:\nMIT makes an implementation of Kerberos freely available, under copyright permissions similar to those used for BSD. In 2007, MIT formed the Kerberos Consortium to foster continued development. Founding sponsors include vendors such as Oracle, Apple Inc., Google, Microsoft, Centrify Corporation and TeamF1 Inc., and academic institutions such as the Royal Institute of Technology in Sweden, Stanford University, MIT, and vendors such as CyberSafe offering commercially supported versions.\nProtocol.\nDescription.\nThe client authenticates itself to the Authentication Server (AS) which is part of the key distribution center (KDC). The KDC issues a ticket-granting ticket (TGT), which is time stamped and encrypts it using the ticket-granting service's (TGS) secret key and returns the encrypted result to the user's workstation. This is done infrequently, typically at user logon; the TGT expires at some point although it may be transparently renewed by the user's session manager while they are logged in.\nWhen the client needs to communicate with a service on another node (a \"principal\", in Kerberos parlance), the client sends the TGT to the TGS, which is another component of the KDC and usually shares the same host as the authentication server. The service must have already been registered with the TGS with a Service Principal Name (SPN). The client uses the SPN to request access to this service. After verifying that the TGT is valid and that the user is permitted to access the requested service, the TGS issues a service ticket (ST) and session keys to the client. The client then sends the ticket to the service server (SS) along with its service request.\nThe protocol is described in detail below.\nSupport by operating systems.\nMicrosoft Windows.\nWindows 2000 and later versions use Kerberos as their default authentication method. Some Microsoft additions to the Kerberos suite of protocols are documented in RFC 3244 \"Microsoft Windows 2000 Kerberos Change Password and Set Password Protocols\". RFC 4757 documents Microsoft's use of the RC4 cipher. While Microsoft uses and extends the Kerberos protocol, it does not use the MIT software.\nKerberos is used as the preferred authentication method: in general, joining a client to a Windows domain means enabling Kerberos as the default protocol for authentications from that client to services in the Windows domain and all domains with trust relationships to that domain.\nIn contrast, when either client or server or both are not joined to a domain (or not part of the same trusted domain environment), Windows will instead use NTLM for authentication between client and server.\nInternet web applications can enforce Kerberos as an authentication method for domain-joined clients by using APIs provided under SSPI.\nMicrosoft Windows and Windows Server include setspn, a command-line utility that can be used to read, modify, or delete the Service Principal Names (SPN) for an Active Directory service account.\nUnix and other operating systems.\nMany Unix-like operating systems, including FreeBSD, Apple's macOS, Red Hat Enterprise Linux, Oracle's Solaris, IBM's AIX, HP-UX and others, include software for Kerberos authentication of users or services. A variety of non-Unix like operating systems such as z/OS, IBM i and OpenVMS also feature Kerberos support. Embedded implementation of the Kerberos V authentication protocol for client agents and network services running on embedded platforms is also available from companies.\nSecurity.\nThe Data Encryption Standard (DES) cipher can be used in combination with Kerberos, but is no longer an Internet standard because it is weak. Security vulnerabilities exist in products that implement legacy versions of Kerberos which lack support for newer encryption ciphers like AES.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16948", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16948", "title": "Ketamine", "text": "Dissociative anesthetic and anti-depressant\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nKetamine is a cyclohexanone-derived general anesthetic and NMDA receptor antagonist with analgesic and hallucinogenic properties, used medically for anesthesia, depression, and pain management. Ketamine exists as its two enantiomers, \"S\"- (esketamine) and \"R\"- (arketamine), and has antidepressant action likely involving other mechanisms in addition to NMDA antagonism.\nAt anesthetic doses, ketamine induces a state of dissociative anesthesia, a trance-like state providing pain relief, sedation, and amnesia. Its distinguishing features as an anesthestic are preserved breathing and airway reflexes, stimulated heart function with increased blood pressure, and moderate bronchodilation. As an anesthetic, it is used especially in trauma, emergency, and pediatric cases. At lower, sub-anesthetic doses, it is used as a treatment for pain and treatment-resistant depression. \nKetamine is legally used in medicine but is also tightly controlled, as it is used as a recreational drug for its hallucinogenic and dissociative effects. When used recreationally, it is found both in crystalline powder and liquid form, and is often referred to by users as \"Ket\", \"Special K\" or simply \"K\". The long-term effects of repeated use are largely unknown and are an area of active investigation. Liver and urinary toxicity have been reported among regular users of high doses of ketamine for recreational purposes. Ketamine can cause dissociation and nausea, and other adverse effects, and is contraindicated in severe heart or liver disease, and uncontrolled psychosis. Ketamine\u2019s clinical and antidepressant effects can be influenced by co-administration of other drugs, though these interactions are variable and not yet fully understood.\nKetamine was first synthesized in 1962; it was derived from phencyclidine in pursuit of a safer anesthetic with fewer hallucinogenic effects. It was approved for use in the United States in 1970. It has been regularly used in veterinary medicine and was extensively used for surgical anesthesia in the Vietnam War. It later gained prominence for its rapid antidepressant effects discovered in 2000, marking a major breakthrough in depression treatment. Racemic ketamine, especially at higher doses, may be more effective and longer-lasting than esketamine in reducing depression severity. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. It is available as a generic medication.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedical uses.\nAnesthesia.\nThe use of ketamine in anesthesia reflects its characteristics. It is a drug of choice for short-term procedures when muscle relaxation is not required. The effect of ketamine on the respiratory and circulatory systems is different from that of other anesthetics. It suppresses breathing much less than most other available anesthetics. When used at anesthetic doses, ketamine usually stimulates rather than depresses the circulatory system. Protective airway reflexes are preserved, and it is sometimes possible to administer ketamine anesthesia without protective measures to the airways. Psychotomimetic effects limit the acceptance of ketamine; however, lamotrigine and nimodipine decrease psychotomimetic effects and can also be counteracted by benzodiazepines or propofol administration. Ketofol is a combination of ketamine and propofol.\nKetamine is frequently used in severely injured people and appears to be safe in this group. It has been widely used for emergency surgery in field conditions in war zones, for example, during the Vietnam War. A 2011 clinical practice guideline supports the use of ketamine as a sedative in emergency medicine, including during physically painful procedures. It is the drug of choice for people in traumatic shock who are at risk of hypotension. Ketamine often raises blood pressure upon administration and is unlikely to lower blood pressure in most patients, making it useful in treating severe head injuries for which low blood pressure can be dangerous.\nKetamine is an option in children as the sole anesthetic for minor procedures or as an induction agent followed by neuromuscular blocker and tracheal intubation. In particular, children with cyanotic heart disease and neuromuscular disorders are good candidates for ketamine anesthesia.\nDue to the bronchodilating properties of ketamine, it can be used for anesthesia in people with asthma, chronic obstructive airway disease, and with severe reactive airway disease, including active bronchospasm.\nPain.\nKetamine infusions are used for acute pain treatment in emergency departments and in the perioperative period for individuals with refractory or intractable pain. The doses are lower than those used for anesthesia, usually referred to as sub-anesthetic doses. Adjunctive to morphine or on its own, ketamine reduces morphine use, pain level, nausea, and vomiting after surgery. Ketamine is likely to be most beneficial for surgical patients when severe post-operative pain is expected, and for opioid-tolerant patients.\nKetamine is especially useful in the pre-hospital setting due to its effectiveness and low risk of respiratory depression.\nKetamine has similar efficacy to opioids in a hospital emergency department setting for the management of acute pain and the control of procedural pain. It may also prevent opioid-induced hyperalgesia and postanesthetic shivering.\nFor chronic pain, ketamine is used as an intravenous analgesic, mainly if the pain is neuropathic. It has the added benefit of counteracting spinal sensitization or wind-up phenomena experienced with chronic pain. In multiple clinical trials, ketamine infusions delivered short-term pain relief in neuropathic pain diagnoses, pain after a traumatic spine injury, fibromyalgia, and complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS). However, the 2018 consensus guidelines on chronic pain concluded that, overall, there is only weak evidence in favor of ketamine use in spinal injury pain, moderate evidence in favor of ketamine for CRPS, and weak or no evidence for ketamine in mixed neuropathic pain, fibromyalgia, and cancer pain. In particular, only for CRPS, there is evidence of medium to longer-term pain relief.\nDepression.\nKetamine is a rapid-acting antidepressant, but its effect is transient. Intravenous ketamine infusion in treatment-resistant depression may result in improved mood within 4 hours reaching the peak at 24 hours. A single dose of intravenous ketamine has been shown to result in a response rate greater than 60% as early as 4.5 hours after the dose (with a sustained effect after 24 hours) and greater than 40% after 7 days. Although only a few pilot studies have sought to determine the optimal dose, increasing evidence suggests that 0.5\u00a0mg/kg dose injected over 40 minutes gives an optimal outcome. The antidepressant effect of ketamine is diminished at 7 days, and most people relapse within 10 days. However, for a significant minority, the improvement may last 30 days or more.\nOne of the main challenges with ketamine treatment can be the length of time that the antidepressant effects last after finishing a course of treatment. A possible option may be maintenance therapy with ketamine, which usually runs twice a week to once every two weeks. Ketamine may decrease suicidal thoughts for up to three days after the injection.\nAn enantiomer of ketamine \u2013 esketamine \u2013 was approved as an antidepressant by the European Medicines Agency in 2019. Esketamine was approved as a nasal spray for treatment-resistant depression in the United States and elsewhere in 2019. The Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) recommends esketamine as a third-line treatment for depression.\nA Cochrane review of randomized controlled trials in adults with major depressive disorder found that when compared with placebo, people treated with either ketamine or esketamine experienced reduction or remission of symptoms lasting 1 to 7 days. There were 18.7% (4.1 to 40.4%) more people reporting some benefit and 9.6% (0.2 to 39.4%) more who achieved remission within 24 hours of ketamine treatment. Among people receiving esketamine, 12.1% (2.5 to 24.4%) encountered some relief at 24 hours, and 10.3% (4.5 to 18.2%) had few or no symptoms. These effects did not persist beyond one week, although a higher dropout rate in some studies means that the benefit duration remains unclear.\nKetamine may partially improve depressive symptoms among people with bipolar depression at 24 hours after treatment, but not three or more days. Potentially, ten more people with bipolar depression per 1000 may experience brief improvement, but not the cessation of symptoms, one day following treatment. These estimates are based on limited available research.\nIn February 2022, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued an alert to healthcare professionals concerning compounded nasal spray products containing ketamine intended to treat depression.&lt;ref name=\"fda-2/22\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nSeizures.\nKetamine is used to treat status epilepticus that has not responded to standard treatments, but only case studies and no randomized controlled trials support its use.\nAsthma.\nKetamine has been suggested as a possible therapy for children with severe acute asthma who do not respond to standard treatment. This is due to its bronchodilator effects. A 2012 Cochrane review found there were minimal adverse effects reported, but the limited studies showed no significant benefit.\nContraindications.\nSome major contraindications for ketamine are:\nAdverse effects.\nAt anesthetic doses, 10\u201320% of adults and 1\u20132% of children experience adverse psychiatric reactions that occur during emergence from anesthesia, ranging from dreams and dysphoria to hallucinations and emergence delirium. Psychotomimetic effects decrease when adding lamotrigine and nimodipine and can be counteracted by pretreatment with a benzodiazepine or propofol. Ketamine anesthesia commonly causes tonic-clonic movements (greater than 10% of people) and rarely hypertonia. Vomiting can be expected in 5\u201315% of the patients; pretreatment with propofol mitigates it as well. Laryngospasm occurs only rarely with ketamine. Ketamine, generally, stimulates breathing; however, in the first 2\u20133 minutes of a high-dose rapid intravenous injection, it may cause a transient respiratory depression.\nAt lower sub-anesthetic doses, psychiatric side effects are prominent. The most common psychiatric side effects are dissociation, visual distortions, and numbness. Also common (20\u201350%) are difficulty speaking, confusion, euphoria, drowsiness, and difficulty concentrating. hallucinations are described by 6\u201310% of people. Dizziness, blurred vision, dry mouth, hypertension, nausea, increased or decreased body temperature, or flushing are the common (&gt;10%) non-psychiatric side effects. All these adverse effects are most pronounced by the end of the injection, dramatically reduced 40 minutes afterward, and completely disappear within 4 hours after the injection.\nUrinary and liver toxicity.\nUrinary toxicity occurs primarily in people who use large amounts of ketamine routinely, with 20\u201330% of frequent users having bladder complaints. It includes a range of disorders from cystitis to hydronephrosis to kidney failure. The typical symptoms of ketamine-induced cystitis are frequent urination, dysuria, and urinary urgency sometimes accompanied by pain during urination and blood in urine. The damage to the bladder wall has similarities to both interstitial and eosinophilic cystitis. The wall is thickened and the functional bladder capacity is as low as 10\u2013150 mL. Studies indicate that ketamine-induced cystitis is caused by ketamine and its metabolites directly interacting with urothelium, resulting in damage of the epithelial cells of the bladder lining and increased permeability of the urothelial barrier which results in clinical symptoms.\nManagement of ketamine-induced cystitis involves ketamine cessation as the first step. This is followed by NSAIDs and anticholinergics and, if the response is insufficient, by tramadol. The second line treatments are epithelium-protective agents such as oral pentosan polysulfate or intravesical instillation of hyaluronic acid. Intravesical botulinum toxin is also useful.\nLiver toxicity of ketamine involves higher doses and repeated administration. In a group of chronic high-dose ketamine users, the frequency of liver injury was reported to be about 10%. There are case reports of increased liver enzymes involving ketamine treatment of chronic pain. Chronic ketamine abuse has also been associated with biliary colic, cachexia, gastrointestinal diseases, hepatobiliary disorder, and acute kidney injury.\nNear-death experience.\nMost people who were able to remember their dreams during ketamine anesthesia report near-death experiences (NDEs) when the broadest possible definition of an NDE is used. Ketamine can reproduce features that commonly have been associated with NDEs. A 2019 large-scale study found that written reports of ketamine experiences had a high degree of similarity to written reports of NDEs in comparison to other written reports of drug experiences.\nDependence and tolerance.\nAlthough the incidence of ketamine dependence is unknown, some people who regularly use ketamine develop ketamine dependence. Animal experiments also confirm the risk of misuse. Additionally, the rapid onset of effects following insufflation may increase potential use as a recreational drug. The short duration of effects promotes bingeing. Ketamine tolerance rapidly develops, even with repeated medical use, prompting the use of higher doses. Some daily users reported withdrawal symptoms, primarily anxiety, tremor, sweating, and palpitations, following the attempts to stop. \nBrain damage.\nDespite the balance of palliative benefits which planned course(s) of therapy can confer when patients face serious medical conditions, ongoing ketamine use is known to cause brain damage, including reduction in both white and grey matter seen on MRI imaging and atrophy seen on CT scans. Cognitive deficits as well as increased dissociation and delusions were observed in frequent recreational users of ketamine.\nInteractions.\nKetamine potentiates the sedative effects of propofol and midazolam. Naltrexone potentiates psychotomimetic effects of a low dose of ketamine, while lamotrigine and nimodipine decrease them. Clonidine reduces the increase of salivation, heart rate, and blood pressure during ketamine anesthesia and decreases the incidence of nightmares.\nClinical observations suggest that benzodiazepines may diminish the antidepressant effects of ketamine. It appears most conventional antidepressants can be safely combined with ketamine.\nPharmacology.\nPharmacodynamics.\nMechanism of action.\nKetamine is a mixture of equal amounts of two enantiomers: esketamine and arketamine. Esketamine is a far more potent NMDA receptor pore blocker than arketamine. Pore blocking of the NMDA receptor is responsible for the anesthetic, analgesic, and psychotomimetic effects of ketamine. Blocking of the NMDA receptor results in analgesia by preventing central sensitization in dorsal horn neurons; in other words, ketamine's actions interfere with pain transmission in the spinal cord.\nThe mechanism of action of ketamine in alleviating depression is not well understood, but it is an area of active investigation. Due to the hypothesis that NMDA receptor antagonism underlies the antidepressant effects of ketamine, esketamine was developed as an antidepressant. However, multiple other NMDA receptor antagonists, including memantine, lanicemine, rislenemdaz, rapastinel, and 4-chlorokynurenine, have thus far failed to demonstrate significant effectiveness for depression. Furthermore, animal research indicates that arketamine, the enantiomer with a weaker NMDA receptor antagonism, as well as (2\"R\",6\"R\")-hydroxynorketamine, the metabolite with negligible affinity for the NMDA receptor but potent alpha-7 nicotinic receptor antagonist activity, may have antidepressant action. This furthers the argument that NMDA receptor antagonism may not be primarily responsible for the antidepressant effects of ketamine. Acute inhibition of the lateral habenula, a part of the brain responsible for inhibiting the mesolimbic reward pathway and referred to as the \"anti-reward center\", is another possible mechanism for ketamine's antidepressant effects.\nPossible biochemical mechanisms of ketamine's antidepressant action include direct action on the NMDA receptor and downstream effects on regulators such as BDNF and mTOR. It is not clear whether ketamine alone is sufficient for antidepressant action or its metabolites are also important; the active metabolite of ketamine, hydroxynorketamine, which does not significantly interact with the NMDA receptor but nonetheless indirectly activates AMPA receptors, may also or alternatively be involved in the rapid-onset antidepressant effects of ketamine. In NMDA receptor antagonism, acute blockade of NMDA receptors in the brain results in an increase in the release of glutamate, which leads to an activation of \u03b1-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptors (AMPA receptors), which in turn modulate a variety of downstream signaling pathways to influence neurotransmission in the limbic system and mediate antidepressant effects. Such downstream actions of the activation of AMPA receptors include upregulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and activation of its signaling receptor tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB), activation of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway, deactivation of glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3), and inhibition of the phosphorylation of the eukaryotic elongation factor 2 (eEF2) kinase.\nMolecular targets.\nKetamine principally acts as a pore blocker of the NMDA receptor, an ionotropic glutamate receptor. The \"S\"-(+) and \"R\"-(\u2013) stereoisomers of ketamine bind to the dizocilpine site of the NMDA receptor with different affinities, the former showing approximately 3- to 4-fold greater affinity for the receptor than the latter. As a result, the \"S\" isomer is a more potent anesthetic and analgesic than its \"R\" counterpart.\nKetamine may interact with and inhibit the NMDAR via another allosteric site on the receptor.\nWith a couple of exceptions, ketamine actions at other receptors are far weaker than ketamine's antagonism of the NMDA receptor (see the activity table to the right).\nAlthough ketamine is a very weak ligand of the monoamine transporters (Ki\u00a0&gt; 60\u00a0\u03bcM), it has been suggested that it may interact with allosteric sites on the monoamine transporters to produce monoamine reuptake inhibition. However, no functional inhibition (IC50) of the human monoamine transporters has been observed with ketamine or its metabolites at concentrations of up to 10,000\u00a0nM. Moreover, animal studies and at least three human case reports have found no interaction between ketamine and the monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) tranylcypromine, which is of importance as the combination of a monoamine reuptake inhibitor with an MAOI can produce severe toxicity such as serotonin syndrome or hypertensive crisis. Collectively, these findings shed doubt on the involvement of monoamine reuptake inhibition in the effects of ketamine in humans. Ketamine has been found to increase dopaminergic neurotransmission in the brain, but instead of being due to dopamine reuptake inhibition, this may be via indirect/downstream mechanisms, namely through antagonism of the NMDA receptor.\nWhether ketamine is an agonist of D2 receptors is controversial. Early research by the Philip Seeman group found ketamine to be a D2 partial agonist with a potency similar to that of its NMDA receptor antagonism. However, later studies by different researchers found the affinity of ketamine of &gt;10\u00a0\u03bcM for the regular human and rat D2 receptors, Moreover, whereas D2 receptor agonists such as bromocriptine can rapidly and powerfully suppress prolactin secretion, subanesthetic doses of ketamine have not been found to do this in humans and in fact, have been found to dose-dependently \"increase\" prolactin levels. Imaging studies have shown mixed results on inhibition of striatal [11C] raclopride binding by ketamine in humans, with some studies finding a significant decrease and others finding no such effect. However, changes in [11C] raclopride binding may be due to changes in dopamine concentrations induced by ketamine rather than binding of ketamine to the D2 receptor.\nRelationships between levels and effects.\nDissociation and psychotomimetic effects are reported in people treated with ketamine at plasma concentrations of approximately 100 to 250\u00a0ng/mL (0.42\u20131.1\u00a0\u03bcM). The typical intravenous antidepressant dosage of ketamine used to treat depression is low and results in maximal plasma concentrations of 70 to 200\u00a0ng/mL (0.29\u20130.84\u00a0\u03bcM). At similar plasma concentrations (70 to 160\u00a0ng/mL; 0.29\u20130.67\u00a0\u03bcM) it also shows analgesic effects. In 1\u20135 minutes after inducing anesthesia by rapid intravenous injection of ketamine, its plasma concentration reaches as high as 60\u2013110\u00a0\u03bcM. When the anesthesia was maintained using nitrous oxide together with continuous injection of ketamine, the ketamine concentration stabilized at approximately 9.3 \u03bcM. In an experiment with purely ketamine anesthesia, people began to awaken once the plasma level of ketamine decreased to about 2,600\u00a0ng/mL (11\u00a0\u03bcM) and became oriented in place and time when the level was down to 1,000\u00a0ng/mL (4\u00a0\u03bcM). In a single-case study, the concentration of ketamine in cerebrospinal fluid, a proxy for the brain concentration, during anesthesia varied between 2.8 and 6.5\u00a0\u03bcM and was approximately 40% lower than in plasma.\nPharmacokinetics.\nKetamine can be absorbed by many different routes due to its water and lipid solubility. Intravenous ketamine bioavailability is 100% by definition, intramuscular injection bioavailability is slightly lower at 93%, and epidural bioavailability is 77%. Subcutaneous bioavailability has never been measured but is presumed to be high. Among the less invasive routes, the intranasal route has the highest bioavailability (45\u201350%) and oral\u00a0\u2013 the lowest (16\u201320%). Sublingual and rectal bioavailabilities are intermediate at approximately 25\u201350%.\nAfter absorption ketamine is rapidly distributed into the brain and other tissues. The plasma protein binding of ketamine is variable at 23\u201347%.\nIn the body, ketamine undergoes extensive metabolism. It is biotransformed by CYP3A4 and CYP2B6 isoenzymes into norketamine, which, in turn, is converted by CYP2A6 and CYP2B6 into hydroxynorketamine and dehydronorketamine. Low oral bioavailability of ketamine is due to the first-pass effect and, possibly, ketamine intestinal metabolism by CYP3A4. As a result, norketamine plasma levels are several-fold higher than ketamine following oral administration, and norketamine may play a role in anesthetic and analgesic action of oral ketamine. This also explains why oral ketamine levels are independent of CYP2B6 activity, unlike subcutaneous ketamine levels.\nAfter an intravenous injection of tritium-labelled ketamine, 91% of the radioactivity is recovered from urine and 3% from feces. The medication is excreted mostly in the form of metabolites, with only 2% remaining unchanged. Conjugated hydroxylated derivatives of ketamine (80%) followed by dehydronorketamine (16%) are the most prevalent metabolites detected in urine.\nChemistry.\nStructure.\nIn chemical structure, ketamine is an arylcyclohexylamine derivative. Ketamine is a chiral compound. The more active enantiomer, esketamine (\"S\"-ketamine), is also available for medical use under the brand name Ketanest S, while the less active enantiomer, arketamine (\"R\"-ketamine), has never been marketed as an enantiopure drug for clinical use. While S-ketamine is more effective as an analgesic and anesthetic through NMDA receptor antagonism, R-ketamine produces longer-lasting effects as an antidepressant.\nThe optical rotation of a given enantiomer of ketamine can vary between its salts and free base form. The free base form of (\"S\")\u2011ketamine exhibits dextrorotation and is therefore labelled (\"S\")\u2011(+)\u2011ketamine. However, its hydrochloride salt shows levorotation and is thus labelled (\"S\")\u2011(\u2212)\u2011ketamine hydrochloride.\nDetection.\nKetamine may be quantified in blood or plasma to confirm a diagnosis of poisoning in hospitalized people, provide evidence in an impaired driving arrest, or assist in a medicolegal death investigation. Blood or plasma ketamine concentrations are usually in a range of 0.5\u20135.0\u00a0mg/L in persons receiving the drug therapeutically (during general anesthesia), 1\u20132\u00a0mg/L in those arrested for impaired driving, and 3\u201320\u00a0mg/L in victims of acute fatal overdosage. Urine is often the preferred specimen for routine drug use monitoring purposes. The presence of norketamine, a pharmacologically active metabolite, is useful for confirmation of ketamine ingestion.\nHistory.\nKetamine was first synthesized in 1962 by Calvin L. Stevens, a professor of chemistry at Wayne State University and a Parke-Davis consultant. It was known by the developmental code name \"CI-581\". After promising preclinical research in animals, ketamine was tested in human prisoners in 1964. These investigations demonstrated ketamine's short duration of action and reduced behavioral toxicity made it a favorable choice over phencyclidine (PCP) as an anesthetic. The researchers wanted to call the state of ketamine anesthesia \"dreaming\", but Parke-Davis did not approve of the name. Hearing about this problem and the \"disconnected\" appearance of treated people, Mrs. Edward F. Domino, the wife of one of the pharmacologists working on ketamine, suggested \"dissociative anesthesia\". Following FDA approval in 1970, ketamine anesthesia was first given to American soldiers during the Vietnam War.\nThe discovery of antidepressive action of ketamine in 2000 has been described as the single most important advance in the treatment of depression in more than 50 years. It has sparked interest in NMDA receptor antagonists for depression, and has shifted the direction of antidepressant research and development.\nSociety and culture.\nLegal status.\nWhile ketamine is marketed legally in many countries worldwide, it is also a controlled substance in many countries.\nRecreational use.\nAt sub-anesthetic doses, ketamine produces a dissociative state, characterised by a sense of detachment from one's physical body and the external world that is known as depersonalization and derealization. At sufficiently high doses, users may experience what is called the \"K-hole\", a state of dissociation with visual and auditory hallucination. John C. Lilly, Marcia Moore, and D. M. Turner (among others) have written extensively about their own entheogenic and psychonautic experiences with ketamine. Turner died prematurely due to drowning during presumed unsupervised ketamine use. \nRecreational ketamine use has been implicated in deaths globally, with more than 90 deaths in England and Wales in 2005\u20132013. They include accidental poisonings, drownings, traffic accidents, and suicides. The majority of deaths were among young people. Several months after being found dead in his hot tub, actor Matthew Perry's October 2023 apparent drowning death was revealed to have been caused by a ketamine overdose, and, while other factors were present, the acute effects of ketamine were ruled to be the primary cause of death. Due to its ability to cause confusion and amnesia, ketamine has been used for date rape.\nResearch.\nKetamine, in the form of esketamine, is approved in the United States for treating treatment-resistant depression. \"In vivo\", ketamine rapidly activates the mTOR pathway, promoting synaptogenesis and reversing stress-related synaptic deficits in the prefrontal cortex, which might underlie its fast-acting antidepressant effects in treatment-resistant depression. A 2023 meta-analysis found that racemic ketamine, particularly at higher doses, is more effective than esketamine in reducing depression severity, with more sustained benefits over time.\nKetamine has shown potential for rapid and tolerable symptom relief in obsessive-compulsive disorder, but evidence is limited and inconsistent.\nThe British critical psychiatrist Joanna Moncrieff has critiqued the use and study of ketamine and related drugs like psychedelics for treatment of psychiatric disorders, highlighting concerns including excessive hype around these drugs, questionable biologically-based theories of benefit, blurred lines between medical and recreational use, flawed clinical trial findings, financial conflicts of interest, strong expectancy effects and large placebo responses, small and short-term benefits over placebo, and their potential for difficult experiences and adverse effects, among others.\nVeterinary uses.\nIn veterinary anesthesia, ketamine is often used for its anesthetic and analgesic effects on cats, dogs, rabbits, rats, and other small animals. It is frequently used in induction and anesthetic maintenance in horses. It is an important part of the \"rodent cocktail\", a mixture of drugs used for anesthetising rodents. Veterinarians often use ketamine with sedative drugs to produce balanced anesthesia and analgesia, and as a constant-rate infusion to help prevent pain wind-up. Ketamine is also used to manage pain among large animals. It is the primary intravenous anesthetic agent used in equine surgery, often in conjunction with detomidine and thiopental, or sometimes guaifenesin.\nKetamine appears not to produce sedation or anesthesia in snails. Instead, it appears to have an excitatory effect.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16954", "revid": "1316968499", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16954", "title": "Kickapoo", "text": "Native American tribe based in the United States and Mexico\nThe Kickapoo people (; Kickapoo: Kiikaapoa or Kiikaapoi; ) are an Algonquian-speaking Native American tribe and Indigenous people in Mexico, originating in the region south of the Great Lakes. There are three federally recognized Kickapoo tribes in the United States: the Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas, the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma, and the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas. The Oklahoma and Texas bands are politically associated with each other. The Kickapoo in Kansas came from a relocation from southern Missouri in 1832 as a land exchange from their reserve there. Around 3,000 people are enrolled tribal members.\nAnother band, the Tribu Kikap\u00fa, resides in M\u00fazquiz Municipality in the northern Mexican state of Coahuila, ending up there after disputes between leaders of rival bands in the tribe caused a schism between followers of the \"Kickapoo Prophet\" Kennekuk and Prairie band Chief Kishko. Smaller bands live in Sonora, to the west, and Durango, to the southwest.\nHistory.\nPre-1800s.\nThe Kickapoo are an Algonquian-language people who likely migrated to or developed as a people in a large territory along the southern Wabash River in the area of modern Terre Haute, Indiana, where they were located at the time of first contact with Europeans in the 1600s. They were confederated with the larger Wabash Confederacy, which included the Piankeshaw and the Wea to their north, and the powerful Miami Tribe, to their east. A subgroup occupied the Upper Iowa River region in what was later known as northeast Iowa and the Root River region in southeast Minnesota in the late 1600s and early 1700s. This group was probably known by the clan name \"Mahouea\", derived from the Illinoian word for wolf, \"m'hwea\".\nThe earliest European contact with the Kickapoo tribe occurred during the La Salle Expeditions into Illinois Country in the late 17th century. The French colonists set up remote fur trading posts throughout the region, including on the Wabash River. They typically set up posts at or near Native American villages. Terre Haute was founded as an associated French village. The Kickapoo had to contend with a changing cast of Europeans; the British defeated the French in the Seven Years' War and took over nominal rule of former French territory east of the Mississippi River after 1763. They increased their own trading with the Kickapoo.\n1800s to present.\nThe United States acquired the territory east of the Mississippi River and north of the Ohio River after it gained independence from Great Britain (now the United Kingdom). As white settlers moved into the region from the United States' eastern areas, beginning in the early 19th century, the Kickapoo were under pressure. They negotiated with the United States over their territory in several treaties, including the Treaty of Vincennes, the Treaty of Grouseland, and the Treaty of Fort Wayne. They sold most of their lands to the United States and moved north to settle among the Wea people.\nRising tensions between the regional tribes and the United States led to Tecumseh's War in 1811. The Kickapoo were among the closest allies of Shawnee leader Tecumseh. Many Kickapoo warriors participated in the Battle of Tippecanoe and the subsequent War of 1812 on the side of the British, hoping to expel the white American settlers from the region.\nThe 1819 treaty of Edwardsville saw the Kickapoo cede the entirety of their holdings in Illinois comprising nearly one-half area of the state, in exchange for a smaller tract on the Osage river in Missouri and $3,000 worth of goods. The Kickapoo were not eager to move, partly as their assigned tract in Missouri was made of rugged hills and already occupied by the Osage, who were their hereditary enemies. Instead, half of the population traveled south and crossed onto the Spanish side of the Red River in modern day Texas. The US government quickly mobilized to prevent this emigration and force their removal to Missouri. This remnant of Kickapoo remained in Illinois under the guidance of Kennekuk, a prominent, nonviolent spiritual leader among the Kickapoo. He led his followers during the Indian Removal in the 1830s to their current tribal lands in Kansas. He died there of smallpox in 1852.\nThe close of the war led to a change of federal Indian policy in the Indiana Territory, and later the state of Indiana. White American leaders began to advocate the removal of tribes to lands west of the Mississippi River, to remove their claims to Native lands wanted by white American settlers. The Kickapoo were among the first tribes to leave Indiana under this program. They accepted land in Kansas and an annual subsidy in exchange for leaving their land in the state.\nTribes and communities.\nThree federally recognized Kickapoo communities are in the United States in Kansas, Texas, and Oklahoma. The Mexican Kickapoo are closely tied to the Texas and Oklahoma communities. These groups migrate annually among the three locations to maintain connections. Indeed, the Texas and Mexican branches are the same cross-border nation, called the Kickapoo of Coahuila/Texas.\nKickapoo Indian Reservation of Kansas.\nThe tribe in Kansas was home to prophet Kenekuk, who was known for his astute leadership that allowed the small group to maintain their reservation. Kenekuk wanted to keep order among the tribe he was in, while living in Kansas. He also wanted to focus on keeping the identity of the Kickapoo people, because of all the relocations they had done.\nThe basis of Kenekuk's leadership began in the religious revivals of the 1820s and 1830s, with a blend of Protestantism and Catholicism. Kenekuk taught his tribesmen and white audiences to obey God's commands, for sinners were damned to the pits of hell. Once the Kickapoo people got relocated to Kansas they resisted the ideas of Protestantism and Catholicism and started focusing more on farming, so they could provide food for the rest of the tribe. After this had happened they remained together and claimed some of the original land that they had before it was taken by Americans.\nThe Kickapoo Indian Reservation of Kansas is located at in the northeastern part of the state in parts of three counties: Brown, Jackson, and Atchison. It has a land area of and a resident population of 4,419 as of the 2000 census. The largest community on the reservation is the city of Horton. The other communities are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nKickapoo Indian Reservation of Texas.\nThe Kickapoo Indian Reservation of Texas is located at on the Rio Grande on the U.S.-Mexico border in western Maverick County, just south of the city of Eagle Pass Texas, as part of the community of Rosita South. It has a land area of and a 2000 census population of 420 persons. The Texas Indian Commission officially recognized the tribe in 1977.\nOther Kickapoo in Maverick County, Texas, constitute the \"South Texas Subgroup of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma\". That tribe formerly owned of non-reservation land in Maverick County, primarily to the north of Eagle Pass, but has sold most of it to a developer. It has an office in that city.\nKickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma.\nAfter being expelled from the Republic of Texas, many Kickapoo moved south to Mexico, but the population of two villages settled in Indian Territory. One village settled within the Chickasaw Nation and the other within the Muscogee Creek Nation. These Kickapoo were granted their own reservation in 1883 and became recognized as the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma.\nThe reservation was short-lived. In 1893 under the Dawes Act, their communal tribal lands were broken up and assigned to separate member households by allotments. The tribe's government was dismantled by the Curtis Act of 1898, which encouraged assimilation by Native Americans to the majority culture. Tribal members struggled under these conditions.\nIn the 1930s the federal and state governments encouraged tribes to reorganize their governments. This one formed the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma in 1936, under the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act.\nToday the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma is headquartered in McLoud, Oklahoma. Their tribal jurisdictional area is in Oklahoma, Pottawatomie, and Lincoln counties. They have 2,719 enrolled tribal members.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16955", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16955", "title": "Kickapoos", "text": ""}
{"id": "16957", "revid": "1276405837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16957", "title": "Kata (disambiguation)", "text": "Kata is a martial arts term referring to a pattern of defense-and-attack.\nKata may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16959", "revid": "29615749", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16959", "title": "Katyusha rocket launcher", "text": "Soviet/Russian multiple launch rocket system\nThe Katyusha (Russian: , ) is a type of rocket artillery first built and fielded by the Soviet Union in World War II. Multiple rocket launchers such as these deliver explosives to a target area more intensively than conventional artillery, but with lower accuracy and requiring a longer time to reload. They are fragile compared to artillery guns, but are cheap, easy to produce, and usable on almost any chassis. The Katyushas of World War II, the first self-propelled artillery mass-produced by the Soviet Union, were usually mounted on ordinary trucks. This mobility gave the Katyusha, and other self-propelled artillery, another advantage: being able to deliver a large blow all at once, and then move before being located and attacked with counter-battery fire.\nKatyusha weapons of World War II included the BM-13 launcher, light BM-8, and heavy BM-31. Today, the nickname \"Katyusha\" is also applied to newer truck-mounted post-Soviet \u2013 in addition to non-Soviet \u2013 multiple-rocket launchers, notably the common BM-21 Grad and its derivatives.\nNickname.\nInitially, concerns for secrecy kept the military designation of the Katyushas from being known by the soldiers who operated them. They were called by code names such as \"Kostikov guns\", after A. Kostikov, the head of the RNII, the Reactive Scientific Research Institute, and finally classed as \"Guards Mortars\". The name \"BM-13\" was only allowed into secret documents in 1942, and remained classified until after the war.\nBecause they were marked with the letter \"K\" (for Voronezh Komintern Factory), Red Army troops adopted a nickname from Mikhail Isakovsky's popular wartime song, \"Katyusha\", about a girl longing for her absent beloved, who has gone away on military service. Katyusha is the Russian equivalent of \"Katie\", an endearing diminutive form of the name Katherine. \"Yekaterina\" is given the diminutive \"Katya,\" which itself is then given the affectionate diminutive \"Katyusha\".\nGerman troops coined the nickname \"Stalin's organ\" (), after Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, comparing the visual resemblance of the launch array to a pipe organ, and the sound of the weapon's rocket motors, a distinctive howling sound which terrified the German troops, adding a psychological warfare aspect to their use. Weapons of this type are known by the same name in Denmark (), Finland (), France (), Norway (), the Netherlands and Belgium (), Hungary (), Spain and other Spanish-speaking countries () as well as in Sweden ().\nThe heavy BM-31 launcher was also referred to as \"Andryusha\" (\"\u0410\u043d\u0434\u0440\u044e\u0448\u0430\", an affectionate diminutive of \"Andrew\").\nWorld War II.\nKatyusha rocket launchers, which were built in Voronezh, were mounted on many platforms during World War II, including on trucks, artillery tractors, tanks, and armoured trains, as well as on naval and riverine vessels as assault support weapons. Soviet engineers also mounted single Katyusha rockets on lengths of railway track to serve in urban combat.\nThe design was relatively simple, consisting of racks of parallel rails on which rockets were mounted, with a folding frame to raise the rails to launch position. Each truck had 14 to 48 launchers. The M-13 rocket of the BM-13 system was long, in diameter and weighed .\nThe weapon is less accurate than conventional artillery guns, but is extremely effective in saturation bombardment. A battery of four BM-13 launchers could fire a salvo in 7\u201310 seconds that delivered 4.35 tons of high explosives over a impact zone, making its power roughly equivalent to that of 72 conventional artillery guns. With an efficient crew, the launchers could redeploy to a new location immediately after firing, denying the enemy the opportunity for counterbattery fire. Katyusha batteries were often massed in very large numbers to create a shock effect on enemy forces. The weapon's disadvantage was the long time it took to reload a launcher, in contrast to conventional artillery guns which could sustain a continuous, albeit low, rate of fire.\nDevelopment.\nInitial development of solid propellant rockets was carried out by Nikolai Tikhomirov at the Soviet Gas Dynamics Laboratory (GDL), with the first test-firing of a solid fuel rocket carried out in March 1928, which flew for about 1,300 meters The rockets were used to assist take-off of aircraft and were later developed into the RS-82 and RS-132 (RS for , 'rocket-powered shell') in the early 1930s led by Georgy Langemak, including firing rockets from aircraft and the ground. In June 1938, GDL's successor Reactive Scientific Research Institute (RNII) began building several prototype launchers for the modified 132\u00a0mm M-132 rockets. Firing over the sides of ZIS-5 trucks proved unstable, and V.N. Galkovskiy proposed mounting the launch rails longitudinally. In August 1939, the result was the BM-13 (BM stands for \"\u0431\u043e\u0435\u0432\u0430\u044f \u043c\u0430\u0448\u0438\u043d\u0430\" (translit. \"boyevaya mashina\"), 'combat vehicle' for M-13 rockets).\nThe first large-scale testing of the rocket launchers took place at the end of 1938, when 233 rounds of various types were used. A salvo of rockets could completely straddle a target at a range of . But the artillery branch was not fond of the Katyusha, because it took up to 50 minutes to load and fire 24 rounds, while a conventional howitzer could fire 95 to 150 rounds in the same time. Testing with various rockets was conducted through 1940, and the BM-13-16 with launch rails for sixteen rockets was authorized for production. Only forty launchers were built before Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941.\nAfter their success in the first month of the war, mass production was ordered and the development of other models proceeded. The Katyusha was inexpensive and could be manufactured in light industrial installations which did not have the heavy equipment to build conventional artillery gun barrels. By the end of 1942, 3,237 Katyusha launchers of all types had been built, and by the end of the war total production reached about 10,000.\nThe truck-mounted Katyushas were installed on ZIS-6 6\u00d74 trucks, as well as the two-axle ZIS-5 and ZIS-5V. In 1941, a small number of BM-13 launchers were mounted on STZ-5 artillery tractors. A few were also tried on KV tank chassis as the KV-1K, but this was a needless waste of heavy armour. Starting in 1942, they were also mounted on various British, Canadian and U.S. Lend-Lease trucks, in which case they were sometimes referred to as BM-13S. The cross-country performance of the Studebaker US6 2\u00bd-ton 6\u00d76 truck was so good that it became the GAU's standard mounting in 1943, designated BM-13N (\"normalizovanniy\", 'standardized'), and more than 1,800 of this model were manufactured by the end of World War II. After World War II, BM-13s were based on Soviet-built ZIS-151 trucks.\nThe 82\u00a0mm BM-8 was approved in August 1941, and deployed as the BM-8-36 on truck beds and BM-8-24 on T-40 and T-60 light tank chassis. Later these were also installed on GAZ-67 jeeps as the BM-8-8, and on the larger Studebaker trucks as the BM-8-48. In 1942, the team of scientists Leonid Shvarts, Moisei Komissarchik and engineer Yakov Shor received the Stalin Prize for the development of the BM-8-48\nBased on the M-13, the M-30 rocket was developed in 1942. Its bulbous warhead required it to be fired from a grounded frame, called the M-30 (single frame, four round; later double frame, 8 round), instead of a launch rail mounted on a truck. In 1944 it became the basis for the BM-31-12 truck-mounted launcher.\nA battery of BM-13-16 launchers included four firing vehicles, two reload trucks and two technical support trucks, with each firing vehicle having a crew of six. Reloading was executed in 3\u20134 minutes, although the standard procedure was to switch to a new position some 10\u00a0km away due to the ease with which the battery could be identified by the enemy. Three batteries were combined into a division (company), and three divisions into a separate mine-firing regiment of rocket artillery.\nVariants.\nSoviet World War II rocket systems were named according to set patterns:\nFor example, the BM-8-16 was a vehicle with 16 rails for M-8 rockets while the BM-31-12 fired the M-31 rockets from 12 launch tubes. Short names such as BM-8 or BM-13 were used as well. The chassis carrying the launcher was not defined in the name e.g. BM-8-24 referred to a truck mounted launcher (ZIS-5) as well as on the T-40 tank and on the STZ-3 artillery tractor. \nChassis for the launchers included:\nThe M-8 and M-13 rocket could also be fitted with smoke warheads, although this was not common.\nForeign variants.\nThe Axis powers had captured Katyushas during the war. Germany considered producing a local copy, but instead created the \"8 cm Raketen-Vielfachwerfer\", which was based on the Katyusha.\nRomania had started developing its Mare\u0219al tank destroyer in late 1942. One of the first experimental models was equipped with a Katyusha rocket launcher and tested in the summer of 1943. The project was not continued.\nCombat history.\nThe multiple rocket launchers were top secret at the beginning of World War II and a special unit of NKVD troops was raised to operate them. On July 14, 1941, an experimental artillery battery of seven launchers was first used in battle at Rudnya, Smolensk Oblast under the command of Captain Ivan Flyorov, destroying a concentration of German troops with tanks, armored vehicles and trucks in the marketplace, causing massive German Army casualties and panicked retreat from the town. This was the first time the Katyusha was ever used in combat. Following the success, the Red Army organized new Guards mortar batteries for the support of infantry divisions. A battery's complement was standardized at four launchers. They remained under NKVD control until German \"Nebelwerfer\" rocket launchers became common later in the war.\nOn August 8, 1941, Stalin ordered the formation of eight special Guards mortar regiments under the direct control of the Reserve of the Supreme High Command (RVGK). Each regiment comprised three battalions of three batteries, totalling 36 BM-13 or BM-8 launchers. Independent Guards mortar battalions were also formed of 12 launchers in three batteries of four. By the end of 1941, there were eight regiments, 35 independent battalions, and two independent batteries in service, a total of 554 launchers.\nIn June 1942 heavy Guards mortar battalions were formed around the new M-30 static rocket launch frames, consisting of 96 launchers in three batteries. In July, a battalion of BM-13s was added to the establishment of a tank corps. In 1944, the BM-31 was used in motorized heavy Guards mortar battalions of 48 launchers. In 1943, Guards mortar brigades, and later divisions, were formed equipped with static launchers.\nAt dawn on September 5, the preparatory artillery and air bombardment began all along the front of the 24th, 1st Guards and 66th armies. But even on the main lines of advance the density of the artillery fire was not great and did not yield the necessary results. The attack began after Katyusha volleys.\nBy the end of 1942, 57 regiments were in service\u2014together with the smaller independent battalions, this was the equivalent of 216 batteries: 21% BM-8 light launchers, 56% BM-13, and 23% M-30 heavy launchers. By the end of the war, the equivalent of 518 batteries were in service.\nPost-war development.\nThe success and economy of multiple rocket launchers (MRL) have led them to continue to be developed. In the years following WWII, the BM-13 was replaced by the 140\u00a0mm BM-14 and the BM-31 was replaced by the 240\u00a0mm BM-24. During the Cold War, the Soviet Union fielded several models of Katyusha-like MRL, notably the BM-21 Grad launchers somewhat inspired by the earlier weapon, and the larger BM-27 Uragan. Advances in artillery munitions have been applied to some Katyusha-type multiple launch rocket systems, including bomblet submunitions, remotely deployed land mines, and chemical warheads.\nBM-13s were used in the Korean War by the Chinese People's Volunteer Army and Korean People's Army against the South Korean and United Nations forces. Soviet BM-13s were known to have been imported to China before the Sino-Soviet split and were operational in the People's Liberation Army. The Viet Minh deployed them against the French Far East Expeditionary Corps during the Battle of Dien Bien Phu at the end of the First Indochina War.\nRecognition and honours.\nParticipants in the creation of the Katyusha rocket launcher received official recognition only in 1991. By decree of the President of the Soviet Union Mikhail Gorbachev dated June 21, 1991, I. T. Kleymenov, G. E. Langemak, V. N. Luzhin, B. S. Petropavlovsky, B. M. Slonimer and N. I. Tikhomirov were posthumously awarded title of the Hero of Socialist Labour for their work on the creation of the Katyusha.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral bibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16960", "revid": "6404", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16960", "title": "Kathy Acker", "text": "American novelist and playwright (1947\u20131997)\nKathy Acker (April 18, 1947 [disputed] \u2013 November 30, 1997) was an American experimental novelist, poet, playwright, essayist, critic, performance artist, and postmodernist writer, known for her idiosyncratic and transgressive writing that dealt with complex themes such as childhood trauma, sexuality, language, identity, and rebellion. Her writing incorporates pastiche and the cut-up technique, involving cutting-up and scrambling passages and sentences; she also defined her writing as existing in the post-\"nouveau roman\" European tradition. In her texts, she combines biographical elements, power, sex and violence.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nThe only child of Donald and Claire (nee Weill) Lehman, Acker was born Karen Lehman in New York City in 1947, although the Library of Congress gives her birth year as 1948, while the editors of \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" gave her birth year as April 18, 1948, New York, New York, U.S. She died on November 30, 1997, in Tijuana, Mexico. Most obituaries, including \"The New York Times\", cited her birth year as 1944.\nHer family was from a wealthy, assimilated German-Jewish background that was culturally but not religiously Jewish. Her maternal grandmother, Florence Weill, was an Austrian Jew who had inherited a small fortune from her husband's glove-making business. Acker's grandparents went into political exile from Alsace-Lorraine prior to World War I, due to the rising nationalism of pre-Nazi Germany, moving to Paris and then to the United States. According to Acker, her grandparents were \"first generation French-German Jews\" whose ancestors originally hailed from the Pale of Settlement. In an interview with the magazine \"Tattoo Jew\", Acker stated that religious Judaism \"means nothing to me. I don't run away from it, it just means nothing to me\" and elaborated that her parents were \"high-German Jews\" who held cultural prejudices against Yiddish-speaking Eastern European Jews. (\"I was trained to run away from Polish Jews.\")\nAcker was raised in her mother and stepfather's home in the Sutton Place neighborhood of Manhattan's prosperous Upper East Side. Her father, Donald Lehman abandoned the family before Acker's birth. Her relationship with her domineering mother, even into adulthood, was fraught with hostility and anxiety because Acker felt unloved and unwanted. Her mother soon remarried, to Albert Alexander, whose surname Kathy, n\u00e9e Karen, was given, although the writer later described her mother's union with Alexander as a passionless marriage to an ineffectual man. Kathy had a half-sister, Wendy, by her mother's second marriage, but the two women were never close and long estranged. By the time of Acker's death, she had requested that her friends not contact Wendy, as some had suggested. In 1978, her mother Claire Alexander, committed suicide. As an adult, Acker tried to track down her father, but abandoned her search after she discovered that her father had disappeared after killing a trespasser on his yacht and spending six months in a psychiatric asylum until the state dismissed the murder charges.\nEducation.\nAcker attended the Lenox School, a private school for girls on the Upper East Side. As an undergraduate at Brandeis University, she studied Classics and \"took advantage of loosened mores, attending orgies thrown by theatre kids.\" In 1966, she married Robert Acker, and took his surname. Robert Acker was the son of lower-middle-class Polish-Jewish immigrants. Her mother and stepfather had hoped she would marry a wealthy man and did not expect the marriage to Acker to last long. She became interested in writing novels and, with Robert, moved to California to attend University of California, San Diego, where David Antin, Eleanor Antin, and Jerome Rothenberg were among her teachers. She received her bachelor's degree in 1968. After moving to New York, she attended two years of graduate school at the City College of New York in Classics, specializing in Greek. She did not earn a graduate degree. During her time in New York, she was employed as a file clerk, secretary, stripper, and porn performer.\nStart of career and relationships.\nAlthough her birth name was Karen, she was known as Kathy to her friends and family. Her first work appeared in print as part of the burgeoning New York City literary underground of the mid-1970s. During the 1970s, Acker often moved back and forth between San Diego, San Francisco, and New York, becoming a fixture of the downtown scene in the East Village. In February 1978, she married the composer and experimental musician Peter Gordon due to a cancer scare, and the pair ended their seven-year relationship shortly afterward. Later, she had relationships with the theorist, publisher, and critic Sylv\u00e8re Lotringer and then with the filmmaker and film theorist Peter Wollen, as well as a brief affair with media theorist and scholar McKenzie Wark. In 1996, Acker left San Francisco and moved to London to live with the writer and music critic Charles Shaar Murray. She married twice. She was openly bisexual, and identified as queer.\nIn 1979, she won the Pushcart Prize for her short story \"New York City in 1979.\" During the early 1980s, she lived in London, where she wrote several of her most critically acclaimed works. After returning to the United States in the late 1980s, she worked as an adjunct professor at the San Francisco Art Institute for about six years and as a visiting professor at several universities, including the University of Idaho, the University of California, San Diego (UC-San Diego), University of California, Santa Barbara (UC-Santa Barbara), the California Institute of Arts, and Roanoke College.\nIn July 1989, Acker was involved in a literary controversy when the trade periodical \"Publishers Weekly\" revealed that around four pages from Harold Robbins' novel \"The Pirate\" (1974) had been lifted without permission and integrated into Acker's novel \"The Adult Life of Toulouse Lautrec\" (1975), which had recently been re-published in the UK in a selection of early works by Acker titled \"Young Lust\" (1989).232 After Paul Gitlin saw the expos\u00e9 in \"Publishers Weekly\", he informed Robbins' UK publisher, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, who requested that Acker's publisher Unwin Hyman withdraw and pulp \"Young Lust\". Representatives for Acker explained that she was well known for her deliberate use of literary appropriation234\u2014or bricolage, a postmodern technique akin to plagiarism in which fragments of pre-existing works are combined along with original writings to create new literary works. After an intervention by William S. Burroughs\u2014a novelist who used appropriation in his own works of the 1960s\u2014Robbins issued a statement to give Acker retroactive permission to appropriate from his work, avoiding legal action on his publisher's part.\nLater life and death.\nIn April 1996, Acker was diagnosed with breast cancer and she elected to have a double mastectomy. In January 1997, she wrote about her loss of faith in conventional medicine in a \"Guardian\" article, \"The Gift of Disease.\"\nIn the article, she explains that after unsuccessful surgery, which left her feeling physically mutilated and emotionally debilitated, she rejected the passivity of the patient in the medical mainstream and began to seek out the advice of nutritionists, acupuncturists, psychic healers, and Chinese herbalists. She found appealing the claim that instead of being an object of knowledge, as in Western medicine, the patient becomes a seer, a seeker of wisdom, that illness becomes the teacher and the patient the student. After pursuing several forms of alternative medicine in England and the United States, Acker died a year and a half later, on November 30, 1997, aged 50, from complications of cancer in a Tijuana alternative cancer clinic, the only alternative-treatment facility that accepted her with her advanced stage of cancer. She died in what was called \"Room 101\", to which her friend Alan Moore quipped, \"There's nothing that woman can't turn into a literary reference.\" (Room 101, in the climax of George Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", turns out to be the torture chamber in which the Inner Party subjects its political prisoners to their own worst fears.)\nLiterary overview.\nAcker was associated with the New York punk movement of the late 1970s and early 1980s. The punk aesthetic influenced her literary style. In the 1970s, before the term \"postmodernism\" was popular, Acker began writing her books. These books contain features that would eventually be considered postmodernist work. Her controversial body of work borrows heavily from the experimental styles of William S. Burroughs and Marguerite Duras, with critics often comparing her writing to that of Alain Robbe-Grillet and Jean Genet. Critics have noticed links to Gertrude Stein and photographers Cindy Sherman and Sherrie Levine. She was influenced by the Black Mountain School poets, William S. Burroughs, David Antin, Carolee Schneeman, Eleanor Antin, French critical theory, syncretistic mysticism, and pornography, as well as classic literature.\nNovels.\nNotwithstanding the increased recognition she garnered for \"Great Expectations\", \"Blood and Guts in High School\" is often considered Acker's breakthrough work. She first began composing the book in 1973 while living in Solana Beach, writing and drawing fragments in notebooks before compiling the manuscript in 1979. Published in 1984, it is one of her most extreme explorations of sexuality and violence, critiquing the intersections of patriarchal capitalism, sexual oppression, systemic power dynamics and fragmented identity. Following a heavily surreal and frequently disrupted narrative, the book is written as a metafictional collage novel, variously incorporating letters, poems, translations, drama scenes, dream visions, and pornographic drawings. Borrowing from, among other texts, Nathaniel Hawthorne's \"The Scarlet Letter\", \"Blood and Guts\" details the grotesque childhood experiences of Janey Smith, a chronically sex-addicted and pelvic inflammatory disease-ridden young urbanite who is infatuated with a supposed father who sells her into slavery and prostitution. In its original publications by Picador and Grove Press, the final two chapters were accidentally reversed from Acker's intended order; the mistake was corrected in the 2017 re-publication of the novel. Many critics initially criticized the book for the transgressive depictions of the abuse of women, and both Germany and South Africa banned it completely. Acker later published the German court judgement against \"Blood and Guts in High School\" in \"https://\". The book eventually amassed a posthumous cult following despite its highly controversial nature, and featured in Peter Boxall's \"1001 Books You Must Read Before You Die\".\nAfter a series of failed contracts to publish \"Blood and Guts in High School\", Acker made her British literary debut in 1984 when Picador published the novel, followed by publication in New York by Grove Press. That same year, she was signed by the aforementioned Grove Press, one of the legendary independent publishers committed to controversial and avant-garde writing; she was one of the last writers taken on by Barney Rosset before the end of his tenure there. Most of her work was published by them, including re-issues of important earlier work. She wrote for several magazines and anthologies, including the periodicals \"RE/Search\", \"Angel Exhaust\", \"monochrom\" and \"Rapid Eye\". As she neared the end of her life, her work was more well-received by the conventional press; for example, \"The Guardian\" published a number of her essays, interviews, and articles, among them was an interview with the Spice Girls. \"In Memoriam to Identity\" draws attention to popular analyses of Rimbaud's life and \"The Sound and the Fury\", constructing or revealing social and literary identity. Although known in the literary world for creating a whole new style of feminist prose and for her transgressive fiction, she was also a punk and feminist icon for her devoted portrayals of alternative subcultures, strong-willed women, and violence.\nAcker published \"Empire of the Senseless\" in 1988, and considered it a turning point in her writing. While she still borrows from other texts, including Mark Twain's \"The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\", the appropriation is less obvious. However, one of Acker's more controversial appropriations is from William Gibson's 1984 text, \"Neuromancer\", in which Acker equates code with the female body and its militaristic implications. In 1988, she published \"Literal Madness: Three Novels\", which included three previously published works: \"Florida\" deconstructs and reduces John Huston's 1948 film noir \"Key Largo\" into its base sexual politics, \"Kathy Goes to Haiti\" details a young woman's relationship and sexual exploits while on vacation, and \"My Death My Life by Pier Paolo Pasolini\" provides a fictional \"autobiography\" of the Italian filmmaker in which he solves his own murder.\nBetween 1990 and 1993, she published four more books: \"In Memoriam to Identity\" (1990); \"Hannibal Lecter, My Father\" (1991); \"Portrait of an Eye: Three Novels\" (1992), also composed of already-published works; and \"My Mother: Demonology\" (1992). Her collection, \"Portrait of an Eye\", was championed by publisher Fred Jordan, who had discovered her work at Grove Press before moving to Pantheon and sent an early copy of the book to William Burroughs in 1991. Her last novel, \"Pussy, King of the Pirates\", was published in 1996, which she, Rico Bell, and the rest of rock band the Mekons also reworked into an operetta, which they performed at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago, in 1997.Acker's novels exhibit a fascination with, and an indebtedness to, tattoos. She dedicated \"Empire of the Senseless\" to her tattooist. Her work often dealt with other themes of body modification as well, such as bodybuilding. She would outline this in such works as the 1993 essay \"https://\"\nPoems and essays.\nAcker published her first book, \"Politics\", in 1972. Although the collection of poems and essays did not garner much critical or public attention, it did establish her reputation within the New York punk scene. In 1973, she published her first novel (under the pseudonym Black Tarantula), \"The Childlike Life of the Black Tarantula: Some Lives of Murderesses\". The following year, she published her second novel, \"I Dreamt I Was a Nymphomaniac: Imagining\". Both works are reprinted in \"Portrait of an Eye\".\nShort stories.\nIn 1979, she received popular attention after winning a Pushcart Prize for her short story \"New York City in 1979.\" She did not receive critical attention, however, until publishing \"Great Expectations\" in 1982. The opening of \"Great Expectations\" is an obvious re-writing of Charles Dickens's work of the same name. It features her usual subject matter, including a semi-autobiographical account of her mother's suicide and the appropriation of several other texts, including Pierre Guyotat's violent and sexually explicit \"\"Eden Eden Eden\".\" That same year, Acker published a chapbook, entitled \"Hello, I'm Erica Jong\". She appropriated from a number of influential writers. These writers include Charles Dickens, Nathaniel Hawthorne, John Keats, William Faulkner, James Joyce, T. S. Eliot, the Bront\u00eb sisters, the Marquis de Sade, Dante Alighieri, Georges Bataille, and Arthur Rimbaud.\nScripts.\nAcker wrote the script for the 1983 film \"Variety\". Acker wrote a text on the photographer Marcus Leatherdale that was published in 1983, in an art catalogue for the Molotov Gallery in Vienna.\nIn 2007, Amandla Publishing re-published Acker's articles that she wrote for the \"New Statesman\" from 1989 to 1991. Grove Press published two unpublished early novellas in the volume \"Rip-Off Red, Girl Detective and The Burning Bombing of America\", and a collection of selected work, \"Essential Acker\", edited by Amy Scholder and Dennis Cooper in 2002.\nNonfiction.\nThree volumes of her non-fiction have been published and republished since her death. In 2002, New York University staged \"Discipline and Anarchy\", a retrospective exhibition of her works, while in 2008, London's Institute of Contemporary Arts screened an evening of films influenced by Acker.\nPosthumous reputation.\nA collection of essays on Acker's work, titled \"Lust for Life: On the Writings of Kathy Acker\", edited by Carla Harryman, Avital Ronell, and Amy Scholder, was published by Verso Books in 2006 and includes essays by Nayland Blake, Leslie Dick, Robert Gl\u00fcck, Carla Harryman, Laurence Rickels, Avital Ronell, Barrett Watten, and Peter Wollen. In 2009, the first collection of essays to focus on academic study of Acker, \"Kathy Acker and Transnationalism\" was published.\nIn 2015, Semiotext(e) published \"I'm Very Into You\", a book of Acker's email correspondence with media theorist McKenzie Wark, edited by Matias Viegener, her executor and head of the Kathy Acker Literary Trust. Her personal library is housed in a reading room at the University of Cologne in Germany, and her papers are divided between NYU's Fales Library and the Rubenstein Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Duke University. A limited body of her recorded readings and discussions of her works exists in the special collections archive of University of California, San Diego.\nIn 2013, the Acker Award was launched and named for Kathy Acker. Awarded to living and deceased members of the San Francisco or New York avant-garde art scene, the award is financed by Alan Kaufman and Clayton Patterson.\nIn 2017, American writer and artist Chris Kraus published \"After Kathy Acker: A Literary Biography\", the first book-length biography of Acker's life experiences and literary strategies. American writer Douglas A. Martin published \"Acker\". a book-length study of Acker's influences and artistic trajectory.\nIn 2018, British writer Olivia Laing published \"Crudo\", a novel which references Acker's works and life, and whose main character is a woman called Kathy, suffering double breast cancer; yet the \nbook's events are situated in August\u2013September 2017. In 2019, Amy Scholder and Douglas A. Martin co-edited \"Kathy Acker: The Last Interview and Other Conversations\". Kate Zambreno wrote on Kathy Acker in her essay \"New York City, Summer 2013\" published as part of the collection https:// (Harpers Collins, 2019). The essay was originally published in \"https://\" edited by https:// (Feminist Press, 2014).\nBetween May 1, 2019 and August 4, 2019, the exhibition \"I, I, I, I, I, I, I, Kathy Acker\" was held at the Institute of Contemporary Arts, London. The exhibition featured works by more than 40 artists, such as Reza Abdoh, Johanna Hedva and Reba Maybury. In 2020, Grove Press issued a new edition of \"https://\", with an introduction by Kate Zambreno.\nIn November, 2022, the 25th anniversary of Acker's death, the Canadian journalist Jason McBride published \"Eat Your Mind: The Radical Life and Work of Kathy Acker,\" the first authorized full-length biography of Acker.\nWorks based on her works.\nSteven Shaviro transformed Kathy Acker's works into an electronic literature piece, Doom Patrols in 1998. This was originally published in \"Beehive\" and is archived at The NEXT Museum, Library, and Preservation Space. Catherine Lacey (author)'s novel Biography of X is a fictional biography loosely based on aspects of Kathy Acker's life and work and uses appropriated texts as in Acker's work.\nBibliography.\nNovels, stories.\nSome of the contents from * \"Kathy Acker (1971\u20131975)\" (2019, \u00c9ditions Ismael, 656 pgs.), ed. Justin Gajoux and Claire Finch, critical edition of unpublished early writings from 1971 to 1975\nPoetry.\nThis is not a complete list.\nThis symbol # indicates published in \"Kathy Acker (1971\u20131975)\" (2019, \u00c9ditions Ismael, 656 pgs.), ed. Justin Gajoux and Claire Finch, critical edition of unpublished early writings from 1971 to 1975\nhttps://\nEssays (periodicals, book reviews, movie reviews, art reviews, speeches, and other texts).\nThis is not a complete list.\nThe symbols ^^ indicate it's available at Duke University's collection of Kathy Acker's papers. The symbol # indicates the essay is included in the Kathy Acker collection \"Bodies of Work: Essays\" (London: Serpent's Tail, 1997).\nBook reviews \u2013 typescripts of sixteen different reviews from 1985 to 1989 \u2013 available at Duke University's collection of Kathy Acker papers.\nInterviews and conversations.\nIncomplete list:\nCorrespondence.\nIncomplete list:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16962", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16962", "title": "Kidney Stone", "text": ""}
{"id": "16963", "revid": "2615838", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16963", "title": "Kidneys, ureters, and bladder x-ray", "text": ""}
{"id": "16964", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16964", "title": "King Richard III", "text": ""}
{"id": "16966", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16966", "title": "Koh-i-Noor", "text": "Large cut diamond\nThe is one of the largest cut diamonds in the world, weighing . It is currently set in the Crown of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother. The diamond originated in the Kollur mine in present day Andhra Pradesh, India. According to the colonial administrator Theo Metcalfe, there is \"very meagre and imperfect\" evidence of the early history of the Koh-i-Noor before the 1740s. There is no record of its original weight, but the earliest attested weight is 186 old carats (191 metric carats or 38.2\u00a0g). The first verifiable record of the diamond comes from a history by Muhammad Kazim Marvi of the 1740s invasion of Northern India by Afsharid Iran under Nader Shah. Marvi notes the Koh-i-Noor as one of many stones on the Mughal Peacock Throne that Nader looted from Delhi.\nThe diamond then changed hands between various empires in south and west Asia, until being given to Queen Victoria after the Second Anglo-Sikh War and the British East India Company's annexation of the Punjab in 1849, during the reign of the then 11-year-old Maharaja of the Sikh Empire, Duleep Singh. The young king ruled under the shadow of the Company ally Gulab Singh, the first Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir, who had previously possessed the stone.\nIn 1851, it went on display at the Great Exhibition in London, but the lackluster cut failed to impress viewers. Prince Albert, husband of Queen Victoria, ordered it to be re-cut as an oval brilliant by Coster Diamonds. By modern standards, the culet (point at the bottom of a gemstone) is unusually broad, giving the impression of a black hole when the stone is viewed head-on; it is nevertheless regarded by gemologists as \"full of life\".\nSince arriving in the UK, it has only been worn by female members of the British royal family. It is said to bring bad luck if it is worn by a man. Victoria wore the stone in a brooch and a circlet. After she died in 1901, it was set in the Crown of Queen Alexandra. It was transferred to the Crown of Queen Mary in 1911, and to the Crown of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother in 1937 for her coronation.\nToday, the diamond is on public display in the Jewel House at the Tower of London. The governments of India, Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan have all claimed ownership of the Koh-i-Noor, demanding its return ever since India gained independence from the British Empire in 1947. The British government insists the gem was obtained legally under the terms of the Last Treaty of Lahore in 1849 and has rejected the claims. \nIn 2018, at a hearing of the Supreme Court of India, the Archeological Survey of India clarified that the diamond was surrendered to the British and \"was neither stolen nor forcibly taken away\".\nHistory.\nLegendary origin.\nAccording to the diary of Alauddin Khalji of the Khalji dynasty of the Delhi Sultanate, he acquired a large diamond when he invaded the kingdoms of southern India at the beginning of the 14th century and looted it from the Kakatiya dynasty. \nIt later passed on to succeeding dynasties of the sultanate, and Babur, the Turco-Mongol founder of the Mughal Empire, received the diamond in 1526 as a tribute for his conquest of Delhi and Agra at the Battle of Panipat. However, it is impossible to verify the details exactly about when or where it was found, and many competing theories exist as to its original owner. Babur wrote about a \"famous\" diamond that weighed just over 187 old carats \u2013 approximately the size of the once 186-carat Koh-i-Noor.\nFor some time it was alleged that while in the possession of Shah Jahan's son Aurangzeb, the stone was cut by Hortense Borgia, a Venetian lapidarist, who reduced the weight of the large stone to . For this carelessness, Borgia was reprimanded and fined 10,000 rupees. However according to recent research, the story of Borgia cutting the diamond is not correct, and most probably mixed up with that of the Orlov, part of Catherine the Great's imperial Russian scepter in the Kremlin.\nEarly history.\nIn early Indian history, diamonds were the most valued of gemstones. However, during the period of Mughal rule, diamonds lost this distinction. When looking at the Mughal treasury, Abu'l-Fazl ibn Mubarak, the Grand vizier to Akbar, noted that red spinels and Burmese rubies had become the most desirable jewels by the nobility. During this time the Persian new year ceremony, Nowruz, had become a period in which the subjects could bring offerings of gems and money to the imperial family in exchange for political promotions within the greater bureaucracy. By the time Shah Jahan ascended the throne as the fifth Mughal emperor, there were so many jewels in the treasury that he decided to use many of them in the making of the ornate Peacock Throne in 1635.\nOver a century later in 1738 Nader Shah founded the Afsharid dynasty. Following the overthrow of the Safavid dynasty of Persia two years earlier, he began raiding Mughal territory before soon launching a full-scale invasion of North-West India. This invading force soon captured Delhi where, after a massacre of the civilian population, the army began a systematic looting of the wealth of the city and the treasury of the Mughal Empire. With nearly 10,000 wagons of loot, along with millions of rupees and an assortment of other historic jewels, Nader Shah also carried away the imperial Peacock Throne. Nader Shah's biographer, Muhammad Kazim Marvi, first recorded seeing the Koh-i-Noor in the 1740s on the head of one of the peacocks on the throne, along with other prominent gems such as the great Timur Ruby and the Daria-i-Noor. It is alleged that Nader Shah exclaimed \"Koh-i-Noor!\", Persian and Hindi-Urdu for \"Mountain of Light\", when he first obtained the famous stone. One of his consorts is even noted to have said, \"If a strong man were to throw four stones \u2013 one north, one south, one east, one west, and a fifth stone up into the air \u2013 and if the space between them were to be filled with gold, all would not equal the value of the Koh-i-Noor\".\nAfter Nadir Shah was killed and his empire collapsed in 1747, the Koh-i-Noor fell to his grandson, who in 1751 gave it to Ahmad Shah Durrani, founder of the Afghan Empire, in return for his support. One of Ahmed's grandsons, Shah Shuja Durrani, wore a bracelet containing the Koh-i-Noor on the occasion of Mountstuart Elphinstone's visit to Peshawar in 1808. A year later, Shah Shuja formed an alliance with the United Kingdom to help defend against a possible invasion of Afghanistan by Russia. He was quickly overthrown, but fled with the diamond to Lahore (in modern Pakistan), where in one account, Ranjit Singh, founder of the Sikh Empire, in return for his hospitality, insisted upon the gem being given to him, and he took possession of it in 1813.\nShah Shuja's memoirs dispute this, and claim Ranjit Singh extorted the diamond from him by having his son tortured in front of him.\nIn Maharaja Ranjit Singh's possession.\nRanjit Singh had the diamond examined by jewelers of Lahore for two days to ensure that Shuja had not tricked him. After the jewelers confirmed its genuineness, he donated 125,000 rupees to Shuja. Ranjit Singh then asked the principal jewelers of Amritsar to estimate the diamond's value; the jewelers declared that the value of the diamond was \"far beyond all computation\". Ranjit Singh then affixed the diamond to the front of his turban, and paraded on an elephant to enable his subjects to see it. He used to wear it as an armlet during major festivals such as Diwali and Dusserah, and took it with him during travel. He would exhibit it to prominent visitors, especially British officers.\nOne day, Ranjit Singh asked the diamond's former owners \u2013 Shuja and his wife Wafa Begum \u2013 to estimate its value. Wafa Begum replied that if a strong man threw a stone in four cardinal directions and vertically, Koh-i-Noor would be worth more than the gold and precious stones filled in the space. Ranjit Singh grew paranoid about the Koh-i-Noor being stolen, because in the past, another valuable jewel had been stolen from him while he was intoxicated. He kept the diamond within a high-security facility at the Gobindgarh Fort when it was not in use. When the diamond was to be transported, it was placed in a pannier on a guarded camel; 39 other camels with identical panniers were included in the convoy; the diamond was always placed on the first camel immediately behind the guards, but great secrecy was maintained regarding which camel carried it. Only Ranjit Singh's treasurer Misr Beli Ram knew which camel carried the diamond.\nIn June 1839, Ranjit Singh suffered his third stroke, and it became apparent that he would die soon. On his deathbed, he started giving away his valuable possessions to religious charities, and appointed his eldest son Kharak Singh as his successor. A day before his death, on 26 June 1839, a major argument broke out between his courtiers regarding the fate of Koh-i-Noor. Ranjit Singh himself was too weak to speak, and communicated using gestures. Bhai Gobind Ram, the head Brahmin of Ranjit Singh, insisted that the king had willed Koh-i-Noor and other jewels to the Jagannath Temple, Puri: the king apparently supported this claim through gestures, as recorded in his court chronicle \"Umdat ul-Tawarikh\". However, treasurer Beli Ram insisted that it was a state property rather than Ranjit Singh's personal property, and therefore, should be handed over to Kharak Singh.\nAfter Ranjit Singh's death, Beli Ram refused to send the diamond to the temple, and hid it in his vaults. Meanwhile, Kharak Singh and wazir Dhian Singh also issued orders stating that the diamond should not be taken out of Lahore.\nIn Gulab Singh's possession.\nOn 8 October 1839, the new emperor Kharak Singh was overthrown in a coup by his prime minister Dhian Singh. The prime minister's brother Gulab Singh, Raja of Jammu, came into possession of the Koh-i-Noor. Kharak Singh later died in prison, soon followed by the mysterious death of his son and successor Nau Nihal Singh on 5 November 1840. Gulab Singh held onto the stone until January 1841, when he presented it to emperor Sher Singh in order to win his favour, after his brother Dhian Singh negotiated a ceasefire between Sher Singh and the overthrown empress Chand Kaur. Gulab Singh had attempted to defend the widowed empress at her fort in Lahore, during two days of conflict and shelling by Sher Singh and his troops. Despite handing over the Koh-i-noor, Gulab Singh as a result of the ceasefire returned safely to Jammu with a wealth of gold and other jewels taken from the treasury.\nWorn by child emperor Duleep Singh.\nOn 15 September 1843, both Sher Singh and prime minister Dhian Singh were assassinated in a coup led by Ajit Singh Sandhawalia. However, the next day in a counter coup led by Dhian's son Hira Singh the assassins were killed. Aged 24, Hira Singh succeeded his father as prime minister, and installed the five-year old Duleep Singh as emperor. The Koh-i-noor was now fastened to the arm of the child emperor in court at Lahore. Duleep Singh and his mother empress Jind Kaur, had till then resided in Jammu, the kingdom governed by Gulab Singh.\nFollowing his nephew Prime Minister Hira Singh's assassination on 27 March 1844, and the subsequent outbreak of the First Anglo-Sikh War, Gulab Singh himself led the Sikh empire as its prime minister, and despite defeat in the war, he became the first Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir on 16 March 1846, under the Treaty of Amritsar.\nSurrender to Queen Victoria.\nOn 29 March 1849, following the conclusion of the Second Anglo-Sikh War, the remaining territories of the Sikh Empire were formally annexed to Company rule, and the Last Treaty of Lahore was signed, officially ceding the Koh-i-Noor to Queen Victoria and the Maharaja's other assets to the company. Article III of the treaty read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The gem called the Koh-i-Noor, which was taken from Shah Sooja-ool-moolk by Maharajah Ranjeet Singh, shall be surrendered by the Maharajah of Lahore to the Queen of England.\nThe lead signatory of the treaty for the by then eleven-year-old Maharaja Duleep Singh was his commander-in-chief Tej Singh, a loyalist of Maharaja Gulab Singh who had previously been in possession of the Koh-i-Noor and gained Kashmir from the Sikh empire, via treaty with Britain, following the First Anglo-Sikh War.\nThe Governor-General in charge of the ratification of this treaty was the Marquess of Dalhousie. The manner of his aiding in the transfer of the diamond was criticized even by some of his contemporaries in Britain. Although some thought it should have been presented as a gift to Queen Victoria by the East India Company, it is clear that Dalhousie believed the stone was a spoil of war, and treated it accordingly, ensuring that it was officially surrendered to her by Duleep Singh, the youngest son of Ranjit Singh. The presentation of the Koh-i-Noor by the East India Company to the queen was the latest in a long history of transfers of the diamond as a coveted spoil of war. Duleep Singh had been placed in the guardianship of Dr John Spencer Login, a surgeon in the East India Company Army serving in the Presidency of Bengal. Duleep Singh moved to England in 1854 and spent the rest of his life in exile.\nJourney to the United Kingdom.\nIn due course, the Governor-General received the Koh-i-Noor from Dr Login, who had been appointed Governor of the Citadel, on 6 April 1848 under a receipt dated 7 December 1849, in the presence of members of the Board of Administration for the affairs of the Punjab: Sir Henry Lawrence (President), C. G. Mansel, John Lawrence and Sir Henry Elliot (Secretary to the Government of India).\nLegend in the Lawrence family has it that before the voyage, John Lawrence left the jewel in his waistcoat pocket when it was sent to be laundered, and was most grateful when it was returned promptly by the valet who found it.\nOn 1 February 1850, the jewel was sealed in a small iron safe inside a red dispatch box, both sealed with red tape and a wax seal and kept in a chest at Bombay Treasury awaiting a steamer ship from China. It was then sent to England for presentation to Queen Victoria in the care of Captain J. Ramsay and Brevet Lt. Col F. Mackeson under tight security arrangements, one of which was the placement of the dispatch box in a larger iron safe. They departed from Bombay on 6 April on board HMS \"Medea\", captained by Captain Lockyer.\nThe ship had a difficult voyage: an outbreak of cholera on board when the ship was in Mauritius had the locals demanding its departure, and they asked their governor to open fire on the vessel and destroy it if there was no response. Shortly afterwards, the vessel was hit by a severe gale that blew for some 12 hours.\nOn arrival in Britain on 29 June, the passengers and mail were unloaded in Plymouth, but the Koh-i-Noor stayed on board until the ship reached Spithead, near Portsmouth, on 1 July. The next morning, Ramsay and Mackeson, in the company of Mr Onslow, the private secretary to the chairman of the Court of Directors of the British East India Company, proceeded by train to East India House in the City of London and passed the diamond into the care of the chairman and deputy chairman of the East India Company.\nThe Koh-i-Noor was formally presented to Queen Victoria on 3 July 1850 at Buckingham Palace by the deputy chairman of the East India Company. The date had been chosen to coincide with the Company's 250th anniversary.\nThe Great Exhibition.\nMembers of the public were given a chance to see the Koh-i-Noor when The Great Exhibition was staged at Hyde Park, London, in 1851. It represented the might of the British Empire and took pride of place in the eastern part of the central gallery.\nIts mysterious past and advertised value of \u00a31\u20132 million drew large crowds. At first, the stone was put inside a gilded birdcage, but after complaints about its dull appearance, the Koh-i-Noor was moved to a case with black velvet and gas lamps in the hope that it would sparkle better. Despite this, the flawed and asymmetrical diamond still failed to please viewers.\n1852 re-cutting.\nOriginally, the diamond had 169 facets and was long, wide, and deep. It was high-domed, with a flat base and both triangular and rectangular facets, similar in overall appearance to other Mughal-era diamonds which are now in the Iranian Crown Jewels.\nDisappointment in the appearance of the stone was not uncommon; \"Punch\" magazine referred to it as the \"Mountain of Darkness,\" a play on the English translation of its name as \"Mountain of Light\". After consulting mineralogists, including Sir David Brewster, Victoria's husband Prince Albert with the consent of the government decided to have the diamond re-cut. For this task, he employed one of the largest and most famous Dutch diamond merchants, Mozes Coster. He sent to London one of his most experienced artisans, Levie Benjamin Voorzanger, and his assistants.\nOn 17 July 1852, the cutting began at the factory of Garrard &amp; Co. in Haymarket, using a steam-powered mill built specially for the job by Maudslay, Sons and Field. Supervised by Albert and the Duke of Wellington, and the technical direction of the Queen's mineralogist, James Tennant, the cutting took 38 days, cost Albert \u00a38,000, and reduced the diamond from 186 old carats (191 modern carats or 38.2\u00a0g) to its current weight . The stone now measures long, wide, and deep. Brilliant-cut diamonds usually have 58 facets, but the Koh-i-Noor has 8 additional \"star\" facets around the culet, making a total of 66 facets.\nThe great loss of weight was to some extent due to removal of several flaws, one especially big, which Voorzanger discovered. Although Prince Albert was dissatisfied with such a huge reduction, most experts agreed that Voorzanger had made the right decision and did the job with impeccable skill. When Queen Victoria showed the re-cut diamond to the young Maharaja Duleep Singh, the Koh-i-Noor's last non-British owner, he was apparently unable to speak for several minutes afterwards.\nThe much lighter but more dazzling stone was mounted in a honeysuckle brooch and a circlet worn by the queen. At this time, it belonged to her personally, and was not yet part of the Crown Jewels. Although Victoria wore it often, she became uneasy about the way in which the diamond had been acquired. In a letter to her eldest daughter, Victoria, Princess Royal, she wrote in the 1870s: \"No one feels more strongly than I do about India or how much I opposed our taking those countries and I think no more will be taken, for it is very wrong and no advantage to us. You know also how I dislike wearing the Koh-i-Noor\".\nCrown Jewel.\nAfter Queen Victoria's death, the Koh-i-Noor was set in the Crown of Queen Alexandra, the wife of Edward VII, that was used to crown her at their coronation in 1902. The diamond was transferred to the Crown of Queen Mary in 1911, and finally to Crown of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother in 1937. When the Queen Mother died in 2002, the crown was placed on top of her coffin for the lying-in-state and funeral. Queen Camilla was crowned with Queen Mary's Crown at the Coronation of Charles III and Camilla on 6 May 2023, but without the Koh-i-Noor diamond.\nAll these crowns are on display in the Jewel House at the Tower of London with crystal replicas of the diamond set in the older crowns. The original bracelet given to Queen Victoria can also be seen there. A glass model of the Koh-i-Noor shows visitors how it looked when it was brought to the United Kingdom. Replicas of the diamond in this and its re-cut forms can also be seen in the \"Vault\" exhibit at the Natural History Museum, London.\nDuring the Second World War, the Crown Jewels were moved from their home at the Tower of London to Windsor Castle. They were kept in leather hat boxes under lock and key in the office of the Royal Librarian Sir Owen Morshead until 1941 when they were transferred to a specially dug tunnel under the walls of the castle. At this time Morshead and the Keeper of the Tower Armouries removed some of the larger stones, including the Koh-i-Noor, and wrapping them in cotton wool, inserted them in a glass preserving-jar, which was then placed in a biscuit tin; the thinking being that, unlike the bulkier crowns, this would allow their swift relocation if the German invasion occurred.\nOwnership dispute.\nThe Koh-i-Noor has long been a subject of diplomatic controversy, with India, Pakistan, Iran, and Afghanistan all demanding its return from the UK at various points.\nIndia.\nThe Government of India first demanded the return of the Koh-i-Noor as soon as independence was granted in 1947. A second request followed in 1953, the year of the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II. Each time, the British Government rejected the claims, saying that ownership was non-negotiable.\nIn 2000, several members of the Indian Parliament signed a letter calling for the diamond to be given back to India, claiming it was taken illegally. British officials said that a variety of claims meant it was impossible to establish the diamond's original owner, and that it had been part of Britain's heritage for more than 150 years.\nIn July 2010, while visiting India, David Cameron, the prime minister of the United Kingdom, said of returning the diamond, \"If you say yes to one you suddenly find the British Museum would be empty. I am afraid to say, it is going to have to stay put.\" On a subsequent visit in February 2013, he said, \"They're not having that back.\"\nIn April 2016, the Indian Culture Ministry stated it would make \"all possible efforts\" to arrange the return of the Koh-i-Noor to India. The then Solicitor General of India, Ranjit Kumar said, \"It was given voluntarily by Ranjit Singh to the British as compensation for help in the Sikh Wars. The Koh-i-Noor is not a stolen object.\"\nPakistan.\nIn 1976, Pakistan asserted its ownership of the diamond, saying its return would be \"a convincing demonstration of the spirit that moved Britain voluntarily to shed its imperial encumbrances and lead the process of decolonisation\". In a letter to the prime minister of Pakistan, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, the prime minister of the United Kingdom, James Callaghan, wrote, \"I need not remind you of the various hands through which the stone has passed over the past two centuries, nor that explicit provision for its transfer to the British crown was made in the peace treaty with the Maharajah of the Sikh Empire in 1849. I could not advise Her Majesty that it should be surrendered.\"\nAfghanistan.\nIn 2000, the Taliban's foreign affairs spokesman, Faiz Ahmed Faiz, said the Koh-i-Noor was the legitimate property of Afghanistan, and demanded for it to be handed over to the regime. \"The history of the diamond shows it was taken from us (Afghanistan) to India, and from there to Britain. We have a much better claim than the Indians\", he said. The Afghan claim derives from Shah Shuja Durrani's memoirs, which states he surrendered the diamond to Ranjit Singh while Singh was having his son tortured in front of him, so he argued that the Maharajah of Lahore acquired the stone illegitimately.\nProposed compromises.\nBecause of the disputes over the diamond's rightful ownership, there have been various compromises suggested. These include dividing it into four, with a piece given to each of Afghanistan, India, and Pakistan, with the final piece retained by the British Crown. Another suggestion is that the jewel be housed in a special museum at the Wagah border between India and Pakistan. However this suggestion does not cater to Afghan claims, nor the reality of current British possession. The British Government rejects these compromises, and has stated since the end of the British Raj that the status of the diamond is \"non-negotiable\".\nIn popular culture.\nA rumor that the Koh-i-Noor is cursed may have originated with the \"Delhi Gazette\"; it was soon repeated in \"The Illustrated London News\", and Queen Victoria herself expressed concern about the curse. This led to a counter-rumor that the curse attached only to male rulers.\nThe Koh-i-Noor was one of the inspirations for the eponymous gemstone in \"The Moonstone\" (1868), a 19th-century British epistolary novel by Wilkie Collins, generally considered to be the first full length detective novel in the English language. In his preface to the first edition of the book, Collins says that he based his eponymous \"Moonstone\" on the histories of two stones: the Orlov, a diamond in the Russian Imperial Sceptre, and the Koh-i-Noor. In the 1966 Penguin Books edition of \"The Moonstone\", J. I. M. Stewart states that Collins used G. C. King's to research the history of the Koh-i-Noor.\nThe Koh-i-Noor also features in Agatha Christie's 1925 detective novel \"The Secret of Chimneys\" where it is hidden somewhere inside a large country house and is discovered at the end of the novel. The diamond had been stolen from the Tower of London by a Parisian gang leader who replaced it with a replica stone.\nThe Koh-i-Noor is a central plot point in George MacDonald Fraser's 1990 historical novel and satire, \"Flashman and the Mountain of Light\", which refers to the diamond in its title.\n\"Kohinoor\", a 2005 Indian mystery television series, follows a search for the diamond after its supposed return to India. \nThe Koh-i-Noor is a main part of the 2014 Indian film \"Bang Bang!\". \nThe Koh-i-Noor features heavily in the in-universe lore of \"Assassin's Creed\" where it is depicted a Piece of Eden, a relic made by the Isu, an ancient precursor race. The Koh-i-Noor itself is featured in the 2016 spin-off video game and in the 2015 video game \"\", where it is revealed that the \"real\" Koh-i-Noor owned by the Royal family is a fake while the true artifact remains with the Assassins.\n\"Kolkatay Kohinoor\", a 2019 mystery thriller film is based on a similar premise and explores the diamond's fictional relations to Kolkata.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16967", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16967", "title": "Kaolin", "text": ""}
{"id": "16969", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16969", "title": "Kara-Su", "text": ""}
{"id": "16970", "revid": "90192", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16970", "title": "King Henry IV part II", "text": ""}
{"id": "16971", "revid": "48747569", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16971", "title": "Kvass", "text": "Fermented cereal-based non-alcoholic beverage\nKvass is a fermented, cereal-based, low-alcoholic beverage of cloudy appearance and a sweet and sour taste.\nKvass originates from northeastern Europe, where grain production was considered insufficient for beer to become a daily drink. The first written mention of kvass is found in \"Primary Chronicle\", describing the celebration of Vladimir the Great's baptism in 988. \nTraditionally, kvass is made from a mash of rye bread or rye flour and malt soaked in hot water, fermented for about 12 hours with the help of sugar and bread yeast or baker's yeast at room temperature. In industrial methods, kvass is produced from wort concentrate combined with various grain mixtures. It is a drink known in Belarus, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Armenia, Georgia, Poland, Russia, and Ukraine. Kvass (or beverages similar to it) are also popular in some parts of China, Finland, Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan.\nTerminology.\nThe word \"kvass\" is ultimately from Proto-Indo-European base *\"kwh\u2082et-\" ('to become sour'). In English it was first mentioned in a text around 1553 as \"quass\". Nowadays, the name of the drink is almost the same in most languages: in Polish: ' (lit.\u2009'bread kvass', to differentiate it from , 'acid', originally from , 'sour'); Belarusian: , '; Russian: , '; Ukrainian: , ; Latvian: '; Romanian: '; Hungarian: '; Serbian: '; Mandarin Chinese: , ; Eastern Finnish: '. Non-cognates include Estonian ', Finnish ', Georgian , '; Latvian ' (lit.\u2009'beverage'), Latgalian (lit.\u2009'beverage', similar to Lithuanian ), Lithuanian ' (lit.\u2009'beverage', similar to Latvian '), and Swedish \"\" (lit.\u2009'bread drink').\nProduction.\nIn the traditional method, either dried rye bread or a combination of rye flour and rye malt is used. The dried rye bread is extracted with hot water and incubated for 12 hours at room temperature, after which bread yeast and sugar are added to the extract and fermented for 12 hours at . Alternatively, rye flour is boiled, mixed with rye malt, sugar, and baker's yeast and then fermented for 12 hours at .\nThe simplest industrial method produces kvass from a wort concentrate. The concentrate is warmed up and mixed with a water and sugar solution to create wort with a sugar concentration of 5\u20137% and pasteurized to stabilize it. After that, the wort is pumped into a fermentation tank, where baker's yeast and lactic acid bacteria culture is added, and the solution is fermented for 12\u201324 hours at . Only around 1% of the extract is fermented out into ethanol, carbon dioxide, and lactic acid. Afterwards, the kvass is cooled to , clarified through either filtration or centrifugation, and adjusted for sugar content, if necessary.\nInitially, it was filled in large containers from which the kvass was sold on streets, but now, the vast majority of industrially produced kvass is filled and sold in 1\u20133-litre plastic bottles and has a shelf life of 4\u20136 weeks.\nKvass is usually 0.5\u20131.0% alcohol by weight, but may sometimes be as high as 2.0%.\nHistory.\nThe exact origins of kvass are unclear, and whether it was invented by Slavic people or any other Eastern European ethnicity is unknown, although some Polish sources claim that kvass was invented by Slavs. Kvass has existed in the northeastern part of Europe, where grain production is thought to have been insufficient for beer to become a daily drink. It has been known among the Early Slavs since the 10th century. Possibly invented in the Kievan Rus' and known there since at least the 10th century, kvass has become one of the symbols of East Slavic cuisine. The first written mention of kvass is found in the \"Primary Chronicle\", describing the celebration of Vladimir the Great's baptism in 988, when kvass along with mead and food was given out to the citizens of Kiev. Kvass-making remained a daily household activity well into the 19th century.\nIn the second half of the 19th century, with military engagement, increasing industrialization, and large-scale projects, such as the construction of the Trans-Siberian Railway creating a growing need to supply large numbers of people with foodstuff for extended periods of time, kvass became commercialized; more than 150 kvass varieties, such as apple, pear, mint, lemon, chicory, raspberry, and cherry were recorded. As commercial kvass producers began selling it in barrels on the streets, domestic kvass-making started to decline. For example, in the year ended 30 June 1912, there were 17 factories in the Governorate of Livonia, producing a total of 437,255 gallons of kvass.\nIn the 1890s, the first scientific studies into the production of kvass were conducted in Kiev, and in the 1960s, commercial mass production technology of kvass was further developed by chemists in Moscow.\nBy country.\nBelarus.\nBelarus has several breweries producing kvass: Alivaria Brewery, Babrujski Brovar, and Krinitsa. It also has a variety of kvass tasting and entertainment festivals. The largest show takes place in the city of Lida.\nEstonia.\nIn Estonia, kvass is known as . Initially, it was made from either brewer's spent grain or wort left to ferment in a closed container, but later, special kvass bread () or industrially produced malt concentrate started to be used. Nowadays, \"\" generally is industrially produced with the use of pasteurization, the addition of preservatives, and artificial carbonation.\nFinland.\nIn Finland, a fermented drink made from a mixture of rye flour and rye malt was ubiquitous in parts of Eastern Finland and was heated in the oven. It was called (which can also be used to refer to small beer) or (in Eastern Finnish), while nowadays the drink is often known as (lit.\u2009'home kalja') and is available in many work canteens, gas stations, and lower-end restaurants.\nTraditionally, was usually made in households once a week from a mixture of malted and unmalted rye grains. Other grains, such as oats or barley, were also sometimes used; occasionally, leftover potatoes or pieces of bread were added. Everything was mixed with water in a metal cauldron or a clay pot and kept warm in the oven or by the stove for at least six hours for the mixture to darken and sweeten. Sometimes, the grain solids were filtered out through lautering. In Eastern Finland, the mixture was formed into large loaves and briefly baked for the crust to turn brown. The porridge or pieces of the malt bread were mixed into a wooden cask with water and fermented for one or two days with a previous batch, a sourdough starter, spontaneously or in more recent times with commercial baker's yeast. In the early 20th century, with sugar becoming more readily available, it started replacing the malting process, and modern \"\" is made from dark rye malt, sugar, and baker's yeast.\nLatvia.\nIn Latvian, kvass was also called . After the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the street vendors disappeared from the streets of Latvia due to new health laws that banned its sale on the street. Economic disruptions forced many kvass factories to close. The Coca-Cola Company moved in and began quickly dominating the soft drink market. In 1998, the local soft drink industry adapted by selling bottled kvass and launching aggressive marketing campaigns. This surge in sales was stimulated by the fact that kvass sold for about half the price of Coca-Cola. In just three years, kvass constituted as much as 30% of the soft drink market in Latvia, while the market share of Coca-Cola fell from 65% to 44%. The Coca-Cola Company had losses in Latvia of about $1\u00a0million in 1999 and 2000. Coca-Cola responded by purchasing kvass manufacturers and producing kvass at their own soft drink plants.\nOn 30 September 2010, the Saeima (parliament) adopted quality and classification requirements for kvass, defining it as \"a beverage obtained by fermenting a mixture of kvass wort with a yeast of microorganism cultures to which sugar and other food sources and food additives are added or not added after the fermentation\" with a maximum ABV of 1.2 percent, and differentiating it from an unfermented non-alcoholic mixture of grain product extract, water, flavourings, preservatives, and other ingredients, which is designated as a \"kvass (malt) beverage\".\nIn 2014, Latvian kvass producers won seven medals at the Russian Beverage exposition in Moscow, with Ilgezeem's \"Porter Tanheiser\" kvass winning two gold medals. In 2019, \"I\u013c\u0123uciema kvass\" ranked second in the Most Loved Latvian Beverage Brand Top, and first in the subsequent 2020 top.\nLithuania.\nIn Lithuania, kvass is known as and is widely available in bottles and drafts. The first written records of kvass and kvass recipes in Lithuania appeared in the 16th century. Many restaurants in Lithuania make their own kvass, which they sell on the premises. Some brands of mass-produced Lithuanian kvass are also sold on the Polish market. Strictly speaking, \"gira\" can be made from anything fermentable\u2014such as caraway tea, beetroot juice, or berries\u2014but it is made mainly from black bread, or barley or rye malt. \nPoland.\nKvass may have appeared in Poland as early as the 10th century, it quickly became a popular beverage thanks to its easy and cheap method of production as well as its thirst-quenching and digestion-aiding qualities. By the time of Jogaila's rule, kvass was universal. It was at first commonly drunk by peasants in the eastern parts of the country, but eventually the drink spread to the szlachta. One example of this is , an old type of Polish kvass that is still sold as a contemporary brand. Its origins can be traced back to the 1500s, when Jan Sapieha founded the town of Kode\u0144 on land granted by the Polish king. He then bought the mills and 24 villages of the surrounding areas from their previous landowners. Then, the taste of kvass became known among the Polish szlachta, who used it for its supposed healing qualities. Throughout the 19th century, kvass remained popular among Poles who lived in the Congress Poland of Imperial Russia and in Austrian Galicia, especially the inhabitants of rural areas. Up until the 19th century, recipes for local variants of kvass remained well-guarded secrets of families, religious orders, and monasteries.\nThe beverage production in Poland on an industrial scale can be traced back to the more recent interwar period, when the Polish state regained independence as the Second Polish Republic. In interwar Poland, kvass was brewed and sold in mass numbers by magnates of the Polish drinks market like the Varsovian brewery Haberbusch i Schiele or the \"Karpi\u0144ski\" company. Kvass remained particularly popular in eastern Poland. However, with the collapse of many prewar businesses and much of the Polish industry during World War II, kvass lost popularity following the aftermath of the war. It also gradually lost favour throughout the 20th century upon introducing mass-produced soft drinks and carbonated water into the Polish market. In the early 21st century, kvass experienced a renaissance in Poland due to the heightened interest in healthy diets, natural products, and traditions.\nKvass can be found in some supermarkets and grocery stores, where it is known in Polish as (). Commercial bottled versions of the drink are the most common variant, as some companies specialise in manufacturing a more modern version of the drink (some variants are manufactured in Poland whilst others are imported from its neighbouring countries, Lithuania and Ukraine being the most popular source). However, old recipes for a traditional version of kvass exist. Some of them originate from eastern Poland; others from more central regions include adding honey for flavour. Although commercial kvass is much easier to find in Polish shops, Polish manufacturers of more natural and healthier variants of kvass have become increasingly popular both within and outside of the country's borders. A less healthy alternative of quick-to-make variants using kvass concentrate can also be purchased in shops. One colloquial Polish name for is ('rural orangeade'). In some Polish villages, such as Za\u0142awa and its surroundings, kvass was traditionally produced on every farm.\nRussia.\nAlthough the massive flood of western soft drinks after the fall of the USSR, such as Coca-Cola and Pepsi, substantially shrank the market share of kvass in Russia, in recent years it has regained its original popularity, often marketed as a national soft drink or \"patriotic\" alternative to the famous Coca-Cola drink. For example, the Russian company Nikola has promoted its brand of kvass with an advertising campaign emphasizing \"anti-cola-nisation.\" Moscow-based Business Analytica reported in 2008 that bottled kvass sales had tripled since 2005 and estimated that per capita kvass consumption in Russia would reach three litres in 2008. Between 2005 and 2007, cola's share of the Moscow soft drink market fell from 37% to 32%. Meanwhile, kvass's share more than doubled over the same time period, reaching 16% in 2007. In response, Coca-Cola launched its own brand of kvass in May 2008. This is the first time a foreign company has made an appreciable entrance into the Russian kvass market. Pepsi has also signed an agreement with a Russian kvass manufacturer to act as a distribution agent. The development of new technologies for storage and distribution, and heavy advertising, have contributed to this surge in popularity; three new major brands have been introduced since 2004.\nMarket shares for Russia (2014)\nSweden.\nKvass was also made in Sweden, where it was known as ' (lit.\u2009'bread drink'). However, it was very likely limited only to areas where rye bread was the standard bread as opposed to crispbread, which was more common in Western Sweden and did not go stale. ' was still being made in \u00d6land farms up until 1935.\nChina.\nIn the mid-19th century, kvass was introduced in Xinjiang, where it became known as () and eventually became one of the region's signature drinks. It is usually consumed cold together with barbecue. In 1900, Russian merchant Ivan Churin founded Harbin Churin Food () in Harbin, offering kvass and other specialities, and by 2009, the company was already producing 5,000 tons of kvass a year, making up 90% of the local market. In 2011, it moved its kvass factory to Tianjin, increasing its sales to 20,000 tons in the first year.\nElsewhere.\nFollowing the influx of immigrants in the UK due to the 2004 enlargement of the European Union, shops selling cuisine and beverages from Central and Eastern Europe were established, many of which stock imported (primarily pasteurised) kvass. As a result, since then a number of different flavours of not-pasteurised kvass, fermented using sourdough starter culture, have also become available in the UK in 2023. In recent years, kvass has also become more popular in Serbia.\nNutritional composition.\nNaturally fermented kvass contains 5.9%\u00b10.02 carbohydrates, of which 5.7%\u00b10.02 are sugars (mostly fructose, glucose, and maltose), as well as 0.71\u00b10.09, 1.28\u00b10.12, and 18.14\u00b10.48\u00a0mg/100 g of thiamine, riboflavin, and niacin respectively. In addition to that, 19 different aroma volatile compounds have also been identified in naturally fermented kvass, most notably 4-penten-2-ol (10.05\u00d7107 PAU), which has a fruity odour; carvone (2.28\u00d7107 PAU) originating from caraway fruits used as an ingredient in rye bread; and ethyl octanoate (1.03\u00d7107 PAU), which has an odour of fruit and fat.\nTraditional kvass made from rye wholemeal bread has been found to have, on average, twice the dietary fibre content, 60% more antioxidant activity (due to the addition of caramel and citric acid to the bread), and three times less reducing sugar content than industrially produced kvass.\nHistorically, alcohol by volume (ABV) of kvass varied depending on the ingredients, microbial flora, as well as temperature and length of fermentation, but nowadays it is usually not higher than 1.5%. The wide availability and consumption of kvass, including by children of all ages, together with the lacking indication of ABV for kvass on the labels and in advertisements, has been named a possible contributor to chronic alcoholism in the former Soviet Union.\nUse.\nApart from drinking, kvass is also used by families as the basis for many dishes. Traditional cold summertime soups of Russian cuisine, such as okroshka, botvinya, and tyurya, are based on kvass.\nCultural references.\nThe name of Kvasir, a wise being in Norse mythology, is possibly related to kvass.\nThere is a Russian expression, (literally 'to clamber from bread to kvass'), which means 'to live from hand to mouth' or to 'scrape by' referring to the frugal practice amongst the poor peasants of making kvass from stale leftovers of rye bread. Another kvass-related term in Russian is \"kvass patriotism\" (\u043a\u0432\u0430\u0441\u043d\u043e\u0439 \u043f\u0430\u0442\u0440\u0438\u043e\u0442\u0438\u0437\u043c) dating back to an 1823 letter by the Russian poet Pyotr Vyazemsky who defined it as \"unqualified praise of everything that is your own\".\nIn the Polish language, several traditional sayings that reference exist. There is also an old Polish folk rhyming song. It shows the history of kvass in the country as having been drunk by generations of Polish reapers as a thirst-quenching beverage used during periods of hard work during the harvest season, long before it became popular as a medicinal drink among the szlachta. The song goes as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOriginal Polish lyrics\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:English translation\nIn the Polish village of Za\u0142awa, there is a customary game known as ('volcano') that is associated with the beverage. The fermentation of sugars makes kvass slightly carbonated, thus, when shaken or heated, it can cause the liquid to suddenly and rapidly rise out of an open vessel. Playing \"wulkan\" consists of vigorously shaking a bottle of kvass shortly before handing it to someone else who is going to drink it; the sudden \"shooting out\" of the beverage onto the person opening the bottle is a source of entertainment for the youth of Za\u0142awa and a well-known prank during regional festivities.\nIn Tolstoy's \"War and Peace\", French soldiers are aware of kvass on entering Moscow, enjoying it but referring to it as \"pig's lemonade\". In Sholem Aleichem's \"Motl, Peysi the Cantor's Son\", diluted kvass is the focus of one of Motl's older brother's get-rich-quick schemes.\nNon-bread varieties.\nA traditional drink made in Ukraine was pear and apple kvas, produced by keeping dried fruit in water for two months. This kind of drink was popular at banquets and also kept the population from consuming low-quality water. Another popular traditional speciality of Ukraine is beetroot kvas, which could be consumed as a drink or used as an ingredient of other dishes, most famously borshch.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16972", "revid": "48506503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16972", "title": "Kolmogorov\u2013Arnold\u2013Moser theorem", "text": "Result in dynamical systems\nThe Kolmogorov\u2013Arnold\u2013Moser (KAM) theorem is a result in dynamical systems about the persistence of quasiperiodic motions under small perturbations. The theorem partly resolves the small-divisor problem that arises in the perturbation theory of classical mechanics.\nThe problem is whether or not a small perturbation of a conservative dynamical system results in a lasting quasiperiodic orbit. The original breakthrough to this problem was given by Andrey Kolmogorov in 1954. This was rigorously proved and extended by J\u00fcrgen Moser in 1962 (for smooth twist maps) and Vladimir Arnold in 1963 (for analytic Hamiltonian systems), and the general result is known as the KAM theorem.\nArnold originally thought that this theorem could apply to the motions of the Solar System or other instances of the n-body problem, but it turned out to work only for the three-body problem because of a degeneracy in his formulation of the problem for larger numbers of bodies. Later, Gabriella Pinzari showed how to eliminate this degeneracy by developing a rotation-invariant version of the theorem.\nStatement.\nIntegrable Hamiltonian systems.\nThe KAM theorem is usually stated in terms of trajectories in phase space of an integrable Hamiltonian system. The motion of an integrable system is confined to an invariant torus (a doughnut-shaped surface). Different initial conditions of the integrable Hamiltonian system will trace different invariant tori in phase space. Plotting the coordinates of an integrable system would show that they are quasiperiodic.\nPerturbations.\nThe KAM theorem states that if the system is subjected to a weak nonlinear perturbation, some of the invariant tori are deformed and survive, i.e. there is a map from the original manifold to the deformed one that is continuous in the perturbation. Conversely, other invariant tori are destroyed: even arbitrarily small perturbations cause the manifold to no longer be invariant and there exists no such map to nearby manifolds. Surviving tori meet the non-resonance condition, i.e., they have \u201csufficiently irrational\u201d frequencies. This implies that the motion on the deformed torus continues to be quasiperiodic, with the independent periods changed (as a consequence of the non-degeneracy condition). The KAM theorem quantifies the level of perturbation that can be applied for this to be true.\nThose KAM tori that are destroyed by perturbation become invariant Cantor sets, named \"Cantori\" by Ian C. Percival in 1979.\nThe non-resonance and non-degeneracy conditions of the KAM theorem become increasingly difficult to satisfy for systems with more degrees of freedom. As the number of dimensions of the system increases, the volume occupied by the tori decreases.\nAs the perturbation increases and the smooth curves disintegrate we move from KAM theory to Aubry\u2013Mather theory which requires less stringent hypotheses and works with the Cantor-like sets.\nThe existence of a KAM theorem for perturbations of quantum many-body integrable systems is still an open question, although it is believed that arbitrarily small perturbations will destroy integrability in the infinite size limit.\nConsequences.\nAn important consequence of the KAM theorem is that for a large set of initial conditions the motion remains perpetually quasiperiodic.\nKAM theory.\nThe methods introduced by Kolmogorov, Arnold, and Moser have developed into a large body of results related to quasiperiodic motions, now known as KAM theory. Notably, it has been extended to non-Hamiltonian systems (starting with Moser), to non-perturbative situations (as in the work of Michael Herman) and to systems with fast and slow frequencies (as in the work of Mikhail B. Sevryuk).\nKAM torus.\nA manifold formula_1 invariant under the action of a flow formula_2 is called an invariant formula_3-torus, if there exists a diffeomorphism formula_4 into the standard formula_3-torus formula_6 such that the resulting motion on formula_7 is uniform linear but not static, \"i.e.\" formula_8\uff0cwhere formula_9 is a non-zero constant vector, called the \"frequency vector\". \nIf the frequency vector formula_10 is: \nthen the invariant formula_3-torus formula_1 (formula_16) is called a \"KAM torus\". The formula_17 case is normally excluded in classical KAM theory because it does not involve small divisors.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16973", "revid": "33659192", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16973", "title": "Kam (disambiguation)", "text": "Kam or Kaam (from Sanskrit: \"kama\") means deep extensive desire, often sexual, and is counted among the cardinal sins in Sikhism.\nKam or KAM may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
